This committee high thank you
for coming out through the only
committee meeting today making
us all look back and I say the
thumbs up is there a is there a
medal or ribbon or something for
rural mmhm what what one think
about that.
Your rational Services.
We'll try to give you something
to I was at mass this morning Mr
chairman I lit a candle for you
how's that so thank you budget
maybe I didn't make it this
morning we were driving Senate
bill twenty six which chairman
we'll start there ever again
with me of course is the
Attorney General and the this
legislation would create within
the train Jones office an office
to support so writes Division of
the material it you'll see is
all the same for New and the
third change can probably give
you a brief explanation for why
we want to create a school
writes Division and probably
best that he explained the need
in the purpose here thank you Mr
Attorney General welcome thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee
all right in in presenting the
Bill Senate bill four twenty six
I think it's important to
provide some context in I think
it's important to put our
experience in New Mexico in
perspective in the sense that
for the last sixty or so years
at least since the nineteen
fifty seven Civil Rights Act at
the federal level and the
creation of the civil rights
division of the department of
justice there has been a
recognition that not just
private practitioners but also
dedicated and specially trained
litigators within the government
have an obligation to do
everything they can to fight
against discrimination to ensure
the basic civil rights of every
citizen as most members of the
committee know that the early
work of the civil rights
division at the federal level
concentrate on the desegregation
of schools access to public
accommodations on their
portfolio has expanded over the
years to address on
constitutional policing and is
actively engaged now at the
federal level in a number of
different areas in conjunction
in partnership with the civil
rights division within the
department of education which is
tasked with ensuring that
children with disabilities and
children with special needs in
educational environments for
afforded various constitutional
rights we would be the latest
state to create the similar type
of division inside the attorney
general's office there are
believe twenty four states in
the country with at least
thirteen with broad civil rights
authority to engage in this
affirmative litigation to make
sure that we are doing our level
best to protect vulnerable
populations and to hold public
agencies and actors accountable
in thinking about the creation
of this agency I have maybe it
might sort of first priority to
make sure that the agency takes
a close and careful look at the
civil rights of children in.
And I think the committee is
well aware given some of the
testimony you've heard on other
bills of the unique and special
demands that we have the state
agents to secure the rights of
children thank you Mr will stand
for questions that let's get
let's get it a show of hands in
the audience is there anyone
here who wants to show support
for this measure.
Did you just say something Mr
Hart come on up and and and give
some testament you can use the
the Mike here at the desk to the
zoom will pick you up.
Thank you Mr chairman Michael
Hardin a lawyer at practice in
the perceptive sorry.
A practice in Albuquerque if
they keep it and I think when I
tried.
Techno of technology thank you
Mr chairman Michael hard I'm a
lawyer practice with small firm
in Albuquerque we do a lot of
civil rights litigation have for
over thirty years I've filed
lots of lawsuits for
In both state and federal court.
The The New Mexicans are well
aware of your commitment Mr
chairman to civil rights in the
state also Senator Sedillo Lopez
actually taught Civil Rights and
Senator masses his practice has
focused on civil rights as well
but we all know is that when we
take a case when any of us
lawyers who who do civil rights
work take a case it's one case
for one person or one family.
And so the remedy if we're if
successful is for that family or
that person and that's that's
meaningful it is meaningful what
this bill does.
Is enable real change when I
speak to loss of life I lawsuits
I'm usually asking for money.
And I'm advocating for some for
institutional change but that's
that's the system we have now
this bill would create a.
An agency a division within the
attorney general's office.
That can sit them down with.
With government and state actors
who who may be violating civil
rights and solve the problem not
just for one person to for one
client for all New Mexicans and
I know it sounds really lofty
but with the twenty general said
this absolute truth you look
around the country to states
have quips done these have taken
initially have given that
authority to Attorney General
every state can can can claim
that they have had the ability
to change.
Outcomes for the people that's
not about money it's about what
we all want which is equal
rights for all New Mexicans
that's that's all I have your
honor I.
Hi we are also still sorry judge
judges what we we we would judge
of so it's it's kind of a it's a
it's a habit I'm not and I'm
very to judge that's I do at
home but I'm.
Mr chairman members committee
and I I hope you seriously
consider this bill and and and
supported thanks Mike anybody
else want to speaker in support
of this bill is there anyone
here who wants to oppose this
bill.
We do have three people on zoom
do they want to speak do we know
okay so the rain Mendiola.
We'll start with you.
Good afternoon Mister chair vice
chair and committee members.
My name is Lorraine Mendiola and
I'm a member.
We lost you.
She's.
We.
Are you still there Lorraine yes
I'm here okay go ahead.
I'm a member of the New Mexico
Family guardianship
conservatorship coalition.
And we support Senate bill four
twenty six this bill will
transform the lives of our most
vulnerable Mexicans are children
the elderly.
And the disabled
thank you to our new address the
general rule Torrez for his
vision to create a civil rights
division the house to the AG's
office and of course a thank you
to the sponsors of Senate bill
for twenty six.
For recognizing the need to
protect our vulnerable
populations.
Please vote yes for a due pass
once again The New Mexico Family
guardianship conservatorship
coalition is in full support of
Senate bill four twenty six
thank you good thanks ms
Mendiola then that dean.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my apologies for
not being present in person I've
been ill my name is Matt dean
and I'm an individual who lives
with multiple disabilities since
nineteen eighty four.
Judy human passed away
yesterday.
A very significant leader in the
disability rights movement a
quote from her is some people
say that what I did change the
world but really I simply refuse
to accept what I was told about
who I could be and I was willing
to make a fuss about it unquote.
I understand that there are some
significant concerns within the
analysis of this bill but I
stand in support of it because
sometimes when we make progress
it is uncomfortable and it is
difficult that is a person with
multiple disabilities who has
faced many civil rights issues
and concerns myself and
supported others through that
process the more that we can do
to improve that process and make
progress.
The better off we are as the
larger society thank you very
much this is a sponsored madam
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you net and then
finally Merioles back.
Thank you committee at
chairperson and committee
members my name is Maryland.
We dropped you again Maryland.
Can you.
Hear me go yeah I know we can
community again my name is
Maryland back and the founder
and executive director of New
Mexico child first network we
are dedicated to improving the
lives of children in foster care
and empowering those who serve
them I know that before this
committee we have seen a lot of
bills about the need to reform
CYFD but also just protect our
most vulnerable use and we feel
that Senate bill for twenty six
is a step in the right direction
and we think both the Attorney
General and chairperson survive
yes for bringing this bill
forward we stand strong support
and thank you thank you Maryland
okay nobody zoom zoom to propose
nobody here was here to propose
members of the committee
questions discussion Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I think that
this is a great bill I just I
can have a big question and then
a few little technical questions
and the big question is has he
has you know Mr chair I've been
trying to get independent
investigations and and we talked
about this independent
investigation of police shooting
cases and independent
prosecution and it's been
difficult because you kind of
negotiate with one group and
they raise an issue you broke to
go **** with another group and
I'm very pleased that the
Attorney General has offered to
host like a summit of all the
stakeholders and kind of address
the issue of independent
prosecution and I look at this
bill and I think this is another
place to deal with police
misconduct cases because of
course as a civil rights cases
as well and so that's my
question is how do you see this
civil rights to does the
division dealing with potential
violations of rights because of
police misconduct.
Mr chair Senator Mr chair
Senator Sedillo Lopez I think
that the creation of the civil
rights division is an essential
component
in terms of providing the
necessary investigative support
for for pattern and practice
which is as you know as a as a
subject matter expert
the the core of what the civil
rights division does at the
federal level whenever they
establish within the police
department failures in training
adequate resources inadequate
policies and procedures that is
separate and apart from the
conversation that we've had
about criminal prosecution and
so the in this is squarely
focused on civil enforcement and
there is no provision in this
bill for for example criminal
prosecutions for violations of
the unders under for
deprivations of civil rights
under color of law which is that
is the the primary tool that
federal prosecutors use to
initiate criminal prosecutions
this is squarely and purposely
focused on civil enforcement on
the institutional level and
patterns in practice that said I
think the investigative demand
of forty will enable the
division two on cover and hone
in on specific agencies that
have historic patterns of
depriving various populations of
their constitutional rights.
Because that's that's what I
think I think that a independent
prosecution bill would still be
necessary in fact kind of in in
a way more necessary because
this is very very discretionary
discretionary and not not an
automatic thing
then for some of my technical
questions on page three.
I'm a little bit confused by
line for.
section five and then line seven
do and then like eleven the and
how they read together because I
says that the subpoena must
contain no requirement that
would be a reasonable approach
or improper if it was a subpoena
duces tecum and then D. says not
withstanding any confidentiality
provision the person
issue the subpoena must comply
and then he says of the court
you know the court can be
petitioned.
Of.
I assume that so could the so
could the person being served
would petition and then for good
cause shown the court may set
aside or modify civil
investigative demand how do they
work together because I was sort
of thinking about like attorney
client privileged information
that's a that's a side so it it
just seems a little.
it was confusing to me
especially do.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
if you look at section do what
you will what what should be a
parent is that there are certain
confidentiality provisions
written into
the sort of the operational
framework for state agencies
specifically and what this
provision allows us to do is
access that information not
withstanding some of those
confidentiality provisions
otherwise we wouldn't be able to
initiate an investigation in we
would be able to get substantive
information that we need to have
that said the reason part of the
reason that we don't make those
public so if you look at half is
that the the officers agents and
attorneys inside the division
will have access to the
information but that information
is not subject to public
disclosure and so we can still
maintain confidentiality while
also enabling those attorneys
and investigators to do the
important underlying work in so
it's a balance between the two
we have to have access to
information that would not be
readily accessible to the
brought to the general public in
we need to be able to do that in
order to uncover a potential
civil rights violations but we
also maintain some
confidentiality around that by
not making it subject to public
disclosure with regard to see I
that is simply a a mere and this
the last element of what is in
it what is required in
investigative demand that would
be sent to HSD such that we
wouldn't exceed the broad powers
of what a court would empower
private party to do under
subpoena duces tecum so it
wouldn't be overly burdensome in
the sense that we would be
asking for things that are
beyond our legal purview and so
that's just attempting to more
of the the sort of the guard
rails that are already in place
in civil practice so.
So this chart that the
confidentiality provision
established by law could you
give me an example of an agency
that has the provision such a
provision senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez Mr chair of the
mid Mr chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez the most obvious example
or the confidentiality
provisions of the of CYFD which
are routinely a referenced as as
a basis for not disclosing
information.
Mr chair what about tax
information.
I'm Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez if if the agency
and the division determined that
the tax division had in in its
possession some material that
would be relevant to an ongoing
civil rights division
investigation then we would be
able to secure that information
but again it would not be
subject to public disclosure so
in this in in to a certain
extent it it is information that
would be provided from one
agency to another agency but not
made publicly available or
reported on publicly it enables
the investigators and the
attorneys to make an evaluation
of about civil rights I'm hard
pressed to think specifically
about why we would be going
after tax records but I don't
want to forclose that
possibility if it becomes
apparent in the course of an
investigation that such
information would be in the
records held by the taxes four.
One of the.
The issues that we've Mister
chair Mister chair I'm sorry Mr
chair one of the issues I
apologize one of the issues that
we've seen with confidential
documents is the leaking of
them.
for example specifically the
leaking of them to ice.
And if I don't know if you're
aware of the NVD situation where
during the prior administration
this is never happened during
this administration it was
stopped immediately but in the
prior administration in the D.
was giving information to ice
about
Who is getting a real ID and who
wasn't.
And
It and that was.
Very comfort controversial and
so what assurance it says shall
not be made public were used
what's the consequence.
If some of that information
would be leaked Mr chair.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez the attorney's within
sight within the attorney
general's office currently
manage highly sensitive
information that would have
impact for
publicly held corporations that
are under investigation
corporations are publicly traded
and the divulging confidential
information would obviously be
something that would subject
them to possible termination and
ethics referral to the state bar
we would also be looking at
whether or not it would be a
violation of the government
conduct act if there was some
personal gain that was attached
to the divestiture of that kind
of information but in in general
these types of attorneys or are
held to a standard that they can
maintain confidential
information in the course of
their work on behalf of the
state Mr chair so you have a
policy that if anyone were to
violate confidentiality that
they would be terminated.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez we have a policy
that we that we would terminate
somebody subject to the
provisions of the state person
act and following the guidelines
set forth there but my my
assault my assumption is is that
if we are able to manage that
process then yes an attorney
would be subject to termination
for divulging or disclosing
confidential information of any
kind including those gained in
in the course of civil rights
investigations.
With a big smile for their
Senator Lopez.
Because of of the S. the bill
you know that so I sponsored a
bill that it would be part of
the state person act to maintain
confidentiality of records and
it was pocket vetoed.
I want to give you the chance.
So thank you thank you Mr chair
In.
I.
I know that you go to Judiciary
and I'm assuming that you did
share is going to have some of
these questions I'm not going to
insist that that some of these
be clarified but I am concerned
about I don't think do is so
clear that it only applies to
agency policies of
confidentiality I think it's
it's confusing any confidential
provision established by law
well are you for it we've you
know the it is the law to
protected work product attorney
client privilege and so I think
that that's a little
A little too broad in in that
provision
and then when I I understand how
you how you balance them but I
don't think do I think he could
be written.
I know I see I see the chair of
the judiciary nodding so I I
just encourage you I I'm not
gonna try to do it here because
I know you're going to Judiciary
and I don't want to slow us down
with with at this time thank you
Mr chair Mr chair Senator may
respond so I do have a brand
comes here was one of our staff
and and one of my staff
attorneys and judiciary
committees right here behind me
and we're making notes as we go
along on a tight right now
subsection these going to be
gone okay that's that's good to
hear Mr chair it should be in
there.
Okay Senator my S. this year to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator run this agency Torrez
welcome the
The
So with regard to that Mr
chairman centers about this so
that that line on page ten we
don't it's kind of a given that
age ten I'm sorry forgive me
page three line ten the the part
the part of that's going to be
gone.
Shall comply with this demand
that's like a given that they
shall comply with this demand.
yes interim I agree with centers
Sedillo Lopez and I think your
concern sounds like to that's
why that's why making a
commitment to that's that
probably can't survive Judiciary
just to just no I wouldn't right
now he was made for me but thank
you Mr Sierra for the no I think
it's great I want to commend up
the two of you for putting this
together.
And I think it's it's going to
lead to a lot of good good stuff
the
but on on the last page the last
page.
Lines ten through nineteen.
In the definition of public body
was or was there a reason to to
not have some of the smaller.
Public bodies involved use want
to deal with.
Kind of counties municipalities
school districts higher ed.
Was there a was there a reason
like a sick as a some of the
smaller entities were not
included.
The so Mr Chairman Olivia
Attorney General address that
I've been looking at that I
think it's a good point etcetera
but it's probably not a good
definition of probably could use
some tweaking I'm not sure why
with exams and specifically
include others I think I it
seems like the definition be
much tighter and my guess is we
probably have many other similar
uses of a public body definition
in the statute this maybe just
probably pattern after that
sounds good thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator just
give a look to lines fifteen
through nineteen.
Then also one hundred page for
the part I like made upon
request by the legislature.
Ready eight appropriate
legislative committee so yeah
how subparagraph H. online five
through fourteen you have about
civil rights division may
collect information and it just
says on line eight civil rights
division may publish information
and I believe the legislative
request.
Only goes to the publishing and
and the reporting of the
information so.
And so you gotta ask yourself do
you want that ship to the
legislature be allowed to.
I guess yet never mind the the
legislature is is that
requesting that the stuff be
published or reported back.
settled.
So in reading it the second time
I don't think it's there's a big
deal but on a on a on line eight
after the word civil rights
period just ask yourself if you
need a paragraph or not a new.
So with page you thank you Mr
chairman says about this on page
four.
A line eight.
In paragraph H..
just ask yourself if it needs a
new paragraph after a civil
rights civil rights period and
then the next sentence the civil
rights division may there's two
maze in there.
So rice Division may collect
online I and civil rights
division may publish online
eight but anyway.
With a look and then also
Also when.
The key the key Mister chairman
Senator about this with the rest
of this in terms of.
An over reach on executive power
it it's on the line to.
Forgiving page two line
seventeen.
Dealing with the subject matter
you know information that's
relevant to the subject matter
of investigation so do you think
that.
So in other words Mr chairman a
need for us to this allow the
need to go on fishing
expositions are so to speak or.
I just deal with that.
With the allegations of civil
rights violations Mr Taurus Mr
chair Senator Maestas I think if
you read paragraph C. as a a
preface to the for the five
component pieces of what is
required when we issue a civil
investigative demand what it
what it requires of the agency's
precisely not to be on a fishing
expedition it requires us to say
with at least some specificity
of what is in the nature of the
investigation with the the
potential civil rights
violations that we're looking at
in other words we cannot simply
send an investigative demand to
a school district for example
and say give us all this
information without telling you
why we're asking for the
information and so it requires
us to identify what the subject
matter is now it's a little bit
of
a chicken and egg because if
we're issuing the demand with
the beginning of an
investigation and we don't yet
know because we don't have the
information all of the
particulars but in general if
you think about it as notice
pleading we're giving you
general notice of the types of
concerns that we have then the
responding agency hasn't has a
sense of of what it is we're
looking at so that we're not
looking at just.
Any and all information in the
custody of the of the respective
agency thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator office we need
to send this one and the way you
the way you perceive this that
this that this becomes in
statute you can then.
Move lawyers within your within
your agency toward this division
it wouldn't.
You would need to be specified
specifically in house bill two
you get X. number of FTAs and
you can move around everyone
Mister chairman Senator minus as
we put in a request in in House
Appropriations we still haven't
had of of you obviously a final
version come out a Senate
finance for a I believe an
expansion of our affirmative
litigation unit in excess of two
million dollars the lion's share
of that money will be dedicated
to the creation and
establishment of this to you
thank you Mr.
Anything else that's Senator
McKenna followed by Tallman
followed by Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator serve on this and thank
you Attorney General for being
here I'm really excited about
this bill chairman Senator I
have a question and two
comments.
my first question chairman and
senator and Attorney General I'm
looking at the fiscal impact
report.
Also known as the FIR.
And it's estimated there will
this new division proposes to
have thirteen attorneys and to
court staff.
So the chairman and senator
Attorney General with the
estimated thirteen attorneys.
Approximately how many civil
rights claims have gone
unaddressed in New Mexico
because.
The AG's office does not have
the capacity and and is asking
for that capacity in this bill
and I'm I'm I'm thinking perhaps
that thirteen attorneys that you
need has something to do with
the amount of on addressable
rights cases thank you chairman
thank you senator.
Mr chair Senator McKenna to be
perfectly honest with you we
have we have no way of knowing
at this point how many pattern
practice investigations at
various levels across the state
ranging from one force meant to
school districts to CYFD this
other issues may have been
initiated if this division
existed in the in the previous
administrations what I can tell
you is that it will take the
agency some time to recruit and
hire the kind of skilled
attorneys that we need
you know but by way of example
the Mr Hart is one of the most
experience of rights attorneys
in the state and what I would
have to do is convince somebody
of his caliber caliber to take a
substantial pay cut which I am
trying to do and I hope you
encourage him to think about
that to come into the agency and
train young lawyers to do this
work at the at the pay scale
that we currently have for these
types of litigators but that's
this is a good place to start I
I would actually add that we
will probably start with about
ten attorneys and what will need
or more investigators and
support staff to get on the road
and go collect documents conduct
interviews and things of that of
that nature but it's going to be
something that's going to take
several years for us to build.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and Attorney General
thank you for that
response on I'm gonna go on to
my.
My two comments and chairman and
senator and Attorney General if
you want to add to it might I am
more than welcome at
I see the
Going back to the F. I. R. I see
the estimated cost really as an
investment and not a cost.
and so that's why I'm a big fan
of this bill
Because unfortunately racism is
still with us and twenty twenty
three and it continues to show
its face and influence.
there's so much exclusionary
legislation in this state and
nation wide.
Our voting rights are under
attack in this state across the
nation and in the Supreme Court.
Our reproductive rights likewise
and also for.
The L. G. B. T. Q. pardon me L.
G. B. T. I. Q. a community their
rights have been.
similarly attacked and so for
all those reasons I really
looking forward to the civil
rights division.
Division formation.
so that was my comment and
chairman and senator and
Attorney General.
for those who have not looked at
the FIR and for those watching
on the webcam.
Some may be alarmed at the
investment of.
Of three hundred eighty two
eight three hundred eighty three
million dollars in FY twenty
four.
Other thousand.
Okay.
That's correct it okay maybe
alarms at the three hundred and
eighty two or eighty three
thousand dollars in FY twenty
four but I want to point out
that essentially fifty three
million of that is for now on an
office for the new staff at the
Attorney General have to hire
two.
Fifty two point seven I rounded
up.
Thanks a million I said
thousand.
So that was my last comment
chairman Senator Attorney
General thank you.
Senator Tallman and finally
Senator Hickey after him.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Center for bringing this bill
forward and thank you very
general being here greatly
elevated the status and prestige
of this committee for your
present.
So the Human Rights Commission
and says encourages eliminated
limitation of charges but they
have no enforcement to eliminate
them.
So you don't have to just.
Well it all answer the question
is yes you can
Who.
Good luck.
Up there.
That a rhetorical question did
you want an answer twelve.
However.
Interpreted.
So
what they've put politically
entrenched the it's it's a
creature statues were there is
there is an answer the question
I understood to be a rhetorical
question but I answered it
affirmatively Sierra simply to
reinforce the fact the
legislature gives an Legislature
taketh away so it's a it's a
creature of statute and to
answer your question is can you
get rid of it you can.
Okay thank you for that answer
and
The FIR says that the works for
solutions department.
Says that this bill may overlap
existing jurisdictions.
And prosecution.
Institutional direction what is
your reaction to that.
Mister chairman Senator toman up
my reaction is that the state of
California has had a functioning
civil rights division I believe
since nineteen seventy two
and they managed to work with
their federal counterparts
without any significant issues
the work that this division
would do would not preclude any
other form of are the fate the
federal or state agencies to
conduct their work so I I really
don't think that's a cause for
concern thank you Mr chairman
finally I do support this bill
but
It this is safe to assume that
no one is doing what you're
proposing to do is that correct
and don't know when the state
government is proposing to do
it.
Mr chair Senator toman
most of the work that gets done
in civil rights in this state is
done by private right of action
one client at a time.
Although you know I I think it's
important Senator AUMENT and
this gets back to CENIC as
questions well too so the you
know the suggestion of the
thinking that without this
funding without creations
Division that this work has been
done in the attorney general's
office in the past I I think we
should probably disabuse that
notion but only the to the tree
General the I'm I'm certain
there are people in the agency
who historically or in the past
have have done Civil Rights
Enforcement but perhaps not as
in a structured way with a
separate division.
Thank you senator again for
bringing this up and thank you
turn general for.
Initiate come from having
initiative to come up with this
excellent idea that's all I have
Mister good thank you senator.
The internet.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Attorney General and senator
for bringing this bill
I didn't realize it could be so
complicated that seem to be
pretty straightforward
but that's not my training so
but I do I do have one question
again this comes from my lack of
training in the legal field
except for one course during a
master's program in health law.
there the this relates to a
federal bill and hopefully soon
to be state bill
mental health parity mental
health parity has been around
since two thousand and eight
Domenici pass the initial bill
and then it's been built up
through the cures act the cares
Act and every appropriation bill
since that which is one of the
reasons why reporting a bill to
make it more clear here in New
Mexico residents of bunches
federal statutes that are
difficult to understand
if it were found that a
particular health insurer
developed a pattern of but
not honoring that bill and and
what it costs for which is
access with no more barriers in
existence medical surgical
prior off the overview what have
you referral
if if there were a continued
pattern my sense is that fifty
dealt with I the office of the
superintendent of insurance but
and and on an individual basis
we will be developing the
ability to both create the the
Policies that have to be created
with the health insurers and
working with them better than in
the year to really the enforcing
it but if there were a
consistent pattern with one
company average to me that's
is getting access to mental
health as a civil rights
particularly if it's in invented
in federal and state law and if
there were pattern is that
something that this division
might take on.
Yes.
Thank you but that's all I have.
Okay.
Thanks for keeping your answers
shortened to the point by axing
your gender and then it looks a
little bit like lines over but I
do one quick question did you
have a for a second time another
question for you disruption I
have a quick question first and
grow it up.
Is this an error at first I'm
delighted you that you're
proposing to do this a few years
ago I had an experience kind of
like Senator Sedillo Lopez of
proposing legislation to to do
something about the.
Over use of force by police
department and it was like will
who's going to who's going to do
that and I at one point
suggested the Human Rights
Commission or take that on and
they acted like they were shot
the this who.
Not us we don't want to touch
that the so I don't know exactly
what they do but they don't do
this that's for sure
One one other question is what
do you mean right now you know
we went from no opposition we're
gonna have all kinds of
opposition thank you senator
Clemente.
Thank so does does the is this
something the district attorneys
to
you can't have the same
statewide impact but do they
take on civil the right section
I guess not there is more
criminal that they do.
Mr chairman what is the district
attorneys in the state actually
do have civil litigation of
forty and we actually use that
authority in the second to
initiate action against private
paramilitary group two years ago
but generally speaking the
district attorneys focused
almost exclusively on the
criminal side of the equation
because they're just so much
work today have to contend with
mmhm okay very good and before
you make your motion Senator
Maestas Senator Gallegos has a
question.
We're coming.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
got me for the third time but
the Mr Chairman center in
Attorney General Preciado and
actually I don't have a question
just comment normally typically
I wouldn't vote in favor of this
bill but I can see that you know
looking at the state and the
situation more Forand I I
learned anything this session or
need to do some things different
possible solutions I think this
is part of that discussion
specifically in solving the the
child welfare crisis in.
I've committed myself to doing
the best effort every day to be
able to protect you know the
child well being I've got a lot
of CYFD built out there and I've
been doing this for a long time
and I appreciate that but the I
know what we're doing now isn't
working so I hope that as I go
forward I've got
house bill or Senate bill of
three seven three before
Judiciary image turns center in
Attorney General I would hope
you would look at that is a this
is an all of practice on that
because I think we need to look
at holistic area in order to
protect our children and for
that reason I'm gonna turn again
I hope you get your support of
I'm gonna vote in favor this
hoping that as a group of bills
are going forward that we can do
things to change the state so
without all your thank you Mr.
We have a motion for a due pass
from Senator Sedillo Lopez and a
second from is yes.
Any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes center
to the piano yes.
By seven zero will give a
depressed Senator thank you very
general good luck will you get
this okay Senator you're still
there though for we're gonna
take my friends who are here in
thank you for all and like I
said appreciate act I think this
one within about ten minutes and
I've got those comments so don't
you worry.
Four twenty seven.
Imposing a mandatory waiting
period when conducting a sales
of the sales of a firearm in
providing penalties thank you Mr
chairman for twenty seven so
really relatively strict for in
terms of the text in the
language of the bill itself this
question really for the
committee is policy I have
Mister comes with our staff
sitting next to me again
skyrmions is a student at the
unilateralism
over the last couple years on
the staff really spent a great
deal of time to get into gun
policy gun law in other states
including the most recent
Supreme Court decision so he he
access my expert when we start
digging into what the Supreme
Court will our not allow these
days but many meant we feel
confident that a waiting period
is something that would meet
constitutional scrutiny under
the existing case law that that
as it stands today other states
I think of the with that the
Levin so so right have a have
mandatory waiting periods
fourteen would put us at the
hi and I think that Hawaii has a
fourteen day waiting period
others have other waiting
periods that are less than that
but the the goal here is to a
number of things that are going
to be pretty evident to all of
us I think which is to allow for
cooling off period individuals
who are in distress emotionally
suicidal ideation domestic
violence all of those are
circumstances where it shouldn't
be possible for people to do
what I I'm able to do I I'm very
to be very Frank with our one
here I'm a gun owner and I've
never spent more than an hour
buying a gun walk in store fill
out some paperwork these days is
not on a tablet you input some
computer data and you walk out
with your gun
the the goal here is to maybe
slow the process down so we get
a more thorough look the other
thing that I think when we start
talking about what it would a
real meaningful solutions to
mass killings mass murders one
thing that seems to be pretty
consistent with many those cases
is.
Is there were clues in so many
of these cases the the
individuals gave us social media
gave us buying patterns
practices and habits that really
would have alerted us that I I I
think that this this have a
waiting period gives us a lot of
opportunities really meaning
have making meaningful
difference and and so stand for
questions on the committee.
Let's go to the audience and get
a show hands those who are here
in support of this bill.
And anybody here in opposition
to this bill.
Okay we'll take where we take
three from the support didn't
agree from the opposition try
not to duplicate what other
people have said to and we'll
start with you miss madam.
Chair members of the if you use
the Mike very good because it to
pick up those get picked funds
of the.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Miranda school echo
president of New.
We stand in strong support of
this legislation is a sixteen
point eight percent spike in gun
deaths in New Mexico in twenty
twenty one three hundred and
nineteen of those were suicides
as a senator serve on teh said
this cooling off period is
crucial I have had several calls
from people from the local gun
to of had family members who
bought guns from the local one
of the local gun shops here
hours later their loved ones
were dead they ask us what we
can do and we suggest they get a
grief counselor this is a life
changing piece of legislation
thank you very much thank you
random of who else did you want
to speak district the yeah do
you want to say something.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my mystery Center
registered lobbyists.
And we support the legislation
waiting period has been proven
to help I said is a proven that
it can help prevent suicides and
help reduce firearm homicides
support legislation I think that
Sanchez.
Thank you to three in opposition
who would like to come first.
Four.
Thank you one of the three of
you are gonna speaking up as you
go and get in line and that we
can kind of arm wrestle for who
those three would be.
This is on it is yeah.
Like that yes perfect thank you
thank you Mr chair committee
members Terry much I'm the state
director for the national rifle
association and we're opposed to
Senate bill for twenty seven
with all due respect to the
sponsor
Before twenty seven does not
provide for more thorough
background checks the background
checks that are conducted won't
be enhanced or improved through
this legislation ninety percent
of fire or background checks
that are conducted by federal
firearms licensees here in New
Mexico R. conducted instantly
the background check is thorough
completed and ninety percent of
the time done at the the instant
that the check is submitted
so this bill applies not only to
cases where there's a delay in
the background check because of
an unresolved background check
or incomplete criminal history
information this fourteen day
waiting period applies to all of
the checks that are done
instantly so it's not just to
cases where there's a delay
in the background check of the
buyer.
as far as providing a cooling
off period for gun buyers
in the house committee at least
we heard that there's.
Aim to reduce youth suicide by
this legislation
on the federal level the
bipartisan safe communities act
twenty twenty two imposed a
three to ten day waiting period
on the purchase of firearms by
people who were between the ages
of eighteen and twenty so that
is done to look into juvenile
records that may not be included
as part of the background check
system but we don't have any
data yet as to whether three to
ten day waiting period for
people in that age group in fact
reduces suicides or firearm
homicides by that by that age
group also it's estimated that
two thirds of gun buyers already
have a firearm in the home so
the notion that a cooling off
period would impact them as far
as suicidal ideation or
impulsive criminal acts the fact
that two thirds of them already
have a firearm in the home
makes us question whether this
would have the intended
outcome up so with that all turn
my mic over to thank you.
My name is Nancy.
Forty two this year no president
of New Mexico and no.
And I urge you to oppose this
fourteen day waiting period
because two weeks is obviously
an arbitrary number and there is
no.
Real data to say why that would.
Don't tell me that improvement
in the background checks
situation background checks are
done as these Sanchez said are
done immediately that's because
the.
Criminal investigation material
and the criminal records are
available immediately on six.
By a gun the check is run you
are cleared or not cleared and
that's all there is to it it's
not that it should take any more
time.
It's really just imposition
legal gun owners.
One violent people are not like
the rest of us nor are they
concerned about any laws at any
level anyway in general they
don't expect legal consequences
to apply to them and you know
this but how often they have
gone charges dropped by a plea
bargain in court.
Particularly differences relate
to emotions and impose
regulation of these people and
mass murders are known to plan
their attacks for weeks or even
months ahead of time this will
not prevented it will simply
build up resentment in those
criminals they are looking for
revenge or for some notoriety
and they're going after it
regardless of how long you make
them wait.
Okay well thank you thank you it
did you have another point to
maker is that it.
I just don't believe that it is
any improvement on the three day
waiting period for anyone who
really cares be stopped by this
appreciate that thank you thank
you.
Yes Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chair
Senators my name is here across
agency on the owner right to
bear arms I spoke before you a
couple of times I I really think
that this is a bill that's up.
The solution in search for a
problem we already have a lot of
the laws on the books both at
the federal level and at the
state level at the state level
one of the things that talks
about is on this bill it talks
about doing a background check
between private parties that was
already passed a law several
years ago here in the state
It was already spoken to about
we already have a delay for of
those under twenty one which.
That's going to allow that extra
time to research that juveniles
passed the.
Excuse me here
One of the other concerns that I
have with this bill and it talks
and it this is backwards from
what I've seen it says that the
records are accessible to any
law enforcement agency that
switch could be city or state
typically that starts at the
federal level because this is a
federal crime so it goes to the
to the to the ATF the request
goes up to the ATF from the
local law enforcement agency and
they're the ones that are
requesting the documents I think
that could be some issues there
with that also.
Of.
Again the the for the arbitrary
fourteen day number I don't
think there's been any
proof that that has helped I
don't know that there's any
state I don't know that you're
capable of gathering statistics
to find out is this going to
stop across the board for.
Have some kind of reduction in
some kind of a dimples I could
tell you after spending over
thirty years with the fire
department as a paramedic I saw
plenty of suicides image that
the majority of we're not done
with guns lastly I would say
that we're we're losing aside on
this we're talking about the
person getting that done in
committee domestic violence.
What what what are we going to
do to allow that Vic potential
victim to get a gun to protect
themselves that is something
that was brought up so these are
these are some concerns I have
with everybody else spoke to
everything else so thank you for
your thank you Mr Rasmussen then
on on zoom we have
what we take a three people in
support and three people against
we'll start with support from
occurred right here Robert
Beatty and Kip Bobrov.
Current right here.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee this is
current record director Lujan
abductions from Mexico and I'm
here this afternoon to state my
support for SD for twenty seven.
Bob Sims Bob was a husband a
biologist former college athlete
volunteer in our conversations
youth group and by far the best
player in our softball team hit
a brilliant since of humor had a
passion for life was infectious
he was my friend Google.
But we lost you.
The accidentally mute.
Are you back on that Mr Reger.
It's current right here right
now and if these are still on.
How about Robert Beatty let's go
to Robert Beatty.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Robert
Beatty Representative swept the
southwest educational partners
for training and I'm the
director of Robert F. Kennedy
charter school and institutional
leader with Albuquerque
interface swept partners with
the Mexicans to prevent gun
violence taken wanted guns off
the street our guns to gardens
program takes done parks and
turns them into garden tools and
flower vases providing training
opportunities but more
importantly creating
conversation with young people
their parents and community
members about this critical
issue last month Robert W.
charter school lost two students
two brothers fourteen and
fifteen to gun violence that
makes is very personal to me.
I believe a fourteen day waiting
period will save lives and
prevent suicide I want to thank
centers of artists for
sponsoring this legislation and
providing me the opportunity
given.
Thank you Robert kept Bobroff
your next.
Good afternoon tipoff route from
one made a Presbyterians and
also a leader with Albuquerque
interfaith
and I echo Mr Beattie's comments
and thank the senator for this
bill and urge approval thank
you.
Thank you kept now we'll go to
three who oppose it and we'll
start with May eski then Jamie
go to and Winston Dorian.
Make us please go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee a few brief points on
the legal side obviously some
sponsor knows drew test is a two
part at the moment first it
determines whether the conduct
that the government seeks to
restrict is covered by the plain
text of the second amendment
since the right to keep and bear
arms is precluded upon the right
to procure those arms when do
much good to have arms you can
get them in the first place
conduct presumptively protected
government that needs to
demonstrate analogous historical
restrictions so I'm encouraging
you to see if the sponsor has
any examples of founding a
reconstruction era the quick one
restriction on the purchase of
firearms thank you.
Thank you Mr eski Jamie goad
year next.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am Dr
JB Delco the cares of New Mexico
and I oppose Senate bill four to
seven because it does nothing to
reduce crime and gang violence
also those who live in remote
rural areas of New Mexico would
have a hardship in traveling
twice to it F. F. L. thank you
for it many opportunities that
we might be invited to take part
to participate in thank you for
your consideration.
I thank you Mr road finally of
the final person in opposition
is Winston Dorian.
Yes can you hear me OK yes Sir
go ahead.
Okay yes thank you thanks for
the opportunity and I definitely
oppose this bill I mean you know
New Mexico leads the country in
property crime
auto theft X. cetera and we've
got a lot of drugs according to
the state and I don't I I just
feel that this doesn't really
there's no data to support
the fourteen day waiting period
is going to really solve much of
anything and because we're
already you know criminals are
not going to subject themselves
to a background checks to a
forty four seventy three
use very easy to lie on the form
even though it's a felony to do
that so we're there's a lot of
assumptions that are being made
in this legislation that I think
if that person is not going to
abide by and you know why
fourteen days if you're gonna do
fourteen wipe out thirty or if
you're gonna do fourteen why not
seven there's no data to support
that a a waiting period is going
to make much of a difference if
any at all and there's other
states that have waiting periods
but yet the gun crimes continue
to continue you know continue so
you know a really just you know
to legislate this is really kind
of it's kind of a feel good.
Provided bill that's not really
going to solve much of anything
I mean the criminals gonna steal
a gun to commit a crime they're
not going to subject themselves
to the legal process the law
abiding gun owners would follow
so I mean it's just up yes the
feel good if you want to feel
good about passes from gun
control then I guess this is the
bill for you thanks for the time
today.
Thank you Sir and we do have a
current rate you're back on he
was this call was dropped Mr
Reagan did you want to finish
your vote your your permission
Yes if I could do was actually
my friend your friend.
Quite sure where it ended Mr
chairman but I'll start here
though years ago I remembered
vividly Bob felt an episode of
depression coming on he talked
to his wife about it maybe
appointed to see a psychologist
to get back on medications
within just days before he
disappeared only a few phone
calls with silence followed
despite many searching he
couldn't be found but only
tracked by the use this credit
card the purchase of a handgun
at a local sporting goods store
and no more phone calls Bob's
body was found in the parking
lot of the campground Sandia's
just a couple days later there's
no time to share of the utter
devastation caused by Bob
suicide nor of all the good he
would have created in the last
thirty years if he were still
alive I believe Bob would still
be alive had yet to wait because
doctors are even more
participate devastating involved
there here's a look back that
there are thousands and
thousands of stories just like
his too much has been lost I
urge your support for SB four
twenty seven thank you thank you
Mr chairman okay now we go to
the committee.
The or did you want to respond
to any of the things you heard
senator appreciate a center
trying to do it real quickly
made some notes as we go along
the suggestion right now is that
the fourteen days doesn't allow
for a more thorough background
check that's the next step will
be just very candid with you and
I've talked to the DPS and
others about that the giving us
additional time we should be
doing a more thorough background
check and so we try to take this
one step at a time and I'll just
be Frank with everyone about
that
the
that that additional time will
allow state local law
enforcement the opportunity to
be part of that process and I've
encouraged that had that
discussion with the PS the state
police chief and others as well
to there's a suggestion there's
been some suggestion that the
data does not demonstrate of a
drop in suicides but I disagree
with that and would be happy to
provide the committee with some
of that detail Mr Cummings can
do that with you as well to the
I should also point out that
there is a house bill that is
provided for a wait period as
well too that's on the house
floor just so you all know this
bill is a little different we've
got some of differences here
namely this is my opportunity
for a soapbox for all of you to
hear what you have to hear from
the oftentimes this bill has a
consequence in other words I I
I'm always arguing you all have
heard me say it time and time on
the floor we pass all these
bills and then I always ask for
what you know you do this or
what were you shall do this and
then or what you don't have a
consequences memorial in my mind
it's kind of aspiration this as
a consequence house bill does
not so I thought I might point
those differences out to this
bill does exempt from the
waiting create a conceal carry
to the point the point person
made earlier that many people
already have of guns and so
forth that makes sense to have a
weight when you already got
existing guns there's a point to
that too and so this makes an
exception for those who already
have the additional training I
I'll be straight with all of you
to I have a concealed carry
permit I've done the training I
wanted to know what that was
about it was part of the
drafting of the regional laws
allow for concealed carry on the
kind of guy who you know I pass
a law I want to see how it works
so I
Passed along concealed Kerry
went and took the class and have
of thought that was important
part of the process to so Mr
chairman so your your provide
your bill does have a provision
that they can.
That they can if they've got to
do the training and they have a
concealed carry permit there's
not a wait period there is not
only that's great can have a gun
in their position.
Saving them the arduous trek
across town the second time that
and and that's that's right Mr
chairman that addresses that
question to it and you know that
there's some logic in that it
makes sense to suggest a cooling
off period to someone who
already owns of a concealed
carry permit and and and and so
I think that those are the
points that were raised in
probably warranted for K. in
response.
For K. the the the report
decision yeah the so with that
I'll let miss Cummins expand on
that if you all want to go in
depth but the Supreme Court
decisions kind of issue one you
know there's some concurring
opinions by justice cabin on and
who is the capital and the arts
Roberts from the out who didn't
seem to buy into the Clarence
Thomas analysis which I don't
buy into for a moment which is
the suggestion that the only
possible constitutional
restrictions on the second
amendment would be those that
were envisioned at the time of
the adoption the second
amendment in seventeen ninety
one I think we've got that right
and it you know and if you
didn't have a the if the
founders that it didn't in
seventeen ninety one
contemplated gun restriction
that that it can't be
constitutional now the of course
that's absurd we already do a
great deal many limitations and
restrictions on the second
amendment
and we limit we limit machine
guns or machine guns in
seventeen ninety one we probably
limit many other weapons that
were never envisioned by the
founders but
you know I'm not in the U. S.
Supreme Court and so will will
listen to the that court and
we're looking real careful with
the decisions of of the
concurring justices to Thomas
and they didn't buy into Thomas
entirely and so we're we're kind
of taking the fact they didn't
do so to be a suggestion that
they may be more open to these
types of restrictions in the
future.
Okay let's go to the committee
senator goodness your first up.
Mr Chairman center thank you for
that and I appreciate the
explanations you just had would
you bill show me in your bill I
also conceal carry
Holder but you I was looking
Page three line nineteen and I
was actually trying to find
looking through just now for
your bill it protects me from
having to go through this Mister
chairman Senator Mr chairman if
you look at page three if you
read subsection E. which begins
on line nine it says the
provisions of sections a and B.
do not apply.
and then it has a list of to
purchase one through five the
fifth subparagraph there says to
any person who will develop New
Mexico conceal carry license
okay let's agree that new and
and realize that's new language
so if you read if you take that
new provision a person holds
value Mexico concealed carry
license and you read that in
conjunction with lines nine and
ten the the introduction to that
list you'll see that it exempts
concealed carry license holders
from the wait period.
Mr chair Senator that's had
written that down because I
thought that's what Roose had
and and I appreciate that that
you allowed for that Mister
chairman Senator they don't need
to go back in time so in the
negative comments or those in
opposition.
The young lady from an ari was
talking about nine percent farm
background checks are conducted
by FBI are already instantaneous
and so of the way I read your
bill it doesn't give.
any consideration of the
incident are we doing all farm
sales in not just those are on
delays this presents center.
I'm not sure I'm entirely
understand your question Center
but let me let me try
underestimate of I don't dress
directly hope you'll come back a
little bit too so so I think
what the representative of the
NRA suggested I think she I
wanted to want to get her yes my
wrong but I think she said
ninety percent so you know so
the what what for so I guess
first question is what what the
other ten percent and what's
going on there too the the
information I have is only
anecdotal which is the these
background checks are less than
perfect and and less than
stellar the information in the
background check is only as
reliable as the information
that's kept in the database that
they're relying upon the the
suggestion here is that we slow
this down so that there is a
more thorough background check
and we've seen that you know
when you look at some of these
these how high profile mass
killings we see in circumstances
where they've missed things in
the in the background check and
review and so that that really
is the the goal here is to make
sure that that's a that's a
pretty robust review and and we
may want to think as I said as a
state begin to establish our own
type of a review process in
addition to that that might be a
good idea.
Mr chair Senator so yes in my
thoughts that
The.
The delays are the ones that are
looking for more detail
clarifications so on the
instantaneous they've already
got all the data in the system
and so if you pull my name out
they would know that I'm because
my consult Kerry already being
broadly looked into they would
have good detail on me on the
delays it's something that
triggers them to hold it up and
I'm just wondering why we are of
fortune this on all of us and
not just a problem people like
you're saying the you know the
ones you're having problems of
they should be look more into
detail but I'm just wondering
why we're not considering those
again the innocent ones of
already been put in system that
have good information on already
whether or not given credit for
the history that's already there
which present our mission parent
center Senator I think you know
probably agree governments less
than perfect and so the good
example would be the let me just
give is a hypothetical court
records for a domestic violence
case a conviction would perhaps
disqualify a gun buyer but then
in that case you're relying upon
the information is kept by the
court system information getting
into the database into the
national the database network
from our court system and that
depends again on the processing
of the paperwork saving that
ours our state District Court
level so I'm I'm building in to
this analysis the recognition my
own experience as a lawyer the
the the pic paper done get
processed right away and doesn't
always get process reliably
despite the best efforts of
state for example our courts and
give me that is one potential
example where you have
potentially up up a person who
is convicted of a felony that I
think you and I would probably
see eye to eye with disqualify
certain people for gun ownership
for gun purchases how reliable
is that information kept by the
state how reliable it is an
information get from our state
court system in our convictions
into that national data.
Basically this is trying to make
some allowances for the fact
that that some of the
information is not cap reliable.
Thank you for that Mr Mister
chairman etcetera and then just
a another thinking through the
the timeline
it's got here you know Congress
instituted a three to ten date
of federal waiting period have
you guys looked at that and is
a reason for rationale to go
over that.
Mr chair Senator I don't know
the answer that you know you're
you're suggesting that there's
of some adoption of a three to
which is a three to five eight
wearing a tan this actually part
of by Mr answer by pardon safer
communities act of those past in
twenty twenty two and it's got a
three to ten day federal waiting
period Senator I I don't know
one of the origin of that or the
status of that is right now I
can tell you is I've most
recently purchased a firearm
within the last four months
three or four months so it would
have been in twenty would have
in a twenty twenty two I walked
and walked out within an hour Mr
chair Senator I apologize that's
for eighteen to twenty year olds
I'm just thinking through what
we're asking.
That might be at least when you
go to Judiciary because I Mr
chairman center they tear part
built in Judiciary you might
want to you're certain to
research that to to see how that
works in in your bill
Going on the should I buy made
to senator Clemente
Representative James R. due
south you'll deal forgive me but
I appreciate the clarification
because I I I think what you're
saying is the that the federal
level there has been adopted
three to five one a pre for
eighteen to twenty year old you
know I I think we have to ask
ourselves what to make sense for
an eighteen to twenty year old
and not for everyone what is it
about eighteen twenty year olds
of course we and Judiciary does
have heard a bill about you know
making different exceptions and
purchases for eighteen twenty
rules that that bill did not
come out of Judiciary so these
things are all interrelated but
I think you for making that
point Mr chair Senator on that
bill the expert witness said
their minds don't mature to
their twenty five twenty six so
I appreciate I just all go on
talking about the no doubt on
the fourteen days
On and just to give you some
information and this is
So so thinking through the
amount of time that it takes in
the fourteen day cooling off you
know for for someone to buy a
gun here says two thirds of gun
ownership.
Gun owners on more one farm
which I do so kids cooling off
period would help them is there
rationale for the think through
the I know it's first time
you're probably looking first
time gun owners why the fourteen
days and not a different number
is properly or Mr center.
So couple things in your
question Center first why so
there's no data so that if if
you all will forgive me for this
for just a moment in it is an
undergraduate Senate
architecture I thought that was
going to be science and
engineering and any number of
things one of the required
courses I was I was required to
give you an was the course in
logic I hated that class I
barely got out of that class
with a B. or C. it brought down
my GPA was horrible I just hate
everything about that class the
more more time I spend here in
the legislature and the more
more time I spent as a lawyer
the more and more I realize how
important that class was because
you learn about fallacious
reasoning and logic and so forth
the realize this place is full
of it right so I am I can say
that carefully that I didn't say
this place full of it I just me
this place is full of fallacious
reasoning but but the you know
when you say there's no data
well it we spend data we spin
statistics are all day long we
did lots of it yesterday and so
the question then is is there
are some correlation can you say
well we impose a waiting period
and then there's no drop in
suicides there's data and
studies and also as we give you
that shows a clear correlation
if we take that data others will
say there is none and that's
just the again but an attack on
my college days of logic you
know how do you how do you show
if if you if acts then why right
is really what it boils down to
hear if we do accident will why
be the result and we can it will
save why is the result was it
because of acts you know that
that that anyway only to get too
far the weeds but that's when
they when there's an argument is
no data to show this I just have
to respectfully disagree Mr
chair Senator our center Mr
chair Senator and I appreciate
that I just wanted to were you
there is a random study and this
talking about intimate partner
homicides and they say that the
the study separately and that
analyzed the effects of waiting
period length they had non
twenty four hour period between
two and seven days and more than
seven days in.
It's a surprisingly found that
waiting peer longer than seven
days significantly increase
firearm related intimate partner
homicides compared with no
waiting period and so it might
be worth just looking for you
get traditionally I just hello
of there are there is data out
there you just have to work
through trying to find it but Mr
chair Senator then my last point
in in this country make tia is
Mr center the average time.
To.
I'm sorry and that APS's the
average time to crime for
firearms trace but the agency is
nearly nine years so from a
purchase to the actual crime.
Is that fourteen day period is
longer than that and I I'm just
saying that I feel personally
that if we continue to
criminalize the good citizens of
the state New Mexico those are
willing to go through the
process and do it right we'll
never be able to protect
ourselves against criminals Mr
Mr with that are you thank you
thank you Mr move it is more fun
you know again you're gonna or
I'm gonna owner I've waited for
the gun to be purchased by mail
and sent to a local dealer and I
I was able to tolerate the
weight of weeks to make that
happen and so forth you know so.
I I don't understand though
notion that this is somehow but
criminalizing things for people
like you and me
the I got to push back on the
the data issue again because
you're you're I think you're
your point was that that the
data that you're relying upon
says that there's that if you if
you have a weight created two to
seven days that's that's no
better than no wait period at
all and I gotta be honest with
you Senator that just sounds
like bullshit to me I mean I I
can't see how anybody could make
an argument that when you when
you have a circumstance we've
got some weight period and
you've got a period with no wait
period that the period with no
wait period results in less
deaths by suicide or otherwise
then we have a wait period you
and I just got to be logical
people that's why I brought up
my college class experience
which is that just doesn't make
any sense at all right now
there's no is no logical human
being can say when we have a
wait period the the the do you
have you have fewer you know you
have or you have fewer deaths
when there's no wait period then
when you do we have what for
that just that defies any logic
or intelligent thought Mr chair
Senator I'll try to find that
ran to get printed for your
staff just so you'll have it
because I think that in it
depends on where you look to
what you get but being that this
is in an intimate partner
homicides and I I don't know
what causes that and and I did
look for that clarity but I
think that we need to be there
again rational with what we do
to the right of citizens of
state New Mexico so I will thank
you thank you Senator Gallegos
it we go to Senator McKenna
followed by Sedillo Lopez and
tell.
I'm sorry yes Sir is not public
comment now.
It is not public comment no Sir
would you please escort this
gentleman out I wanted to speak
no well I'm sorry we you had
your you will have.
Senator McKenna please thank you
Mr chair thank you Senator
llantas
I am a big supporter of this
bill I've heard enough fax in
this room and the past two.
Months and years since we've had
some horrific horrific.
Mass shootings in this country
You're looking at the gun
violence archive right now
chairman and senator and in
twenty twenty two we at twenty
four thousand.
Ninety suicide deaths due to
firearms.
The centers for disease control
and prevention report in twenty
twenty reported for females
suicide using firearms has
replaced poisoning.
And it's the leading means to
commit suicide.
For males suicide via firearm is
the leading means for suicide.
By the rate of suffocation.
And chairman and senator this is
not something.
I'm not a very.
Percent I'm not a person likes
to share a lot but I'll tell you
when it comes to bills like this
and the capacity I'm serving I'm
more than willing to share these
things.
So a chairman and senator
I've lost two friends to
suicide.
Both of them used a firearm one
of them committed murder before
he killed himself.
I've had for relatives.
That have committed suicide.
Three of them used a firearm.
I'm also these people we're
under forty years old.
Two of them were teenagers.
All of them had easy access to a
firearm in the home.
And that's all I have to say
chairman and senator and that's
why I'm supporting your bill.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I know the
studies we're talking about
studies the one point.
Was into part.
And what it shows here I hi Sir.
I served on the intimate partner
drug death review team a few
years ago and every time they
issue report I read very
carefully and at least one but
usually two or three involve
people who went straight to the
gun store bought a gun and and
went in and shot their partner
and that happens in New Mexico
so this bill is going to save
lives we don't know who or when
or how but saving at least one
life is is worth it so I'm very
enthusiastic about this bill
Just like the bill that you
carried the debit domestic
violence and gun safety bill
that you carried we don't know
what we know how many guys have
been reviewed removed or what's
right or turned in and we don't
know who or what but we know
that it's five hundred times
more likely there's domestic
violence and gun in the home
that there's going to be a a
definite home and so therefore
just has many guns have been
taken out you've you save lives
so I'm really of really happy
that you brought this bill
I wanted to ask you because this
is always puzzled me
you've you've put another
exemption for to any person who
has a valid New Mexico concealed
carry license how does that
square with the constitutional
provision in the New Mexico can
constitution which says but
nothing herein shall be held to
permit the carrying of concealed
weapons what is that provision
about in.
It's too we just have a very
interesting
The.
The right to bear arms amendment
yeah we can have an interesting
history on that right we've been
we've had a lot of that debate
and discussion you've been
Judiciary I think we've had some
of these presentations on on
history so you know oddly I
guess the history the west was
the the you know you weren't
supposed to carry a concealed
weapon right that if you were
carrying a weapon you're
supposed to display it and and
and the.
so how that constitutional
provision originated said
Senator I can't tell you clearly
we've we passed the concealed
carry law in the state and I was
one of the original Sanchez that
bill it's been a long time ago
and it's it's I think it's
seemingly worked
In in like anything else when it
comes to guns it was an attempt
to strike the right balance
right and and that's what we're
doing here I think when those
somebody argues well should be
thanks they're gonna should be
two days or five days or seven
days or fourteen days we're
trying to strike a good balance
the fourteen day comes from the
fact that Hawaii is adopted a
fourteen day and and that's on
the outside and I took the
outside date.
Mr chair I think you know maybe
with the constitutional of.
Study commissioned that you're
proposing maybe just maybe that
can be a of addressed and then
there was in the FIR you
probably read this and I don't
know what if you want to fix it
here there was a a request to
clarify whether you're talking
about of fourteen business days
or actual days just because of
holidays or whatever I don't
know if you clarify that.
On page two.
It's it's probably good
suggestions Mr chairman you know
we I guess we can put out the
word business states to make
abundantly clear I think the
presumption in the law is that
when you don't specify business
days was Kanye's the presumption
is the default is it's calendar
days.
If you want I than happy to move
of the fourteen business day so
yeah if you look if you look at
centered so I think that's by
what you're referring to page
two right
Representative Eli fifteen.
And it just says we're resisting
calendars it's line nineteen
fourteen day yes it also has
fourteen days ago did the
defaults going to be found out
clearly the calendar day the way
this is written yeah if you
wanted to be a cat is your
intent for it to be accounted
air business day I think
fourteen calendar days is a good
and consistent with the other
states and what they're doing so
I leave it the way it is thank
and then the second a little
technical thing is and I think
this was an whether the affairs
or or the analysis
the on the on page three records
of firearm sales because we know
we can have private sales the
suggestion was that these be
clarified to a business selling
firearms shall make records
available for inspection by any
law enforcement because I I
don't believe your intent Mr
chair was to have anybody who
sells a gun of she subject to
having a search of their records
upon law enforcement request I
think you're talking about
businesses Mr chair.
We get to where you're at it on
page three line six.
Sliq goes.
Got the answer to that some the
Mister chairman Senator the
answer would be that in every
case there is now
Records of firearm sales unless
you're accepted they're like a
family transfer we don't allow
private party a private party
without having a background
check so private party sales to
private party will have records
because you had to go to the FFL
to do the background check thank
you Mr chair so my question is
if it is so what is your intent
that law enforcement could ask
any person for their records
between nine AM and five PM on
events that that's was
clarifying I I thought that
should be that you were really
infants intending for businesses
who sell guns but if you intend
for that to be everyone then
that's correct and that's fine
Mr chair.
Thank Senator must ensure that
comes over you you still of the
of.
And well my my question was
So this the separate charges
I think that that's that that's
really good
that they're separate charges
without due to multiple
misdemeanors.
I guess I did I've never
practiced criminal law they
don't have that much from the
experience so what does it mean
if you have separate charges and
multiple misdemeanors do they
give staff sentences or how does
that work Mr chair so Mister and
Sir Senator unclear we're talk
about setting your are you
looking at the language on page
four line twenty two yes so
although center first well
that's all existing language
right now okay that's why we're
not really changing any part of
the existing law by that that
provision which provides for
each violation be separately
charge okay each corresponding
sale the only the only change
that we're making law there is
that making this applicables to
a federal firearms license
holder which is another example
of the difference between this
and the house version the bill
house version build is not
specifically capture federal
firearms license holders.
Okay at the rate of and then to
applying it I'm sorry brains
ride that the house was actually
exempt federal firearms license
holders so
so you're on the look out we
don't like that.
The house number I saw I saw
Representative Lujan around some
of encouraging hearing okay they
always easy to take a look cheap
shot the house members were
there not and when they're not
in the room as Representative
Akan is still there.
There's some of their own.
Okay Mister chair I also know
that thank you I appreciate that
you brought the bill and I like
I said I I do believe that by
passing this bill you will save
lives thank you you're my
Senator.
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
chairman centers about this
thank you for bringing it
forever the conversations in the
nineties around this issue.
It was just kind of a rational
debate amongst folks you know.
Regardless of what with the
thought is a good idea bad idea
but now we've got like a twenty
year onslaught of.
Rhetoric with regards to
firearms and stuff so it's just
it's kind of a different debate
I think.
But I think it comes down to
whether it's.
Whether the the possible benefit
outweighs the ink frankly the
inconvenience everybody involved
you know it is inconvenient.
We can't discount of this all
the small towns that don't have
a firearm store you know
And traveling back and forth and
stuff like that but at some.
I think if someone invites you
to go hunting or whatnot it's
usually a couple weeks you know
a month out maybe even several
months out
But up.
It's always good to review this
tactic that we passed in two
thousand nineteen and how
reasonable now and how crazy the
debates were four years ago the
I think the.
The best part of this bill is
that exempts
Conceal license carriers you
know.
Because it the the those of
I was a valid point that someone
has guns in their house you're
not really there's not really a
cooling off there have access to
weapons today and the purchase
of an additional farms not gonna
make or break anything
So it's a so it's you know two
thirds of folks buying a gun
already have one.
See you know in a perfect world
would exempt those two thirds
but there's no way to do it
there's no there's no database
of gun owners things of that
nature so this exempt conceal
carry license owners and also it
also and you may want to think
about this as it goes to the
next committee Mister chairman
Senator about this but also
percent of the those center
could you said again.
Mr chair is in this office if it
goes to I thought he said when
he goes if and when a family
owned awareness it's like that
days it's like a calendar days
when like if and when.
But
But I think this applies to up.
To the background checks that
The the valid concealed license
Kerry person of.
May apply to all any and all
background checks you want to
think about that whether that's
what you want to accomplish but
but just to review does this can
to police officers of.
If if a police officer wants to
sell a firearm to another police
officer to have to wait fourteen
days.
No Sir that's specifically
exactly but I'm I'm just making
sure that that's remember they
can that six existing language
right so what you're looking at
if you look at page two thousand
twenty four twenty five that's
that's existing exemption yes
absolutely Mr Chairman says want
to that's the point I'm making
is that this this fourteen days
doesn't apply to family members
right doesn't apply to to police
officers it doesn't apply to us
or persons selling a gun back to
a store
you know doesn't involve like if
a law enforcement agency has
like a gun buy back.
Person is not to wait fourteen
days you know things that nature
of the
So I think you know what we got
knowledge of the former for the
folks maybe for the store maybe.
I don't know if stores will.
Lusail ultimately will get the
bills because they make the sale
and use given the gun to the
person fourteen days later maybe
they'll be that person that says
what I mean fourteen days I'm
out here the person that we
pride I want to sell a gun to
you know so
So I I think what the bombers
German sentiment is that the
constitution limits us
tremendously on on gun policy it
limits us in so many ways and so
this may not make a difference
the the.
The background checks make a
difference on the margins that
all these laws make a difference
on the margin they may not make
a big difference but it's all we
can do as policy makers in light
of the fact that I could.
Walk anywhere around town with
the with the automatic quicker
on my shoulder and has totally
lawful it's actually protected
by the constitution so I think
small up things like this are
not just feel good but.
Hopefully up.
Would prevent you know handful
of suicides over that there must
be a little bit there please
make chairman sentiment with
which I agree Flynn you got a
long enough and I'm I'm done
your second have a lot of a lot
of the bills you I would judge
would briefly center you know
you said the constitution limits
gun policy of the interpretation
of the constitution limits gun
policy let's be clear about that
we have a current court with the
current interpretation this
court has interpreted abortion
different than the same court
has in the past I'm looking
forward to a court that maybe
moves beyond seventeen ninety
one.
Senator Tom in your last.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center for bringing this bill
for an article years as people
in homes of hand guns more
likely is sure to be shot dead.
The state most American gun
owners say they own guns to
protect themselves and their
loved ones but a study published
recently to just people who live
with hand gun owners are shot to
death at a higher rate than
those who don't have such
weapons and almost think about
it somebody comes into your
house.
With the gun and you don't have
a gun is less likely to shoot
you Madam if you show a gun
because going to shoot you in
self defense.
This it goes on to say that the
research this research
calculated for every hundred
thousand people in that
situation twelve would be shot
to death by someone else over
five years I think a person
eight out of a hundred thousand
who live in gun free homes will
be killed in other words you get
a fifty percent better chance of
not get being killed a few if
you don't have a gun
in particular the researchers
found people who live with a
hand gun owners had a much
higher rate of being fatally
shot by a spouse or intimate
partner the vast majority of
such victims eighty four
percent.
For women.
So you know as you all know of
yeah I say says the highest.
Right of gun killings per capita
of any modern and
industrialized country in the
world allies that is because we
have more guns than any per
capita than any modern
industrialized country so
there's a direct correlation
between the number of guns and
the number of killings so that's
all I have Mister
Chair I'm moving to pass okay
will Senator most this has to do
it could you just you just
debated the motion shot over the
past and the second consecutive
Senator Tallman any other
discussion I just want to
apologize for us that I feel
badly that I just I've got to
leave but this is a town hall
meeting actually made that clear
at the beginning this is it this
is a very.
And orchestrated discussion of a
bill we have to follow the
process we can't just let
anybody jump up because
something that we said struck
you as being irrational or
unnecessary whatever.
All of the rules and and and we
can get through this otherwise
it becomes chaotic secretary
will call the roll.
Senator gave us so much Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle etcetera myiasis.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator AUMENT yes center to
the piano yes.
So sixty one you have to do
passes Senator and we'll go to
for twenty eight and I did get
the notice that the Darren the
sort whose there in the sort.
Yes the.
Those young ladies will be on
soon.
Okay he's going to testify on
this one somebody asked me if
you could do that so okay
Senator for twenty eight thank
you thank you Mr Mr chairman of
the Senate for twenty eight
proposes to make amendments to
the unfair trade practices act
statue New Mexico this is an
existing law that relates to the
information is communicated
Houston's connection with the
sale of goods or services and
also of to provide certain
remedies that relate to the
manufacture sales of guns and so
Mister Cummings is
not sure with that we have
you're right we probably should
take up the amendment to the
bills we have an amendment yes
can you pass at the amendment
for twenty eight.
if we.
Analysts added Mr Cummings
leisure analyst had it but
I'm looking around the room to
see whether that's accurate or
not so.
Okay sure would revert to go
with the bill without the
amendment and you can M. and if
if you get out of here you can
just.
Terms of the let miss Cummins
briefly explain what is
relatively lengthy legislation
for the committee of trans trans
summarize it quickly but
fundamentally this is intended
to work with of support is like
the difference group which
you're looking at the false and
deceptive of advertising in
connection with the sale of guns
and and also what this bill does
is look at the.
Class of stuff standing I'm
looking at the Sir my Estes and
and others who have Senator
Sedillo Lopez who are from of
lawyers so this is this captures
who can remedy who can avail
themselves of the laws result of
false and deceptive practices
and expands the that class of
individuals to those who were
armed beyond just that maybe an
immediate purchaser of a firearm
so Mister Cummings of the bill
will almost go as they strictly
equipment but this place Mr
Chairman
this bill would modify the PA to
include specifically include Act
actions against those who
manufacture distribute
advertise or sell firearms but
it only permits to if that suit
is permitted by the protect
lawful commerce in arms act
which is a federal law that was
passed in two thousand five and
says you may not sue an arms
manufacturer dealer.
distributor unless you meet one
of five or six exemptions this
would apply specifically to one
exemption and not law which says
that you may need to firearms
dealers distributors
manufacturers if they act
contrary to state or federal law
so if they're breaking the law
their son going to somebody
they're not allowed to sell a
gun to you can bring suit but
you cannot bring suits simply
because they sold a gun that was
later used music crime rate
right okay.
Thanks that makes Mr thank you
anything else about the
militarism was ever questions or
pay hundreds.
We have the amendment good so we
do have an amendment do you want
to consider that now.
Mr we would yeah we I think in
fairness this committee we want
you to know that's what.
And and make sure they have the.
I wouldn't want to be the
center to show that we're but it
will take care of it Judiciary
that's not the way of doing
business of.
So here's your amendment.
No no explain it to a Senator
loss was coming to explain the
moment please.
This amendment
Mr chairman would specify that
only acts.
That the only time you could
bring an unfair practices claim
against a member the firearms
Business is if it's specifically
falls within one of the
exceptions from the liability
shield law PLC ADA antics that
explicitly requires that any
person bringing a suit under
that exception
not only allege that it is that
it falls within an exception but
also that it
that they have to show proximate
cause part.
So that's not required for all
areas of the U. PA but the
federal liability shield law
requires that so this makes it
explicit that New Mexico law
complies with the federal limit.
And then the final paragraph see
on that amendment
there's been some argument in
other states that wins firearms
transactions were allowed for
included in a statute like the
U. PA that a state may have
accidentally or even
intentionally desire to create
more immunity for people
involved in the firearms trade
and so C. would say that This
act does not decide complies
with the immunity required by
federal law but it does not
create any additional or point
four or other types of immunity.
Thank you you also seem to have
a new the firearm accessory
definition you're inserting.
For a.
That that's correct and that's I
guess these are just like
special holsters are both the if
I may yes German this is
primarily for things like bump
stocks or other devices that you
attached to a weapon.
I guess theoretically it could
include a holster because that
would attach to a device but
it's still only allows soup over
that if
if you if the sale was in
violation of state or federal
law.
And it does our to our state
laws currently have.
Any reference to these these
accessories.
Mr Chairman not at this time
okay all right.
Mr chairman I don't know what
was coming to appreciate this
but I do solve all take a moment
he builds guns the of symbolism
he built the parts he built his
own guns he prints his guns I
think is a disincentive point
three three D. printing no not
yet three D. print goes guns
he'd this guy couldn't tell you
how to put one together build
one all the pieces all the parts
and so it's it's a resource that
we're fortunate to have yes
thank you Mr okay let's just.
My.
The amendment right now we just
got past at.
I mean what what else do you
need to know of a I mean.
Details on how and I've heard
the discussion on.
Your well it was it was
delivered to the committee when
did you go to.
Yes so I mean our analysts have
it have had it.
Did you give us an analysis of
the NM.
That I mean what so what you're
your point is we we shouldn't
vote until we have an analysis
of it.
Times are and most of.
Okay it will it can we have a
motion on the minimum you have a
motion yes to.
I.
Any questions did you have some
questions Senator Gallegos of.
No.
For.
The.
Any any.
Questions for the sponsors or is
that correct.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Senator Gallegos.
Okay Senator call the roll.
Senator gave us no ma'am Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator AUMENT yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes six six two so
by six to one the the bill as
amended and we will now go to
the audience and the list is the
same thing we did last time
maybe three different people so
that everybody gets a chance to
speak on something today those
who are in support of this bill.
Okay well those are the same to
do you still want to speak your
to say anything else.
Thank you and did you want to
say anything about it for
through this okay.
Mr chairman members of the
committee hi you Mr Senator
register lobbyist for Giffords
and we want to thank the sponsor
and its staff from the hard work
they put into this legislation
this for the purpose and intent
of HB to the point when I four
engine work the sponsors of
legislation for we do believe
the proposed legislation meets
the legislative exceptions in
federal law thank you thank you.
And then we'll take three in the
chambers who are against it and
we'll talk to Mr list sort and
some others quit Sir you you
come up.
Yes.
There's an just use the Mike so
zoom will pick you up in.
Senator Matias is a little bit.
Good afternoon
Mr chair Senators.
Sure.
Several days as well.
In the old one then a lawyer
here for fifty years of the
founders is this the holding on
at the end of you have to keep
on hold okay one of the founders
of calibers back in the nineties
and up to we're all in.
The farmers by speaking
opposition of the Senate bill
for twenty eight because many
parts of it are
unconstitutional of the one of
them I think just got fixed with
the proximate cause
Representative requirement but
there are other parts for
example
it says under private remedies
any person aware of an unfair or
deceptive or unconscionable
trade practice be granted an
injunction
without proof of damages or you
could do that to to see now that
violates fundamental rules of
pleading
I don't know if that would fix
the amendment because I haven't
seen.
Another example of.
finality process.
If the party that.
Representative brings the
complete and wins they get
attorney's fees if the if the
party who's the target of the
attack we is they don't get
attorney's fees by prevailing
they have to prove that there
was actual knowledge or intent
by the accuser at the time
that's that's one of the with
the examples of problems within
this building consisting of.
The
Action pursuant to the.
Thank you.
We have a situation here where.
Of.
There is an opportunity for a
person who is concerned about.
The on field practice.
Request records.
And that.
If the if the firearm of this
case the FFL does not produce
the records then the failure to
produce the records would
constitute a two hundred fifty
thousand dollar a penalty
this is a draconian penalty
basically you're having
discovery without benefit and
that's before there's any court
action taken so you haven't
forced discovery without any
presiding a judge or other
arbiter to determine fear this
very sensitive issues of
privilege and all that sort so
that's that's a massive problem
with this of the other would is.
fundamental is that a willful
violation of the U. PA
in general balls the.
Potential penalty of one to five
thousand dollars depending on
the amount of the.
Possibility of however if it
involves firearm then the
penalty is trouble damages for
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars whichever is less this
is that this is draconian.
this the industry can't live
with this and I also I've got a
whole bunch of itemized there in
the paper that I asked to have
passed out the members the
committee I don't know if
anybody has it or not that I I
submitted this yesterday with
the request passed out there
which is good it's point seven
yeah I know we have that that is
right okay rather than to go
down we all use itemized I don't
think it's is one.
This.
And as we know it but.
And
I would sing your pillow paper
well let's of course that I've
it's gonna take awhile for me to
go through and through all this
but I'm going through.
I'm going through item by item
and I hope that Steve that by
passing the paper updates
We didn't get a hard copy I
think was a problem.
A.
That I can look back with.
How many copies for okay let let
let me speak generally to they
don't want to sit here and have
people thinking I'm thinking
just simply taking up all your
time I think.
I want to skip past all the
specific objections because
they're laid out in the paper
and just go to the general
overall umbrella of what the
issue this.
Firearms are regulated.
At least Mexico through federal
firearms licensees there's about
a thousand of us here in New
Mexico probably two hundred or
so are active retail business
we're subjected to a multitude
of federal laws federal
regulations by the F. and and
regulations by the FBI as well
as the AGF.
The FBI are the ones who making
this clearance form the forty
four seventy three mix
requirement that's a national
isn't prime system checked.
And then the ATF inspector
promises all the time inspection
of books required to do all
kinds of details
regulatory compliance.
So the F. bills.
Or if you prefer the gun dealers
they all have to be licensed the
fact.
Gun dealers are the guns police
in New Mexico.
We are the ones that do that
with this if this loft as real
as it presently drafted is is
inactive.
With the.
The provision of joint and
several liability so that
anybody up and down the chain
can be responsible in advantages
for a hundred percent of
whatever the alleged wrong or
damages was.
That's the kids if there's not
an FFL in the state of New
Mexico if you get insurance to
operate with that that kind of a
liability which they would be
subjected.
Likewise if any person who feels
like you're aggrieved.
To bring in action this opens
the door for.
for class actions with other of
annoying abuse of a multitude of
litigation that NFL would have
to grind through the use up
there of all of the money and go
out of business.
So the cut through all the the
details of what we don't like
about it the thing is that if
your intention the passion this
bill is to improve public safety
and protect the public this bill
is going to have exactly the
opposite effect you're gonna
lose the.
One police that you already have
because you have a built cannot
operate with this type of
liability the can't get
insurance they can't function.
If you eliminate the FF fails
you lose your entire fabric of
gun regulation within the Mexico
black market moves in.
Under the counter sales go on
and you both what we could end
up with the position in a
position that you have an old
Mexico where you've got all
these criminal gangs running
amok and that's in a country
that does not allow firearms or
guns he owned by anybody.
So with that.
Mr chair Senators.
Senator Swansea's I yield
Navratil let me just ask you one
question Mr come you said that
the the unfair practices are
overly broad but everything in
here is already existing except
for the new one as I read it.
It says representing goods or
services as legal to purchase
under the laws of New Mexico and
the US when they are legal to
purchase well that's the only
one we've added a I think revise
that make it over the because
everything else is already.
Well many examples if you're a
dealer a you receive a box from
a manufacturer open the box the
go through the next clearance
and sell the thing it turns out
that there were some defect in
the manufacture or there was
some part which at the time it
was manufactured was legal but
at the time that it was sold was
not legal then.
The FFL and everybody up and
down the chain is responsible in
damages for two hundred fifty
thousand dollars there are a
number of a anomalies like this
that could happen this is
because of the intricate nature
of the firearm business you have
a just in the hear that I'm sure
is well aware of the intricacies
of of firearms to keep track of
that so it creates astronomical
liability
if there's a fix in here to fix
proximate cause I understand I
have no time to read it.
But there is not any Sarah
balancing going on in this
in this bill it creates a
draconian unconstitutional
situation for people who are
doing the business of being the
gun police.
Good thank you at the
who else wants to speak on is
yes Sir.
And if you could avoid repeating
anything we've already heard.
I'll do my best I'm not an
attorney so I don't think we
have to worry about that.
My name is Dennis Byrd I was a I
practiced as a CPA for forty
five years.
I've been managing partner of
calibers indoor shooting ranges
not sure the New Mexico border
Authority for governor Martinez
for years.
In those roles one of my task is
to assess assess risk.
Look for my clients and for the
state of New Mexico.
Between them and involve
billions of dollars.
Here today in opposition a bill
for twenty eighth.
Representative from the national
shooting sports foundation will
speak to the content of the
bill.
I want to share concerns with
the committee about the impact
of the measure.
In my estimation just before
twenty eight poses a systemic
risk to the survival ever every
firearms the retailer in New
Mexico.
In all likelihood.
If the bill is passed we will
not be able to buy liability
insurance for companies.
No insurance no business.
Calibers was planning on
building an additional location
in Farmington New Mexico.
We've acquired the land.
Groups.
Landed the architectural
drawings are complete.
Project is now on hold.
Estimated construction cost is
approximately two million
dollars.
G. R. T. lost the state New
Mexico is approximately two
hundred forty thousand dollars.
Plus future G. R. T. from that
location.
The city of Bloomfield has
contacted us about assisting
them in building a range for the
police force.
We can say that community
hundreds of thousands of dollars
I simply negotiating access for
them are yet to be built range.
If we're not able to obtain
liability sure insurance.
What are policy expires.
I will be in violation of our
loan covenants with the banks.
I want to be called and the
survival of company becomes
problematic.
If the company closes.
We will no longer be able to
provide training training
services to multiple state and
federal agencies including
districts attorneys.
And the up predecessor Attorney
to.
Pardon me if the vehicle sales
of firearms extinguished as Mr
Goldman alluded to a black
market that has no federal state
or oversight will take its place
the result.
No tax revenue from the sales in
the state becomes the
significantly six more dangerous
place to live thank you for your
time thank you Mr.
is there a third person was to
speak on this here.
We we do have the men from the
of a forget we're from the
national firearms whatever
Derren list sort let's go ahead
and hear from him.
Mr chairman thank you I am there
unless sort for the national
shooting sports foundation we
are the firearm industry trade
association I do my best to skip
around my testimony so I don't
repeat what Mr Gilman Mr Burke
said before me Mr Chairman one
thing I did want to address is
the overly broad definition of
unfair trade practice that was
referred to earlier and an
example is that the definition
is misleading representation of
any kind knowingly made in
connection with the sale that
may tends to or does mislead
something that tends to mislead
I don't think any more mortal
can know what that means and
that is one of the reasons that
right now the maximum penalty
associated this violations three
hundred dollars this bill is
changing that specifically just
a firearm introduce to a quarter
of a million dollars as a
minimum so contemplate that for
a moment running a business and
having that hang over your head
with a quarter million dollar
penalty hanging over your head
that's eighty three thousand
percent more than what is
available today for the same
offense.
Mr Chairman I do appreciate the
time this bill as the two prior
to me mentioned will destroy the
firearm industry New Mexico
that's not an overstatement and
if this truly is the objective
there is a way to do it and that
is to amend the constitution is
been done eighteen times before
and that's a tough process it
was intended to be but repealing
the second amendment would be a
better way to go about this
to the details of the bill.
I mentioned that.
This is a specific directed tack
on a fireman history with this
eighty three thousand percent
increase in the penalty
associated with violation of
this very subjective they act
That's the only indication that
you can get out of that is that
it is an attempt to destroy the
industry every FFL in the state
every manufacturing the state
there's no other conclusion you
can come to so including the
legislative finance committee
content language on page eleven
limits limits the scope of
claims that can be brought
against the firearm industry if
this is the intent the language
is not getting the job done does
need to be changed in addition
to the unprecedented eighty
three thousand percent thank
increase the punitive awards
against firemen's he's
exclusively this legislation is
intended to circumvent federal
law prohibiting law abiding
heavily regulated members of the
firearm industry from being held
civilly liable for the criminal
actions of third parties over
whom they have no control the
entire concept of potential
liability in these instances is
absurd to most New Mexicans is
absolutely identical to the
concept of holding for
manufacturing and its dealers
responsible for the harm caused
by drunk drivers.
Wrapping up here last forty five
seconds Sir those centers likely
to support this bill usually
argue that they are looking out
for the average New Mexican this
bill does precisely the opposite
these people will not be able to
afford to drive hours each
direction to legally purchase a
firearm from a few FL's may
remain standing to sue me any
survive.
Certainly the two very
experienced a fellow you just
heard from say nine well those
who remain will be required to
dramatically increase prices to
pay for the litigation this bill
forces upon them making firearms
and ammunition even more
unattainable ultimately this
will undoubtedly lead these
otherwise law abiding New
Mexicans to the black market to
secure their means of protection
and natural god given right
those who support this bill will
be crushing in criminalizing the
average New Mexicans Sir chip Mr
chairman members the committee I
appreciate your time and we
would certainly ask that Senate
bill four twenty eight the table
the state constitution and the
citizens of the state thank you
thank you Mr let's sort Senator
did you want to respond to of
the the testimony from the
witnesses I would briefly I'll
just touch a few points inching
the just posted it was thrown
around repeatedly is an eighty
three thousand percent increase
in fines and penalties are
unfair trade practices act we
were just checking the what
we're doing is we're increasing
the penalties that existed now
under the existing act those
have existed since nineteen
fifty three that's the last time
we increased any penalties or
fines under the unfair trade
practice at I'm looking around
the room I'm guessing most of
you all well I'm guessing maybe
were not alive in nineteen fifty
three but the I didn't have to
volunteer you have to on here I
was giving you all pass there
for a minute but but many of us
working remotely alive in
nineteen fifty three when those
penalties and fines were first
adopted so yes it sounds like an
enormous increase in something
that's well over a half century
old in their in their fines and
penalties but once again you can
use statistics and spend things
and lots of different ways the
the suggestion that is going to
put the industry out of business
I would just focus the committee
on pages four and five we have
an existing definition under
existing unfair trade practices
act you'll see that definition
on page four line twenty four
here we define what is an unfair
and deceptive trade practices we
make that illegal in New Mexico.
We provide a list of the things
that mate may constitute an
unfair and deceptive trade
practice in all we're doing here
is reading that language on pay
I as an additional unfair
deceptive current practice and
the only thing that's going to
put out of business or harm or
penalize anybody is a business
that represents to be legal that
which is not legal as long as
you do not unfairly and
deceptively ms Representative
your fire arms you this bill has
no consequence to whatsoever.
What about the two hundred fifty
thousand dollars
that that that's where they're
getting that eight hundred and
thirty percent increase Mr
chairman and and that is that is
a six and significant potential
up upper and penalty and I think
of the the I think we all know
without me having to go into
detail about the
money that exchanges the.
In this industry in the purchase
and sale of firearms and so it
is a significant penalty the
goal here is quite simple which
is we're trying to get
manufacturers not to
misrepresent that which is
illegal to be legal example is
you know what we're looking at
think of of machine Sheet�
machine gun as an example right
federal law restricts and limits
what can be sold and used and
possessed and as long as you're
not representing an illegal
machine gun to be legal you're
not going to be worried about a
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar penalty it should be a
big penalty.
Okay
we'll go to the committee then
first to Senator Gallegos.
Mr chairman thank you and
senator and I appreciate you
know the dialogue that you just
try to clear up some of the
concerns of Mister chairman
Senator in the handout that Mr
Gilman gave us of.
Under right underneath the
heading.
No it's actually second page
eighteen nineteen civil
penalties it says a and it goes
back to the two hundred fifty
thousand that you're talking
about a willful violation you PC
you pay a civil penalty not
exceeding five thousand less
farms involved in civil penalty
up to two hundred fifty thousand
he has at designated as
unconstitutional and and I I
heard the remark to you just had
have we looked at the arc on
constitutionality of this Mr
chair Senator Mr chairman I'll
just little smile I was the
sponsor of legislation that
eliminated the so called gun
show loophole and to require
background checks at the time I
was told that law was most
certainly unconstitutional I
can't member how long ago we did
that but it's been for for five
years and then when I introduce
the legislation to the extreme
risk protection law so called
red flag bill of course you may
remember I think we meant that
seven times on the floor I was
told repeatedly that law was
unconstitutional would be
promptly challenged this is the
arguments rates when it comes
down to any kind of gun safety
legislation it's always going to
be charged be unconstitutional
I'm used everybody telling me my
bills are unconstitutional and
I'm sitting here smiling because
nobody's challenge me not even
brought suit much less been
successful so we work real hard
we we have really bright lawyers
in this legislature I'm
privileged Law School professor
appear and we have an incredible
staff of lawyers we read the
cases carefully we're pretty
bright and I'm proud of that and
for all the threats that I'm
constantly confronted with that
we're gonna be challenged on
constitutional grounds go for.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator I'll ask a this
bill be looked at by a Ivey Soto
he seems to be able to go deeper
but Mr center of those joke of
all the call on the same page of
a little further down since
legal sales farms would as
you'll answer same page page
preview of second rate movies a
year looking ahead of a week
we've got it now I'm sorry we
didn't have before we got it
thank you so a little further
down says this just before eight
serve no legitimate purpose of
venture or purpose
It right under so legal sales
farms in New Mexico are hundred
percent of controlled by farm
dealers and and understand that
I just received the same time
you did have you guys looked at
that and see where the issue is
with the dealers in New Mexico
if we have problems with them in
the past Mr Mr chairman you know
I don't think we that we do I
really don't know that we've had
a lot of problems and I respect
the FFL and I think they do a
very good job of policing the
industry I think that that is to
their great credit and the and
I've done business with them and
and respect what they do in the
important role when they when
the statement in that paragraph
says they're heavily regulated
by the FBI a TF another I. group
they are and and that's that's
all true as well too let's be
clear though however that some
of those regulations when the
reference here is heavily
regulated by state law they are
because we've impose a state law
you know they're heavily
regulated because we've said we
want background checks we
they're they're heavily
regulated because we so we don't
want to have gun show loopholes
with their heavily regulated of
by us that's we've been elected
to do so I I I think we have a
working relationship and that's
where it should be.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that I I just have concerns with
this gentleman coming out trying
to protect his business I do
have a Mr Chairman center a
question and this came from the
dust analysis have you seen what
they are asking do on page
eleven of section three and you
actually in your amendment a
repair one of them so Mister
center on up page eleven.
line I you put in the state to
designate the.
Page eleven one one one again
Sir and and it's in your.
Amendment of move it the.
To the a.
Of.
To give you a section I.
In the dust remarks it's asking
just for clarification it might
be good to go further down.
On after the period online ten.
To add a B. section and then
further down of.
On line nineteen after the
period to add a C. section I
just didn't know if you've
noticed that in.
The information from the Asian
else's.
Louis let miss Cummings and
answer that for you center
because he's he's committees
anticipated that that remark but
before we do if you'll forgive
me because I don't want to
forget your question the I think
I you know as I was reading and
and talking the same time I
think it's important on that
last question if I may go back
just a bit before big with
because we're talking about F.
of elves of the one thing that
that they included a paragraph
here is the statement that the
FL's are the only fire arms
police I I think that it's
important to recognize that we
have of extraordinary law
enforcement officers and our
state of New Mexico and a half
of those support for performing
import role but to suggest that
they're the only
of
entity organization of people
that are policing firearms I
think that disregards the law
enforcement role in that process
but but your point on the
structure of the organization
bill let me turn to Mr comes
please.
Mister chairman Senator the
amendment does actually create
that section C. so only now on
an eight and a B. and C..
I hope you turn to the amendment
on to that amendment.
I apologize HSD.
The very last paragraph.
Mr reading on item three on the
front page give me the Hey.
I see see in the bottom and be
is halfway down.
The reason don't see it so I
just want to bring that up I I
just have a couple final
questions Mister chairman
Senator all all not worry about
that since you've already looked
at addressing that I do have a
question on
The penalties is Mr chair
Senator is a two hundred fifty
thousand the minimum penalty or
set the maximum.
The through the.
Server is greater.
Mister chairman Senator the two
hundred fifty is actually
neither the minimum and maximum
the two hundred fifty would be
in the absence so the maximum
amount of damages would be the
actual damages if they are
greater than two hundred and
fifty thousand.
So it provides a floor if you
will but it isn't that cap for a
minimal.
So if that's if it is more okay
and that's what I try to clarify
because that would be the
minimum.
Plus whatever the anything over
that in damages.
Mr and and senator Rick if I can
what you're looking at that
sections on page fifteen of the
bill that that that of financial
award I think the key that we
haven't discussed yet is that
language on line twelve page
fifteen this is for a knowing
violation notices this requires
a proof that somebody knowingly
engaged in a trade practice
income functional trade practice
in violation of New Mexico or
federal law so that the let's
hybrid right we have to show we
have so somebody intended to
violate state and federal law.
For that penalty will apply.
Well I think for then with that
you Mr chair thank you senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Your microphone Center thank you
Mr Mr chair I have here is the
FIR talks about the jury
attorney general's concerned
about making the investigation
to material subject to impress.
Page.
Twenty two.
but with you to the attorney
general's
is concerned.
The concerned.
Twenty.
It says the.
The Attorney General often six
highly sensitive information.
Including hip of protected
health information private bank
banking information including
detailed transaction logs and we
have this discussion with the
Attorney General about how
important it was for them to
keep the information
confidential and your bill makes
it subject to it for a.
Miss Mister chair what is the
difference.
What why the different treatment
here this bill.
Mr Chairman Senator Lopez the
change in here would provide
that.
That.
It pro would apply if not
otherwise if there was not
otherwise an exemption so hit I
I the I. P. R. A. does not apply
to hip of protected records the
I. P. R. A. does not apply to
trade secrets
it doesn't apply to anything
that has been sealed by court so
this just that the change would
say that
any information gathered by the
internet general's office.
Related to an investigation for
violations of the act would be
subject to EPRA unless it falls
under the existing in the IPRA.
There.
The default confidentiality for
exception.
Because they feel like the
default is it is subject and
then they'd have to prove.
That it's not and they're just
concerned about that and and I
guess I just want to know if
that's your intent.
It is okay thank you thank you
it's too bad we lost internet
Attorney General because but
it's you know it's interesting
point on the last action and we
have you go backwards of course
but but of that section we look
at is part of a civil
investigative process in which
is what we're talking about with
the civil rights division right
and so we already do this and we
already have something along
these lines but to the to the
specific of your question yet
this is the default this is can
be subject April.
Thank you and then.
do you know if ghost guns are
banned by federal law Mr chair.
he could look at look at Mr
comes coming out of his chair
here okay.
Who's looking is live some of
them the Hey can I can I say
that you build goes guns is that
is if you want to take credit
for that or not really you have
a Fifth Amendment right to.
Amounts shown Mister chairman
Senator
So first the term goes gun is
it's not a term of art the term
that's used as a descriptor and
various different ways factually
what it refers to is the firearm
that's manufactured without a
serial number because it's made
by a person who does not sell it
is not in the business of
selling.
And so as it stands right now
federal law and state law permit
you for me to build a fire arm
but they do not permit me to
sell the fire are so under
existing federal law
There is an open question about
it because they're at the ATF is
in and in the process of
preventing a new rule that would
say that a.
Partially completed receiver the
receiver is the part of the gun
that we put a serial number on
and it's the one thing that you
cannot buy through the mail you
can buy all the other gun parts
through the.
So they're in the process of
perhaps re classifying it what a
partially couldn't completed
receiver is as a done but right
now you can buy of the partially
completed receiver from under
current that would be legal
under current federal and state.
Thank you Mr chair and what I
like is the representation that
something is legal to sell when
it's not would be covered by
this act and unfair trade
practices and that's what I was
kind of trying to search for is
one of the parameters of it and
I'm sorry I offended you by
using the term goes the it's the
one I'm most familiar with.
Mister chairman Senator doesn't
offend you know.
again I think that this is
really important another
important firearm bill and I
think the sponsor for bringing.
Anybody else with the will of
the committee.
I moved to pass second seconded
by Senator McKenna any
discussion further debate
questions.
Secretary will call the roll.
As well as amended yes we have
the the amendment.
Cost center guy angles no ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center my is this yes Senator
McKenna yes centers committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator to
the piano yes.
Six to one yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you for let me
have so much your time on the
committee today it's been
certainly learned a lot about
firearms today thank you.
Until next will have Senate
Representative Chandler for two
bills.
HB twenty six.
I tried to send you an answer is
said this bill putting would not
sit send the answer the answer
was I'd already told senators of
undersea could go first.
Chocolate pudding.
You really meant get just right
it was worth a try he's trying
to guilt trip yeah Hilton.
All right.
Go ahead Representative good to
see you good to see you thank.
This is not our first house bill
but it's one of the very first
and we're glad to see I'm happy
to be here thank you very much
chairman and hello Committee
members very good to see you
this afternoon this bill is
intended to frankly a fix an
error in my call and more that
we made a couple of years ago
we're in our tax package we
remove the requirement that the
tax department actually publish
lists of abandoned property in
you know hard copy newspapers
and I'm sure all of you know the
tax package is often an eighty
year hundred page bill and you
know it's just agency that this
was put in there and we feel
that it is not in the interests
of those individuals who have
abandoned property to have have
simply going to a website which
is what was put in its place to
see whether or not there might
be some abandoned property
listing under their name and
that's on this tax department's
website that they can go to so
the replacement for the long
standing practice of publishing
was replaced with going to a
website and we feel that that's
not in the service of many many
New Mexicans especially those in
rural New Mexico who don't have
access to you know some good
strong solid internet service so
that's just the essence of the
bill chairman and committee did
you want to add anything Mr
chairman Mr chair members of the
committee Larry R. and Richard
lobbyist for Albuquerque
publishing company and the New
Mexico press association that's
exactly what happened was the
COVID session because the tax
cleanup bill we just did not see
it so we think it's a good
policy to go back to what it was
before so this just goes back to
the to the requirement that was
in statute up until two years
ago but I was I would point you
to one what I would consider
improvement and that came from
tax and Rev when we are dues
additional and that is instead
of publishing someone's address
we don't publish their address
which may be bad for public
safety reasons we just.
Published the name and the
municipality in which the last
known address is located and
he's not here today but he did
testify and I think I can speak
for my father actually had two
instances where he found
significant financial resources
through the publication this
publication requirement once my
grandfather died they found a
life insurance policy and when
his current wife mother died
they found some stocks that she
had owned and also life
insurance policy which was worth
about eighty thousand dollars so
it's not always something little
and what happens frequently is
if you don't see your name in
the list somebody else sees it
they call you you inquire you
find that you have property that
you have access to it so this is
really about making sure people
can get their property that they
have a legal right to.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
okay good.
Let's go to.
Is there anybody here in support
of this good with that.
The up the newspaper association
isn't press associations in
favor of it yes this must be a
significant source of revenue
for the presses of Hughes.
Of the one.
Philadelphia yes it it it's all
some revenue that I think it's
probably about a little over a
hundred thousand dollars that it
goes to newspapers all across
the state but one that those is
we've heard a lot of people say
I didn't see the paper but my
uncle Saudi prince Saud and he
gets to them so so it you know
that T. services purpose when
you when you've got something
just online.
Who knows how you find it's
there's so much out there and
and so this is kind of nail
down.
Communication people.
To.
Thank you during the first day
or two of the session there was
a group from Texan road in the
lounge in the house.
With the computer set up and you
gave him your name and your
identification they tell you if
you had but.
How would anybody know of their
review.
Who has the time to spend a few
minutes every day checking that
website Seaview picked up some
lost money years money so with
anybody here in opposition to
this bill.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Maestas discussion thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler to amend
the R. this doesn't do away with
the website correct well I still
there Mr chair and
representative no it doesn't it
does not and actually the press
association also has a link to
these publications that so when
there's a publication of press
association make sure that those
are available only legal notices
and so on including this Mr
chair representative who who are
who purchases the the
publication what what agencies
in charge of all this private
property taxed roof.
Mr chair.
All right.
Very good any other discussion.
Yeah we had a second from I
forget who told you.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maintenance center city of
office yes Senator Tallman yes
center to the penal yes.
Six three five six zero budget
to pass thank you very much you
have another.
Bill number thirty one no
publication required for a name
change.
You want me to move.
Right
thank you again we are on house
bill I guess thirty one and I
hope you all know Marshall
Martinez with the quality New
Mexico and my dear colleague
senator o'neill had a meal
Senator Hotmail is going to
carry this bill on the floor for
us so I'm very pleased to be
working with him Mr chair
this bill is is on behalf of the
LGBTQ community and survivors of
domestic and sexual violence and
what it does is it changes a
very an outdated practice where
by somebody wishing to do a name
change has to publish the name
change in advance in the
newspaper and.
We feel that this was before
that this has been in the in for
over a hundred years this has
been a practice generally so
what the bill does it removes
this outdated requirement to
publish a name change in a local
paper for people of any age.
And when the safety of the
parent or child is jeopardize
this bill allows parents or
legal guardians to seal the name
change records for themselves
and for their children thanks
for their children under the age
of fourteen.
The bill is about removing
unnecessary financial burdens
because obviously there's costs
and publication and so on and it
also protects members of the
LGBTQ community and survivors of
sexual and domestic violence and
with that we're I'm happy to
stand for questions unless Mike
pleasure the chair wishes to
hear from my colleague senator
how to meal very good thank you
Representative Senator do you
want to say anything Mr chair
members of the committee
Committee this means a lot for
the LGBTQ plus community if you
think of trans individuals who
are changing their names who
might not want to be outed would
then be out in the publication
and this could lead to issues
within the community when a
community isn't accepting that
without all yield over back to
the representative and Mr mark
one at anything I know Mr
chairman I think responses
covered about thank you again
anybody in the audience in
support of this measure.
Yes let.
Thank you Mr chairman was
committee still are Iran and so
this for the New Mexico
association.
I just think it's important to
point out that we do think
publication is a really good way
to get information to people
since we just talked about that
but we also recognize that
that's not always a good thing
and there are those instances
where you can create a public
safety problem or other problems
in individuals lives that we
publications not a good idea so
we appreciate this piece of
legislation and the sponsor for
bring it we think this is a good
public policy and urge you to
support the bill thank you thank
you yes yes.
Linda.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel for
the coalition against domestic
violence and we've worked on
this bill for a number of years
and never been able to get it
through it's very important for
people who are survivors of
domestic violence sexual assault
if they want to make sure that
they care and change their name
and not have an easily
accessible way for offenders to
track them so this is very
important and we urge your
support thank you very good
thank you.
And on line we have Janet
Williams did you want to speak.
Miss Williams.
Hello members of the committee
and chair this is Janet Williams
of Santa Fe.
National organization for women
and we strongly stand in strong
support and reiterate everything
ever everyone else has said
thank you.
Thank you is there anyone here
in opposition.
Anybody online members of the
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr chair I could be missing
amendment or something
Does.
Things like court order.
People.
Thanks for that.
It applies to parents of and
children who are under fourteen
or children under fourteen I
think I have that right.
Yeah sure Mr chair and senator
so to start with I I think as
you well know anybody can make a
motion in court for the records
to be sealed across any of those
cases it also allows this this
this amendment allows for the
parents to to apply the parent
or guardian to apply to the
court not to give notice to
other guardians if there is a
safety concern and so the
example is one parent is abusive
the other parent is trying to
change their name in the name of
their children to get away from
that abusive partner the notice
from the court to the other to
the other Gardner parent could
be waived because of the danger.
This.
Thank you.
Anybody else any of Senator
Maestas thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Hotmail
Representative Chandler is.
German expert the okay I'm
freaking out so a twelve year
old a thirteen okay change your
name today I didn't know that R.
or is or is this sentiment is a
statue written in anticipation
of of an adult petition on their
behalf.
If Mister chairman Senator the
second part right so the need
this bill does not change the
name of which some are the age
at which someone can change
their name just that
notification peace only when the
guardian of the parent or
guardian makes an application on
their behalf.
Thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Second it any other discussion
or Senator Hickey seconded could
present to keepers.
The
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maintenance Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes
center to the piano yes.
Six.
Six zero six area of a defense
you so much thank you it was
having Senator out of me other
than.
Would you over the top of my
lucky charm.
Thank you no Senate
representative all kinds been
sitting there all afternoon and
when we need him when he finally
his moment has arrived these gun
do we know how to get a more
Representative Lujan listen to
you before him.
Yeah I mean Madam will drive
this shouldn't this I don't
think any of these will take a
whole lot of time
so let's go to Representative
Lujan Hey house bill ninety
five.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee for having is here
today on a beautiful Sunday
with the purpose of is the house
energy environmental natural
resources substitute for H. B.
ninety four ninety five does is
in twenty nineteen commissioner
Garcia Richard establish the
State Land Office is first ever
office renewable energy.
This legislation is aimed at
institutionalizing this function
and its successful efforts to
advance renewable energy.
What.
The bill adds a new section of
law to chapter nineteen which
governs the state land office
are formally establishing an are
formally establishing an office
of renewable energy at the
agency and specifically the bill
provides quote the commissioner
shall establish and maintain it
renewable energy office to
advance the production and
development of renewable energy
and with that Mr chair all have
my expert witness introduced
himself.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is certainly
Stewart deputy commissioner of
operations at the State Land
Office.
Right I will stand for questions
I just quick question and I see
this is the committee sub for
you.
It's a one paragraph bill what
what is the regional bill look
like.
Thank you Mr chair I will let
similarly answer I see here it
is it's always a Mr chairman
that's a different bill members
of the committee at the original
bill had amended to sectional
law related to the duties of the
land commissioner
Hadn't been updated since
nineteen twelve so when we went
into that section as you know
you look at all the other
provisions of law in there and
there were a lot of discussions
on the house side and
the minority thought that it
would be better to just go ahead
and have a separate section of
law the operative language is
exactly the same we're simply
creating a new section of law as
opposed to amending existing law
so this is good with you to make
that yes and and better yet we
worked along party sides to get
it done surtax.
For that so if anybody in the
audience here in support of this
bill.
Yes mark of.
Good afternoon.
It's a good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is mark opens
Ollis and I represent both
pattern energy and Invenergy
pattern Energy of is building
over eight thousand megawatts
renewables in New Mexico and has
already invested over three
billion dollars in owed ten
thousand I'm sorry one thousand
fifty megawatt farm down to
Duran and it's you know
Invenergy is getting ready to
invest over two billion dollars
for three hundred seventy mile
transmission line here that's
really helping us achieve our
ETA objectives this we what one
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward is appropriate
and eminently reasonable to
include this new office in the
state land office and so we
appreciate her highlighting the
renewable energy in New Mexico
renewable industry.
In New Mexico and we support the
bill just a committee to move it
forward thank you very much Mr
chairman and members the
committee I thank you markup and
online we have Meredith Macon.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on merit naked
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
and American Association of
university women and we stand in
very strong support and we want
to thank the land commissioner
what I think of the Sanchez who
worked on this is very important
for I'm not just New Mexico but
for our country to have
leadership in renewable energy
and we have we have to face the
fact that oil and gas is soon
going to be a depleted and we
need to have alternative energy
sources as well as revenues to
keep our state funded thank you.
A good thank you.
Members of the committee I move
to I move you move to do pass.
Okay.
Senator McKenna seconded.
He's very quick is yes you can
close.
Slow on the uptake secretary
will cut any any questions are
doing this is a great idea I'm
looking forward to geo thermal
being part of that to three.
He had a quick question thank
you Mr chairman of the.
So the office the office would
that be similar to a division in
a normal state agency Mr chair
Representative Senator what is a
normal I mean it you know under
the chief executive it would be
under the chief executive so
those.
Madam chairman hi Senator yeah
yeah that would be like a new
division faced yeah essentially
and you don't want to put in the
statutory framework to that new
office.
Mr chair Senator than the office
already is is functional and is
under operational budget right
now so it it would just be able
to be codified into law and and
be able to continue its
functionality Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank secretary will call the
roll Senator guy Aigles Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Six is there a vote to have a
due process thank you for your
patience and for spending Sunday
afternoons as thank you Mr.
Representative Alcon.
yes one of six.
I need to pay attention.
I
afternoon Mister chair
afternoon it is awesome to be
here on a Sunday afternoon with.
Mr chair out pretty much a house
bill one oh six thank you listen
to us you would participate in
have put this on the consent
calendar but of course everybody
says that right.
With the best care with those is
that it means a public employee
retirement that to raise the
maximum amount of the pension
benefit from ninety percent to a
hundred percent of it employees
I know average salary.
And I have here on my right
a column a godfather because
users David M. as a monthly I do
work for B. R. eight he used to
be above the water yes the for
and non.
Actually he wrote this bill
before you left us.
I
it or not and he will answer any
questions you have.
So that Mr chair I hope that
requests thank you did you want
to say something about it
Mr chair I'll just note that the
the airboard had has not taken a
formal position one way or the
other on this but I am here for
any technical questions that
come I think we had we had a
similar bill on the state police
for Representative Senator these
are all the chair of senator
Munoz has a bill like this that
includes the just the state
police corrections and
From appropriations chairman of
yes of the like this but this is
inclusive of all state employee
to a lot of really good P. R. A.
employees the argument then was
that that would enable them to
hang on to people a little
longer they would be leaving
after their bare minimum they
would try to get those extra
years how many years extra does
it usually take to get from
ninety to a hundred.
Mr Mister chair if it depends on
the plan there are some plans
that have for example a two
point five percent multiplier
some three percent state police
for example third tier one of
three percent with the twenty
percent enhancement on top of
that so it depends but it would
in general be maybe three to
three to four years.
We can squeeze in for a little
more work before they retire.
Given incentive to retire that
let's go to the audience anybody
here in support of this bill.
Anybody here in opposition to
this bill anybody online one
person is on line.
Josh Anderson.
From just me.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee just want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
Ford and echo what you said Mr
chairman this is a great
proposal to retain our current
workers a little incentive to
have them work a few years
longer which will help with food
or vacancies and we urge the
committee to support thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you judge members of the
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
I'm asking this question in case
I get asked it on the floor
okay.
Of integrating the carried it
for you on the floor why hasn't
the P. E. R. A. done the
actuarial
analysis pursuant to article
twenty section twenty two of the
constitution.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
about we have received actuarial
analysis up I apologize if
that's not updated in the FIR
the analysis shows and and it's
similar for all bills that
provide this this increase in
the from the ninety percent a
hundred percent what essentially
happens is that we recalculate
the days goes into a lock to
account for one hundred percent
pensions which shows essentially
higher pensions going out so it
shows a a one time hit in terms
of the solvency of the fund
because we're now adjusting for
higher pensions if the bill does
what it's intended to do and and
that has people work longer in
order to receive those higher
pensions they pay in longer they
also if they receive a pension
for less time because they've
worked more of their life
which that affect that offsets
that one time in the beginning
causing it to really be either
cost neutral or slightly
positive but but but that would
and I would just note that would
that would require us to kind
of.
Account for human behaviors
going into the future which is
why it's not an exact certain
number.
Thank you Mr chair these are
never exact science so I
appreciate that Mr chair I just
hope that all have that in my
hands when I hear it on the
floor in case I get that
question.
Thank you Mr chairman question
this in the.
F. I. R. there's a chart.
The chose years of service
required for maximum pension
benefit the very thing I was
just asking you about and am I
reading this right it for for
municipal general members after
work forty five years.
Was that something else present
me that's like the fourth one
down.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee that that's.
This is looking at it now and I
would probably defer to our door
is that H. A. somehow aging out.
Under under municipal plan one I
I I'm almost I'm under the
impression that that may be
phased out already at this point
out of if we don't have anybody
because they all died of old age
before they could return.
Mr chairman members actually
here with our
so we administer thirty one
different plans to choose a
budget but yet the lowest plan
of for small municipalities it
is a two percent pension factor
so.
Ninety the so that their
retiring but they're not getting
ninety percent the they could be
retired they could be actively
working they pay in less amount
in contributions to what they're
creating is that a lesser amount
but yet we've we've had members
retire with fifty years so it it
just depends on on that
individual plat and the plan
that they are in so this will
enable them to get to a hundred
electorate fifty years to do it
Mr chair that raises Committee
if if they stay in that plan
that is correct okay got you
thank you.
Any other discussion what's will
of the committee.
The quick question quick
question from Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative reasons for it
so.
Is it P. R. Peroni recommend
this.
Mr chairman and members on this
bill part in particular the the
purported stay neutral I will
say in twenty twenty we had a
pension reform bill Sen bill
seventy two this provision was
included in that it it actually
didn't have a capsule as long as
somebody wanted to work they
would get credit for it you are
be are are you know sister
agency they don't have a cat B.
it's not uncommon for for
pension funds like us to cap
pensions.
So okay so it Mr chair and the.
If you're neutral.
That take imposition Mister
chairman Senator it it doesn't
hurt us so yeah the pair board
decided stay neutral associate
with the unfunded liabilities
in.
Is that
Sound the current financially
far is alive and for the
liability relief Mr chairman in
the Senator are unfunded
liabilities just to under seven
point two billion dollars we are
seventy percent funded that
reform that was passed in twenty
twenty we're about halfway
through the implementation
standpoint so we are seeing
improvement going forward but as
of today seven point two billion
unfunded seventy percent funded.
Why are you as you know it we
are you have to be a hundred
percent to be sewn financially
soaps Services percent sounds.
We'll be back Representative
that that's all I have those six
Mr chairman thanks again for a
caring this bill.
Okay.
All right secretary will do we
have a motion what will the
committee.
I'm Senator item that you can
Senator Sedillo this moves that
we adopt to do best seconded my
S..
Well we're the second second
second you yeah of course
senator Helms seconds it Senator
my sister the question thank you
Mr chairman thank you call on
thank you Madam the just wanted
to the point that Senator
telling me that there is no.
It's a misnomer to suggest
there's an unfunded liability or
that there's that that that that
that's an incorrect assertion
with the gentleman said was
corrected in the pay as you go
system.
The pay as you go so you know
the the the government's gonna
go belly up so we which should
have it slightly different
policy than say the private
sector with regards to that they
but my question is the up.
How do you get to ninety percent
to a in other words you you
might need sits on that.
Almost persuaded me to vote for
that that not everybody gets to
the ninety percent correctly
could you just explain that to
me Sir.
Mr Chairman center Maestas in
most plans and we'll just use
the state police of state
general plan for example twenty
five years I'm gonna be eligible
to retire okay seventy five
percent of my final average
salary the cap today if I chose
to stay to ninety percent of
that would be a career of thirty
years to get to that ninety
percent lifting this cap would
be about thirty three years and
for my.
Percent and Mr chairman German
result on the thirty three years
or so is.
Is determined by what you put in
through those thirty three and a
half years or is that in
statute.
Mr chairman Sir Maestas yeah
there are statutory contribution
rates that I make each year that
my employer makes each year and
preacher I work I get.
Edit three percent for those.
Thank you Mr chairman Jim about
the thirty th th for example I'm
looking on page three of the FIR
at the top.
Top category planned three it
goes from thirty years to thirty
three point three the
contributions are in statute but
is the thirty three point three
in statute.
Mr chairman and Jeremih Estes
not today this is a.
Would this bill would put that
in statute and depending on the
percentage that each person gets
per year so right now it's being
exit ninety I think that answers
my question that that it's not
that thirty three and a half
years that the statue but the
percentage correlated to the
money that comes in and that and
that it pays out at this
particular time my kind almost
there the ballpark gentleman I I
just just exactly okay I I feel
a little more easier about this
because we we've seen this
before you we
We increase the pay out.
By the employer.
Which is the taxpayer we
increase the payout by the
worker which is the tax payer.
And then we lower the oil you
know we allow more in the back
in and it's awesome said it is
no longer awesome we have to cut
the years back and then ten
years later we expanded again.
So I I I'm uncomfortable forty
for this in the less I see like
the actuarial analysis from the
board but I so I don't know if
the boards remain neutral
because that they take a
position because there or the or
their disagree as to what that
message should be but I think
this private idea but we
But I I I just not comfortable
making at least right now thank
you a point with I'm gonna be
carried on the floor and I
assume that I would have that
actuarial.
For.
Senator Hickey.
being very new to all this and
hearing people's history of the
ups and downs and the ups and
downs in the ups and downs we
certainly have more ups and
downs coming in the future the
point I'm I'm trying to make is.
That it's so hard to find people
who take a number of state jobs
and and I do believe that that.
We underpay.
And so I know this is perhaps an
incentive for people to to stay
longer
And so I in and and I've I've
lived my life in actuarial
tables and health care
Thank all up and down to all
that we can give sign waves and
so forth working with good and
and and how to support my belief
is that we'll find a way to be
able to support this when we
need to be able to support it
but perhaps the most frustrating
thing is I'm learning is our
inability to fill positions are
crappy pay are excuse me bit.
Thank you well Cervantes got
away with B. S. so I thought I
could at least rapid.
that
I I've ever so I I I understand.
The potential uncertainties and
you'd love to see the actual
tables but certainly aware of
this but I'm in every agency and
and the the personnel department
up which needs to baguettes
sixty year old set of rules and
stuff and go out and find what
might under in large companies
do to attract and retain people
in the state but this is
certainly
help and it just helps my
soapbox time can we please
modernize state.
Thank you thank you senator any
other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes center
to the piano yes.
And the six zero by six to zero
you have a do pass
Representative so did you you're
gonna vote against.
Okay I don't know
for
sure sure this is changes both
in a so I I do want those yeah
they do pass these are thank you
members of the committee.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Chiropractors.
House bill seventy five.
This.
Go ahead Representative good
afternoon and welcome members of
the committee good to see all of
you this beautiful Sunday
afternoon house bill seventy
five does one thing and that
allows chiropractors to be
included in Medicaid so that we
can start to help New Mexicans
gain more access to chiropractic
care in.
I'm sorry I'm gonna take that
back this is there's two bills
and I were on the other one so
I'm just going to read the time
on this one Mr chairman and
acting sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance code the health
maintenance organization law on
the nonprofit health care plan
to establish limits on
costsharing and coinsurance for
chiropractic physician services
and with that Mr chairman I'm
gonna introduce my expert this
is doctor Michael Padilla once a
susceptible things are good to
see you again good to see you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Michael program
chiropractic physician private
practice work at in a federally
qualified health center and at
the university of New Mexicos
pain clinic and a this is a
patient access bill that will
make it easier for patients to
receive
refracted Medicine budget and
it's been endorsed by the New
Mexico Public Health Association
over the decade the last decade
as well as several organizations
I will stand for questions.
And.
We'll go to the audience is yes
there is somebody in the
audience who wants to speak on
this bill.
Come up come up Linda and use
the Mike.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
members of the committee Linda
Siegel for the New Mexico
chiropractic Association and we
support this bill this is the
third time we've done this it
passed through the Senate in
twenty one and in nineteen and
That are are by annual renewal
of high rate so we started in
the house this time with
Representative Hochman Vigil and
hopes that it'll be easier to
get it through thank you.
Thank you and anybody else we
have to online both in support
we'll start with Branagh guy
ton.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Brenda great and I'm calling
on behalf of Blue Cross and blue
shield of New Mexico we want to
thank the sponsor for working
with us.
To ensure that the bill was
amended so that we have
sufficient time to implement we
support the expansion and look
for opportunities to ensure
their members have access to
primary care thank you very
much.
Very good thank you then we have
doctor J. see more.
Dr more.
You have on yes go ahead.
This chairman and members of the
committee thank you for your
time my name's doctor Casey
Moore I'm the vice president New
Mexico chiropractic Association
and the clinic director of
heights chiropractic and sports
medicine in Albuquerque on
behalf of our hundreds of our
party positions across the
states in the tens of thousands
of patients we ask for you to
support this bill to improve
access to our services in my
clinic it is not uncommon for
patients to present to my office
with private insurance that
have.
Copays per visit upwards of a
hundred dollars or more often
times these inflated copayments
are in excess of the
reimbursable about creating what
I consider phantom insurance and
not really benefit that
advertise and repeats
under this product so I ask you
for your continued support of
this bill and I think the spot
sponsor for bringing it forward
and I appreciate your time.
Very good thank you.
Okay members of the committee.
I move the past four years
we have a due process is their
second.
Second it this we move on to the
discussion we have a quick
question from Tom in a big
question from Hickey and a small
question medium size medium size
question for myself Senator
Tallman your small question.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Representative bring this
forward just curious and that.
Two of twenty one and you run
out of time or you run into
opposition if so what was it
thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom and we just ran out
of time.
The usual.
I've had that happen.
That's all I have Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair
I feel discriminated against
since I can only be small and
I'm shorter than him and I don't
know maybe you know you have the
big question all has a big
question thank you you know had
the small you had the big in
most of the meeting of the
offices I on medium and big yeah
so I write this out this is the
only chance I get to get B. tell
anyway thank you Mr chair and
thank you for bringing the bill
I I have used chiropractic
services for what turned out to
be too severely herniated just
for for wild that that work and
and and my wife swears
with the various musculoskeletal
neurologic
and I and I and I and I and I
agree that that as as and I
ought to tie this into mental
health we do ours
Exhibit our mental issues into
our bodies in ways in which we
twist ourselves up and create
paying for ourselves is no crime
in the evidence is rapidly.
developing to to confirm that
the the my only concern in this
is because I grew up in the
Midwest in the palm school of
chiropractic some chiropractors
under the guise of primary care
we're treating diabetes
pneumonia what have you with
thinking that that that credit
hit the right nerve it somehow
was gonna pump out more insulin
and so I'm I'm assuming that
you're not looking for a quote
primary care with your primary
care physician the bill we call
on would do so I assume this is
really to do Musco skeletal
neurologic in related Mr chair
Senator Hickey yes this is
definitely primarily focused on
pain management and opioid
prevention.
You very much thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator messes with
your medium sized questions or
medium sized quick comment thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative hope in the hill
drive at the refreshment
everyone this is passed twice
before but I think we got to the
finish line could you Mr chair
members of the committee
centered Maestas it's passed the
Senate in in its entirety twice
it's passed
last time it was on the house
floor just waiting
at midnight at twelve thirty I
was watching.
Late night waiting for it to
pass and and I can add to that
Mister chairman Senator last
aside was trying my hardest to
get this bill in as part of the
package of the last few that
have to get out and my efforts
were unsuccessful the last time
so hoping this time there will
be plenty.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Hochman Vigil and
then drive more raise it the.
Trying three times nothing
productive workers he waited
fifty years for his team to win
a Super Bowl
But now sixty five yes alright
trap is like a fleeting memory
in their.
They're now the two time
champions recently and.
So now you can't love the chief
as much as one state so thank
you.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes center
to be no yes so you have a six
to zero to pass this committee
members the last bill is on this
grid.
And if you remember we passed
this bill in its identical form
this is the
independent certified are in in
messages.
In the
area passed in the Senate
version this is a house version
of the same bill also having
Ellery tested do you want to
take action on this house
version of the sure I move that
do pass.
Thank seconded by Senator
Maestas and a question that.
As our bill Bennett equipment
and service Senate Bill been a
minute since as I have no idea
of what to.
It it's it's identical I do
believe me I know I've I've I've
been at this for you three
months is this the one you're
know you're carrying the other
one it was for the caring the
other one this one is coming up
in the hi has been passed coming
up in the house Monday that but
what we don't understand is why
we didn't buy the are doing what
we did here which was one right
after the other the co presented
and I and I'm certainly hoping
that that is going to be
happening in the house so that
they have enough fantasies are
thank you Mr thank you very
very.
The committee just to for due
diligence.
The bill we passed is identical
to this bill however our bill
fifty is the Senator Padilla is
bill went to Judiciary they did
an amendment to put in one
definition and then it passed
so.
They are not identical but we're
we're we yes and I just feel
like I need to be closed all
facility as that is amendment to
this I need to go to a Judiciary
and thank you for the what what
is it we are in a row.
It over this may be the only
referral we got although it is
going to need to issue okay I I
spoke with Representative
Matthews okay and she said well
if it needs if the judiciary
wants to at the amendment will
accept that there is a friendly
one okay so it is identical to
what we passed and it's a very
clear and strong.
Okay all the chairman of but I'm
sorry yes question.
My back.
Bear with me
unit current practice yeah I
know.
The so when you have two more
bills did they still have to go
to each they had they both still
have to cross over one doesn't
you don't okay first one through
we'll we'll get the gold medal
the other one just.
Okay that they both go through
both how yes thank you.
You just have an easier time
because of the secretary will
call the roll Senator Gallegos
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas this Senator
McKenna yes finish committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes center to
the piano yes so we tested every
bill in front of us today and
with that the committee will be
