Center and all.
And all.
He's not L. any.
Here.
There's.
Senator Sedillo Lopez your.
So that makes.
And.
Call one here.
I'm sure to reaching out to
center to Senate panel you
should be with us shortly.
Okay thank you and welcome
everyone to the up.
C..
Health and Human and public
affairs committee this afternoon
and the first first up we have a
Representative
Okay.
And that the who is going to
present bill house bill one
seventy five HSD bill go ahead
Representative.
Thank you Senator bye sure
Thomas actually house bill one
twenty five and what this does
senators are members of the
committee it modifies licensing
requirements for certain mental
behavioral health practitioners
it also immense a professional
psychologist Act in the
counseling and therapy packs Act
to allow for the application of
technology I eat internet to
allow for Sir the satisfaction
certain supervision requirements
and it changes the composition
of the counseling and therapy
practice board by adding state
residency requirements for
members of the counseling and
therapy practice point in the
board of social work examiners
I can go into a little bit of
history this bill I want to
about.
For you guys too much but
basically the impetus for this
bill came throughout my work
with the mental and behavioral
health practitioner start New
Mexico it's kind of been the
issue one of the issues I wanted
to run on was to examine the
status of mental behavioral
health in New Mexico and
provision of those resources
especially after the great purge
of twenty thirteen and in my
studies of this issue Mr
chairman members of the
committee licensing requirements
became one of the first and most
pressing issues that we need to
deal with in order to make sure
that we have sufficient mental
behavior health resources
available for New Mexicans
throughout the state so I teamed
up with former representative
now I'm secretary Linda Trujillo
at RLD to take a look at our
licensing requirements and these
changes are necessary Mr
chairman members of the
committee because for a while we
have had a bottle necking a fact
that has been taking place in
that we have mental behavior
health practitioners who want to
get license in the state but it
had a very hard time doing so
because some of our requirements
are the most stringent and the
entire country the reasons for
which I'm still trying to find
and there's also some
discretionary language in the
statutes that have created
problems and that the analysts
are examining these applications
for licensure aren't quite sure
what the requirements are that
allow them to grant the license
there's too much discretion
shower could or may and we
change some of those terms to
make it very clear what the
requirements are and if maybe a
licenses to be granted and with
that Mr chairman I'll stand for
questions.
and if I may Mister chairman
before you can come back I do
want to give us a shout out to
to chair RTC Pino who helped
with this initiative he was in
some of the initial
conversations we had and we did
gather some stakeholders to talk
about this issue and and he's
been very supportive and and
working on mental behavior
health for quite some time so I
just want to recognize him for
his efforts on that as well.
With professions.
Okay thank you Representative
you want your expert witnesses
speak now or later I'm sure if
she if secretary Trujillo is
available and wants to see us
see something absolutely I would
welcome it thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative and and
I just Representative Hochman
Vigil is already given a great
explanation of why this does we
truly believe this will reduce
barriers for licensure we're
doing a number of other things
in the department like moving to
online licensure online renewal
but this is one of those things
that asked the representative
stated is really difficult for
us to figure out why did we
decide on five years across the
board for mental health
reciprocity reducing that down
to two years reduces a lot of
barriers and we just had a very
strong support of this thank you
and thank you for the work that
both Representative day Hochman
Vigil and center to see if you
have done on this to help reduce
these barriers.
Okay thank thank you Secretary.
Trevor do we have anyone wishing
to speak in opposition to this
bill.
This is Trevor with us.
Well.
You know as Representative
hyperreal Finley signed up to
speak in opposition or support
of this this bill Senator US
senator Tom and I do not but I
was just reminded in going
through this we actually have an
amendments on this that needs to
be made however hi I requested
from the chapter and I don't
remember hearing or seeing
anything from her on it do you
guys have an amendment that was
submitted to this committee.
Yes we do okay thank you penny I
don't have the two oh two number
can someone help me with that.
You yes children number.
Two two zero three.
Eight seven point one.
Okay thank you.
And so I'm what they what the
amendment does senators is on
page twenty three it starts
mines nineteen through twenty
one and in lieu thereof States
possesses compatible Education
and at least two thousand our
hours of reference provision of
equipment counseling experience.
Is it Jerry out of the apple.
Yes.
I'm sorry on page twenty one
twenty three.
You for sure and put it up on
the screen.
And he put up yes he has.
No he has thank you penny only
has a little quickly well he's
got the document counties and.
I'm just currently located.
He does again with page in line.
I page twenty three and it
strikes lines nineteen through
twenty one.
And it states instead.
I'm the word perfect document
which I cannot open.
I'm.
It strikes language and the that
puts and inserts and Lou there
thereof possesses compatible
Education.
or the equivalent counseling
experience excuse me of
Representative that is not the
amendment that I have here will
look trying get up online it's a
very short amendment I would be
happy to read it too it's number
one on page twenty three line
nineteen strike master's or
doctoral and and so and served
in lieu thereof some centrally
equivalent.
That's correct that is the
correct version thank you.
And then the second.
Is on page twenty three line
nineteen strike in and strike
line twenty.
Brookfield.
That's correct so this
compatible Education basically
strikes the masses are the top
doctoral degree accounting
accounting would treat related
field replaces it with are
compatible education from an
accredited institution.
The amendment.
I second.
Some question about it if we can
discuss Mr Chairman.
Go ahead Senator.
This will change the bill that
passed the house.
Why wasn't this is going on in
the House road.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and great question Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino at this was an amendment
that was requested by my co
sponsor and what happened was
just timing Senator Ortiz if you
know that the bill was put on
the floor much to my surprise
before the amendment was
requested so here we are.
Okay and you don't think they'll
be any trouble then it goes back
getting concurrence on the
Senate version that has the
amendment.
I thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ortiz can I do not I don't
anticipate any trouble.
Great the amendment was
requested by my Republican co
sponsor my my hopes the
shopkeeper people online.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you.
Senator chairman I'll follow up
to make sure that they're kept
in line.
Thank you senator.
So do we have anyone that I
guess we've establish is no one
and not public wishing to speak
in opposition or support of this
bill is that correct.
We do also looks to support.
And a vote on the amendment
yeah.
On the amendment that's true.
I get distracted easily
distracted so.
Our.
We we are yet we've have we
concluded.
Discussing the amendment.
Anybody else wishing to speak.
Right enriched with respect to
the amendment.
Hearing none that penny want to
call the roll please.
Our guide goes on the amendment
to one twenty five House.
Yes Representative.
Senator McKenna yes.
There is a Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tallman yes.
to panel yes.
So.
Representative you have amended
the bill.
that will look.
Open up to.
Questions from the from the.
Members of the committee
addition to this speaker.
Thank I think we had a couple of
people who are at and the
audience you wanted to speak in
support.
Okay.
So.
Mr Chairman is more lives and
Karen.
What is your name.
I don't know.
It's my middle name let me get
affects.
Mister Phillips.
Good afternoon ladies and
gentleman I am actually here to
speak in regards to the bill
that will be addressed next
slide this committee I'm not
this particular one although I
am a little bit familiar with
this one the bill that you
propose would actually be of
immediate help to one of our
counselors who is trying to get
a license here in Roswell
regarding that five year
reciprocity problem it's been a
problem for a lot of people
so just parenthetically I would
I would St I would strongly
speak in support of this but I
will be speaking hopefully and
when you pick up take the next
bill HB one seventy five on the
licensure Act.
Okay I don't have a list of the
people.
Mr chairman currently has and
rage.
Miss more.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen rate lock with
the national association of
social workers and we standing
strong support to this bill
these changes are long overdue.
we need and if we consider this
to be a first stop our first
step in improving reciprocity
throughout the state thank you.
Okay thank you Mr wood plaque we
have any anyone else I don't see
any other hands up.
wishing to speak at this.
Time so now we move on to
members of the committee.
Anyone wishing to speak because
the.
Thanks.
Thank you
my question is why is this bill
reducing the number of the
public members on the group on
the board.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and Senator Stefanics and I'll
also deferred to amended to to
supplement my explanation if
need be but basically the number
of people on these boards have
has proven to be unwieldy very
hard to get to this point
together at very hard to find
consensus and also with the
number of public members at the
end of the board it has proven
itself to be less
valuable and that we really need
more professionals and people
with experience to be lending it
to the duties of the board so it
so that they can conclude their
business in a timely manner.
I am at
Monday will have a additional
explanation of maybe.
Well let me just comment I don't
think that's an adequate reason
to do decrease the number of
public members so
Is there any further explication
director Trujillo yes Mister
chairman Senator the the this
Representative was correct in
many aspects there's nine
members on that board the
customary member for our other
boards of seven members it has
become more difficult to find
individuals to serve on boards
as the years go by and and I I
think I think everyone's had
some complaints about the point
not being completely filled and
our public members just need to
be a challenge to continue to
fill this board is
representative one person for
each licensee and so they have
five professional members just
because each of their licensees
are Representative that's a
little unusual for four usually
they'll be that fifty one forty
nine percent professional and
public representation on the
board but this one has I
individuals to represent each
profession each type of license
and reducing the two board
members just makes it it really
does make it less difficult for
us to get members approved and
to get everybody to have to come
to the meeting so that we've got
a quorum when we come to the
meeting that is proved to be
very pop problematic and I think
those who served on the
legislative LFC this summer will
may remember that the department
boards took a big hit in sunset
of reports because and this is
been ongoing it's not just this
administration it's been ongoing
for years because the boards are
not fully of appointed and again
it has been the public members
that have been more difficult to
a point.
That's all I have Mister chair.
Okay next up is so Senator.
But he panel go ahead.
Recision Mr chairman I was going
to make a motion.
Okay Senator a.
I thank you chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez is hand was up so
I'll follow her thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair and this may
be on the may be beyond what
you're trying to accomplish but
when I was in New Mexico we
value we wanted to have an art
therapist come in from New York
to be the director.
Of our program she had lots and
lots of experience and was just
fabulous in so many ways and we
had trouble
with the reciprocity in his I
look at this
that does not I don't think that
that solves the problem and now
I'm trying to remember if the
problem with the regulations or
or or whether it was in the
statute but basically there was
no reciprocity for an art
therapist that wanted to become
the director.
That is the supervisor of the
program she could it we had all
kinds of problems and I'm just
wondering if this bill by by
making it of column I guess I'm
I'm just a I don't see that it
solves the problem and maybe I'm
wrong.
At Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez was there question
and and there are.
Thank you maybe I'm wrong but
does this solve the problem of
an art therapist so this bill
hat and has an art therapy
reciprocity thing.
Representative provision but
what I don't see.
Is whether an art therapist
income in has a supervisor.
Director.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez I'm gonna diverted to
director Trujillo.
Mister chairman Senator the
licensing doesn't determine you
know whether someone can be
employed in a certain capacity
but the licensing is is is
really just to give you the
license to perform the one thing
that we've had troubles within
the in the licensing of the art
therapist and this may be part
of it is is an insurance issue
and that's not contemplated in
this bill and that's a question
that has to be taken up in a
completely different arena we
didn't have enough information
and with there haven't been
enough like communication.
Done on that we have talked to
individuals in that industry and
we're going to just get from
work on that but the art this is
much more related to the lack of
coverage for insurance okay so
that that may have been the the
problem because what I
understand this bill to do and
looking looking through it I
understand that it's a dance
between the statutory
requirements in the regulations
and what I recall in this was a
a while back it's very difficult
to hide to provide bilingual
therapist.
And this particular person had
been work had worked as an art
therapist for twenty two years
and she had also supervised
are there are other
Therapist that we're not just
our therapists but different
different therapists and somehow
she could not get if we had all
kinds of trouble with the
reciprocity of provision we
ended up losing her as a
candidate
Which was extremely
disappointing and my quit you
know as I look through this bill
I don't I I I see that it does
make reciprocity a little bit
bigger and maybe what you're
explaining to me is is the
problem was.
Maybe.
I guess quicker art therapist
treated differently.
Mister chairman Senator I am not
aware that part therapists are
treated differently I I can't
tell you you brought up an issue
that has been kind of difficult
and is being addressed by this
which is for example in the
rules for the psychology the
psychologist board in the past
this is this rule is been on the
books for a long long time they
took the at least five years and
they extrapolated that out to
ten year by role and so we've
had literally people who have
come into the state have wanted
to get licensed as a
psychologist and had.
Nine years and ten months and
we've had to deny them that
licensure so changing that from
made to shall eliminates any of
that kind of blurry eyes I think
that that rule is I'm I'm
illegal I don't think that they
have the right to do that
however there's really not
anybody that challenges those
and so by taking away the the
the made to shall it is our
intent is the representatives
intend to stop that kind of
behavior in rules excellent and
now I remember in a little bit
it was a rules problem having to
do with
with I think in the rules and I
just I'll just suggest that if
you could look at that because
our therapist it's a very
rigorous program.
And I felt that the rules
created art therapists
differently because we were able
to get reciprocity with someone
else that we didn't end up
losing
and so I I guess it's not
relevant to the bill and I
support the bill of but I guess
this is an opportunity to
suggest that the rules regarding
art therapist be examined and if
there should be some explanation
for why if they are treated
differently why that why that is
and as I recall it had to do
with supervision but I may I may
be wrong about that but we did
have trouble getting the
reciprocity for an art
therapist.
Thank you thank you miss thank
you Mr chair and representative
I I do support this bill.
Thank you senator next up we
have a sanity it goes.
Mr Chairman.
Representative and director
appreciate the okay look this.
I was just gonna pass a troll
basic.
in looking at the.
The bill one of the areas that I
saw were to.
And I go back with
Senator products asking about
why we're reducing understand
some of that but
Are we also.
Removing some of the core
curriculums is that what I
understand from your therapist.
Mister chairman Senator guy and
those are not my understanding
no this is just reducing the
amount of at you know years
experience that's required in
order to apply for licensure in
the state.
Please correct me if I'm wrong
director Sergio thank you thank
you Mr chairman and senator
actually the language that has
been added in in the amendment
today
corrects a child a problem that
has been long time and when the
alcohol sorry about that when
the alcohol licensure was added
it does not require a master's
or a PhD it requires in some
cases of an associate's degree
or a bachelor's degree and by
having that language saying that
you have to have a masters or
PhD you you actually are
eliminating the alcohol and drug
counselors from reciprocity in
New Mexico and this just cleans
about up it does not reduce the
of education that's required it
just make sure that it tracks
with whichever type of licensure
getting instead of a broad
paintbrush.
Okay thank you for that Mr
chairman and representative.
And in understanding on the FIR.
One hundred and HSD
as chair tracking other tenants
from all states.
We compared this bill to other
states and how that works.
I'm thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator guided goes I I do
believe that comparisons were
made especially with regards to
this the standards that we're
gonna require and how New Mexico
standard ads currently codified
in law is much higher than other
states but again I will leave it
to director trio to supplement
my answer if need be thank you
Mr chairman and senator all
other states have been quickly
moving over to compacts and we
do have hi standards in regards
to the number of years that
you've been up prepped licensed
to practice in another state we
were on the high end of that
requirement but other many other
states are not even addressing
that law how long you've been
licensed under reciprocity
because they're moving to
contacts and the contacts only
require typically a year of
licensure in another state and
in New Mexico we've been unable
to get compacts through
some committees and so this
really is an alternative to
that.
Well thank you for that and I
remember some of the discussions
Mr Representative on compacts of
that is when we look at in proof
that these changes would add
more workers I've got a daughter
works for CYFD and I know that
it's really hard to get people
in the state in our state but
bring someone from out of state
I was just wondering if we had
any kind of of evidence on where
these changes would help long
term.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Senator guy goes at as part of
the process leading up to this
bill actually abducted Trea
Trujillo and I were involved
also Senator GDP now we're
several different phone calls
and stakeholder meetings to
discuss the issue of licensing
reciprocity and during those are
meeting several stories were
shared with us of current
practitioners who have been
trying to get licensed in New
Mexico and want to be licensed
in New Mexico who have been
unable to do some do so some are
still waiting and for such
licensure to be granted which
this bill would would allow for
and others simply have given not
so that it is our hope and and
we know specific people that
will be allowed and if this bill
were to be passed into law and
also it would kind of bring our
requirements down in such a way
that we can be competitive with
other states and what is
required and we certainly have
the work available because the
mental behavior health needs in
New Mexico are quite high
especially after the pandemic
but again I believe it to
director Trujillo to supplement.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator of the representative is
absolutely correct all we don't
have any evidence because we
can't we don't know how many
people might move hearing get
licensed but we do have quite a
bit of anecdotal testimony that
individuals have been trying we
have a number of people that are
trying right now that this bill
would actually help.
Thank you for that and Mr
chairman and Representative my
last question then is.
In the in the bill talked about
appropriate supervision and I'm
trying to figure out what the
appropriate supervision is and
if this is based base and or
it's video I just didn't
understand how the supervision
portion or door.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
senator Gallegos so what
initially when the pandemic
struck the governor through
certain executive orders allowed
for the come the at allowed for
supervision requirements to be
completed through video
conferencing and telemedicine it
is requirement that has that we.
That is very important to make
sure that supervision is given
to a new practitioners and is
proven to work quite well and
because of the rural nature of
our state but we are simply
codifying the ability to meet
those supervisory requirements
through telemedicine and and you
know other electronic means
permanently so that we can make
sure everybody gets the
supervision requirement for
filled and that we can continue
to meet the roll needs of our
state.
Mr Chairman representative about
project that I've been asked by
a friend of mine that's their
post he's trying to make the
telehealth of the city here in
Lee County in in talking to him
I really thought that would be
are a really good way to do it
because I.
We don't have not their best
statewide so it sucked trying to
meet the needs in a in a better
way so what that all you thank
you for your answers.
Thank you senator.
Senator Kennedy took your hand
down east you still want to
speak.
I know thank you chairman and
representative a day Hochman
Vigil missed a Trujillo answered
my question thank you.
Thank thank you Senator.
The.
Thanks we're gonna recognize the
chairman RTZ panel.
Thank you Mr chairman this this
is a great rewards include an
exam classes and has made much
much more likely that people
will be able to
Mexico get license greatly
enjoyed are are behavioral
health report so we made a
motion to bring to pass.
Yeah we didn't do it as amended.
We have a motion by Senator ET.
The keys okay don't anyone
wishing to second.
Also but I changed my mind.
Given somebody else an
opportunity we have a second.
Thank you Mr chair Senator we
have a second from Senator is to
DO.
Lopez penny please call the
roll.
That our guide goes on house
bill one twenty five amended.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle are you them.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tallman yes there
are to help yes.
You have in past Senator.
Thank you graduations.
Scent Representative read a do
pass thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you.
So what Senator Ortiz appear you
want to take over the reins
thank you thank you Mr vice
chairman senator Collins we'll
go then to Representative one
Johnson was two bills before us
today and which one you want to
start with Representative.
Thank you Mr Chairman how about
we start with house bill one
seventy eight.
The house bill one seventy
eight.
Therapy licensure.
Yes thank you thank you chairman
Ortiz Y. Pino vice chairman Paul
men and committee members house
bill one seventy eight well and
then the counseling and therapy
practice act relating to
professional licensure in that
behavioral health field and
counseling curriculum.
This bill will add the Human
Services family services degree.
Under the definitions for
counseling related field to be
recognized as eligible by the
counseling and therapy practice
board otherwise denied because
the current degree listed is
human and family studies which
has no relevance to behavioral
health.
This bill pertains to.
Students who are working on a
meaningful career path in
behavioral health who are
currently enrolled at UNM tells
eastern New Mexico university
CNM UNM Gallup and other
universities.
Now presently as it is students
have to wait for months to file
and be granted an appeal for
approval of certification.
Not to mention the time that
travel that yield the lady it's
a huge barrier to obtaining a
license credential.
So in their regular session of
twenty nineteen I introduced the
same bill.
Then it was house bill two
thirty five along with
Representative Tomasz Alice are.
It passed the house and the
Senate committees we just ran
out of time.
On the Senate floor so that I
stand for questions I have an
expert witness Dr Bob Phillips
who is the coordinator of Human
Services and addiction studies
at eastern New Mexico university
Roswell I'd like to afford him a
few minutes to
To to to say something.
Mr chair.
You need on your so.
My apologies good afternoon and
I am doctor Bob Phillips
according to program of Human
Services in addiction studies
heard eastern New Mexico
university Roswell
this is a and as senator Johnson
has stated so eloquently both in
twenty nineteen and now this
language of this bill actually
had if they had been in the
statute for many years but was
virtually ignored for many many
years of we assume that it was
basically written off as a
typographical error there are no
human studies degrees offered in
New Mexico and we've written
extensively the legislative
papers to the council and
therapy board and also to other
representatives over the last
few years that the Human
Services is the degree bye bye
which that degree is not it is
the singular best degree for
preparation for behavioral
health providers at the
associates level that applies
primarily to persons that are L.
SA eighties or late acts in the
addictions counseling field in
particular
so what this bill seeks to do
literally is to change that one
word is the primary objective
from human studies to Human
Services that degree is the name
of the degree on six different
campuses here in New Mexico the
Human Services degree relative
to any other degree that one can
get at the associates level has
things that no other associates
degree has including supervision
internships field placements are
courses specifically devoted to
diagnosis assessment creating
that are all part of the scope
of practice of the Dixons
counseling workforce in
particular
in the students to get those
degrees very successfully go on
the normally get those licensors
but also to go on for graduate
work or upper division working
social work and counseling what
has to happen now is.
That with some changes in
administration the board
administration has started
denying people because they're
degree says Human Services not
human studies so an appeal is
written by the student and would
usually help from faculty and
they go before the board which
often takes months as secretary
Representative Johnson said we
have never had a student denied
that license when they made that
appeal but it's often six months
or more before those meetings
can happen in those appeals can
take place but they've been very
routine the we have asked the
remedy to be at the rural level
or at the level of the board and
we've been told on any number of
occasions that the board has
said you have to go back to the
legislature to change the actual
statute which is what this bill
simply intends to do that is the
essence of it is to change that
one word from services to
statute that from trade from
human studies to Human Services
to remove that bottleneck for
students across six campuses
here in New Mexico thank you so
much appreciate your attention
I'll be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Thank you Mr.
anybody else wants to speak on
this million for our industry.
So raise your hand use that icon
in the bottom of the.
Basis reactions and you raise
your hand.
To go to the committee.
Will committee on this bill
Representative senator of
mechanic.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Representative Johnson when
you're ready chairman I'd like
to move it to pass for H. B. one
seven eight.
At.
Our motion is that and is there
any discussion at all.
Zoom and the secretary will call
the roll.
On house bill one seven eight
center guy angles.
Well yes.
Senator Ingle are you there.
Sir McKenna yes.
Yes.
Sir Senator Lopez.
Senator.
Sorry yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tallman yes there
are two.
Yes.
Representative hello one twenty
seven homeless youth I used
cars.
Thank you thank you everyone for
it thank you passed house bill
one twenty seven.
Will provide a fee waiver for
identification cards for
homeless youth and individuals
this bill will help eliminate
the barriers that homeless you
under the age of twenty five in
individuals X. experience when
not having an ID while applying
for federal state and other
services the lack of the ninety
prevents homeless individuals
from securing housing banking
employment and so much more
attaining an ID could be a huge
step on the path to attaining
self sufficiency.
With that.
Mr chair vice chair and
committee members I stand for
questions.
The audience.
Some people want to speak on
this bill
regeneration hand recently in a
way.
Yes.
Senator from New Mexico Jan.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee and Erica Sanchez The
New Mexico can an organization
that partners with young people
coming out of systems and are
experiencing homelessness we
support house bill one twenty
seven we see that accessing
identification documents is an
issue that almost all of the
young people we work with
struggle and ID's as was that
ID's prevent them from securing
employment housing banking and
on and on so this is a really
important bill and we urge you
to vote in favor thank you.
Thank you.
To register hello.
Sorry.
Hi Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My name is most of the hill and
I stand in support of this bill
one twenty seven this bill is
important because as I see it
I've seen my peers experience
business continue to face
barriers when accessing
resources without an ID you're
unable to access benefits and
unable to get the important
documents needed for almost
anything and I ask you to please
support.
House bill one twenty seven
thank you for your.
Thank you Mr chairman.
S. mission Julian.
Thank you.
Yes.
Chair and members of the
committee appreciate the
opportunity my name is Patricia
Julien L. of school has
connection since twenty nineteen
the New Mexico public education
department education of homeless
children and youth committee has
met regularly the lady consider
policy reforms to support
children youth experiencing
homelessness in the state and
this committee determined HB one
twenty seven is among the most
important steps the state
legislature can take to support
homeless families and you The
New Mexico from my position I
work on bills like H. B. one
twenty seven and many other
states across the board there
fiscal notes have been just like
New Mexico's which found no
fiscal implications of these IT
policies cost very little thing
to implement and they bring
immense benefits to the state.
Now more than ever timely access
to such services is really
imperative to keep our
communities healthy and boost
the economy and just the simple
fact of being able to get an ID
card can make a big difference
for parents and youth
experiencing homelessness so I
urge you to support this bill
and thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I'll panelists after your next.
Thank you Mr chair person and
members of the committee Pam
Stafford with the ark of New
Mexico we support this bill one
of the things we have found when
we find advocacy supports for
individuals who are homeless and
disabled is the lack of an ID it
presents an additional
impediment to try and help
people access disability
services and other services that
could assist to stabilize their
housing and so we stand strong
support thank you.
I have Mister chair I was remiss
to not introduce my expert
witness in my experiment witness
is Patricia Julie now and you
heard her speak so at thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
so we're ready now to go to the.
Or in the bill and we'll start
with senator she's.
Thank you Mr chair
And thank you Representative I
just but with the title of the
bill you know so as you
I'm just reading it differently
but really this is for the way I
read the bill is it's it's for
anyone that's homeless rise not
is not limited to twenty five
and under the.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you senator yes you are
correct and I believe that we
started to work initially
specifically on you.
Under the age of twenty five and
we use the definition from grant
and we can do that to act.
And then we the committee
continue to work on it and we
decided to include individuals
that everyone.
But we wanted to be specific
about thank you and I would like
to defer to my expert witness so
she can
Provide further details.
L..
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Johnson in
senators members of the
committee exactly what
Representative Johnson said the
bill was amended in the house to
be sure that the fee waiver
covers all individuals
experiencing homelessness and it
is not only limited to you so
that is correct and I believe
the phrase enabling a company to
receive identification card
should have been deleted from
the title of the bill as part of
that amendment.
Okay that makes sense Mr chair.
Well I I.
I take a little bit different
approach to this issue and I
want to six point really briefly
because I am opposed to the bill
I'm so not opposed to the goal
of the bill and I understand the
the barrier issue that we're
talking about here it's it's I
mean I would consider it
possibly a barrier issue in in
some circumstances maybe not all
But you know in in looking at
providing things for free to
people of low socioeconomic
status I I've studied this
extensively and have you know
what my own way of looking at I
would probably be the only one
to vote against this bill maybe
in the entire Senate but
I.
When I looked at how things have
been given out to people.
Whether it be public housing or
furniture or even health care.
when things become
you know where there's no
investment.
Either financial or with time or
worker or whatever it may be.
We we do value things and and
but I would be very interested
in saying what what would get me
to to support the bill is if we
had a study state of the of
twenty five homeless people on
one in one group and twenty five
in another and you charge one
group five dollars for the ID.
In the charge the other group
zero dollars are you you can get
some for free and then you come
back a year later.
And you see how many people that
were charged five dollars still
have the ID and you see how many
of the twenty five people that
have the free card still have
the ID any of those numbers are
are equal or statistically
insignificant our system to
strictly not discrepant then I
would vote for the bill but my
my inclination my hypothesis on
that experiment would be that
the people that pay the five
dollars would have a higher rate
of retaining their ID therefore
being able to use it positively
in their life for employment for
voting or or whatever else and
so that is my concern as we
continue to
we continue to.
In my mind it incentivize
poverty even in the smallest
ways.
on principle I I propose that
just because I have that certain
view point.
Support it
it's also why I support very
small and nominal copays for
certain Medicaid patients
because I think they're outcomes
would be better in fact I have
data to show that out of McAllen
Texas and so I just that that
that's why I'm opposed to it I I
don't mean to be disrespectful I
think be very easy politically
just a no vote yes to pass and
not make a big deal about it
but I hope to at least you know
say something to maybe this
means something to somebody and
just try to explain why I feel
that way
but but I do think it's a I just
have that concern so but I'm I'm
very thankful for looking at
this bill I and I do hope that
if this is the ends up being a a
barrier.
The issue for some homeless
individuals I I do hope this
this will help them but I I just
have that concern so thank you
Mr chairman I appreciate you all
hear me out on that thank you.
on the committee.
Mr Chairman just technical
question and I apologize I
dropped my call with you so I
don't know if anyone asks also
look through our analysis on one
twenty seven I did not find it I
noticed in the notes out at
twelve o'clock today that was
added to the list do you know
when that was sent to our
analysts.
L. as.
Yes Sir.
I just did an update and I
wonder when it was sent to us
and I and I know we don't have
full court for a ruling for
those just wondering why she
didn't get us a copy of it.
Mr chair.
I haven't it was sent on Friday
we at five twenty two PM with a
very low it with the agenda and
a very very long list of
analyses.
I'm just reading them now.
Good deal that's what I need to
find out just double checking
side business so thank you for
that and all you.
Yes Mr chair.
Is there any discussion.
Hi.
The second by Senator and this
is the lotus any further
discussion this secretary will
call the roll.
Senator
Sir guy eagles yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle are you there.
Senator McKenna.
Yes explain my boat please.
Senator Mary.
No.
There's a deal Lopez yes in to
explain my vote please there is
a balance yes.
That are COVID.
Yes.
There are too you know.
Yes.
Mon you Senator me Jennifer's.
Thank you chairman and
thank you Representative Johnson
for being with us this afternoon
I I'm really
Really proud that you put this
legislation together chairman
and representative
Representative.
I see this as giving dignity to
those and some very trying times
in their lives and I also see it
as something that they'll always
remember and pay it forward
where I can't predict that every
single person will pay it
forward I think we can I think
it's safe to say they will
remember how they were able to
get themselves out of affects
because they didn't have a
proper ID.
I can also.
Remember dealing with
constituents on my job for the
representative and many times we
would come.
This was pretty COVID and people
come to the office I'm.
Homeless without a penny to
their name needing help and so I
can see where even five dollars
seven dollars ten dollars would
be a real obstacle.
For them to put forth to get
such as to get an ID card much
less to even get a meal so I I
thank you chairman and
representative.
For bring this forward and I
look forward to many more New
Mexicans
Having a good life because they
got an ID card to get them
started on some programs that
they really need thank you.
Thank you senator and then
Senator Sedillo Lopez whining
slander motives well.
Thank you Mr chair I think that
you know it was Senator McKenna
said but also when we when we
ran our homeless project at the
at the law clinic and I do was
the most presses precious
possession that someone who was
homeless could have and when
they lost it it was not because
they were careless but because
of the difficult circumstances
of their lives.
And I anticipate that the whole
issue of losing ID's is is
really a on a non issue with
regard to how effective this law
is going to be it is going to
make a huge difference in their
eligibility for benefits and
their ability to just function
in life because it is so
difficult try going through life
just for a week without any ID
and you'll see how difficult it
is to function so I of which I
would invite my colleagues to do
it sometimes
So for that I'm I'm very very
grateful and I want to commend
the sponsors for bringing this
bill forward it's it's excellent
it is an excellent bill thank
you.
Thank.
And so thank you Representative
Johnson your tier two today
what.
All right.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members have a great.
Representative maybe I like
because.
Richard ritual under judicial
flexibility.
Please house bill one fourteen.
Thank you Mr chair with me today
I have my expert Kim Chavez Cook
from the law office of the
public defender's and we are
grateful for the opportunity to
present today are House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for H. B. one fourteen of this
bill is meaningful but also
importantly important to so many
New Mexicans living through
cycles of substance use
disorders what we've done here
is two fold so the first piece
we have eliminated the visual
offender in sentencing
enhancements from the COVID to
offender statutes overall so
that folks that are coming back
in with only that underlying
simple possession conviction no
longer will face the mandatory
sentencing structure that was in
place previously we define
simple possession to mean
A drug charge that is not
trafficking or distribution but
simple possession as would be
commonly understood what someone
has on them for their personal
use so that's the first piece
the second piece is that we are
now saying for the rest of the
habitual offender enhancements
instead of making these a
mandatory penalty that we
believe it should be in the
hands of the judiciary to decide
whether or not to impose these
additional sentences also Mr
chair and committee for myself
it's incredibly important that
we move New Mexico to a smarter
criminal justice system so that
we can improve public safety and
the ways that so many of our
families and communities deserve
I'm sure so many of us across
our neighbors districts here
here the the dis heartening news
about crime in New Mexico and
for me it's really important
that we think about specific
parts of our criminal justice
system with the public health
approach that is rooted in
access to health care in
programming and not just unitive
penalties that obviously have
not worked in the state like
ours so that Mr chair I would
appreciate if my expert Kim
Chavez Cook could see a brief
statement in in support of this
bill and then we'll be ready for
questions I also want to add I
appreciate that one of my
Colleagues in the house
Representative lane from the
other side of the aisle did
catch that we potentially we're
missing a repeat of language
moving from section eight to to
section B. and C. so we brought
that forward to your committee
as an amendment from at from
this that catch that
Representative lane had on the
house floor and we committed to
him that we would get this
addressed once we got to the
Senate side so we also have an
amendment that was should have
been emailed yesterday morning I
believe to the committee.
Check on do we have to
Thank you madam.
R. I'm sorry I was working on
something and then
we have an amendment how's your
of the committee some
promotional one forty.
I haven't seen it Senators.
I have an email from council
that was sent over yesterday
senators so I'll work on getting
that as well.
Your readiness yesterday
morning.
What is your expert witness
called wireless internet yeah
thank you thank you Mr chairman
Kim Chavez Cook with the law
offices of the public defender
and I will mention also add that
the I resend the amendments to
Any email address I believe if I
have the email address right
just at the start of this
committee hearings so it might
be easier to locate in her inbox
she looks that this afternoon
all of the.
I can only imagine what her
inbox looks like so I thank the
committee for considering this
bill the I think also all start
with the maybe less this piece
which is granting judicial
discretion to I'm all people who
are facing the jewel of fell in
enhancements across the board
and that is based on a notion
just of increasing judicial
discretion generally we art
American legal system did not
really start using mandatory
minimum sentences until that may
twentieth century and it was
sort of started as a way that in
response to a growing drug
epidemic it was viewed as a way
to determine activity by having
the spread of certain lot
lengthy sentences but what the
data has borne out in the past
seventy years since we started
doing that is that it doesn't
work and so not only does it
move the judge's ability to
consider individual
circumstances but it also is
extremely expensive and has no
deterrent effect and does not
help public safety so there are
a number of studies that have
been done the sentencing project
issued a report in twenty
sixteen that sounds that the
actual only place where there's
a deterrent effect is on the
certainty of getting caught and
not on what the potential
penalty is and additionally
notes that half of all street
state prisoners were under the
influence at the time of their
offense and therefore less
likely psychologically
cognitively to be deterred by a
potential center I'm legislative
organization also noted that
longer sentences reduced public
safety because they actually
increased recidivism rates so
for those reasons that general
thinking behind mandatory
minimums has proved to be just.
Incorrect it was it was an
incorrect assumption on the
second piece of the bill which
is fully removing the
enhancements for drug offenses
simple possession as the sponsor
described being the possession
of just a small amount for
personal use with no intent to
distribute or anything like that
is based on a recognition that
repeat drug possession for
personal use is indicative of a
health issue a public health
problem it needs to be addressed
through a public health system
and cannot properly be addressed
through incarceration the rand
corporation recently studied
administrative minimums for drug
offenses and found that in a
million dollars spent on
extending sentences we have
almost no effect on reducing
cocaine consumption but equal
amount spent on
Things like treatments treating
having users is the only place
where we have found of return on
investment in New Mexico the
percentage of males in our
prison system who were convicted
of drug offenses is above the
national average at seventeen
percent compared to thirteen and
a half and for females it is
well above the national average
at thirty five percent compared
to twenty five percent based on
a report in the sentencing
commission so I will refrain
from going further although I
could talk all day and I will
save additional information as
answers to committee students
are.
However I have this ammendment
but Kim left I don't know how to
send it to the post.
You have the amendment.
Yeah I don't know how to Senate
committees in their.
Current.
Bill down I think we all can
access the bill in other ways
here.
I had a question or
career answering this
Representative.
When we passed last year Senator
money this bill.
In a similar position
misdemeanor any out not even a
misdemeanor just a civil civil
penalty didn't return already Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee that the agency said
Senator about this bill was
specific only to marijuana it
did not apply to any other drugs
and so this.
This would so there still are a
number of felonies for simple
drug possession and this would
still read they would still be
felonies under this bill they
would still be have the
potential to basic sentence of a
year and a half in prison but
the mandatory enhancement time
if they have a previous offense
is what we would be removing.
I'm gonna have to say thank you
that's very helpful and that's a
good reminder message us for
more on this is for all all drug
possession
I'm gonna have to say let's find
the the the amendment there was
an insulator there is just.
Our amendment was submitted
yesterday by Council services at
nine twenty two AM.
Then that we're trying to get it
to you and Trevor I've emailed
it to Trevor and he'll try and
get it out okay.
Let's let's let's see if you
have anybody else is there
anybody else who wants to speak
you for against the bills
analysts is being access the
amendment will will take action
on that.
Okay we are let's let's let's
see on the amendment first and
you want to explain it was
Representative.
Yes Mr chair thank you this
amendment does not change the
substance of the bill what it
does is copied language from
page one that was part of
section eight and repeats that
language for the following
sections in sections B. or C. so
again this is a catch by
Representative lane but it's the
important language that we've
named here as you can see after
the not we are inserting but not
including a conviction for a
felony pursuant to the
provisions of section sixty six
dash eight just wanted to NMSA
nineteen seventy eight or for
simple possession as defined in
the section also just to make
sure that that definition
follows through the three
Portions of the habitual
offender enhancement that
section a B. and C. we're
following through to make sure
that that language is repeated.
I move adoption of the
amendment.
Also.
Is there any opposition.
Program
thank you.
Know your.
And then Amanda in the with the
with the amendment submitted by
Representative on them and we'll
go now to the audience for
comments on this bill I see a
number of people who have their
hands up and we'll start with
some chairman you're the person
sharing Janet a lot.
Thank you Mr chair
and we want to think we want to
stand in support of this bill we
and members of the committee are
we support this bill and we
appreciate the sponsor for her
continuing efforts to just be
criminalized is that simple
possession charges this is not a
criminal problem they should be
considered.
Public health the public health
concern that it is and again we
want to echo the statements of
mistrust cook as well in this
effort thank you very much when
thank you again energy to
support this bill.
Thank you.
We have a Marshall Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez the interim executive
director of the quality New
Mexico statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization.
LGBTQ people especially youth
have been have always
experienced over policing and
over criminalization we often
experience more difficult
barriers to recovery from these
interactions LGBTQ youth
especially because of the stigma
and shame and hostility we
experience in our communities
experience much higher
incidences of mental health
crises and as a result of self
medication higher rates of
substance use for these reasons
we believe this legislation will
offer queer and trans you more
opportunity to find ourselves to
heal ourselves to become
healthier more stable more
successful members of our
communities this is one of the
many meaningful steps we can
take toward criminal justice
reform which is a critical piece
of liberation for LGBTQ New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you March.
is even Steven S..
Yes.
I thank you Mr chairman and
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify before
you today my name is Steven
that's been I'm a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico I'm
speaking today on behalf of A.
F. PNM activists urge you to
vote yes on H. B. one fourteen
we need a thoughtful approach to
criminal justice that applies
tough standards were needed but
which recognizes that the
current system is flawed.
Harsh mandatory sentencing and
other practices have resulted in
the U. S. having the highest
incarceration rate in the world
more than two million people are
behind bars at any given time
the cost the taxpayers a
staggering an estimated eighty
billion just on correction
systems H. B. one fourteen gives
judges the ability to sentence I
each individual case based on
the circumstances but still
gives judges the power to impose
enhancements where is reasonable
and stop forcing them to do so
in every case.
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico strongly urges the
legislature to pass this bill
and give judges the ability to
send introduced each case based
on the individual circumstances
while also allowing them to
discretion to impose
enhancements were reasonable
thank you.
Thank you.
Next is enemy trash.
good afternoon committee and
chair I die and the cash
removing simple possession of
drugs from the individual
offender act is an important
action for New Mexicans in
general and for my family in
particular my son is likely to
end up with years of
imprisonment because of his
illness of addiction without
this change she already has
prior convictions for possession
I also strongly support judicial
discretion for crimes that would
continue to qualify for the
sentence enhancements provided
for the eventual offender act it
doesn't make sense to me that it
would be better for us to have
long expensive to taxpayers
years of incarceration handed
down without individual judicial
examination of the circumstances
and appropriate discretion on a
case by case basis your car
serration can destroy a fragile
life we could destroy my son's
life I strongly urge you to
support H. B. one fourteen thank
you.
Thank you.
Finally we are reviewing each of
us.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf of
the New Mexico called defense
lawyers association we stand in
strong support of this bill we
appreciate the work of the
sponsor and miss Kim Chavez Cook
this was a priority piece of
legislation that the association
was interested in supporting as
we recognize the individualized
sentencing and the critical
component of positive criminal
justice reform and the bill
before you today seeks to
address that any meaningful
thoughtful way that still allows
for judicial discretion but does
most importantly recognized that
individualized sentencing is a
way to address public safety to
reduce recidivism and overall
get New Mexico to a place with
that system that we want to be
thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee for
your time we encourage you to
support thank you.
Thank you re regulated.
Okay.
Currently you may then.
But just.
What should we have on the
internet.
Senator.
Thank you chairman and thank
you.
Representative for being with us
on Sunday afternoon I I do have
a question and it's something
that the FY are brings up and
came to my mind and and that is
my concern for what about its
Retroactivity for prior like
sentences I think it's yet
hoping that this passes I think
it's really important that those
are who are incarcerated for
like offenses.
Get afforded the same treatment
that this bill would support.
Thank you Mr chair Senator this
is certainly a question that we
considered and I'm gonna turn
back to my experts to explain
where we landed on this point.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and senator the we
did consider that and what we
landed on was the approach we
have which is that that the to
the extent there's retroactivity
it is
if the impact would be on the
prior is that are already in
place and not people who have
already been sentenced that
being said the way retroactivity
works under the law we're sort
of just relying on operation of
law would be anybody who's K.
right now it's not final yet if
they haven't been if even if
they've already been charged for
their cases still in court they
would benefit from this this
change in the law we are
considered making it retracted
in a way that would reopen cases
for people who are already
incarcerated ants are serving
their sentence now and we were
afraid that it would make things
so complicated we didn't want to
risk not making having the
change go forward so that was
where we landed but I certainly
you know in my heart of hearts I
would have loved to go that way.
Thank.
And Representative and
subject matter expert well I I
appreciate that the thought was
there
And I I still think about those
who.
Maybe sometime later we could
make such an adjustment thank
you.
Thank you senator.
Senator and this is the lowest
you thank you Mr chair and thank
you so much for bringing this
bill forward my question was
almost exactly of what Senator
McKenna just just asked and that
was why does it happen
expungement provision
for people who have I mean I
it's so unfair do you have the
people serving years and years
with these are Vigil offender
enhancements who are Star
sitting in prison with their
addictions and not getting the
appropriate treatment
in many cases that they need of
when.
You know I I totally support the
bill going forward I'm gonna
vote for the bill without that
but I did feel
Just like it regard expungement
for marijuana offenses why what
can we get them of for this and
particularly because we also
know about that just affect this
is having on persons of color.
Are you.
Answered that it was a.
You already answered I guess
that question but I just read
that to share if I just my offer
one more comment certainly this
is heavy on my heart as well and
as you all know we make
decisions about how to be
politically expedient and
hopefully have the best impact
that we can while committing to
longer work in the future when I
debated this bill on the house
floor actually last Monday a
week ago
I was bringing to to the
conversation some some room I've
had to learn from system
impacted women in New Mexico and
overwhelmingly when we look at
the way that habitual offender
enhancement stack up at the one
four eight year sentence time
something that's really
important to name is that right
now if somebody has that Vigil
offender peace on their you have
to send them to prison and this
overwhelmingly in our state is
impacting as you've named
Senators women and women of
color specifically these are
Mamas that have kids at home
these are families that are
stuck in intergenerational
cycles of trauma and poverty and
incarceration and substance use
us well while I'm proud that
we're taking a step in the right
direction I I got to have a
conversation just within the
last couple of weeks about a
woman from a woman for rural New
Mexico sharing with me her story
and she was actually in early
twenties studying an associate's
degree in criminal justice when
she first fell into Matthews and
will be very forthcoming and say
talk about all the the mistakes
and the hard path she's tried to
live off and on since then but
she's currently facing
charges with that that level up
to over twenty years and have
been jewel offender prison time
these based charges that we're
not impacting it would get to
about a year and a half each for
the possession piece but to know
that that stacked in front of
her when she's finally in a
program working through what her
life could look like moving
forward.
And knowing that the sentences
hanging over her I I believe
that New Mexicans when they're
showing up to bring their best
deserve a chance to do so within
our criminal justice system so I
appreciate the insight that you
both have brought and certainly
hope with so many champions
including icy Senator about this
maybe up next a little bit and
like he says he takes on the
hard bills I hope to continue to
head in that direction so that
New Mexico can be a place where
our family struggling with
substance use have access to the
resources they need thank you Mr
chair and and committee.
Senator Sedillo.
Or and thank you thank you Mr
chair all of system offer to
work on this in the future and
and with that a low yield.
We have a fund transfer
marijuana we don't yet I don't
think that's part of the house
bill twelve the.
And in the Senate.
But I I don't think we have a
fundamental for.
That was part of this is bill
last year.
I may be wrong.
Thank you
Mr chair I thought we did just
because I've seen it.
Placements for if you want it
lawyer advertisement if you'd
like to just get a crimes
expunged call.
So.
Mr.
I have been.
Dealt with personally.
Yes.
It was.
Mr chairman of the expert it's
Kim Chavez Cook.
good okay good thank you
speaking out of turn but I just
thought I could say that did to
the extent that expungement is
available now it's available to
all crimes if you meet the
expungement statute requirements
so it is available in that sense
but the automatic sort of
expansion and that is in house
bill twelve for example would be
something that that is a sort of
what we said we had can
contemplated with this bill that
did not do.
We have two other members of the
committee.
Questions or comments Senators.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
this just go on to Judiciary and
I would love to see it
Cleanup more but I also don't
wanted to complicate matters in
taking it back to the house so
the sponsor might want to visit
if you know as we pass this on
which I think we will the
sponsor might want to visit with
the staff over in Judiciary to
see if there's any minor way to
Clarify things and when you're
ready I'll make a motion.
Senator Schmedes.
One commenter made a motion.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Mr mentioned
possession a lot.
on this bill and I'm I'm I'm
very open to the bill on the
possession piece I I want to
make sure are at the you know
what what else was included I I
looked up.
That one of those other
reference statutes and it is a
D. Y. and aggravated the why is
that is that correct.
I'm Mr chair and senator good to
see you again on the other side
of the body as it happens to you
I has their own sentencing
scheme and we are not impacting
that with the habitual offender
amendments were making up if my
expert would like to clarify
further.
Yes thank you I would madam
chair Mr chair and thank you
Representative Senators
committee that is actually
already current law so since we
were at creating the exception
for simple possession we're
codifying that in sections
eighty and with the amendment B.
and C. it is already in the
statue in the opposite direction
that they cannot be they're not
considered priors and then case
law has already held that it
cannot be enhanced either and
that is in both state the in
line just to bring court
nineteen ninety seven and state
needs the big gate two thousand
one Supreme Court cases that
already have held that so when
you do why it's different from
other kinds of felonies and is
not part of this habit you'll
offender enhancement scheme so
that's not actually changing law
just codifying case law.
Interesting okay because I I
just saw that and I look back at
that statute so this is only
it's only simple possession of
that is that my understanding
there's something else that
that's in there.
Mr chair Senator as we've
explained there's two basic
components of this one is the
simple possession and we are
eliminating simple possession
from the overall habitual
offender enhancements but we are
making another second important
change and that means for the
remaining applicant applicables
felonies that would come into
play with the Vigil offender
enhancements instead of holding
those as mandatory as they exist
today we're moving discretion to
the judiciary so they can decide
on a case by case basis of
course looking at the
circumstances of what's in front
of them whether or not to impose
the prison sentence that comes
along with the habitual offender
enhancement.
So okay moving from the
mandatory we're making it we're
moving it to a from a sell to a
may.
Okay Mister chair representative
thank you that makes sense now I
was thinking and I got the the
tiered the what the member was
doing I don't realize what it
was to all the non capital
fillings I thought you're
specifying specific types of of
crime so
so I would be and I you know
you're we'll be surprised I I
saw this was a a party line vote
in the house I imagine probably
part along the Senate but I
would I was I would certainly
vote for it was just simple
possession I have a concern
about you know all the other
this call is in and the and the
reason really is and it goes
back to I think a very
insightful comment on one of the
proponents of the bill is you
know they said something to the
degree of
you know well this is kinda you
know harm someone's life if
they're incarcerated to launch
an absolutely committee it is
but I also ask the question.
Because they're incarcerated and
there have been jewel fender if
they were out what they do
something bad again hurt someone
else so are we I I I I realize
the collateral consequences in
the in the damage it does to
someone's life being
incarcerated but.
Because they're they're not not
out doing their habitual
offending who who are who else
are we protecting and and you
know nobody can of course answer
that question it's kind of a
rhetorical question but that's
kind of the way I see it but but
I support you know
I didn't vote for Representative
Maestas expungement bill but I
give it serious consideration to
our research on it and I I
support funds meant for people
of the age of twenty five
absolutely for certain things
and then I would I would score
this bill if it was limited to
simple possession but I just
want to make sure you do while
as respectfully opposing it
today and I appreciate you
looking at the issue because I
think we continue to need to do
contest reform we're support of
it but I just can't go quite as
far as this bill's going so but
I I I very much appreciate it
it's good to see you as well to
my former colleague in the house
so I'm glad you're doing well
and thank you for bringing the
bill to the committee.
Thank you Senator Schmedes.
Senator.
Mr chair I would move a do pass
on the committee steps to as we
amended it correct.
I'm using it okay.
All second it.
So.
Senator seconded by Senator
Sedillo Lopez is there any
further discussion on the
internet.
Seeing none secretary will call
the roll.
Does.
Ingle no ma'am.
Ingle Senator McKenna yes.
There's maintenance.
No.
Here's the deal Lopez yes.
Thanks yes there are Taliban.
Yes.
There are too you know.
Yes.
You have I yes is to nose one
excuse.
Graduations Representative nice
job presenting this.
Bill thank you so much thank you
Mr chair good afternoon
committee and best of luck in
your long Sunday thank you.
Right Mr Chairman.
Sure you know I know I'm out of
order but before Representative
Cadena gets away I wrote down
very carefully something she
said she says she wants to take
away the responsibility for me
for taking on all the hard bill
so I just want to make sure
there's a good record of that
and I'm all for that and and I
hope she comes to see me
immediately.
It's great immediately Mr chair
and Senate Judiciary
bills including this one headed
his way so I look forward to
conversation thank you
committee.
Thank you Representative all
right let's go to Senator
Hamblen smelters before we get
to Senator about this this is
Senate bill three sixteen.
Right
now I'm sorry gender and gender
and orientation data collection.
Yes.
Thank you so much Mr chair and
committee it's lovely to be with
you even though I know we're
probably all looking outside our
windows at the gorgeous weather
that we're having in New Mexico
I thank you all for spending
time working through all this
important legislation that has
been before me and that will
come after me
thank you for this opportunity
as well to talk about Senate
bill three sixteen which is the
gender and orientation data
collection nope you know in my
time as a senator I have been
reminded many times why
representation matters as an out
lesbian serving in our
legislature remind young people
and adults alike that we are in
every sector of private and
public service committed like
every single one of you to help
our communities with their needs
and get on the services that
they deserve now if you would
have asked me when I was sixteen
if I ever thought that I would
see someone like me who has an
amazing wife who is a professor
and educator who lives in the
nineteen forty eight home that
we're constantly working on
active in our community you know
in serving the residents of New
Mexico in this capacity as
senator I would have simply told
you now I would have never
imagined somebody like me when I
was sixteen so representation
does matter and that's why this
bill is so important because
data on services needs and
interventions about LGBTQ people
are rare and difficult to find
to the extent that we can track
the number of LGBTQ people who
access various services and
monitor their successful use of
their services we will be able
to identify barriers to
accessing particular programs
and services that affect this
particular population and this
will support request to analyze
and respond to such barriers and
allow us to address those
existing inequities now keep in
mind we've done this with with a
number of different data points
that the best decisions are made
with data to inform them and we
know that LGBTQ people live in
every community are part of
every family and work in every
sector in New Mexico and what we
don't necessarily know is if we
have access to all this.
Services we need so.
SB three sixteen those two
things it asks the state
agencies and departments to
collect data on sexual
orientation and gender identity
when they're collecting other
demographic data like age sex
race etcetera and then also
guides state agencies to ask the
questions using best practices
already monitored by the
department of health unless the
program is federally funded and
the federal agency provides them
with questions and answers to
use I have two experts today in
a couple of folks want to
provide public testimony I do
have engine dance from the
department of health and also
Robert stern from New Mexico
community aids partnership also
we heard from Marshall Martinez
earlier from a quality New
Mexico he's here mainly for
public testimony but if needed
he can jump in to speak if
necessary so I appreciate the
opportunity to talk about this
today and look forward to the
discussion thank you Mr chair.
My expertise to speak if they
can't.
Yes.
First if we can hear from Andrew
Gantz first and if you don't
mind chiming in.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Hamblen and members the
committee I appreciate this
opportunity my role at the New
Mexico department of health is
each every STD and hepatitis
section manager so I work with a
number of federally funded
programs that we're information
about behavior about identities
extremely important we have
little over six million dollars
a year in federal grants for HIV
and STD and if we did not do
good data collection there two
challenges we would have one
would be and not be able to
describe health equity in health
disparities and the other is we
would not be able to protect our
federal money
what works well in this bill is
if there are good federal
expectations requirements as
they are in the fields of each
having just to do we would do
first of those but in the areas
where we don't have that data
how do we know that health
disparity might be how do we
know who's being served and who
is not being serve again
knowledge is power knowledge
informs the work we do it
protects our federal money it
identifies these that we need to
focus on and there's a lot of
expertise in the department I'm
proud to work for in these areas
so Department health here would
be second step of the federal
grant didn't have at
requirements there's a lot of
research about how you ask
questions to get honest and
complete answers the feds have
improved data collection the
entire thirty years I've worked
in public health and I think our
department is not a lot as well.
Doing surveys better doing
demographics better it cetera
giving us information that helps
us improve our programs I
believe this bill would continue
in that same thing.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair there's also
Robert stern from New Mexico can
and community aids proper
notion.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Hamblen and members of the
committee I will try not to
repeat what senator and and
again said everything I I do
know everything they've already
set I think this bill is a
really natural next step to the
work we're already doing to
increase equity for LGBTQ folks
in the state one of the things
that we've seen consistently in
a report on the health
disparities and inequities
affecting this population both
within the state of New Mexico
and nationally is a constant
laments that there are
insufficient data to really know
all the details that we need to
now the New Mexico department of
health in June of twenty
eighteen published a report
called addressing the
Excuse may.
The help of sex and gender
minority New Mexicans and again
in that report which was a
created by the the department of
health with community members
and professional.
We talked about major
recommendations was that we need
to be more consistent and
collecting data so that we
really understand not only what
the disparities are that exist
where there.
we're already in New Mexico
thing better than many states we
have for a number of years and
collecting both sexual
orientation and gender identity
data in both the purpose and the
why our asset the high school
level so we have enough data to
know that these populations are
experiencing some really serious
disparities what we like to do
now is gathered with consistent
data that will help us to
understand how to best address
those concerns
Another thing that I think is
really important is that what's
happening now we when we talk to
folks in clinics and in various
state and how and nonprofit
agencies across the state what
we're finding is that folks
understand that LGBTQ clients
and patients need to be asked
questions about their sexual
orientation and gender in order
to provide them the best
possible service but what's
happening now is the onus on
when to ask those questions is
often on individuals rather
because it's not systematic and
as a result it's really awkward
for the individuals need to
gather that data to decide who
should they ask questions about
their orientation and their
gender identity and who should
they not ask those questions to
it also then becomes awkward
sometimes for our citizens when
they when those who are not
LGBTQ but someone things might
be are asked these questions
they feel what they wonder if
there's something about them
that has provoked those
questions so by systematizing
this we take the responsibility
off of the individuals by making
it a routine and standard set of
questions which makes it better
both for those individuals have
to ask the questions and for
community members both those who
are LGBT and those who are not.
the last thing I want to say is
that one of the.
The problem is that people often
think we'll come up with such
legislation is that somehow hard
to get people to answer these
questions or that we can't get
accurate data we know that not
to be true particularly now that
we've had for years since first
require all FQHCs all federally
qualified health centers across
the country ask questions about
sexual orientation and gender
identity and they have been
doing that and there are
multiple studies reporting that
it has worked fairly well on it
the standardization has in fact
made easier to ask these
questions I'm I have a lot more
I can say but I'm going to yield
now and I'm available to answer
any questions that committee
members may have thank you again
Center have one minute Mr chair
and committee members.
Sure you are muted.
Senator Hamblen that's although
that the moment that Mr chair
that is all we have but we do
have some folks on who want to
COVID as members of the public
if we can go to that that would
be fantastic.
Marshall Martinez your first.
Mr chair members the committee
thank you so much again Marshall
Martinez from quality New Mexico
I will repeat what other folks
will say I just want to say a
couple of quick things one of
them is thank you NM wants to
really share gratitude and
appreciation of for expert
witnesses in the state agencies
who have already been leading
the way in this work I will say
as a as a young gay man which I
once was being asked in an
appropriate and respectful way
these sorts of questions
definitely normalized the
opportunity for me to come out
and health care settings later
on when it became much more
necessary and I want to give
extrication is to our amazing
sponsors Center Hamlin for
taking this issue on and she
said I'm happy to answer any
questions but these two experts
have everything I think pretty
well handled thank you Sir.
Thank you Marshall the next is
Alex Steele.
Our.
Senator Ortiz members of the
committee and thank you for your
service Mexico and percent are
hampered Senate bill three
sixteen.
I work in New Mexico Human
Services Department and in my
professional capacity can't
officially supporter of
prosciutto I want to speak about
the importance of data
collection I'm particularly with
our health and Human Services
programs you know my colleagues
and I at the New Mexico Human
Services Department under the
leadership of secretary again
it's great we take evidence
based policymaking very
seriously and part of that calls
us to consider adding to
important questions that are
ready who are our customers and
what challenges are they having
in accessing our many programs
like Medicaid snap behavioral
health child support etcetera
and the spirit of this bill
really compels state agencies to
to to better understand the
diversity and breadth of our
customers and how we can best
serve them in making sure that
This bill has
sponsored an incredible
discussion with my colleagues
and I
and I just want to share that
feedback today about the
importance of data collection
related to sexual orientation
gender identity thank you.
Thank you.
The next turn regular.
Members of the committee can
level up with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and I would
just like to echo the comments
of HSD everything I'd written
down and basically been which
she stated it's it is so
important that we collect data
on on the customers are in the
state of New Mexico and if we
are and are not meeting their
needs and the collection of data
is the best way to do it by us
sometimes these questions and to
help normalizing them anyway in
a very and a health care setting
so that it is it becomes part of
a routine exam thank you very
much thank you for Sanchez.
Mr chair members of the
committee get em Erica Census
within can and we work with
young people impacted by systems
systems in which a GTP LGTBQ
people are over represented so
we represent we support this
bill for all the reasons stated
already thanks.
Thank you.
Number is.
Sorry.
Hey I'm just of the hill Mr
chairman members of the
committee as a former foster
youth and someone who has many
friends and family that.
identify as LGBTQ I'm I stand
as part of this bill thank you.
And I hope you stand and support
to.
John what you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block and I oppose SB
three one six and from my
research this bill is mostly
copy pasted from a California
bill assembly bill six seventy
seven from two thousand
seventeen also there are
concerns about the sensitive
information this bill will
harvest from the population as
well as its use within the
department of public safety
according to DPS there is a
concern about us for the
voluntary information from
members of the public that may
result in the perception by the
public that law enforcement
decisions take into account the
protected class status of an
individual and may spur civil
rights complaints and inaccurate
perceptions of law enforcement
decision making and I would just
like to avoid this reverse
reaction by the state of being
obtained by the government and
so I would respectfully ask the
committee to vote no on this
bill thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you John.
anybody else.
Want to respond
Senator Hamblen to to the
opposition.
Now Mr chairman I'm fine with
that I think it's very important
I think we have we can put trust
and faith in our our law
enforcement especially since
we've had legislation that has
gone through already in the
Senate about protecting that
information and not disclosing
that information where would
harm people so I feel that
argument is invalid I would like
to the committee to consider the
importance of representation and
making sure that we are
gathering the data that we need
to to serve all New Mexicans and
especially recognizing that
there are LGBTQ people who are
valid members of our community
and contributing to our our
local economies and our
workforce and our schooling and
so I think that the by including
the stated there is recognizing
that value of members of the
LGBTQ community when we're
talking about gathering data for
research purposes so thank you
Mr chairman I certainly welcome
any opportunity to speak with
members of the committee.
Members of the committee senator
Senator lotus.
Thank you Mr chair I think that
senator Hamblen already alluded
to it I'm very very happy that
SB seventy five past and will
require agencies to keep this.
information confidential unless
it's necessary like it would be
necessary for studies and and
the important well thank you
again it gets several examples
about why the state would be
important to collect I I wanted
to share with you Mr chair that
But you may not be aware of this
but the corrections department
does not keep any data with
regard to the race of or
ethnicity or tribal membership
of people within the corrections
department so last year I did a
memorial because I spoke with
the state sentencing commission
because I didn't understand why
is is not kept our information
about the over representation in
the present dates back to the
last census data and that's how
we know there's or that's why we
believe that there's over
representation of people of
color in the prison system well
if you tour the prisons you can
see that there's over
representation there's just by
the visual and so since the
department of corrections is
also on your list on the list of
agencies that would co correct
collect this data.
I haven't specifically the
question but my guess is they
don't collect collect that data
either if they're not
collecting.
race in criminal justice so my
suggestion is to contact the
state sentencing commission
because what came out of the
memorial is this turned out not
to be has easier fixes I thought
it would be.
Because they had to.
The by so many computer programs
and we also learned that
some information about race and
ethnicity in the system is
probably incorrect because that
wasn't voluntarily provided by
the.
By the customer where we will it
was instead perhaps a police
officer saying Hispanic male you
know whatever it just making a
judgment about the individual so
that the way of collecting data
had to be corrected as well so I
totally believe in data and I'm
thrilled that this bill will
provide the data that is needed
for the yes public policy my
only suggestion is it is a
little bit more complicated than
I thought it was when I was
seeking race and ethnicity data.
And so I urge you to to work
with the various agencies that
will do that to help with
implementation and with best
practices I noticed that the
that the statute already
describes best practices it must
be voluntarily provided in and
it does that but what I learned
from my experience and money was
much more limited than this that
Mr chair I would simply to get
accurate information about who's
in our corrections facilities
that's all just very limited in
and it was quite quite the the
lift and it's still still in
progress but I have a lot of
confidence in the state
sentencing commission will get
it right.
so with that I just say I
support the bill and and look
forward to seeing the rules
results of the state of.
Thank you senator Senator lotus
Senator guy in the US Europe Mr
chairman I have response to
Senator Sedillo this is COVID
first before we go sure great
thank you so much Mister
chairman Senator the Lopez just
let you know on page two of the
bill line three corrections
department is one of the
departments that is all included
in there and also just to let
you know that this really means
they only collect that
information when they collect
other demographic data obviously
is you know the department of
corrections is a much bigger
issue in conversation than what
we're focusing on here in this
bill but I appreciate your
insight and and experience and
and bringing that in this
conversation thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair what you find
is a corrections department does
not collect this data.
So that that's my point.
Right so they since they don't
collect the data does the bill
apply at and that that that's
why I'm suggesting you might
want to work with the state
sentencing commission it's their
revising their for firms collect
race and ethnicity data now
we will be collecting data like
this in the future and they
might as well make sure that it
gets in that process I and again
that was started with the
memorial.
Not not a lawsuit it wasn't
needed any deadlines or it was
just work on this on this
project and they are but I like
I said I appreciate the bill I
understand it it only
corrections department listed
and I and I understand it's only
when they correct select
demographic data may be more
limited than you would like as
it was for me in the correct
department thank you.
Mr chair noted Senator Sedillo
Lopez thank you thank thank you
Mr chair and like I said this is
important data is so important
and I'm I your support of this.
Senator.
Sorry there.
Mr chair I am I'm waiting
patiently
Mr Chairman Senator Hamblen
appreciate the dialogue I do
have a couple of questions so
are you trying to me how the
data will be collected last I
guess I didn't understand that
early on in the presentation.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
that's a question that Andrew or
Robert might be able to answer.
Thank you and then the.
At and Mr chair.
Right now we collect data across
public health programs because
the department of health
when we have federal grants that
specify how and what we collect
we follow that unfortunately we
have many our data systems they
don't all speak to each other
and they're all monetized to
different ways
the key thing though is is this
bill specifies that when there
is
not a federal mandate that the
best practices defined by the
department of health would come
into play here
and there's some key words in
the bill that in voluntary is
one and self identified is
another so if you look at public
health and social science
research what it's going to say
is you're gonna get better data
and and to set the to Senator
Sedillo Lopez point you don't
look at somebody and tell them
what race they are or ethnicity
or sexual orientation or gender
identity or age you ask them
that voluntary self identified
it is going to be the best way
and then
The research is involving a
little bit but generally their
best practices that have been
tested of how you ask and then
you need epidemiologists and
other experts to do the analysis
to tell you what that that sense
so if you're looking to health
disparity for example and you
have the data of the
demographics the population then
you could answer the question
somebody said is there a higher
rate of smoking is there a
higher rate of to utilize their
higher rated incarceration you
can only answer that if you have
the data available to I hope
that answers the question.
Mr chair I will thank you I may
as well.
So that just just to let the
committee know thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee that we're all we have
already been in dialogue with
multiple state.
Multiple state agencies
including CYFD BHS Senator HSD
programs some and it are gonna
health program we've already
identified collecting data of
this type to be relevant to
their programs and part of what
this bill is trying to do is
simply organized the way that
happens so that there's
consistency about the way we ask
questions when we ask them and
that we can therefore compare
data across the many systems
that Mr Ganz referred to rather
than asking questions
differently each place having a
bunch of different data from
different data sets that
we're not asking anyone to start
collecting data where they're
not already we're simply asking
if their demographic data to
include these particular quest.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative our center and
the my next question is
is it
HSD here's a contract employees
you're able to get this
information.
Mr chair Senator guy a goes I
believe that's a that Mr Ganz
might have already reference
that but if Mister dancer Robert
can Mr Robert Mr mistranslated
they can address that question
that be great.
Yeah I'll also point out that
our our policy director Erin
showers to someone as well as
speak to the whole department
we're probably but the language
in here is that any executive
department of public body would
collect this data either
directly or through contractors
and I think that would be based
on the specific type of program
in we do a lot of both in our
department depending on what the
services so if we're delivering
a service to contractor they may
be mandated to collect data
elements or federal grant or for
state purpose so if this would
not be standing up a new system
it would make sure that best
practice questions would be
added to the existing system.
Okay thank you Mr chairman sure
have on that my last question he
started on federal grant what
other uses would this be used
for other plants.
Mr chair Senator Davis I believe
Mr Gans or Mr stern can go ahead
and address that or maybe even
Mr Martinez I'll be happy to
take Senator have one thank you.
There's there's a couple of
things that the data would be
used for first of all it would
be used to increase the quality
of care and services that we
offer to LGBTQ folks through our
state programs.
One of the things that folks in
Judy find difficult is when they
go to get care and people that
they're working with don't
understand enough about their
identity and their lives to know
what kind of care they need or
perhaps to use the correct the
correct nickname pronouns
etcetera in referring to them so
that it I think collection of
this data would help folks at
our state programs to be more
tactful of LGBTQ folks when
they're working with them in
addition but help us pinpoint
where there are problems in
state programs trump surveilled
unique you folks either we know
that there are folks on the
LGBTQ community or not accessing
a program or service at all or
because they're starting
accessing and leaking so would
allow us to track better
there are problems which we
don't know about at this point
because we're not tracking these
kinds of services for this
population and to the extent
that we have better data we can
take steps in the future to
grant any inequity is that are
taking Senator providing
barriers to services thank you.
Mr chairman and senator I guess
my main question is a all guys
on traveling didn't have time to
write down others but
I will yield.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
center gave a safe travels we'll
see you tomorrow on the floor
I'm sure.
Thank you senator and snatches
Senator magenta.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Hamblen for joining us
this Sunday
and I think this is a wonderful
piece of legislation
so to recognize all of our New
Mexicans I and I think I've been
following the conversation I
think the question I have has
been touched on a bit.
I am curious how does the
just a moment I just had the
bill right in front of me
how does.
The electors of the data.
How do they protect the personal
identifying information and I
can see how it not only does
that relate to the LGBTQ
community
but essentially all of us in New
Mexico how what are the the
quality controls that are use
that prevent the P. I. R. I.
from being revealed.
Mr chair Senator McKenna thank
you very much for that question
I think I can I'll I'll do a
quick reference to it but I do
believe that are one of my
expert witnesses will be able to
address that but I think the
projector like any other data
unit you know I mean there's
there's information that is not
included when we're using data
for analysis and report and so
this is especially with the
Senate bill that just recently
passed we have those protections
in place but it Mr Gander Mr
stern would like to go ahead and
add to that that would be
fantastic.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee and and Senator
McKenna Department health has
very strict guidelines for first
of all federal laws such as
HIPAA would protect health
information there are other
federal laws that were protected
it if you were a collected
mother agencies for another loss
that educational information we
also have certain expert
practices that are epidemiology
response division of which I am
not a member but I am impressed
by their strategies and and
systems their rules of that you
don't with the small data
numbers you know if there's
three people in my County who
have a certain health condition
that's too small in number and
could.
Disclose so really using best
practices in public health and
epidemiology and research you're
gonna protect the population not
just the one person who are
protected under help up but also
the collective group
white stigmatizing people when
you look in a small population
size so there are a lot of great
best practices that ensure
exactly that you know it
ensuring confidentiality and
privacy of our clients is
essential to get them to come in
for any health service and that
would be true across other
systems as well people share
voluntary data if they don't
trust our state agencies to.
The very professional.
Very good thank you chairman and
senator and is it doctor Ganz.
Thank you.
State just or public health.
Mr downs so as a follow up to
that chairman and senator and Mr
Ganz does D. O. H. and the other
agencies follow.
What to federal agencies
following that as we have for
instance when I was a deal we
employee we had to adhere to
need to know as an employee do I
do your colleagues at your age
the state agencies follow that
same protocol.
Mr chair members the committee
and senator McCain I think our
our policy director conceded
west only that I can but I will
we certainly are trained
routinely and help another
policies it is very strict
health data systems are set up
in a way that their paper trails
you know electronic paper trails
are tracking who's getting into
information
you certainly can't work
professionally in one of these
organizations and I'm assuming
if it's true it's for department
of health it would be a true
across other agencies.
you can't just access
information at a personal
curiosity there needs to be that
that would be protecting our
clients appropriately.
Thank you.
Very good Senator our chairman
and Mr gas very good that so the
that gives me some reassurance I
appreciate that very good I
thank you chairman.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman did you shake your hand
down or.
Your question on your answer.
Yeah I yeah my questions have
been answered thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator Senator
manager next.
I'm ready for a motion.
Yes.
I passed.
I seconded.
Remember motion from Senator
Stefanics seconded by Senator
your lotus any other discussion.
Seeing.
You want to make the random
statements Senator Hamblen.
Mr.
Sure sure will be brief I
promise because I know that
you'll have still quite a bit of
an agenda to go through
you know I I'm I'm grateful for
this bill and I'm grateful for
your support on this bill I I've
mentioned this before on the
Senate floor but when I was
twenty two and had to go to the
doctor this information wasn't
available on my intake form when
I went to the student health
center New Mexico State
University and have been on the
form I would have been
I would have been able to avoid
a very uncomfortable situation
of having to come out to my
nurse practitioner when I wasn't
ready to and so I think this is
really and it really important
for folks especially as they're
going into situations where
there might be uncomfortable
data that is or the reasons that
they're going in for of medical
treatments or you know any
anything else that I think what
we're doing is we are removing
the opportunity for a stigma up
for discomfort for circumstances
that individuals are prepared
for but still being able to
collect their data so I thank
you for your consideration and I
thank you for your support of
this bill.
Thank you Senator Hamblen the
secretary will call the roll.
Senate bill three one six.
No ma'am I'd like to explain my
vote.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Thanks yes their top one yes.
Or to the panel.
Yes it is Senator hair looks.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr I I just don't have
a real fear and I know we talked
about having data protected I
just know that there are times
that
for multiple reasons people
share things and I just think
that this might add to that
Senator Hamblen that talked
about her issue of having to
come out the the metal
professional and I I actually
think that would be the best
place for the detail go I'm just
president will go to other areas
but with that I thank you for
the discussion thank you Mr.
Thank you senator and once any.
Was I yes to no one excuse.
Regulations Senator Hamblen your
new cast thank you Mr chair and
and and thank you committee you
know given that it was my
experience and my choice I feel
that having that that indicator
on a form was a much better much
better way to go for me so I do
appreciate that it is it does go
to Senate Judiciary next so I
think it's really perfect that
it goes to Senator serve
Hernandez next in the I'd be
more happy to join
representative Cadena in helping
helping you in this process even
though I have no legal
experience whatsoever.
What we're really going to
Senate bill three seventy states
Senator monitors bill that would
prohibit this Ms qualified
immunity Senator launchers.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee forcing me on a
Sunday I believe the issue of
qualified immunity is one that
we're all familiar with but just
a very brief explanation of
qualified immunity is a defense
that has emerged through what we
call the common law or case law
in the federal court system so
it's not a defense that has been
enacted by the Congress or any
legislature but rather by the
courts in principally by the
United States Supreme Court.
What what qualified immunity
does is allows law enforcement
officers and claims that are
brought under civil rights
claims to essentially be avoided
and to be dismissed where it
cannot be shown that the civil
right violated was well
established by some prior
precedent so that such that it
is well known and well
established.
Want to pause here for a minute
because I hope that it becomes
clear to this committee and to
to everyone that this this
becomes a circular argument the
courts essentially say that you
can't maintain a federal case
under civil rights laws unless
you can show there's well
established law and recognition
of that civil rights that
constitutional right by some
precedent but you can never get
the president without a basis
all being discussed and so as a
result of all of this many.
Very legitimate and worthy civil
rights cases in the federal
system are dismissed.
We have a as as a result of our
work this last summer in special
session we convene the
commission that studied the
issue of this defense the
qualified immunity defense they
came up with a report and
recommendations led by former
Supreme Court justice Boston and
others.
That report suggested that we
adopt a The New Mexico version
of a civil of the same civil
rights laws that exist under
federal law but rather under
state law.
The bill before you three
seventy six is intent intended
for one purpose which is to try
and assure that the tort claims
act.
Squares with the initiatives in
the efforts being made on the
Civil Rights Act.
and we do not adjust the tort
claims act at the same time we
would be adopting the Civil
Rights Act we would have a a
different laws in different
standards that are in conflict
and so the purpose of this act
is to is to reconcile those in
as we develop the Civil Rights
Act and as it continues to make
progress the session that we
that we work on this bill to try
and make sure that they're that
they're working together and and
they're not in conflict I I did
Mr chairman of lately send your
committee a proposed amendment
and if it with the the committee
feels this late to receive I'd
be happy to just explain it's
very simple amendment into
places of the bill and then last
Mr chairman I know this is been
an issue for some so let me put
it on the table I've never
brought a civil rights claim
under section nineteen eighty
three against a law enforcement
officer in thirty years of
practicing law I never wrote a
civil rights I can't claim under
section nineteen eighty three
again state local government so
I know some folks have have
expressed concern about lawyers
being involved in these issues a
citizen legislators but I wanted
to make sure this committee is
well aware of that in a full
disclosure I have brought cases
against local governments under
the tort claims act but and I've
also defended a local
governments for many years under
the tort claims act so I have a
pretty strong working
familiarity with the act that
we're talking about here and I'd
be happy to discuss this more
with the committee and your
questions.
Thank you senator was regarding
the amendment of we were seated
Jr right Mr chairman we received
the amendment about two o'clock
and I would comment on the
they're not then the tax rates
reddit striking.
Thank you six all one one
instructor thank you for the
period there's a quotation mark
after very good my question is
should the quotation mark
restrict and it would be a
Bancorporation work without it.
Senator.
Yes Sir I am looking the the
question is whether we service
sure it's straight Corporation
marked as well.
Mr chairman I don't know what
you're going to get that up on
the screen or not.
Well we can all read our own
version of the bills.
let's see the PDS version has it
that are right after that
period.
Then there's a quotation mark
you should actually.
I think when you turn away from
this screen we can't hear you
I'm sorry Senator.
You are I've got the bill and
then Memon up on a different
computer.
Okay you sure the amendment
again.
We're.
You're trying to put it up right
no Senator I don't.
Putting enough.
Thanks.
Want to.
It is very.
When we just started a whole lot
of certain grant that would not
be the simpler manage.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry muted
myself you're right you can just
write college section F. or if
it was rewarded it would be
through the through the
quotation mark.
Mr in Mr chairman I know that
that same language.
was added in also on page three
lines one and two.
As subsection do.
And for the same reasons Mr
Chairman that language should
also be amended out of the bill.
current.
They were in in my opinion I
think and there's even a legal
question whether we could
purposefully make this law
applicables to all cases are now
pending or on appeal as of the
date of enactment.
Okay so we would you're you're
you're in stride
The on top of page three as well
yes Mr chairman I would the same
language in both places should
be removed from the bill.
Thank so thanks three struck
lines one and two in their
entirety.
Yes.
And then on page six.
How do you what do you want to
through the quotation mark or
distract lines one into in their
entirety that we do it.
It is Mr chairman that's messed
with like demanded.
Down coverage we can see each
other
Discussion on the amendment
You want to discuss imminent.
No chairman Ortiz Y. Pino I was
speaking I wanted to speak on
the bill as a okay right Senator
of Representative.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator savant does I'm I do
believe my questions been
answered I was wondering why.
The sponsor wanted to remove
that provision but.
Expanding chairman and senator
it's because.
I you recognize there is not
the.
legality to do so to
For to apply to pending cases
and those on appeal.
That that's correct that's
correct and.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I just offer
to make that amendment because
it was a question that I had The
New Mexico constitution article
four section thirty four
provides that no act of the
legislature shall affect the
right or remedy of either party
or change the rules of evidence
or procedure in any pending case
so I am constitutional and I
right both of those.
In that range yes the amendment
of the amendment is.
In addition to writing
Where is on page three so if
you'd like me to read it into
the record if you happen to.
Yes.
Hey maybe made a motion.
Okay I.
Should you wish.
You.
On page three line strike line
one into yes Mr.
Thank you on page three.
strike will a section do in its
entirety.
Which is line one and two.
And on page.
six strike section F. in in its
entirety.
Which is one of which are lines
one into.
Also chairman.
Thank you senator major so we
have a motion and a second many
discussion on that motion.
Any offers addition to the
motion.
I
will consider no to that amended
Senator and and we'll move ahead
and you have anybody else you
want to speak on behalf of your
measure thank you know Mr
chairman you've been in so well
moving three bill so quickly I
thought I just strike while I
could.
World world.
Brought it and they brought it
to a slowdown for you.
No worries I just had to
financially we will thank you.
So let's see who was to speak on
built on the audience is there
anybody in opposition to the
bill.
and.
Given relief counties the
promise that I would recognize
grace Phillips who wants to
speak in opposition to the bill
so right from the start with
you.
And then we'll go to the others
who raised their hands.
I thank you very much much
Mister chair members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity to share with you
some concerns that we have with
this legislation I'm gonna focus
my comments on the amount of the
caps and the addition of
attorney's fees as a recoverable
element in the tort claims act
I'm not gonna say anything about
qualified immunity qualified
immunity is not currently a
defense to state law claims
brought under the tort claims
act but when you're thinking
about about the caps and and the
sponsor didn't mention it but
but I cap to been in place for
quite a few years I think a lot
of us came into the session
thinking well you know maybe
it's time to raise the caps and
so what we did organizationally
as we thought it would be very
important to take a look at
where New Mexico stands with
respect to the rest of the
country and I believe you have
all of you have the materials
that I'm sharing with you on the
screen right now what this is is
a summary of the research we did
I'm not going to go through this
in any detail because each of
you have it but I would like to
point out that in the column
this this lists all the state's
right and their caps and also
their waivers in that short cap
column if it's yellow that is
the state whose caps are lower
than ours currently if it's
yellow in the descriptive extend
to the waiver column those are
states that have not opened the
door to liability to the extent
New Mexico has and that's really
important because if you have if
if you don't really allow years
yourself to be sued very much it
doesn't really matter so much
how big your way to your cap is
or if you even have a cat and
I'll talk about that in a little
more detail the orange fields
are those are states whose caps
are currently bigger than ours
but would become smaller than
ours if the amount suggested by.
This legislation we became law
so this is much easier to look
at I think hopefully you can all
see a map now on your screen
this map shows how New Mexico
compares to the rest of the the
country I'm in terms of its
waiver of immunity so if we
recall you know the government
has sovereign immunity absence
await absent a waiver of that
and the state to do that a
couple different ways we invoke
our immunity and then waved it
other states did it different
ways but essentially what you
see from this and and that the
extensive research that was done
is that New Mexico really stands
alone in the country in terms of
waivers we have waived our
governmental immunity our
proprietary immunity our
ministerial immunity and and
most important our discretionary
immunity.
Almost no other state with the
exception of Montana has way
discretionary immunity and
that's that is super important
because when you think about
ways the government can be
liable for things when you think
about what it a law enforcement
officer might do or not do
anything about what a social
worker or a teacher or any you
know any governmental actor it
is the it is the use of
discretion that is what is often
at the source of that liability
so it's much easier to still
government in New Mexico and
elsewhere the other thing I'll
point out about this map is the
percentages I'm in each state
are the percentage of poverty
for each state and if you
scrutinize that what you will
soon discover is New Mexico is
one of the poorest states in the
country surpassed only by
Louisiana and Mississippi I'm
sure that's not a surprise to
you you pay attention to the
news you know that we actually
ranked number one in use of of
Medicaid forty three percent of
our population is enrolled in
Medicaid we have more food
insecure children than all but
two other states as you well
know a court has found that we
are failing to educate at risk
youth in our schools and they
make up to three quarters of the
population of kids in public
school in New Mexico so
so we're poor and that is
something to consider when
you're deciding when you're
making a policy decision of how
how big should are caps the and
so how do we compare cap wise
there's a couple ways to look at
it one is what are the caps per
person or per claimant that's
what this the slide shows you
can see that there are some
states where the per claim it
cap is under a hundred thousand
dollars there are states where
it's between a hundred and five
hundred we are in the group of
states that is the five hundred
to one million cap per person
the most a single per.
Sen can get under our current
caps in New Mexico for medical
and compensatory damages is
seven hundred and fifty thousand
that puts it squarely in the
middle of that category and then
there are a couple County a
couple of states that have her
claiming caps of over a million
dollars.
this is the way the country
looks if you're looking at her
current
and again some some cash some
states have pretty small figures
you know limited to live you
know liability insurance there's
a couple states with caps of a
hundred thousand or less
and we are in the group of
states that have caps of over a
million the current cap in New
Mexico is is eight cap of
million fifty four and a current
so that would be like an event
for all the people and claims
arising out of a particular
event I'm sharing this
information with you because I
think it's important not to
assume that a new caps and in
fact vastly increased caps if
you take a look at the F. I. R.
take a look at the the the bill
in front of you what you'll see
is the caps that are being
suggested would more than double
and in some cases triple our
current caps and and I hope
you'll see by looking at this
data that even under our current
caps we are well within the most
generous of of states in the
country and we're also a very
you match that with the ease of
suing New Mexico and this
there's there's it's no surprise
that we are considered such a
eight an attorney friendly
State to come to and just to
government and so we hope you'll
consider I hope you'll consider
that data as as you have as you
have your debate now
The other thing I want to talk
about is attorney's fees I'm
adding attorney's fees to the
New Mexico tort claims act would
be a very significant change to
the law as we see it today
New Mexico like the rest of the
country it lives under the
American will under the American
Eagle parties paid their own
fees and and on the plaintiff's
side that is shows up often
sometimes its hourly but often
it's contingency I will you know
you see the science very if you
don't recover we don't recover
you know that kind of stuff
that's the American rule adding
attorney's fees as a recoverable
element and and the language of
this bill makes it mandatory
it's a shell
shell language the court shall
award fees to the prevailing
party that that is an exception
that really should only be
applicable where there is a
policy it policy that would
favor incentivizing lawsuits so
starkly that then that attorneys
might be fearful it might be you
know might might just in some
kind of rest or a concern that
attorney's just wouldn't take
cases if they didn't have this
added incentive and we know in
New Mexico that there is no
additional incentive that's
needed for people to see
government
The government all the time and
and they do very well one of the
things you know it Senator
savant has referred to the Civil
Rights Commission that did the
the the meetings about creating
what ultimately has turned into
a house bill four I was really
stunned when I saw the collected
data that was submitted in
response to the request of how
much you spend on lawyers.
Because if you add up what
counties cities the state the
school spend on attorneys today
it's in the tens of millions of
public dollars a year tens of
millions a year and we didn't
even have the figures from
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
Farmington the the biggest
defendants and the those dollars
are paid not just to people
defending cases but to people
who are suing government and in
fact a majority of those dollars
are paid to people who are suing
government even though on a
contingency basis they wouldn't
recover unless they're
successful and the reason for
that is that lawyers who work on
the plaintiff's side charge two
to four times what lawyers on
the who defend government are
allowed to charge and so to give
you a little context
the state pays of private
contractor Council eighty five
Bucks an hour to defend
capital murder cases you know
the most the most sophisticated
more most high risk cases the
state pays I think of what we
pay which is between a hundred
and ten and a hundred and
seventy five dollars an hour to
attorneys to to defend lawsuits
brought against government and
but when you but when you look
at what is and I'm sorry.
Jeremy if I could just show one
more screen I see I've been
disabled I'm if you could give
me that
the but when you look at what is
paid on these attorney fee under
these attorney fee provisions
Thank you.
You have to have the screen yep
I got it thank you so much
It's it's a whole lot more and
it and it it is not connected to
what the attorney recovers for
his or her client I pulled this
from a basis just a few years
old where the court this is the
district of New Mexico when we
have a their body of law frankly
on attorney's fees from the
district of New Mexico
The court cited a bunch of cases
inside you know for for skilled
attorneys over four hundred
dollars an hour is is the going
rate and this court went on to
award the attorney they were
discussing a fee at the rate of
four hundred twenty five dollars
an hour.
That is a lot of money.
And it is it is an M. mount of
money that drives litigation it
makes it hard to settle cases
because an attorney and it makes
it especially hard to settle
small case is you know we're
talking about increasing the
caps this he the the ability to
recover an additional fee will
have the greatest impact on the
lower lower level cases where
liability is clear but an
attorney who knows that he or
she will simply get paid their
hourly rate without you know any
connection to to the recovery
they get for their client has
has no incentive to resolve the
case efficiently and I will just
close with this Mr chair you
know the question I think for
you all as a policy matter is is
given the poverty in the state
given the ink and the incredible
needs of our community is this
the best use of of precious I
would save taxpayer dollars and
I'll I'll ended there the
sponsor took care of my other
maybe the other concerns I was
gonna raise that thank thank you
very much for the the time Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr.
So let's see we've.
We'll go then she boarded you
have something to say on this
bill.
It's chair committee I
appreciate you you time speak
with you Douglas for chief of
police of clothes police
department.
This legislation to bring more
frivolous lawsuits and our
police departments in experience
the potential numbers that we
see already.
We continue to bring distrust
against our law enforcement
because the necessary separation
our citizens are police officers
we now with all aware person see
continuous lawsuits brought in
even when they were doing their
jobs doing a properly try to
claim they were doing the wrong
in bringing frivolous lawsuits
against us.
This kind of bill again will
enhance the villains ation of
our law enforcement is not
healthy for our communities are
police officers who serve and
protect them.
This is more legislation which
is going to cause good police
officers to leave our state and
to leave their duties in the
state or to leave this
profession completely.
And we are already seeing that
now with all the legislation the
negative rhetoric and what we've
been seeing throughout the
country and throughout what's
been going on with this state
and the bill's been been put
forward their affecting law
enforcement so I would say we
strongly oppose it.
Appreciate the committee would
vote against this thank you for
your time and I appreciate all
your hard work.
Thank you Judy Ford.
Is.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Steven Curtis our labor and
employment lawyer in Albuquerque
New Mexico ask me Council
eighteen is asked me to identify
some of the legal issues with
respect to this bill as
mentioned by Mister Phillips.
Current law does not apply to
defense of qualified immunity to
claims under the tort claims act
as best I could tell there is
one case in nineteen ninety five
a New Mexico Supreme Court case
Romero versus Sanchez which had
both in nineteen eighty three
and a tort claims act claim and
in that case both the parties is
that the defense would apply and
so the Supreme Court analyze the
differences are going to have to
anyway Senate in nineteen eighty
three claim
but they ended that discussion
with although we questions
parties assumption I II the
assumption that it applies to
the tort claims act we will not
address the question here is is
not properly before us now using
relying on that language the
federal courts sometimes have to
apply New Mexico state law when
but if there's a nineteen eighty
three claim brought along with
the tort claims act claim which
gives federal courts
jurisdiction over such matters.
They have consistently and
repeatedly over the years
refused to recognize the defense
of qualified immunity to the
tort claims act I'm really
however Assamese concern is less
with the difference the removal
of defense of quick tort claims
act but with some of the other
language and subsection B. of
the act.
I'm subsection B. provides
further that it shall not be a
defense that any action was
undertaken in good faith the
subjective knowledge of a party
shall not be a defense to any
claim brought under this action.
Then goes on to say no defense
of qualified immunity shall be
available as a defense to claims
brought under this section and
then the last sentence most
troublingly says liability under
this section shall be
established by proving that a
violation of this section
occurred.
The the interesting aspect is
that is subsection a which is
what defines the waiver is
courts have noted those are all
intentional torts on these are
not any other what does include
constitutional claims the bulk
of them are tort claims and
they're intentional tort claims
such as libel defamation
malicious abuse of process
politician intentional
spoliation of evidence all of
those claims in fact do you turn
on the subjectivity tent of the
officer without the subjective
now intent of the officer the
claims are not valid
but this language in subsection
B..
would would essentially rewrite
those point by making the
subjective intent invalid and
also the last section flirts
with what I refer to a strict
liability meaning that the
effect if the violation occurs
it does not matter if the person
intended it to occur or not.
Very significant alterations are
the liability question and I I
let in chairman are to be no
members of the committee I I am
a labor and employment lawyer I
have actually brought nineteen
eighty three claims on behalf of
workers when they had their
rights to participate you
violated or their first
amendment rights violated or
when they had their prevailing
wage not set as required by
statute for six years so I do
understand the frustration with
the defense of qualified
immunity I faced I've had the
litigated
and it can if the bill were
limited in such a way I'm not
certain I be speaking here today
but the other sections and other
adjustments to the liability
question and subsection B. which
seems to rewrite all the torts
and subsection a is what's
really troubling to us thank you
very much.
Thank you.
next June Michael Ashland.
The Senators thank you for
hearing the mining this Michael
us from and I'm the county
attorney and terra county and
also chairman of the county
attorney affiliate of the
counties association I would
like to associate myself with
what my friend grace Phillips
said I think these will
significantly increase our
insurance or insurance defense
costs particularly in light of
of with the last speaker Mr
Curtis and said about the almost
strict liability the nature of
these claims for the the the
language that it potentially is
going to.
Our insurers are going to know
what to charge and we're
concerned about losing access to
the market state law already
requires us to have insurance
if the Mike made my concern
beyond what this Phillips said
is the reactivate chair of this
bill if the evil to be remedied
is police officers and other
public employees doing bad
things of if that is the problem
we seek to to remedy I think it
would be better to attack the
problem at the front end rather
than a reactive solution of
years later providing some sort
of increased ability to sue
increased tort claims act's I
would suggest that a better
remedy would be reforming the
law enforcement academies
certification decertification
process which the Attorney
General who is the chairman has
said this about us we should
look at better training more
money to local departments to
get certification jails to for
money for certification and most
important of all more money for
behavioral health Otero Carroll
County incurred we had
settlements of two million and
three million dollars in two
separate cases for mentally ill
people who are in our jail we
have no control over who's in
our jail many of these people
should be at the state mental
hospital Las Vegas.
the their attorneys find they
can't sue a judge who ordered
them committed they can't so
prosecutor so we wind up getting
getting sued done any county had
a twenty one million dollars
settlement over mentally ill
then I would suggest that
instead of spending money on
increased insurance costs and
lawyers Defense funds the money
should be put in at the front
end to prevent these things from
happening in the first place I
think the committee for hearing
me out have a good afternoon.
Thank you Mr.
According to the agency only.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee aged forty with
monopoly we have to stand
opposed this bill it's do you
mind we have a hundred sixty
this ballot is but part of our
municipalities do not have an
annual budget in excess but this
cap we were looking at the
current cap million fifty and
when we read the bill is a bill
under the increased we've been.
I had a every state in our
region prepares all of the last
thirty years.
Justice Mr chair and not just
increasing on the back.
Thank you.
More New Mexico with our
membership.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am general
counsel for the month Mexico
Public School Insurance
Authority with me online also is
Richard Collett was the
executive director of we stand
opposed stand opposed to the
bill has very significant
implications for schools school
budgets the Nipsey of frontier
and potentially ability to
retain rien purchased
reinsurance.
I'm gonna be as brief as
possible but I'd like to let
this committee to consider the
legislative declaration behind
the tort claims act which is set
up to balance the interests of
victims to recover for injuries
against the financial
constrictions and limitations of
government that there is a
balance so that needs to be
recognized as special especially
since government takes on more
risks than let's say a private
corporation it takes on all
risks that are presented to it
so to be mindful of that balance
that's in inherent already as
policy in the toward.
Is is very important I want to
give you all an example to
consider here we all have
automobile liability insurance
you're probably a liability
insurance is two hundred fifty
thousand dollars and we decide
that we're gonna increase that
liability print insurance to
million dollars to cover
ourselves to protect our homes
and and and our resources.
We have to pay for that increase
we just can't say move our move
our our our our liability
insurance to million dollars
since it to fifty you have to
pay for it the the same
principle would apply here if we
increase limits and essentially
what this bill is doing is it's
increasing the cap from.
Well actually seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars to to
well over to about two point
eight million dollars we are
increasing the liability for
governmental entities and and
I'm speaking about schools not
only are we increasing that
liability we're also adding the
additional factor of attorney's
fees which had never played a
role in settling cases before so
that's gonna sensually add more
value to these cases and also
when the something that no one's
talked about is that the statue
limitations presently for the
tort claims act as two years and
this upset two three so if you
look at premiums for the largest
school districts like Santa Fe
Los crucis Rio Rancho
they average anywhere between
four to six million dollars.
What will it mean to their
budgets potential anywhere from
a ten to twenty percent increase
in risk premiums given the Expos
liability that could be anything
from three hundred to five
hundred thousand dollars that
comes out of the operating
budget to pay the additional
exposure that is a hit coming
out of actual school budget so
we ask you instead of that
presently right now this bill
Public School Insurance
authority has the S. I. R.
something sure retention of a
million dollars if we have to up
that to two point eight million
dollars or two million dollars
again it's going to cost and
premiums it's going to affect
the public school insurance
authority fund.
So in short this bill is much
more than just getting rid of
qualified immunity is
essentially tripling our
exposure and because of that it
has since the very significant
financial implications and I
think it's do a much more
comprehensive analysis to allow
the public entities especially
our schools to to absorb that
it's going to happen thank you.
Thank you Mr.
It.
Our vision support this measure.
Rebecca over other are you
seeking a supporter Hentze.
And support okay.
Those who are supported thank
you might need some inspiration
for it.
We are going to have in this
meeting of about four or five
years we have a five o'clock
o'clock consumers departments.
Good afternoon my name is
Rebecca all of lotus and I'm
speaking on behalf the day of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league stands in
strong support of the bill we
believe that New Mexicans who
are wrongfully injured or killed
by law enforcement personnel
reserve justice before the law
the league advocates against
systemic racism in the justice
system and at a minimum
representing excessive force and
brutality by law enforcement
thank you.
Thank you miss Harper Marshall
Martinez.
And again Mr chairman members of
the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez the executive director
of the quality New Mexico the
LGBTQ civil rights organization.
LGBTQ people have a long history
of experiencing violence and
that includes at the hands of
law enforcement as a reminder
the Stonewall riots at the
beginning of the modern LGBTQ
civil rights movement was the
result of consistent abuse of
where entrance the police the
road to reconciliation is long
and we've been walking alone for
much of it in large part because
we've been asked to provide more
support on the front and while
never being given adequate
opportunities to compel
accountability after the
brutalization happens to us and
let me be clear we know that not
all law enforcement officers or
government officials are overly
violent toward queer and trans
people we believe that members
of the LGBTQ community can never
builds trust in local
governments and law enforcement
we will never feel safer in the
present in the presence of them
if there aren't mechanisms for
accountability and transparency
and I want to especially thank
chairman for about this for
bringing this legislation one
more note of attorney's fees
I'll be taking people of color
and trans women of color who are
extremely over criminalized over
brutalized and underserved are
also predominantly low wage
under employed or unemployed
individuals as a result without
opportunities that allow
attorneys fees to be recoverable
our community would rarely have
access to ask for the justice we
deserve for the record queer and
trans people are notoriously
left out of the category of
people who sue government all
the time we support all attempts
to offer put the public greater
confidence in law enforcement
and government entities we
applaud the sponsor again for
offering meaningful change and
for put toward police and
criminal just reform justice
reform policies thank you.
Thank you Marshall Lucille that
works.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
that compass I'm a policy
associate apple futures formally
known as young women United.
Invasion led by people of color
and for people of color we know
the impact that over policing
and police violence have had on
our communities we stand in
support of SB three seventy six
and the avenues towards
accountability that this bill
provides thank you.
Thank you.
And I think that published.
Our.
So Senator wonders only can give
you an opportunity to.
Respond to some of the things
that were said about the bill
before you go to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that opportunity Mr
Chairman a lot of the arguments
made against this bill really
have no relevance and when the
committee begins to explore the
more dig into them a little bit
you'll find the reason for that
let me start with my own
experience is the easiest one to
dispute some of the arguments
you've heard here today the
argument was made this will cost
governmental agencies and
entities much more money in the
funding cases.
I began by telling you all I do
do some of these cases I do have
had tort claims cat cases and
when you heard that this is
going to cost too much in
defense costs let me give you my
own most recent example had a
wrongful death medical
malpractice case in Gallup the
jury felt the just damages were
eighteen million dollars that's
what they thought the value of
the pain the suffering the loss
of life the medical expenses
should be eighteen million
dollars.
Four point five million dollars
of that was awarded against
universe in New Mexico Hospital
but because of this tort claims
act the most the family could
recover with seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars and so the
judgment of four point five
million dollars against the
state was reduced to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
The state has been appealing
that matter for three years
after the trial despite the fact
that all of the defendants have
settled the case despite the
fact the cases spent the state
has spent far more than seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to save the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
So the state should be able to
complain and the agencies of the
government should be able to
come and complain that this cost
too much and defense costs
because the fact of the matter
is they mismanaged the defense
costs and spend far more
defending cases and it would
take for them to settle the
cases were resolved.
And so the argument that that
that this will cost too much in
defense costs really ignores the
fact that the state doesn't do
and the agencies of the state
don't do a good enough job of
managing their legal expenses
and I say that as a former
defense lawyer.
Now you were told that you
should compare the cost of New
Mexico caps to other states and
I'd like to know what this
committee thanks could possibly
be the relevance of that
argument.
First of all I'll note that
there was no discussion about
the fact that ten states have no
caps at all including
California.
And in those states that have no
caps then are outside of this
discussion whatsoever but what
is the relevance of saying that
other states have lower or
higher caps in New Mexico.
Is there some suggestion that
state employees law enforcement
officers and agencies of the
state and our schools are going
to move to other states whether
lower caps sometimes comparing
our state other states make some
sense when we were worried that
businesses or economic gap
opportunities are where people
are going to go to other states
but it's absurd to think that
our schools are counties or
cities are going to move to
other states because they have
lower caps and so there's really
no relevance to comparing those
caps.
And let's be clear about those
caps Mr chairman members may
those have been changed since
two thousand eight.
Two thousand eight was the last
time we changed any of these
cabs New Mexico thirteen years
ago and realize these caps apply
to medical expenses lifetime
medical expenses pain and
suffering lost wages and the
value of life itself.
Thirteen years we haven't
changed the value of medical
expenses that are capped under
this law.
And so ask yourself what have
you seen what has been your own
experience with the cost of
medical expenses and realize
that under current caps right
now the most anybody can recover
for their medical expenses are
capped.
It's absurd to think that that
cap that applies now to medical
expenses should be made maintain
without with no change and so
Mister chairman what on scrutiny
the issue a comparison
comparison of other states the
issue of how much you can spent
on legal fees are all really red
herrings and all that last give
you this example the argument
that is made about legal fees or
costs or caps ignores the fact
that today these cases can be
brought in federal Kate federal
court here in New Mexico and
abroad in New Mexico federal
court all the time and in
federal court there are no caps
at all.
Our own case in Dona ana county
is the best example of that the
Slevin case where the district
attorney had an individual in
solitary confinement for two
years.
The jury decided the rightful
compensation to that individual
Mr Slevin was twenty two million
dollars.
Dona Ana County finally settled
for fifteen point five million
dollars.
They pay that out of their own
resources.
I'll tell you from my own
experience that if the county
had a two million dollar cap
which is what this bill would do
and cap all counties at two
million dollars all of those
counties and cities if they were
really evaluating this with
actuarial analysis and really
proper spot would realize that a
two million dollar cap would
ultimately be far more
reassuring and predictable for
their exposure to liability and
for their ability to insure
themselves.
I'll tell you after practicing
law for thirty years when I have
a case that is capped I know
walking into that case that the
worst day that I could ever have
would be a two million dollar
judgment.
And so when you get into a
negotiation the negotiation
begins at that Capitec million
dollars the negotiations proceed
much more smoothly and much more
productively toward a final
settlement when you know what
that ranges right now cities and
counties have unlimited exposure
damages in federal court this
bill gives them greater assurity
and ultimately will result in a
savings to the taxpayers thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator let's go to
the committee now.
And the first is Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
thank the sponsor and everyone
who spoke on the bill I think
this is a very important bill
because the caps have not been
changed in twenty seven years
and the caps are very far from
making plaintiffs hole so I
think that that's important I do
have some kind of little
technical questions about the
bills and then of.
Well I guess I'll just go in in
order has I scribbled on the
bill and so it made me jump a
little bit I'm.
So I'm in section B. on page two
Has has Mr Curtis stated it is
not at all clear in fact I think
it's I've been arguing that
qualified immunity is not the
law in the state of New Mexico
and so this defense in any
claim.
It shall not be a defense so
it's it's a it's pro.
We would prophylactic write it
it's it's stopping a defense
that that has been applied in
federal courts but hasn't been
implied in state courts and
isn't it usually that the court
does something and the.
And the Legislature responds I
don't know I just what what are
we why is this so important to
to put this defense and has you
have put it Mr chair.
Mister chairman Senator.
There's still a business aspect
and I understand your question
asking why it's important this
bill to expressly deprive a
defense of qualified immunity it
would bring a state cause of
action and and you raise a good
question which is that we
establish a state civil rights
cause of action there would be
no qualified immunity in our
common law this would
statutorily assure that that
never gets created in our common
law but you're right right as it
stands right now even without
that language there would be no
qualified immunity in our state
common law this this avoids the
development of that common law.
Okay and and Mr chair so we're
trying to avoid the development
of the common law but then we're
going forward and talking about
it's not a defense that any
action was undertaken in good
faith how does good faith
interact with intentional point
which a lot of the towards that
are listed on page one
False imprisonment battery false
arrest malicious prosecution of
abuse of process libel slander
defamation of character
violation probably read some of
those are intentional torts.
And so how.
I mean good faith is an element.
Or lack of good faced state or
malice is an element of those
claims so I'm a little bit
confused about about that.
So Mr Chairman
Senator Sedillo Lopez I I I
understand your point which is
that it would it would seem
inconsistent that you would ever
have a qualified immunity
defense for intentional torts
but but the reality is that
again the the development of the
federal common law in our court
system is such that they are
elements like good faith are and
the other language that you see
that we put into the bill is is
where that qualified immunity
defense comes from and so what
we've really done is we've taken
this bill and and assured really
a point that I should have made
earlier and that is that this
bill is intended to run parallel
to the Civil Rights Act that we
now have in in our Senate in
other words if if we enacted the
Civil Rights Act and did not an
act this bill with appropriate
modifications to the tort claims
act you have been consistency
are you would have different
caps under the state Civil
Rights Act then you would have
under the tort claims act for
example you would have a
different statute of limitations
you have recovery of attorney's
fees under the Civil Rights Act
and not under the the tort
claims act and so to avoid
inconsistency in our law this
bill is important to run
parallel with the Civil Rights
Act.
thank you thank you Mr chair but
I still think there's a problem
in an inconsistency that the
judge will have trying to figure
out jury instructions when an
element of the case for example
of malicious prosecution just as
an example requires that the
prosecution show the part that
I'm not the prosecution but that
the towards so that the
prosecution was malicious then
your eliminating the defense of
a good faith which is the only
defense you you have if you're
if you're a defendant you're
trying to prove that the
prosecution was not malicious.
Do you see what I'm saying.
The interaction between the
elements of the tort claim and
the defense that you're saying
is precluded.
And Mr chairman and CEO was all
I can assure you is the language
there that it is intended to
preclude a qualified immunity
defense is the is the language
that is you'll see.
Coming out of the Civil Rights
Act it's under consideration in
the Senate now and is intended
really to take the Supreme Court
precedents and the common law
development of qualified
immunity and assure that that
common law could not be
established in New Mexico so I I
do see the point you're
concerned that it may never
happen or that it can be
impossible to happen at I think
the point you're making it would
be impossible you could ever
have a good faith defense for
intentional tort and and and of
course I see your point except I
would argue that that the fact
that it that it could not happen
simply reinforces the fact that
we would never have a qualified
immunity the president or law
develop in New Mexico and and
frankly the that's a good thing
that's what we're trying to do
with this bill and the Civil
Rights Act.
Mr chair I just I think has you
and your I know you're the chair
Judiciary but I think that you
that it may be helpful to really
think through how a judge is
going to figure out the jury
instruction for this
because if I were the judge I
wouldn't I wouldn't know how to
structure the fact that that the
act this seems to say I can't
use good faith has a defense and
what the elements of the toward
of an inch of an intentional for
our so so I I would just suggest
infants moved forward to
Judiciary that that be thought
through a little bit a little
bit more
Again thinking through how was
the judge going to draft these
jury instructions how the
party's gonna crappies jury
instructions I know that the
parties work through it but I
think that this raises a little
bit of of of confusion
and then.
The next one.
the next thing is on page two
subsection C.
there with the litigation
expenses and attorneys fees
right now the law provides for
the winter to who exceeds of who
makes an offer of judgment for
plaintiff makes an offer
judgment to to receive their
costs in in the rules of of US
civil procedure I'm so this
would affect the rules of civil
procedure and then it also adds
attorney's fees which are not
provided by law my question is
what's the relationship between
reasonable reasonable litigation
expenses the costs in the rules
of civil procedure and then the
relationship between attorney's
fees of providers the statute
with contingency fees which are
normally the mechanism for
funding tort cases.
There will be no longer a need
for control contingency.
so I believe there are several
questions there I'll try to make
sure that I get everyone from
center city Lopez so first of
all you heard one of the earlier
part of the bill say that that
attorney's fees are not an issue
now we're not recoverable now
that's not very clear or broad
understanding of the law because
of course attorney's fees are
recoverable if you bring the
civil rights case in federal
court and and and in fact you
heard misspelled compare
attorney's fees on an hourly
rate to others and so the only
reason she would make that
comparison is that in fact
attorney's fees are already
recoverable under civil rights
claims you also when you heard
the The presentation by the
public school authority that
attorney's fees are not now an
issue that's not really accurate
so so do your point the the
better language may be a
reasonable attorneys fees and
costs I wouldn't disagree with
that we may need to change that
language to cost because costs
recoverable costs have a very
well defined understanding in
our law we have a number of
statutes that prescribe what are
recoverable costs and we have a
pretty good body of case law in
New Mexico that prescribed what
are recoverable costs so I think
the language that's in this bill
right now that use the word
expenses probably an artful and
probably should be rewarded to
use the word costs as opposed to
expenses.
I hope I address all your
questions in there and and with
regard to attorney's fees the
judges have authority to cut
attorney's fees based on
reviewing them now under
consumer rights cases and
actually they just have inherent
authority to cut attorney's fees
when they review them out with
that be included in your in your
In section C..
You
chairman Senator syllabus that's
actually right and and for those
that are non lawyers on the
committee or or else the
participating on our call today
I've never had a case where the
judge does not very carefully
scrutinized any claim for
attorney's fees by requiring the
lawyers to present hourly
billing to try and justify the
hourly rate they're required to
show their years of experience
they're required to show
comparable rates charged by
other attorneys with comparable
experience in the in the same
field to practice so judges have
a very but I Dickel analysis in
process by which they assess
attorney's fees it's it's well
established once again
oftentimes referred to as some
of the five factors and so
between all of those factors and
very careful scrutiny I've seen
judges of be very a very
appropriate in cutting
attorney's fees when they feel
the attorney's fees are not
reason.
Thank you thank you Mr chair but
the question didn't get answered
from from my first question is
how this would work with
contingency fees which are the
traditional way for getting
Getting costs I do not cost for
the traditional way of for
providing access to attorneys
for those who do not have the
resources to bring these claims.
Senator Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez this is a good
topic for you as a former law a
law professor to really perhaps
expand all for all of us to
expand on why we have attorneys
fees recoverable in the area of
civil rights.
Most cases for that again for
the non course most cases the
prevailing party does not get
their legal fees we operate
under the American system where
everybody pays their lawyers and
they're responsible for their
own fees come when or loss.
In civil rights the Congress
made a very specific exceptions
the United States Congress
because they recognize that in
the area of civil rights the
people that we're trying to
enforce our civil rights whether
was voting whether it was race
weather was gender whether it
was sexual harassment or
otherwise that oftentimes the
people bring these plans might
not have the resources to have
to put pay a lawyer or that
their ultimate recovery might
not even warrant or justifies
justify the cost of the
litigation then that much of
this arose out of the Civil
Rights Act and efforts to assure
the vote of black Americans in
the southern part of our country
and so what the Congress
recognizes that given these
disparities David versus Goliath
of voters versus their
governments were trying to
suppress their vote they put in
a provision for the recovery of
attorney's fees an exception to
our law of a very narrow
exception or law one of the very
few areas were attorney's fees
are recoverable in in in in this
bill it's our position that the
same analysis in the same
reasoning should apply to civil
rights cases in in New Mexico in
state law that Congress adopted
many years ago for section
nineteen eighty three actions in
the federal.
So this will be in Mr chair more
recovery for plaintiffs because
they will no longer be a third
taken out.
Four or up to the I've heard
even forty percent he can.
Mr Chairman is Senator Sedillo
Lopez the this bill does not
address contingency fee
contracts the issue of what the
recovery would be between the
client and the attorney would be
pursuant to their their contract
and whether the attorney's fees
would be subject to the
contingency or added to the
total recovery under against
which the contingency would be
computed all of those we would
be subjects that are addressed
as you know in in the required
written contract between
attorney and client as were
required to have in the case of
a contingency fee basis.
Thank you and then this was
actually mentioned in the FIR
and I looked and I think they're
correct get the this statute and
you could I'm sure as it is Mr
judiciary you'll fix it you need
to repeal I believe the current
two year statute limitations as
well as imposed could you
changing the statue limitations
to three years so the repeal of
the old one and I think that
that's that's correct and then
finally I'll just end with how
did you come up with the I mean
I am totally on board the caps
need to be raised of the twenty
seven years a long time and I
understand there's even
litigation pending has you know
I know and everybody knows about
this issue of the cast how did
you come up with the figures.
So you to point your question
I'd like to address them both
you mentioned a statue
limitations some of the
opponents of the bill also raise
that I'd like to address that
very briefly right now anybody
who brings a lawsuit in New
Mexico for a tort for an injury
for a death for a medical
malpractice they have three
years to bring their cause of
action that's the current statue
limitations for everybody else
all other claims.
For reasons unknown to me many
years ago somebody decided that
claims against the state should
be abbreviated there should be a
stricter standard and you should
have to bring your claims within
two years.
This bill would take that the
two years to three years and
essentially put the state on the
same footing as everyone else
and so the argument made that
this is somehow again unfair or
harming the state ignores the
fact that the state has had this
advantage in this benefit for
years and and we believe that
that's an unfair advantage and a
disadvantage the people that are
injured in our state to you to
your other question about how we
came up with the caps Senator
what I did was I began with the
Civil Rights Act as you are
probably aware as it was
originally introduced the Civil
Rights Act had unlimited caps
there were negotiations between
the speaker on his civil rights
bill and a two million dollar
cap was ended into his bill and
and I simply took that two
million dollar cap and then
transpose that into this bill so
that as I said the two this tort
claims act would be running
parallel here with the Civil
Rights Act said this the tort so
Rights Act as a two million
dollar cap this would have a two
million dollar cap as well on
total liability for all claims
and then and then what we did is
we took that adjustment to look
at other adjustments just down
from that scale and all or
emphasize some of this the the
current cap on property damages
is two hundred thousand dollars
so if the state or local
government burns down your house
because of their negligence you
get two hundred thousand dollars
at your cap on your house all of
your property damages is capped
at two hundred thousand dollars
another existing cap if the
state injures you and you end up
with catastrophic medical
expenses if you end up with any
medical expenses candidly right
now the cap is three hundred
thousand dollars I ask everybody
on this call to take your own
experience with your family and
others and wonder how long you
have to be in a hospital before
you reach a cap of three hundred
thousand dollars for the entire
lifetime medical expenses both
past and future to know that
that cap should be adjusted
upward from three hundred
thousand dollars and so Mr
Chairman
Madam senator the internet
Sedillo Lopez that is how we
came up with the with the of the
new table of of damages.
Thank you Mr chairman and like I
said I really emphasize that
issue of the intentional
intentional torts I just I think
you've got a real problem with
I'm not.
With the saying it's on defense.
To an intentional tort in good
faith is not a defense
intentional dentinal sort but I
I trust that you'll deal with
that in the in Judiciary I I
don't think I'm probably the
only one sees that
inconsistency.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you
Mr so we donations Senator gave
us.
Thank you center.
Just a couple of questions.
To start exported units for
twenty years and it really.
Here.
The person that is going to
increase
the liability costs the schools.
What not because I I look this
is that there is a greater
opportunity for someone to jump
out the.
Should the schools before how
would not increase the cost
liability schools.
Mr Chairman center guy goes I
would answer that question by
having the insurers for the
school districts give you the
amounts that they have paid to
settle cases in the last five
years and what you will find in
those settlements is there are
settlements that are well in
excess of the cap that we're
talking about in tort claims act
that's because those cases were
settled by bringing them under
federal civil rights laws so
when you have a teacher who
senator is abuser of children
who sexually molest them and
gets move from one school
district the next and is never
precluded from being with our
our children and ultimately
finally the law catches up with
that individual they get sued
their student federal court the
the settlement is is well in
excess of a million dollars in
those cases well in excess of
our existing cap so so the
suggestion that this bill will
cost the school districts more
money ignores the reality of the
settlements they've been paying
and and and I would ask you to
invite the school districts
provide you with that
information what they paid to
settle cases well beyond the
state cap by the cases that are
brought in federal court.
Thank you for that.
Senator but this allows.
So risk management would be the
only one in Los V. the employee
also correct.
Mister chairman Senator this
this bill does not change are
there have there have been some
discussion about the in the
Civil Rights Act about limiting
or precluding end of it
individuals being named as we
joined as parties right now of
of plaintiffs in some cases join
individuals some cases they join
only the employer agency you are
or branch of the government
responsible for that employee as
of this bill would not change
that center.
Thank.
Mr chair actually.
Let's hope by the way that the
employees get the.
Sure there are being caught in
the.
Senator we lost you.
We'll be able to play a play out
if this were to pass get signed
by the governor
we have a deal with perhaps the
Supreme Court would they be.
Part of this I just noticed that
higher out be dealt.
Mr Chairman center I'm sorry
because of the gaudy connection
I didn't get your question well
you are you asking I think
what the basis would would be
decided by the Supreme Court and
I'm not sure I understand your
question.
So I was just wondering if this
what your bills passed
why cases are on appeal.
It would have as it was written
Senator Mr chairman but we've
made that amendment in
correction as the first two
amendments of this committee we
we eliminated language that was
in the original bill that would
have purported to affect cases
that are now pending or on
appeal I agree with the analysis
of center city Lopez earlier
that that doing so would
probably be unconstitutional and
for that reason I asked the
committee to amend that language
out.
Okay thank you for that my last
question is currently up to the
plate show the state employed
working outside Act outside
scope of duty not be called up.
Suit.
Use the basketball but.
Senator a guy goes Mr chairman
of I understand your question
the tort claims act requires the
plaintiff to show that the
conduct was in the course and
scope of employment of a state
employee so state employees
outside the course and scope of
their employment could not be
subject to a lawsuit that would
then be vicariously or the for
which the state or the county or
the the local government would
be vicariously liable that
answers your question.
You have you have to show that
you have to show that the toward
the conduct which is giving rise
to the to the action you have to
show that occurred in the course
and scope of the employment.
Okay thank you for that and I
guess I was talking about the
teachers less children that
would be I would have thought
that would be it the scope of
his job it happened occurred off
school grounds but only that
there are just.
One last question and we have
the gentleman from the August
police department speak in
opposition to this.
How are you dealing with the
police officers and their peers.
Mr chairman of.
The the really the impetus for
the the Civil Rights Act of
course originated from the
events of this last year and the
Greg Floyd def and the response
of the public around around the
country with the sense of
outrage and and of course we
since then we've seen the
shootings the videos we've tried
to address it here in the state
with body cameras and such as
well too my experience
Senator has been that I've had a
lot lot lot of law enforcement
officers come and and be very
supportive of our efforts to
increase transparency and and to
try and ensure that that we keep
the public respect for what they
do and I want to assure that as
well too so I realize that
there's going to be of an
initial resistance to this
they've been told by other
lawyers that this is a targeting
them that it's bad for them I
really respectfully disagree I I
think that body cameras are good
for police I've been a former
prosecutor I love that when we
had a videotape of a DWI as a
prosecutor so so again sometimes
it's just a little bit broader
perspective and ultimately we
have better law enforcement of
and better people in law
enforcement I think that's a
good thing for law enforcement.
Thank you for that Senator Mr
activist and my thoughts is
during that same.
What everything else we are are
all the ones why we had a couple
of bad actors that really.
Write it off point but it all
and just pray that this because
there but do that also but what
that are you thank you Sir thank
you Mr.
Senator Tallman here in the UAE
it's up to you you're next.
You know reminded many we're
gonna have to stop for a five
o'clock o'clock this very soon
so.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for their work
on this bill.
It's we only have a few minutes
I'll be brief I accept short
answers I was issue discussed
turning it during an interim
committee.
Meeting.
Mister chairman Senator was the
report of the Civil Rights
Commission was presented to the
courts corrections and justice
interim committee.
Thank you.
So.
Second question what prompted
you to motivated breakfast bill
for I guess it was the George
Floyd incident that you've
already mentioned.
Well partly Senator but in all
candor the real reason for
bringing this bill is the fact
that we have the Civil Rights
Act of progressing in the Senate
we have to pass this bill It
we're gonna pass that bill
otherwise we would have
conflicts and inconsistencies in
our law we have different
damages different statue
limitations different defenses
this was principally addition
added to assure that our tort
claims act keeps pace with the
Civil Rights Act and there
there's not conflicts in our
Los.
Or briefly has is change of
qualified immunity.
Mr Chairman center this bill
would expressly preclude
qualified immunity as a defense
in actions brought in state
court and under state law I'm
like federal law were qualified
immunity is a defense and
remains a defense.
Would modify.
Qualified immunity just
completely do away with it.
In proceedings brought Mister
chairman Senator under
proceedings brought in state
court under state law yes
qualified immunity would not be
permitted Defense one of the
debates and discussions we've
had is whether plans where we
bring a case under in federal
court under federal law or state
law in state courts that's an
open question if I was a
plaintiff's attorney at have a
difficult time making that
decision because of I bring the
case in federal court I
absolutely get attorney's fees
under current law I potentially
get unlimited damages under
existing federal law.
For you indicated thank you for
that answer Mister chairman
Senator cindicator earlier to
get a better deal in the federal
court.
So there must be a good reason
now why not everybody goes to
federal court.
Mister chairman Senator again it
would be a bit decision it would
be a judgment decision for
attorney because bring the case
in federal court you'd have
unlimited damages if this bill
was passed in state court you
have two million dollars as a
cap on damages and so you have
to evaluate your your case and
determine whether it's a case
you think could exceed the cap
and then more likely than not
probably bring it in federal
court.
Well.
Follow up question that is not
time one last question you and
talking about their caps.
We Iran and sound like the you
know we shouldn't consider.
What thirty states are doing
that we should compare ourselves
to California which has no
capital we're number.
We're at the bottom of it of the
other list why would we be at
the top of the list of of what
caps.
Why increases the to.
I realize it may it probably
could be increased a little bit
of a wine increases torque caps
and we are ready.
higher than than the most
states.
Mr Chairman center I didn't mean
to say in a way that I would
like to alter my mic statement
do you I don't think we should
be caricaturists off to
California or the ten other
states that have no caps at all
I I don't believe a comparison
to any other state has any
relevance in in many cases
meetings we do should be
compared to other states are
minimum wage should be compared
to other states because people
may choose to go work in a
different state and we should
compare medical medical
malpractice to other states of
course because doctors may
choose to go work in other
state but in the case of the
tort claims claims act these are
recoveries made against cities
counties in the state the state
is going to move to some other
state the county is not going to
move to some other state the
city is not going to move to
some other state none of the
parties who would be liable our
schools are not going to move to
some of the state none of the
parties that would be liable
under this law are going to go
someplace else because they
would have a lesser caps it's
it's an absurd argument.
Okay what that's all I have an
interest you know.
We have this only states that.
Have a shorter of.
Legislative sessions and we do
our trying to jam a major piece
of legislation through.
I think it needs a lot more
discussion I'm not totally
against what you're trying to do
I don't agree with everything I
agree with some of it but I
think this is a lot more work so
consequently I move it.
Table.
The motion to table at some non
compatible motion.
Also.
When you say let's find out
thank you.
The secretary will call the roll
motion to table.
Motioned to table three seven
six are great girls.
Yes.
Senator McCain.
Now.
Senator
Lopez no.
Thanks yes.
Sierra yes.
Search now.
No.
So it it it does three three
then do I have the account right
any three three that's correct
three three with one excuse.
Motion everyone tries
Association.
What is that no REC.
Do that a recommendation.
Yes all make that motion.
Further debate on this I guess
the same thing and we're almost
out of time but.
Using this should go to the next
committee you need a morning
editor
Status traded the the civil
rights bill the Human Rights
still and so I think it's it's
it's it's probably the the the
brain then you're going to go to
Judiciary where that one is is
currently being debated.
So anybody with all of the roll.
On Senate bill three seven six
amended.
Our motion without
recommendation third guy and
goes.
Yes.
Thank you all.
Yes.
So.
No.
Tallman.
No.
There are two.
Yes.
So we we it'll stay on the table
we we have to members who.
Who are with us today.
No I guess we just have one
everybody else is here Senator.
Senator Ingle.
Yeah we're running all so this
is the.
There is a motion to reconsider
murdered at a later meeting
Senator we'll we'll take it up
with with those two present
thank you that is really
promising I have to say for you
the NMAA right
thank you for The presentation
it's been a real educational
thank you members we have built
from the Senators Sedillo Lopez
who knows Campos and lotus that
we're not getting to today will
start with those tomorrow before
a house built in.
And we'll do those that will
cater House Bills and we'll get
to the rest of the Senate Bill
agenda tomorrow.
And that.
Meeting is adjourned thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you all.
Why.
