Get together to go over
whichever final bills need to be
reviewed they get assigned to
us.
Okay a book recommendation.
Yes
You know separate somebody gave
me another copy of the big.
And I and and and I to get into
too.
Senator souls and he had another
coveted somebody's investing
about did you do in order.
Yeah maybe it was how to me if
somebody put a great book yeah.
Any of okay so let's move on
then with Senate I mean house
bill two thirty one the CYFD
child ID cards and
Representative read good to meet
you it's nice to meet you miss
welcomed the committee Senator
thank you for having me we
usually table the first bill it
comes over.
Right.
I'd like to introduce Maryland
back who's with me as an expert
Mr chair and senators what this
bill does it relates to getting
identification cards for
juveniles of foster care that
are twelve years of age or older
and the I want to give just a
little brief explanation of why
we feel this is important we
looked at it we getting
questions why to why the age of
twelve and what we've learned
through our research is that at
about the age of twelve that is
when foster care kids and
children youth and families tend
to run away and what we're
trying to do in working with the
department of motor vehicles
which we have in many
stakeholders and even children
who have run away is to get the
ability to give them an
identification card that they
don't necessarily have to
except and they don't have to
carry on them but CYFD will take
them down the get this card and
it will give law enforcement an
actual updated picture because
or happen is is children are
running away and when law
enforcement is making contact
with them to actually get them
back to where they need to be we
have no picture so we have no
updated picture when there's an
amber alert to locate these kids
which is kind of sad and on an
average day fifty five children
will disappear from foster care
and over the past twenty years
has been a hundred thousand
missing foster children were
there cases were closed because
they had no way of locating them
so that's the first reason for
the ID and the second reason is
that also in powers these
children normally at eighteen
you have to get an ID for these
children but it's always a
little too late so they're
recommending that you get an ID
for them sixteen seventeen lower
so they can get out and start
empowering themselves in the
work force and so those are the
two reasons why we feel this is
important and again we pick the
age of twelve because that
sentence to be the standard age
were they run away this bill was
asked to.
He brought by law enforcement
they really need the tools to be
able to to put this picture what
happens is when these ID cards
go in the going to a national
database system and it basically
if they make contact with them
on the streets or there's an
amber alert we'll have an actual
updated photo to help locate
these kids that are running away
so I will defer to Maryland and
she has anything to add on that
will stand for questions very
good thank you thank you
Representative Maryland back
thank you my name is Alan back I
am a former foster parent I've
had twelve teams in my care I'm
every single one of them at some
point was on front I am missing
around run and this morning we
passed house joint memorial for
unanimously out of house health
which is really looking into why
these kids run and how we come
back the federal government
released an audit report just
last week saying New Mexico is
not complying with kids who go
on run and we're not trying to
find them and then I believe in
front of you you have the
American Bar Association proven
strategies exist strategies for
assisting youth in obtaining
identification cards and I just
want to say that and one of
their policy advocates is on
page seven it says require that
vital documents are obtained as
soon as the child enters so
twenty nine states have entered
this most actually and that's on
page seven I've highlighted it
for you I'm most actually think
that identification cards at
some level should start at age
zero I working with the
department who doesn't or is
this bill we said twelve and so
yes this past the first
committee nine zero nine zero to
great bill and so we just thank
you for supporting this bill and
we really look forward to
keeping our most vulnerable
youth safe today we believe that
there are at least fifty six
youth in foster care who are
currently on run.
And what was the vote on the
floor is complicated.
As complicated yes but we we
were successful in the for and
what was forty two twenty seven.
Okay
was it next it was intended to
be
Republicans and moderate
Democrats voted for it or it in
the in the.
Yes I think the leadership voted
against yes he did
It was there and the floor
amendment changed we have the
did you do before moving to not
do a floor amendment Mr chair I
think that it was twelve all of
it was well we when we started
we had no age on the bill in the
first committee and the first
committee recommended that we
with the age of twelve because
that is age that kids start
running away it in on the floor
Mr chair Senators intended to go
into an argument that law
enforcement would target people
of race and that the kids would
like that however we talk to
lots of kids who have aged out
and they would love an ID card
to help them get jobs and you
know things of that nature so it
turned into kind of a a racial
thing against law enforcement on
the floor.
Okay well let's anything else in
it and I just need to say Mr
Chairman representative on the
floor was mentioned that if we
wanted to amend it to fourteen
that's a friendly amendment
we're very happy to do that at
fourteen they have a used
attorney I'm again most states
have this at zero this is a
safety mechanism but it's also
if kids on run they have a gift
kit is on line and they don't
want to be in foster care this
will help them get a job so they
don't have to be in foster care
we want to keep these kids safe
and so I've had kids come back
just to get an identification
card and then they go right back
I'm not.
I mean we need to be protecting
our use if these are the use
that the state is in charge of
the state has a duty to protect
them.
We could well Senator okay let's
go to the audience and see
anybody on we got some people
into just one wish for
participants but.
Okay
is there anyone in the audience
who's in support of this bill.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this bill.
Basis Senator in opposition
let's listen to the person in
support who's on zoom is Allison
and to cut communis from a
distance at advocates said
because the.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you all right I thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Alice in
Endicott communis and I am the
legal director of advocacy Inc
we are the look New Mexico's
largest provider of legal
representation for children in
foster care and we are in
support of H. B. two thirty one
CYFD does not take photos of
kids as a matter of practice
when they come into custody so
you do not have a current photo
in their file it is unreasonable
to rely on family to find
pictures of the child goes
missing many.
Do not have reliable phones for
phone storage or taking pictures
many of our kids don't have
family who had recent contact
with them and not all kids have
school ID's many older teens
don't go to school as a result
which is run from CYFD custody
or go missing there are no
current pictures available and a
grainy five year old photo was
no real value we're trying to
find a missing child you the two
as you the treaties we all
struggle to get ideas for
clients before the twenty
eighteen and this would make it
a lot easier to do and much
sooner most kids want ID's I've
spoken with a lot of my clients
so what my colleagues legal
ideas are needed for everything
these days from travel to
applying for jobs and bank
accounts most of my youth
clients beg for ideas and are
proud when they finally get
wanted to give them a sense of
agency even kids on the run who
don't want to be found often
reach back out to us to ask for
help in getting an ID so that
they can get a job instead of
sleeping under a bridge or being
trafficked so it actually serves
to benefit them in the pool way
because one is there really a
current photo on file and the
other is that they will be able
to also help themselves I've
heard debate about the law
enforcement issue be with the
agency using the ideas to
profile children and I
understand that line of thinking
especially when juvenile justice
is involved and many kids on the
run don't want to be found for a
number of reasons but the bottom
line is this do we want law
enforcement to stop looking for
missing children because we
don't then they need the tools
to find them and that includes
current ID quality photos and
information to work with thank
you very much for listening have
a lovely evening thank you
Allison.
okay we'll just go to the
audience and and to we won't we
won't take a lot of time but if
you could say something in a
minute to about your position
but please come up in some way.
Alexandria you start thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee congratulations on a
great work this session.
my name is Alexandria Taylor
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs I'm also the co
founder of an organization known
as the New Mexico Black central
organizing committee we work
directly with young black people
here in New Mexico to inform our
policy work and as a clinician
the majority of the clients that
I work with are black girls and
women who've survived trauma
including involvement in the
foster care system I am deeply
concerned about this bill I
listen to the big debate on the
house floor that made it through
the house and its committees on
it's basically what we can see
is this bill what we see this
bill do is create a clear foster
care to prison pipeline for
children and youth were supposed
to be engaged in the system of
care this isn't just about
getting kids ID cards it's also
about entering them into a
database which to me sounds a
lot like in CIC to the Sanchez
on admission this bill was
requested by law enforcement
which lives up to the term
coined by Dorothy Roberts that
with the child welfare is the
welfare system actually is as a
family policing system family
policing relies on an expansive
network of information sharing
that spans from the school
health care public assistance
and law enforcement system this
confluence of social services
and child protective services
does not serve our families it
causes us to surveil poor and
low income families if we had
racial impact statements like
I've advocated for on on some of
the other racial justice work
I've done in this state I think
that this bill would rate in at.
Nationally more than half of
black children when hot will
have had a child welfare
investigation before the age of
eighteen and in New Mexico
according to see why FTEs own
data while while black children
Representative two point seven
percent of children in New
Mexico they represent four point
five percent of children in
foster care while black New
Mexicans represent nearly two
point seven percent of the total
population in the New Mexico
corrections department we
represent eight point two
percent thank you very is that
so yes thank you very much next.
Good evening.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is Mike
about Sanam a policy manager
with both futures I'm and we
respectfully oppose XP two three
one as a mother at the net
mother and a former teacher at
an almost all native American
high school I personally know
and understand the fear of law
enforcement and just like our
black sisters and brothers we
are over represented in the
carceral system child welfare
system and any of those systems
that remove our children and
lock them up so we
instead would like to focus on
providing law enforcement the
training of what it is to have a
missing child every child
situation is unique and
sensitive and we want to support
policies around proper tools
such as cultural safety trauma
informed practices and in this
state collaborations with tribes
pueblos in nations due to the
jurisdictional reasons let's
focus on providing law
enforcement agencies with
specialized unit to investigate
cases involving child victims
thank you thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Good evening.
Good evening.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Sharon Arjun bright I been a
nurse for forty five years I
taught pediatric nursing for
many years and if this is a
breach of privacy this is an
over reach.
One ID card is made it's part of
the record.
Children are vulnerable.
Especially disenfranchised
children who were in the CYFD
system they should be protected
by us and have the children that
said they would like the card
been informed that it will be on
the record for ever thank you
thank you sure and yes.
Hello.
To keep it.
I know Mr chair members of the
committee on the river Holly
Beaumont with interfaith worker
justice New Mexico
a couple of points if the
purpose of the ID card is to
make it easy for law enforcement
to locate and identify use and
why is the ID card on the youth
that are running seems to me it
makes more sense to have a
photograph in the file somewhere
where it can be referred to by
law enforcement in the event
that they are trying to locate a
runaway foster kid so that
doesn't make any sense for me at
all the second thing is that if
in fact as the sponsor has said
that many of these children who
have aged out of the foster care
program are in support of this
it would have been very helpful
if some of them one of them
could have been online or
present to throw their support
in favor of this program so that
just doesn't have any validity
as far as I'm concerned and
again I'm not really sure what's
behind this but if it really is
about helping law enforcement
locate run aways and and get
them back into the appropriate
care that they need this doesn't
make any sense to me for that
reason we oppose this bill.
Thank you for every moment and
finally.
Good evening chairman members of
the committee my name is Lucy
let them both I'm a policy
director with gold futures up in
upon your committee many times I
would like to use my time to
name a couple of organizations
that do stand in opposition and
we do have a written letter no
position so we have both futures
crossroads for women New Mexico
can you Mexico tech we have the
coalition to stop violence
against native women strong
families New Mexico the New
Mexico Dream Team send me your
project we have the New Mexico
immigrant law center New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee girls Inc of Santa Fe
New Mexico Dulo Association the
New Mexico breastfeeding task
force together for brothers
dreams in the action and the
ACLU of New Mexico and the
reason that we stand in
opposition is because we
absolutely see this as another
target against our communities
we know that this is going to
create a foster care to prison
pipeline we are concerned that
if children do not want to be
found they shouldn't be there
already is a system that CYFD
implements to be able to track
youth that are within their
system they do keep photographs
and children and you'll still
have access to getting regular
ideas through MVP and if we
wanted this to be for all
children that would be different
but the fact that we are
targeting children that are
within CYFD makes it very clear
that this is a targeted approach
thank you thank you and then we
have one one person they still
are
Kenora a little.
hello chair members of the
committee my name is qi more to
later I am seventeen years old
I'm able to just leader and a
survivor of the child welfare
system I am in propose H. B. two
three one when I was in foster
placement I felt the need to run
away because I was treated
poorly the foster parent shamed
me for being a bad kid and being
part of her foster home this
behavior made me feel far from
state and made me feel the need
to run I definitely do not want
to be found because I know that
if I would it would take me back
to their unsafe I would get
place and where situation like
treatment are given a probation
officer see we have the already
Traxxas and the take our
pictures when we get into the
system the last thing we need a
shared database between CYFD and
law enforcement any traction
with law enforcement could be
the beginning of our criminal
record when children are running
it's because they don't feel
safe loved are treated
differently we are seeking
safety and CYFD foster homes
treatment centers jails and
police to definitely do not mean
safety to us this bill is a bad
feeling in my stomach because it
puts a lot of these things in
the place to and quote help us
but they really harm us we are
ready live with trauma social
justice judgment and stigma
because of who we are and the
trauma we have live you can see
we have to get a safe space not
pipelines to prison thank you
guys for your time.
Thank you okay is there anyone
here from CYFD.
Struggle we can talk from Mr
chair on behalf of their
recommendation because we have a
good with them thank they have
endorsed this bill they have yes
I haven't or system of it they
said they they already secure
identification and similar
documents for children in foster
care in the regular course of
business the juvenile justice
services do not have processes
in place for obtaining
identification of the half of
its clients and would have to do
it but but they say they already
do this I can speak on behalf of
that Mr chair I've been a foster
care for thirty nine placements
not one single child had eight
photograph I'm in their margins
the placement and actually as
it's come out in these hearings
about this I think that we all
agree that if they could just
take a photo when a child comes
into care we would be a lot
better most case workers didn't
even know there was a place and
fax FAC T. S. to even put photos
up there the James simply cruise
with I mean this is this should
not be this heated up a bill it
is not also the databases on N.
B. T. it is not a database with
law enforcement it is a state
identification card I don't know
where that came from but as it
stands CYFD does not take photos
of kids in care and and and Mr
chair I would also say that the
photographs art updated we've
definitely been able to
determine that those are not
updated and again repeating this
just goes into MB do an
identification card just has
doesn't have a social security
number on it the children aren't
allowed they are required to
carry it and they can reject it
if they want to reject it so if
a child wants to reject the ID
card they don't have to get it
so it just goes into the
exploitation for missing
children so it's not done on all
children because most of you
have kids have current pictures
on your phone of all your kids
that you can find law
enforcement but that's just not
the case here and Mr chair in
senators when you actually see
these missing kids and there's
just no photograph it's actually
a very sad thing and so I I've
not gotten any indication.
From law enforcement that this
is trying to say select or or
get one group or anything of
that nature they're just having
no ability to provide these kids
when they don't have an updated
photograph so with Mister chair
Mister chair that we stand for
questions.
Okay members of the committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Maestas go ahead Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you Mr chair
and I apologize for for being
late we it was my dinner so high
Came as quickly as I could
always start it and I apologize
if I missed this I always start
with a look at the bill and I I
ask what is the problem we are
trying to solve and I read this
bill and I I couldn't figure
that out so Mister chair I I
appreciate just a brief what is
the problem that we're trying to
solve yes Mr chair Senator the
there are two problems we're
trying to solve number one is
the fact when these children run
away from foster care law
enforcement has no current photo
to identify them from they may
have a photo if one was taken at
CYFD when they were young but
it's not current and so there's
no way if they make contact with
them on the streets where they
want to do an amber alert
there's no way to get that
photograph out there so that is
the first reason for the bill
and the second reason for the
bill is to actually give the
children a chance to have an ID
card if they want so that that
can empower them to get a job in
the future what we've been told
is when you leave CYFD custody
you are supposed to have an ID
card of some form or fashion at
the age of eighteen now they're
recommending it be a younger
because it's not happening so
they're saying if you go down to
sixteen or seventeen and and we
have fifty kids on the run in
New Mexico right now and lunch
of those kids are calling into
their CYFD worker still on the
run but begging for these ID
cards so they can get a job and
not be sleeping under bridges
and so those are the two reasons
for bringing forth this bill and
Mr chair and senator I we don't
believe it's a fix all the
problem but we believe it's a
good step into protecting our
kids thank you Mr chair did you
did you meet with stakeholders
about this you Mr chair and
Representative Senator I will
defer to the spec was we we did
meet with a lot of stakeholders.
At Mr chair and actually you all
met range have then I think it
the democratic think she's that
with you she's part of a a
different group of youth leaders
and they actually back I just
got a text from a different
attorney that said and all of my
fourteen fifteen years I'm not
had a single case where there's
a picture of the child on files
we've met with many use who age
out current use law enforcement
foster parents legal advocates I
know that there are many
stakeholders in this group but
yes to confirm and then I also
want to say DMB supports this
MBT and then CYFD is asking if
we can amended here to move it
to fourteen.
Fourteen yes they would like it
for.
Mr chair then so you obviously
didn't read this with the
stakeholders that spoke out
today which tended to be the the
the groups that that serve
children of color and is there a
reason for that.
Mr chair and and Representative
our board is one of the most
diverse equity and inclusive
boards for New Mexico child
first network that exists in the
state right now and so we didn't
need to exclude and again at
you'd have to ask them this is
not been opposed until Monday.
My question was did you meet
with the stakeholders that spoke
today.
Mr Chairman representative I
have emailed New Mexico can and
will futures three times their
emails don't work I've tried to
call in if you email and I've
tried to email them I don't know
how to get a hold of them and
I've tried in the committee and
I'm sorry we have tried as best
as we can.
Mr chair the the reasons because
I the reason I think about the
what the problem is that we're
trying to solve is always look
at the connection between what
we're trying to solve and what
we do and if the problem is
right away but not having recent
pictures the bill could say CYFD
shall take it could take a
picture of a child when they
come in and put it in the file
that would be a direct way of
solving that problem and if the
problem is give child give
children an ID of when they are
sixteen or seventeen then you
could say CYFD shall attempt to
get an ideal I do for a child
when they turn sixteen and
seventeen has a as part of it my
understanding is that what is
called of the connect
connections from Boston K. five
six fostering connections my
understanding is that they do
that the N. eight maybe maybe
they don't do it very
effectively but that's my
understanding which means if if
if I see you say yeah yeah they
didn't well then then we should
make sure that they do that
because this does feel.
I mean if I'm a child in foster
care I don't want to be
different I don't want to all of
a sudden I'm the person with an
idea I'm the person that and
that is in the database of M. D.
D. E. N. one of the things Mr
chair yes M. D. D. is not law
enforcement but law enforcement
has ready access to look up
records it M. D. D. all they
have to do I mean because they
have total access to the envy
envy database.
And that does concern me that.
I don't know I I and I should
also say Mr chair is I was once
assigned the.
It's kind of a long story but I
I was assigned to Representative
a father in whose kids were in
foster care and that the kids
ran away.
And I was so this was a while
back this is probably.
Fifteen years ago I was so
disappointed with CYFD is lack
of doing anything to provide
those kids.
they had their pictures they had
and what they did is they called
me and said does a father have
them and I said I have no idea
but even if I did you know that
would be you know confidential
information and that was it
that's all they did to provide
those kids and I don't see that
having an ID would have done
anything unless you put a little
chip in the ID so that you could
you can see them which is very
very frightening to me you know
is that the next step so I'd I
feel like this bill is broader
than the problems for you know a
bigger solutions then the
problems you're trying to
resolve and.
And not likely I mean I don't
there has to be some connection
between the problems you're
trying to solve and if you get
in an ID for a twelve year old
or if I guess if you want the
minutes of fourteen year old and
the child wants to get away it's
seventeen they're still not
going to have a recent photo so
it's it's not it doesn't solve
the recent the current photo
problem and then for for runaway
children and.
It doesn't solve the problem of
getting ideas when they're
seventeen and sixteen when the
when the A. B. A. says they
should get them because it's
getting them wait early sixteen
and seventeen year olds are the
people who need ID's.
A twelve year old or a fourteen
year old really doesn't need an
I do that at this point so I I
do have problems with with the.
With the bills but all listen to
debate.
And then respond yes please
representative has a couple
things Senator
for one the child can refuse the
ID so that's I think first and
foremost they don't have to have
that's in there in less they
oppose so I think that at that
solves that problem and I think
one thing we need to realize is
when foster children went to run
away Mr chair and Senator within
sixty hours there gently preyed
upon by people who want to sex
trafficked them and that is a
huge problem I was brought up
yesterday on the floor or the
day before the floor where many
people from both parties had
concerns about that
and the policy that's passing
across the state and the
recommended best procedures
across the state is that vital
documents should be obtained is
as soon as any child enters the
welfare system and that
additional verification that
these documents or in the case
file occurs at eight at sixteen
for youth in the juvenile
welfare system
twelve we had twelve but there
were some concerns on the floor
that fourteen is the age where
they switch attorneys regarding
Adlai item to I guess maybe a
children's court attorney and so
they thought that might be
inconsistent the other side of
the argument from other people
on the floor Mr chair and
senator was we're missing those
kids for two years that we will
not have an ID on that they can
oppose it to but I don't think I
I would I don't think that many
will I mean if they want to they
can oppose it Mr chair that
raises a couple of other
questions for me how often do
children in the foster care care
system go against something that
this is that the.
It is just being done to take a
picture get an ID take about how
often the children and she stand
up.
Mr Chairman representative you
would have to pass again one of
the things we talked about is
also
the children could refuse were
welcome we're this is a safety
mechanism and also empowering we
would never want to do anything
that would infringe upon a uses
rates and it's just really
unfortunate that this
conversation is going there we
could say they could refuse but
also that being said the
feedback from youth partners and
from that the guardian of items
in the US attorney is that you
are asking for the so that if
they are.
No fourteen and fifteen and
twelve right again so if they're
on the run and it again you for
us right now right are used in
foster care at the lowest
academic records attendance
records and graduation rates of
every single one of our
vulnerable populations.
Mr chair so there is nothing in
law that prohibits F. that CYFD
from getting them the ideas if
they want them right.
Is that correct madam chair Mr
chair and senator I think
they're required to give them
the ID's between the ages
seventeen eighteen which studies
are showing that's just too late
however Mister chair if they
wanted to get them at sixteen or
four fourteen or fifteen there's
nothing in the law the president
some is that correct.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
getting text messages from CYFD
attorneys there's nothing in the
bill that being said one of the
issues and why everyone is
supporting this bill is because
the issue and we all know where
that pain point is is that
sometimes getting together these
vital documents is a problem the
Attorney General recognizes that
that in the FIR so moving it to
twelve or fourteen would allow
for years to get some of these
vital documents last year nine
youth age out on foster care
without identification cards the
age started eighteen while on
the run we know at least I have
died in the past three years
while on right and I know this
will prevent this but it's a
mechanism to support these yes
Miss Mister chair no I I have to
say
when you say everyone is
supporting it and we've had such
strong
Objections to it
that doesn't sit well with me
that you're saying everyone
support I didn't mean to say
everyone I apologize St and.
This is the issue that started
coming up for me is the issue of
real ID compliant identification
cards and of standard cards has
you know.
I get a standard card because I
want to stand with those people
who can't get a real ID and.
And but there are other people
who want a real ID because they
don't want to have the stigma of
a standard chart and so what
you're offering them is a
standard ID card which may give
rise to children of color being
seen has having a standard card
because they don't have
documentation which may or may
not be true but that could race
and stigma issues Mr chair Mr
chair and senator we give them
the option of both they can get
a real ID or they can get an
identification card up although
it it doesn't say that Mrs
Clinton this is the standard
specifically at Mr Chairman
representative this is actually
gone back and forth and the
reason is because we actually at
the recommendation of CYFD and
and TRD who support this we
removed realized he because
right now for children in foster
care would be transient and we
have trouble identifying where
they live which is a
documentation for the really do
again these are really important
conversations but so it was
actually a recommendation to
remove the real ID and that was
not supposed to be problematic
then it would have the social
security number where is the
standard doesn't know that
Representative will confirm yes
Representative and Mr chair
there's no social security
number on any of these
identifications you know the
real ideas of securing right but
the standard doesn't yeah right
Mr chair and senator your social
social I don't I have a really
good idea be laying the twenty.
I find I don't know since I
don't have one and and Mr chair
and senator we did have
conversations with MVD and they
said all they would require
because we're concerned about
the requirements of getting the
actual ID card and they said
they could have an affidavit
from CYFD that the child is in
their custody and some type of
medical card and they had days
the order no issues with getting
the kids these cards I know
costs.
No social security no
noticeable.
Thank you Mr chair I I don't see
what CYFD here
they may not be here Mr chair
Senator they've have been on all
our other committee meetings
that have spoke in support of it
we actually worked with them on
this bill.
That thank you Mr chair that's
that's all I have Senator Mrs
you're next thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Rehm miss
Maryland back thank you for all
you do it it's just a policy.
Disagreement you know but many
times in this building this late
our policy disagreements become
very.
Very heated but the other day I
think regardless of where you
stand on this issue everyone
wants what's best for the kids
you know
I actually tried this Mr
chairman with the department of
corrections in my decades long
battle with the department of
corrections
I did a bill that that the
department has to provide either
Dr lancer and I do upon exiting
this the system sounds simple
enough boom a phone call a fax
machine.
they don't do it
but nothing prohibits them from
doing nothing prohibits DO see
from obtaining these documents
providing ID's and so that when
that person gets out you know
they have their ID to get a job
or get services or get.
Update their Medicaid or
whatever the it's also the
reason Mr chairman that I was so
adamantly opposed to the.
To the
In a drivers license
prohibitions because because the
argument was public safety we
need to take our lives from make
honest because of public safety
was not it was propaganda
because.
Of public safety it in the
interest of it's in the interest
of public safety to document
every single person and to put
them in a database to have their
photograph last known address
height weight hair color eye
color it's it's the it's in the
government's interest to
document all of us
So so I can understand why this
may be detrimental to the youth
in terms of.
Up in terms of being in a
database and identifying them
leaving the scene or whatever
but it also would be very very
helpful up with runaways you
know I think that's kind of the
main.
Reason for this I think but and
maybe empowering because for
those who never had an idea
particularly those honorable use
but to to have your driver's
license or your ID if you've
never had it in your late
twenties thirties is incredibly
empowering to have an idea in
your wallet like this like I am
I am somebody you know like
Nathan Johnson but times ten
anyway so however
Nothing like that like the jolly
said nothing prohibits a foster
parent or or or CYFD.
From documenting these foster
kids with via photographs you
know I mean
and so I don't know why that's
not done up because like you
said some very powerful
Representative re Mr chairman
that you know if you're looking
for a will right away or or
there's police that have some
bad news you you immediately
show the cops that that
photograph of your loved ones a
please find this person so to me
they could they could have a
photograph of the foster child
without this bill they could get
the foster child and I do or
even a driver license without
this bill.
It's just a question of
leadership you know CYFD could
put out a memo to all foster
parents please in the next three
four months obtained birth
certificates socials whatever
and encourage them to get and I.
Also just lastly Mr chairman the
This doesn't insure that the
child has an ID.
This doesn't say find a ID and
give it to the foster kid it
says that the department shall
obtain a standard identification
cation chart of the child you
know so that's that's kind of
weird
and so.
Thank you have a child can opt
out all but if you say Hey we're
gonna go get your good idea
today I'm here that is the
foster child gonna like no I
don't you know I don't know just
depends on how the questions
posed anyway so I don't really
understand the.
The push back on this of.
But I also don't.
I don't understand the push
toward it when all this stuff
can be done today so I'm trying
to be able to support this at
this time
Because.
You know every parent I suppose
should take their kid to get a
ideas soon as possible and.
And get up driver license as
soon as possible you know thank
you Mr thank you senator and I
was just on this place Mr
chairman miss am I just got a
text message from another CAFé
attorney that says it's just
important to remember that not
all children in foster care have
foster parents right now I'm
most I mean right now all of our
shelters are full with children
in foster care right and we we
know they're sleeping in
shelters also legally foster
parents have to be very careful
about taking pictures and
sharing them and then not all
foster parents and this is the
most important foster parents
don't keep those vital documents
the department keeps those
documents so like the Medicaid
card it's very hard for foster
parents to get those the social
security card CYFD has the birth
certificate CYFD has so it
actually is incumbent upon the
department to help get those
documents and then actually
something that's been very
interesting is who's paying for
these when kids especially like
want to dry I know the faster
connections has come before you
like who pays for the driver's
license and who pays for the
insurance and it's a huge issue.
That's cool that CYFD Mr
chairman has these documents but
they should also be prided
provided to the children.
you need these documents to live
on this earth at this time thank
you Mr thank you.
Senator committees Europe.
Mr chair.
I was this thing so far away.
A couple of things that could I
could I moved it changes since
two of these requests that
change could we move that
amendment I could just some
questions of you Mr chairman.
Yes Sir so I nine.
H. two lines nine eleven Frank
you nine eleven also page one
line thirteen.
page one line thirteen.
Change twelve to would you want
to put it at fourteen fourteen.
On
page six line one.
Well we had I had.
For.
I had four total instances rate
page six line one.
Page two into with fourteen
year.
What age.
From twelve to fourteen
accounted for total of then it's
all of it's also on page two
line level.
Yes.
The.
Well.
Is thank you for fourteen.
Okay.
Okay so is there any opposition
to that amendment yes Senator.
Chairman thank at that chairman
and representative at but got a
question is do I understand that
CYFD is asking for this change
of of age is yes Mr chair and
Senator it was on the floor that
there were a lot of there is
there is apparently a different
change at the age of fourteen
with the the system and their
attorneys said it regarding a
lot item and then they actually
have a an attorney and so they
thought maybe a little older
than they could actually make
that choice better whether they
wanted to reject it or not and
so that was their recommendation
on the floor thank you.
Is there any opposition to that
a change for those four changes
really.
Seeing none will consider that
amendment to have been adopted
okay thank you and get you you
still have the force and thank
you I did I I did want to
discuss Mr chair and
representative of the amber
alert issue and I I actually I I
woke up this morning to an amber
alert and so can you it tell me
just maybe one more time how how
getting an ID card has a
relationship with an amber alert
yes and Mister chairman Senator
so what would happen is when
these ID's are done they will go
into the DMV system and that
will give law enforcement access
to so when there is an amber
alert that a child has run away
or they're looking for a child
then when that amber alert goes
out they will actually a
photograph that they can put up
and and actually the law
enforcement Mr chair and senator
will have a an updated photo if
they actually make contact with
them on the street even if they
lie about their age or they're
not carrying their ID it will
give them assistance to help you
know try to get them back into
their custody of Kerr.
And
You Mr chair and and
representative of I'm I'm still
having a little bit.
Of a hard time understanding.
Really the the opposition I I'm
trying to put this you know I I
tend to think about other pieces
of legislation that we that I've
seen over the years and we have
with bills to help homeless
people get.
you know ID cards we talk about
elections about how certain
people have difficulty in
obstacles getting ID's and then
I'm hearing a lot of things
about don't don't give some
folks eighties I understand so
different over time out minors
but we're also talking about
trying to successfully.
You know spring for these people
at some point
And I also I I understand you
know that there's no argument
about is it legally permissible
potentially now but I I think we
have to look at where we're at
New Mexico with a with the
department number one apartment
if the department supporting
something other asking for
something that is a best
practice with a BA is gonna say
this is going to help us get to
in a be a best practice.
It seems pretty straightforward
to me to just help the
department do that I mean that
they're having a very hard time
it's very hard New Mexico right
now if you Hawker any shot you
have I think and see you at the
is is is tough I mean it's so
hard for these folks motion to
doing I think the best they can
and
And so.
I don't know a in in the way I
read the bill it's it's Mrs may
may may may I mean this the way
this bill is crafted it's it's
very it just seems very
permissible to me out person
that Levin I do well they may
get this chart if the you know
they they can object to me just
it is not this it doesn't see I
don't I don't see a very
forceful tone with the way this
is drafted and so I think and
it'll I guess last thing I'd say
is you know it may be legally
permissible but you know if you
put something in statute it it's
in statute her height is going
to happen and I think you have
to has
the for whatever reason we
finally begin to I mean it just
hasn't happened I mean we have
an opportunity to do this if
it's going to if if they if they
do see supports it I think we
should we should help them I I
feel this is I've told in this
and other bills like Hey if you
have something you want to do
that you can't do please ask me
and I would like to help I will
give need I gave you money I I
will do what I can to to help
the agency accomplish what
they'd like to do and if if if
putting in statute is gonna in
in their eyes help them to just
do a best practice for these
kids and everything is may may
may may not shell shell shell
shell by I don't know I I just.
For me I I'm I'm in on okay
there but let's let's get a
reaction Mr chair and Senator I
wanted to percent agree I I
guess I really also don't
understand the controversy
around this bill I mean this is
being adopted in states all over
the United States state in its
best practices right now one of
the big things they say is
getting an ID card helps the
safety of the children and
empowers a children to get work
and so I I guess I've been
confused the opposition to it
also I understood the fourteen
to twelve because of that is an
age where things change and CYFD
so I was fine with that but I
think anything that we can do
the key provisions suicide show
yes the page well H. one the
department shall unless the
child tax the teen center they
do and then on page two if the
department the.
the department shall obtain the
ID card no later than ninety
days so those are the key for
that starting in section two
that's all from the the
department after in section two
is actually the motor vehicle
department correct tax and
revenue motor vehicle division
and I think Mr chair the shell
is a shell obtain the ID card
unless a child objects so I mean
we can we could change that to
may but we wanted apartment to
basically be required to we want
to do the shell to so yes I I
did get think it's good and but
it does give the child a chance
stop on that point Senator a
city of the.
I saw the.
Mr chair Senator I think our
concern is the average ages
twelve and so we're trying to
line the age with when I guess
the the code says that they're
fourteen and they're able to
make better decisions for
themselves but we're we're going
to miss out on a lot of these
children who are just never
going to be found at if we move
it to sixteen that is monitors
is reduced on the floor thank
you Mr chair representative I
also see on page four it says
secretary may either refuse
revoke or deny the issue and so
you know we still have it seems
that.
In the in the bill it.
A page for page for that that's
that's the that's the that's
increasing motor vehicle up.
I Suzanne motivated okay I
gotcha gotcha Thurman.
The
And I want to explore that a
little bit Mr Chairman
representative so the.
So if they have I mean I'm I'm
trying to see how this would
happen if someone is of.
Has a mental disability of some
kind.
this is our specialized
placement where the child cannot
be transported.
It what what with the is there
an example of that it's like
they're.
Placed in some kind of
Well like I met like a mental
health institution or similar Mr
chair could you and as senator
Wirth Peter looking I'm sorry Mr
chairman I on page top top of
page two says if they're in a a
place where that the child
cannot be
transported they were gonna give
the department ninety days.
Mr Chairman representative
Senator I'm sorry it's been a
long week and that would be an
RTC residential treatment
patient and state and we have
also use out of state as many of
you now and so that would
probably very much likely we
also Parker placements and so
those are the real specialized
okay.
And also I just want to call
attention page three is really
deep for standard identification
card just wanted to call the
cops on the.
Okay Mr chairman I I think that
that's all I have I I it you
know it seems.
Early.
Despite all I I I see a bit of a
mismatch when we talk about ID's
just in general and and and once
again I mean I I I do think
it's.
It's empowering if they can
refuse it on I don't know I
don't think.
Europe.
Mr Chairman.
And Representative I was going
to call you Senator.
But I just got a few questions
so can you explain to me
Just go back when my girls were
small I thank you madam rewards
that had a child find program
back then they did fingerprints
and photo you took those two
years police and fire department
in your community in order for
when something were to happen
Montgomery Ward it's gone and I
need to check with my PED and my
girls roiled right now so it's
not I mean would be relevant
because of photos probably
twenty years too late but I'm
just trying to understand Mr
chair and representative what is
the process if my child were to
become missing or or even my
foster child to come missing how
does that get to the PD do they
have those the information the
photos or is it see why peers at
me so Mister chair and senator
so it goes into a national
database of for the DMV and then
we it can be pulled out by law
enforcement and I think and you
can correct me if I'm wrong
agency budget but I think that
at that point you can go it it
can go up to the child
exploitation missing children's
act I think is what it's called
and so in that situation law
enforcement have access to it in
the DMV would have access to it
but and probably CYFD but nobody
else would have access to it and
I do recall Mr chair and senator
those days when you could and
and they're still sometimes
where I think cops will be in a
certain area the finger print
your kids and give them an ID
but I'm again that's generally a
parent you know doing that in
case our kid gets missing and
and the whole point is we want
to keep this ID current and so
we can know what this child
looks like.
Thank you for that and and Mr
Chairman representative and just
call back I thought is good idea
back then I just didn't do a
follow up and I liked the way we
have it in here so it's actually
a current ID a yearly so it's
not something that.
My daughter full grown has
daughter and we probably still
have her little tiny pictures
so.
Mr Chairman center Mr chair
representative can you explain
to me now that we've amended it
to fourteen years.
What does that do to the bill
can you explain that part to me
Mr chair and senator it it seem
to be that a lot of people who
worked in CYFD that were arguing
this on the floor felt that
while they may not be able to
consent or not consent and
fourteen was age at under the
code I believe that that
everybody said documented it to
fourteen we could maybe support
this because that is the age
when I guess the code changes
over to your attorneys being
from a guardian Adlai item he
just represent the best
interests of the child to more
of a interactive like children's
court attorney and I can Mr
chair representative I can speak
thousand Endicott Yanis is the
legal director of advocacy in
can she is a youth attorney and
she's happy to speak on behalf
of what is the difference
between and help you to turn it
and it guardian Adlai item and
then it's also worth saying
there is a bill on the house
side that was trying to change
so use attorney says that when a
child is fourteen and that's
under statute today that they
consent and they are they
changing Allison would be a
better person to speak to it
she's the head and she's on them
but also there was a bill that
is being circulated that was
changing that age to six so for
talking about use being like
twelve being too young there is
actually a bill being circulated
as a priority and so if you'd
like Allison could explain what
to you for twenty does I think
it's important and Mister chair
if if she could and and the
reason for it I've done a lot of
CYFD bills and they've never
given me a separation point at
fourteen so I I didn't
understand that I appreciate
that he amended it for their
need but if you wouldn't mind
Mister chair if she's to all he
excellent Ellison communis could
you explain why fourteen is of
is different in terms of the
legalities.
Yes absolutely thank you
chairman and members of the
committee
so a you the tourney when a
child turns fourteen they go
from having what we call a grant
you all know is a guardian Adlai
item that is someone who
functions looking at all the
areas as an arm of the court
looking at all the areas of a
child's life and making
recommendations as to their best
interest even if it doesn't
align with what the child wants
once a child turns fourteen I
become what's called you the
tourney and that is the same as
any parent has an attorney any
adult has an attorney it is that
where I am client directed in my
representation so in a situation
like this when my fourteen year
old client is asked do you want
to get an ID what I would do is
I would sit down with them alone
because we have attorney client
privilege now that they're
fourteen and I would sit down
with them and go through the
pros and cons of why they would
want to do this what are their
concerns I would answer those if
they have questions I would find
out the answers to those and we
would come back together so we
would make we would potentially
discuss that and make sure that
it was something that the child
wanted and then if for some
reason they were feeling that
they were being pushed into
something they didn't want I
would be there to stand up for
them and make sure that there
was nothing being done that was
not something they agree to so
they would have the power of an
attorney backing them in terms
of their decision making as well
as their educational piece.
Mr Chairman representative I
appreciate that one final
question to so my daughter runs
costs of Lee County in my other
daughters in a investigator for
CYFD does this currently
happened in in cost of round
they talk a lot about the
guardian light I'm I've never
heard that fourteen they
basically have their own
attorney is is currently
happening in New Mexico.
Yes yes it's been this way for
quite some time originally it
was all guardian Adlai item but
it's been quite a while that
from fourteen and up we have
what we call it the you could
turn it is client directed
representation of children yes
thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative of that clarifies
for me part of the problem
between twelve and fourteen just
going backwards I just couldn't
understand what changed now they
have a full attorney that they
have confidentiality within it
takes as a foster parent takes
me totally out of loop manage
between her and the child and I
appreciate that I did have
question Mr chair and.
Representative can you explain
to me how this went in house
health house of vote house
discussions I don't know that
you had a thing I had heard
about the floor but in committee
did it
yes Mister chair and Senator it
sailed through all committees
with whatever number ten to zero
ninety two we had no opposition
and so.
Nine zero nine zero in both okay
thank you nine zero on both
committees went through health
and tax tax because of the MVD
issue.
I appreciate that I just
wondered you know if the the
discussion was summer different
And and just Mr chairman and
representative can you explain
to me and I I think I have this
because
work with CYFD now the kids and
I'm going to talk about way too
young for this but I I don't
know if you heard the Mona Lisa
K. and Hobbs we're CYFD didn't
put out an amber alert for
multiple reasons the parents
were here illegally and they
didn't want to alert people but
she came back blind to the state
because of battery by her
parents in my thing is thinking
not thinking through a child at
that age but thinking at a
fourteen year old if that would
have happened would you give me
comfort that an amber alert this
would have helped that in
getting the amber alert out in
us being able to have law
enforcement look for this child
to be able to keep that child
safe Mr chair representative
okay Department.
I'm Representative Mr Mister's
chair and Senators fun fact in
that case CYFD impeded the amber
alert and that was part of that
from full death and also part of
that was a lower lawsuit is that
CYFD asked not to send an amber
alert and that is come out in
the whistleblower staff so that
is complicated also that is been
one of the pain points I know
that the Senator city Lopez
specifically asked what we're
trying to.
Right now and I I sent and I can
send it to the committee but
also a federal report came out
just last week the office of the
inspector general of the federal
Department of Health and Human
Services published an audit on
March seventh that says New
Mexico has lost children in
foster care and has failed to
report the missing on time this
is a federal report the feds
have come in and audited this is
so we know that their kids are
going online and CYFD is not
reporting them and so the amber
alert is actually has to come
from the custodial guardian or
CYFD and so that is a question
you would have to ask CYFD.
Mr chair and representative and
miss I appreciate that because
it seems and and as you know I'm
I'm always trying to look at all
we have to oversight for CYFD as
part of the task force it was
not allowed into Albuquerque to
the task force meeting and so
the I've always had trouble with
getting and give clarity but the
way I'm looking at this this
gives the opportunity for that
to be taken care of in a way
that that that child is running
for whatever reason and is in
danger than we would have the
photo on the information on the
child to protect a child so with
that all yield but also support
your bill thank you.
Quick questions for you what age
is amber alert kick and is or
stop picking in the fourteen
year it get an amber alert they
have they bring alerts and also
for years I'm not really sure
but the teens I've gotten New
Mexico state police alerts for
runaway teens especially at
there's a couple shelters and
house they go running all the
time you have to ask them
because my impression is it
mostly teenagers run away the
police aren't real assertive
about this is teenage behavior
they'll come home or they'll and
a lot of times they never come
home they're they're lost okay
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative again thank you
miss so I'm looking at the FY
R. page two.
And with I think our discussion
we've talked talked about this
but
I might get a little foggy.
it says under significant issues
CYFD said protective services
program already secures
identification and similar
documents for children in foster
care.
In the regular course of
business so if that is true.
What does the bill in front of
us trying to address are you are
you saying CYFD is not doing
this.
Mr chair and and senator we're
not getting information that
this is happening at like I said
she's had for foster kids in her
care right is that what you said
thirty nine thirty nine and have
around the age that they're
supposed to get in have.
They have their ID's not.
M. chairman and Representative
respect.
Could you share with us the age
range of those thirty nine at
three days to seventeen and a
half and then I've become can to
a nineteen year old.
Nineteen years old.
Okay and then
Something that this concerns me
Chairman representative of
respect page one of the bill.
One twenty two.
Unless the child objects.
But for me it should be more
should be an opt in and that
concerns me that it's not popped
in.
Mr Chairman representative I
know that miss Taylor is here I
know this was it this was
brought up on the floor and we
asked for an amendment a
friendly amendment it she wants
to help can put that language
and to be affirmative consent
instead of objection we are very
we were off we were open to it
on the floor just never
happened.
To get Mr chair that was one of
things is product that maybe
should be a consent line refers
and less a child objects and you
know to me it seems very similar
but we're happy to change that
Mr chair Senator if that makes
anybody that you know feel
better on that issue yet and
chairman and Representative
respect and the reason I'm
thinking that that is
I'm just visualizing.
A young person going through we
could be very traumatic time.
And even though CYFD could be
communicating with them here's
all these papers to sign.
That whole bit about unless you
object this is going to happen
it just might not register
that's my concern and then that
ages it's a tender age I think I
mean right what we're I think
we've all agreed on Santa we're
twenty five that the brain has
fully matured
so to meet these they're still
kids.
Mr chair and am centered at that
would be a friendly amendment to
to add something and let the
would you like to say unless a
child can sense unless the child
consents that's not a problem to
change and twenty two well known
the consent of the child on this
on that consent.
Okay.
Upon the consent of the child
that's not a problem just a
Frank the big Bucks for to come
up.
The program was looking at the
department after the department
show online twenty to provide
the child an opportunity to.
chain Representative okay hang
secretary.
That work for you Representative
yes that would work for us show.
Provide an opportunity to
find the child.
The two.
And then it would continue
to raise the standard of the
patient's chart.
That work for you yes Sir.
This Taylor you see with what
but it did.
Mr chair no one ever.
I think in your.
That that's waiting but I do
want to be clear we oppose the
bill one of the things I have
pointed out is that as the
discussion of the committee has
been sorry Mr chair members of
the committee at the session of
the.
And children young people have
the opportunity now to say I
would like an ID and ask the
department for an ID that is
affirmatively asking for ninety
I don't think we need a bill to
do that.
All that.
Through.
So if in Mr chair and I and
senator I agree with you but
it's it's just not happening
it's just really not happening.
If we were the bill this way it
still will be happening.
Maybe I mean I guess I mean I
don't know if you wanted to Mr
chairman and senator there at
ten percent of our youth in
foster care right now are
currently.
As we call them the shelter
shuffle or on right right these
are you these are most
vulnerable youth and if we're
not here to protect them I don't
know what we're doing.
Thank Mr.
On that point set up I was just
wondering Senator Sedillo Lopez
would ask her if it is actually
being done true is one spectrum
actually being done is totally
different will actually Texas if
the child wants one.
Well correct but missed Mr and
etcetera I don't agree with
forcing the child well but R. I.
is it available or they actually
using I try to get CYFD on text
and they've not answer me to
different people nose miss
Martin and Cody okay Senator of
Medicare McKenna still has the
floor.
Do you want to make a motion.
Thank you so what we're.
thank so it's line twenty two
right.
Online twenty two after show.
Stripe and lets the job
objection and insert in the
there are a provide the child an
opportunity to to get to strike
to come into effect on.
The last two comes yes yes shall
provide an opportunity to
obtain.
The standard eighty the standard
identification card.
Yep two okay.
Okay.
That we're that would be
friendly thank is there any
opposition to that amendment any
discussion of it optician.
Seeing none will consider the
second amendment to have been
made to the okay and with that
it was the will of the
committee.
Senator Gallegos moves a do pass
as amended.
Sir second Senators me seconds
it.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Davis this spans Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle center my SS.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez.
That was on the bill as amended
no.
Senator Clemente.
Miss Iglesias.
Elector voting.
The current.
The three to three read.
The motion was it do yes yes.
Senator is if you know.
Yes.
So I I agree though as amended.
Okay thank you thank you thank
you next on the agenda.
L. timers disease and other
dementias Council I think the
house bill four seventy one
Representative Garrett you've
been very patient think of all
you've learned about ID's and
see right.
Yes.
It's one.
To.
Mr.
I I appreciate.
That was okay.
I.
Please go ahead.
Mr chair and committee.
We'll bring you on house bill
four seventy one I think you'll
find it much less controversial
than your previous bill.
It is a bill to establish a
fifteen member Advisory Council
in the aging and long term
services department on timers
disease and other dementias to
create the statewide plan the
needs to be updated by July
twenty twenty six on my left
tell me your nine does who is
the director of public policy
for the Alzheimer's association
of New Mexico and I'm gonna
write director care or take a
from the Office of Alzheimer's
dementia care the aging and long
term Services Department you've
seen both of these experts
before and I think Mr chair
committee you are well aware of
the dementia and other
Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias statistics for our
state and the fact that forty
three thousand.
New Mexicans over the age of
sixty five percent offering from
Alzheimer's the twenty twenty
and by twenty twenty five that
number will rise to fifty three
thousand that's a twenty three
percent increase in five years
we have to get a handle on
what's happening and what the
state it can offer and how we
can support families who are
dealing with this disease
there eighty five thousand
unpaid caregivers.
For these folks who are
suffering Alzheimer's and other
dementia and we have to make
sure we are planning and head
for the wave this coming.
when we will stand for questions
because I know you want to go
for speed so so your bill
essentially creates this council
would be advisory to your office
could you want to say anything
about of the agency on aging
long term services stands in
favor of this because it's point
the current mission of what
we're doing with the program
very good and did you want to
say anything to Mr chairman of
the committee very briefly we're
very pleased to be working with
all stakeholders on this
including the ageing Department
simply put this just codifies
and establishes accountability
and time line that we can do to
tackle this disease or
strategies simply are met with
the count abilities including my
work at the Alzheimer's
association thank you Mr
chairman.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Yes.
Health.
Okay anybody in opposition to
the bill we have one person on
the zoom who wants to speak
about it.
And breeze.
Yes Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Ian Bryce I
am a volunteer advocate with A.
R. P. New Mexico A. R. P. New
Mexico fully supports HB forty
seven also I members disease and
other dementias Council thank
you thank you and members of the
committee.
Sierra.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative ribbons for
so the fiscal taxes are gonna be
going down volunteers.
Mr chair and senator and the per
diem costs that will be provided
to the members of the Advisory
Council can be absorbed by the
aging and long term services
they have that in their budget.
Thank you Mr chairman is the
executive director of the
Alzheimer's association feel
that.
If you're a.
Seven and the negative impact
and what he's what it does.
I'm sorry Mr chair I didn't was
it because okay the food at that
question
so what what with the city
council to is that being done
already.
Because Mr chair Mr chair
Senator kind of eyes Council and
brings more voices into the
creation of the plan and the
looking at the services across
the state so right now they're
requesting and supporting this
council because of the variety
of voices it is bringing to the
creation of this plan it will
make it a stronger place.
And Mr chair Center told I think
I can add something that's
that's very important your
question here is that the
question was is this work
currently being done yes it is
however what the bill brings
forward is it is not being done
with a regular standard of
practice that there have been
the state plan published in
twenty thirteen one published in
twenty seventeen and then once
again was twenty twenty so what
this so I twenty twenty two
forgiving what this bill is due
to ensure that administrations
beyond this one and legislators
be on this one continue to
address and hold accountable to
stakeholders source simply
ensuring that the work continues
and that there are reports being
submitted to the legislative
body as well as the executive
that what progress is being done
what barriers are being faced
and how can we all collaborate
together so this just really
brings bring some stronger
definition to what we want to do
thank you for the answer that's
that's all I have to thank you
senator Senator Hickey you're
next.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill
So something I probably ought to
be more familiar with given my
stage
and
But I to me it seems it's very
similar to.
in issues of families with
substance use disorder mental
health and that's impact on the
family members
I've been very open about I'm a
very active Allen non member
really helps me
how will this council help them
you mentioned sixty seventy
thousand people and its growing
I know
but then you probably add three
four five six family members
that it's impacting maybe some
directly every day for those who
I do know the suffering that
they go through is immense and
intense so with this console
help the families dealing with
the disease to to provide to
Alan on does with me to have
dealt with some addiction in my
family.
Yes Mr chair and senator that is
actually one of the tasks
specifically assigned to the
council if you look at page
eight it talks about educating
providers on the early detection
and diagnosis and then assisting
these eighty five thousand which
will be over a hundred thousand
in a couple years unpaid care
givers to help them deal with
this crisis.
Thank you for for that answer Mr
Chairman representative
I think I would quibble with the
math there.
Look at that figure does that
make sense to you that a hundred
fifty seven million hours.
Vented unpaid care only amounts
to two point five million in
unpaid care I think we're
talking about another three
zeros.
I think we're talking about two
point five billion Mr chair I
wouldn't disagree we didn't want
to argue with the fiscal impact
report will
Namik impact it to the bottom of
the state.
Oh boy yeah and she has a PhD.
Okay well.
I think it's it's a huge impact
much bigger than two and a half
million.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that clarification I mean
that's.
Dealing with mental illness and
I was just testifying I was in
here on my mental health parity
bill and House Appropriations
and it was amazing to me that
the I have a few people spoke up
and said you know we all have
this in our families and we just
don't like to talk about is is
difficult and the more we can
talk about it the more we can be
open with that that more easily
it is for those who are caring
to be able to bear that burden
and the greater sensitivity of
us who don't bear the burden how
much we need to help them so
thank you Mr chair for that
opportunity to make the comments
and thank you for bringing the
council for thank you senator
Senator Gallegos Mr Chairman
representative thank you I've
just gone through this with my
mother the past but she had
dementia and so I like the idea
looked over the the group that
you're bringing in currently as
you guys make plans without this
bill how do you guys get of
detail and how do you grow
forward because I know that us
madam secretary Holcombe Lopez
coming in contact with the group
statewide group but also she
gave me a lot of detail from the
department and I'm wondering if
this were not in place what can
limitations to have now Mr
Representative.
Okay thank you senator again
because of Mr chair Senator
Gallegos so right now what we
have in place as we do have a
plan a state plan for
Alzheimer's and dementia that
goes from twenty twenty to
twenty twenty five and that was
developed with different
individuals for representing
state agencies and other outside
agencies that work state
agencies and with this we looked
at longitudinal studies of gaps
in services trends and things of
that nature the types of
supports that we're hearing that
family caregivers need respite
services and what have you so
that's what it incorporates the
existing state plan so we're
we're planning to go with this
is continue to move that plan
forward of the we things are
changing very fast so we really
need to get ahead of the game.
We really need to be competitive
so the other thing that that we
need to do is start looking at
our funding sources start
looking into this in the
positive things that we are
doing barriers challenges to
implementation what the
population the state of New
Mexico really needs and really
there there is a different a
varied approach to what our
current state plan is looking at
looking at reducing
hospitalizations emergency room
visits we're looking at trying
to help people and communities
agent place.
We're looking at the the
vulnerable ness of the
population as far as abuse
neglect exploitation so what
we're tackling a lot of issues
with the state plan and we need
to as Mr Hernandez said we
support this cause it does
support our mission and move it
forward and we get a lot of
other ideas and things that you
just can't consider.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
representative in of the reason
I just said well let me just get
back to the bill I like on page
two line nineteen pre of
national organization as part of
this so I've already had my
baseline done because my mom
said the family has a lot of
Alzheimer's and dementia but in
the discussion as we're going
through this because my
additional she's care giving for
her that in Dallas they were
told to get a dementia baby doll
and it totally changed my mall.
And and I had not heard that
here given in our groups but
because they're so much of this
nation wide that if you can pick
a point from here to pick point
from there this can be
beneficial to New Mexico so I
really like that you've got
national dialogue because that
one thing two hundred seventy
three dollars I believe gave her
focus and gave her it just
changed her demeanor she went
from being lost to be in a
moment here and it was just so
enjoyable for us to see that but
it's just one of those where you
have to look for just be on the
walls of New Mexico because this
is a national trend my doctor
told me they I passed the test
but they'll check me every two
years in order to see if there's
any deterioration because the
expectancy is because I've got
in the family that it possibly
could continue with me so I just
want to thank you all for this
are I was really interested in
who you're gonna have on the
list
Wish I had time a goal to be on
but it's one of those things
that continue believed it you
don't realize how much the
natives and I love what you guys
do the secretary was great for
me the Alzheimer's group in
Albuquerque is incredible but
it's nice to get a bigger
perspective than just two or
three table so with that are you
thank you thank you all but so
will the committee.
do pass motion for depression
Senator Gallegos seconded from
Senator Hickey.
They told me today.
Eight years after I started
seconds promotions that we have
a rule that says you don't have
to have a second promotion in
the committee.
If you never told me that all
those years you were there.
Senator.
But it's fun I don't know how
many things I've allowed to die
because there was not a second
all right.
Secretary will call the roll we
have a motion and seconded and
necessarily.
Senator I have us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yeah Senators metes yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente center to the
piano yes and I'll explain my
vote.
This is a staggeringly important
issue so thank you for doing
this just a couple things about
the
the FIR.
The there's eighty five thousand
care givers.
Tells me why we have such a low.
Participation labor market
participation rate I mean yeah
we was they're just sitting at
home watching TV and and
enjoying the you know walks in
the sun no way they're taking
care of elderly and and and and
Relatives with L. timers a lot
of our people are doing that
that's that's that's were
spending a lot of time.
And.
Under underwriting the cost of
care this that otherwise be
skyrocketing yes I would only
add Mr chair that eighty five
thousand was the number in
twenty twenty one and it'll be
twenty five percent higher by
twenty twenty five.
I also add something
respectfully wanted to decline
in New Mexico information from
the twenty nineteen behavioral
risk.
Risk factor surveillance survey
in New Mexico indicates that
twelve point eight percent or
one eight individuals age forty
five or older reported that they
were having experience
experiencing confusion or memory
loss that was happening more
often or getting worse and
approximately fifty percent of
those have not talked to a
primary care physician about
that.
It's because then to give up
daily activities work activities
social activities.
And Mister chair members of the
committee page seven B. any on
like to are going to finish with
this we we certainly welcome all
of that I really appreciate all
the professionals on behalf of
the all time Association
obviously the support however I
will say accountability is
something we look forward to
answering to our Legislative
Health and Human Services
committee and the LESC committee
you'll see that is mentioned on
page seven I want to highlight
that because that's something
we're very proud of is that our
strategies are only as good as
the accountability is that we
have to answer for so that's why
we were very excited about this
but we're very thankful to have
the support we look forward to
presenting all of our great work
in our children how the
legislature can be part of the
solutions when we submit our
annual report for I believe Mr
take it with some of the issues
we look forward to getting that
annual report some of you can
find a lot of good members for
the council thank you very much
thank you Mr thank you have a
due pass what was the count
eight eight to zero thank you
your spotless record continues.
Senator.
Pope and then Senator Pinto of
impact of COVID nineteen to
Senate Joint Memorial one.
Some of
is on a group from good.
Okay that we have both memorials
on grid.
So this is
Recognizing the devastating
impact of Corona virus disease
twenty nineteen honoring the
sacrifices that essential
workers and made to protect and
save lives in their communities
declaring support for permanent
Corona virus disease twenty nine
nineteen memorial to be located
in Bernalillo county on state
trust lands to honor the victims
of Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen Senator pro.
What's this all about thank you
Mr chair committee members and
if it's okay I have Janet you
know still Prada on as soon as
an expert as well if Janet still
problem Mr Mr prodigal ahead and
I'll be I'll be short and then
I'll pass it over to her if
that's okay we'll start with
senator Neville
you laid out what this is this
is really just a memorial to
highlight what's happened those
we lost those are still dealing
who are dealing with it with
long comment as well
but more importantly a memorial
for those that lost family
members and friends but giving
them a place to memorialize
those that they lost
the fact is you have folks that
you know died in our hospitals
and some of them can be with
their loved ones here folks that
we've lost and they were even
unable to have a proper service
for some of them or even attend
with what we're going through
this memorial is supported
there's been five local
resolutions including Sandoval
County Bernalillo county
Kerala's City of Albuquerque and
Los crucis.
And
once again a scholar for those
of lost we've lost those are
still suffering in the families
that are still dealing with this
and with that Mr chair I get
handed over to Janet and give
her
some time to speak on this
morning additional product go
ahead.
Thank you so much for hearing
from me my name is Jeanette
Nunez R. Pronto I live in
Albuquerque I am a bilingual
bicultural licensed clinical
social worker and expert in
trauma and healing I'm the
leader of market comment New
Mexico the largest survivor lead
COVID advocacy group in the
country and I lost my father
we're going to test our pride to
comment in may of twenty twenty
one he was sixty two years old
and so full of life we love to
sing karaoke together and dance
like most others who lost their
loved ones the COVID when he got
sick I couldn't be with him in
the hospital to hold his hand
and tell him I love him and I
couldn't say goodbye my dad
lived his life surrounded by
friends and family and love he
died alone and in pain and that
will always haunt me.
As of today we lost over nine
thousand people in New Mexico
over a million in the United
States and millions more around
the world I have found much
solace in being in community
with others like me who
understand the unique pain of
losing someone to comment and I
want to tell you our grief has
been exacerbated prolonged and
even denied by the social
climate of the pandemic we have
not yet had proper
acknowledgement of our losses
and what I know from my work as
a therapist is that we teen is
not acknowledged or given space
to be processed it transforms
into problems such as anxiety
depression addiction.
A memorial would help us to move
forward with our grief and more
healthy way and help us to
contextualize our individual
tragedies as part of a
collective trauma I know that
we're not alone.
We've partnered with Bernalillo
county parks and rec and have a
dedicated space and Mr duffel on
public trust land the memorial
offers the visitor of pilgrimage
experience and an opportunity to
travel through personal and
collective expressions of grief
the memorials reflective of our
rich traditions and cultural
diversities in New Mexico it is
eight cover image walk filtered
by P. Khandelwal with mutuals
are small shelves for a friend
that we're offering spot by
mourners and colourful gardens
at the end of the pilgrimage
visitors will see the stone
plant which will have a digital
component people can use their
cellphones to we hold up their
phones and see a digital view of
a vortex of photos of those who
died of COVID spiraling upwards
towards the sky.
Given by those who lost them
curated by by their loved ones
people have grown numb to the
number of deaths because it is
so large our minds just can't
wrap our heads around what a
million empty seats at the
dinner table looks like so
viewing the names and photos of
those who died will help to
humanize our losses it will also
give people such as myself who
had to say goodbye to their
loved ones be as soon.
And experience of having their
cell phone as an object of
healing and connection and not
just a trauma trigger
recognition and acknowledgement
that pain from COVID last is
real and I love once mattered
and that the pandemic happens is
essential to our collective
healing I also want to add that
we will work with any community
in New Mexico that wishes to
have a moral and their district
thank you so much for giving me
space to share my grief with you
all and the importance of this
memorial please vote yes in
support of Senate Joint Memorial
one.
Thank you very much Mr of of.
Members of the committee of the
two plus.
We have a second from second
seconded from Senator Tallman
discussion Senator Schmedes.
Thank you
Mr chair Senator.
and I I won't I won't take long
You know I it's it's very hard
for me to to talk about this I I
very much respect you know what
you're doing I think it's
important that people will have
an opportunity grief.
But I also think it's important
for people to understand.
Really the the a full picture of
why why their loved one died.
Why other people died I mean
excess deaths are still elevated
in developed countries all
around the world now and only a
tiny sliver those expects deaths
are to comment.
So I we we have to I think the
you know what one of my problems
with with the COVID response was
we we seems to.
Be laser focused with our health
care system on people who die
from COVID but in the response
we increased deaths in other
areas and saw a lot of problems
in a one
it is so so many things I could
say about this but one thing is
is nursing homes we had six
states that
that took policies early on
twenty twenty.
That.
Brought people that had with the
were positive for comment not
just that sense but positive and
put them in our state homes I
mean this is a nursing home
disease a devastating in nursing
homes and we had one
jurisdiction that
that that his all those horrific
death numbers ended up resigning
a very public way so I I think
we just have to remember what
the COVID response has done.
When I look at the bottom of
page two I I I don't like this
last we're just because well
wait absolutely devastating
impact native Americans at your
last we're as Clause of each
life lost.
Merrill is a whole hearts loved
ones absolutely I support that
but but the the COVID nineteen
as harm the health and well
being of children well actually
the the response I mean children
have never been at at risk at
that high risk then I've got a I
love this document it's from
mainly from UCSF UCSD physicians
Case Western public health
experts in one if you want to
see it can see it I'm here CDC
data that shows COVID you know
mortality midst way less than
the two thousand seventeen flu
two thousand twelve of those
fourteen flew no members those
foods with kids I mean you know
it and so they say with
overwhelming consensus that
you know code risk for healthy
kids is extremely low.
And then you know like I said I
could go on and on I think you
know there's also a former dean
of Johns Hopkins school of
medicine he said overriding
principle in the response to the
code pandemic is that
experiences shown communities
faced with epidemics or other
adverse events respond best and
with least anxiety with the
normal social functioning of the
community is least disruptive.
And so I I I can't support this
because in my mind it just
doesn't it knowledge the lives
lost from the COVID nineteen
response
many many harmful harmful
policies denying pre existing
community which was clearly
evident in T. cells and acting
like kids are super spreaders
the device of the virus when we
had clear evidence that actually
living with a child under age
eleven actually showed you gotta
decreased mortality rate from
COVID and we treated the kids
like they were super spreaders
of of the disease I mean this is
such a such a bill in the last
I'll just say this I've got a
long list I'm not gonna go on
and it's like you guys got
caucus but the family issue in
the hospitals was so.
I mean it is so wrong ethically
on every level I I propose that
with every ounce of my being
from the beginning because my
hospitalized patients I've
always done better when there's
a lot of one and to have someone
who is not at risk from COVID
okay
to have a healthy you know
whoever it is healthy thirty
year old four year old someone
who doesn't have those risk
factors of a B. C. chronic
kidney disease of their over
sixty five whatever to deny
those people
the opportunity to go to
hospital and and help with their
loved one I think was so so
wrong and deadly deadly and so I
just want to I just I can't
support because it doesn't
acknowledge some of the the
great harm we made this much
much much worse and I just I
just can't supported in in the
form that it's in so I have a
lot more to say a lot more
evidence about talking reviews
of got so much stuff but I I
just leave it there because it's
late.
Thank you senator Senator he.
I'm so sorry that we're
resurrecting.
This.
But I feel is a.
I choose my words carefully.
Maybe it is dysfunctional point
of view.
And and I'm not going to get
into the argument but I
completely one hundred percent.
Do not in any way concur with
what my colleague consent.
I'm sorry.
But.
And I and I'm not gonna start
and and the data but.
The compassion.
For the families.
Who disregarded my next door
neighbor.
Totally disregarded any
protective measures.
And he's dead.
That.
And this myth.
The family finally.
Agreed.
That that's what kids.
So.
I just don't want to get back
into these debates because I
want to respect the families who
did.
Lose their loved ones and I
fully endorse.
This bill.
And it's capacity.
To help people through the five
stages of grief that they're
having.
Which is huge.
So I just I'm but I I want to
move and I hope and forget the
second Mr chair as you said and
let's do a vote.
Okay I do want to give timely
getting that forgot to ask if
there is anybody and soon and
that is so would you give her a
chance to speak.
Go ahead Dawn yes.
Good evening members and thank
you chairman can you hear me
yes.
Okay my name is Tony getting and
I am a member of New Mexico
marked by COVID and I do stand
in support of this ninety or
just the committee to support as
well I also speak is a daughter
who lost her father to COVID
October twenty twenty.
And to say that he will not be
remembered as a statistic of the
pandemic but instead of so much
more and that is with the
memorial is about to get face to
the human impact and please to
create others honor and
acknowledge.
as the senator did mention
Bernalillo Sandoval County city
Albuquerque village realist city
of Los crucis of all passed
resolutions in support of this
and we do continue to work with
other local communities and
other representations to ensure
in parts again thank you for the
committee for hearing this
memorial tonight and I to ask
for your support support thank
you thank you Tanya is there
anybody in the audience who
wanted to speak on this measure
yes please both of you come up
and speak.
Thank you the quick because
we've got to get down to a
caucus at seven and we still
have one more memorial to go.
Some of the so thank you.
Credit to subpoena remembers the
current take the Mike is working
if you could push the button.
For really long time when we
have a crisis we experience a
life change we have come to a
fork in the road life will never
be the same again.
The pandemic represents a crisis
we have suffered I can be better
after crisis where we can have a
to.
It's a diminished life and at
the same time we can become more
appreciative.
For a memorial will help us get
from that fork in the road to a
more fulfilling and rewarding
life thank you.
Thank you and to.
Reverend all the moment.
Mr chair members of the
committee on the Robert Hollie
Beaumont with interfaith worker
justice New Mexico I agree with
everyone who is in support of
this memorial I think that while
we may have differences of
opinion about how our nation was
able to manage something that
was completely unique are the
the fact that it had devastating
consequences for so many
families and their loved ones I
have a small business I went
through the pandemic next to
essential workers at grocery
stores and other facilities who
to keep their job had to be a
part of the work force and they
were extraordinary so
It you know this is moot because
this memorial will not get
through this body and the state
legislature of New Mexico will
not include a voice when we
dedicate this memorial standing
with all of these families who
are suffering and hoping for
reassurance from their state
legislature so I do think this
committee and hope that you will
pass this memorial.
Senator Gallegos and Senator
thank you Mr chairman Senator
I'm going to go down a different
road I was trying to find out if
I heard right is it just
Bernalillo Los crucis they're
putting up these memorials is
that correct.
Mr chair Senator it so that it
is one moral at this point so to
the southeast met may so of
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
and it's in the mesa del sole I
will be in the recreational
complex are this is a limited
schools statewide it's for any
but the goal is this this
memorial will be statewide but
there's talks of other Morris
with at this point it's one
memorial that will be
representative for the state.
Mr chair and senator David just
trying to understand because Los
crucis was brought up does the
county pay for the memorial or
else's.
Eight four just by.
Mister chairman Senator
those talks of Los crucis and
Bernalillo.
Out of the indoors with those
are those were county
commissions city councils that
supported this
as far as funding the county is
the lead agency on this they are
providing funding but I also
wanted to mention that there
were capital outlay requests for
this memorial as well and money
was given in the Caporali bill
for this as well.
Think that Mr Chairman center
that's right trying to find out
if we're gonna have state monies
as far from this capital and it
I'm trying to do more government
moral in Hobbs and we're looking
at local monies of so I just
hope that same and I.
just in finishing Mr center and
Seriki it brought up
you know discussion of how we
lived through this I actually
had family members died myself
my mom and my daughter never got
a shot never got mask did we
just survived it up yet I know
people that have gotten at those
in Albuquerque that was fully
masked always ground up
everything she could and she
passed so I'm not sure I
understand what my doc here
because I understand that
everyone took a different it I
think it's more of a personal I
think it's my blood the created
Berrier forming and not the mass
but I appreciate the dialogue I
just want to make sure see how
much was state funded and how
much was community I appreciate
the opportunity thank you.
Mr Chairman yes Mr chair focuses
on the yes you know I I I just
think the focus on this is the
memorial and the loss of the
politics how we acted
I understand we have different
views of bottom line is we can
talk about examples where
someone took the vaccine and got
sick happens with flu and
everything we could talk about
folks who I know folks who
didn't want to take anything in
past as well the bottom line is
we lost people.
And that's what this is about
this is what people are are on
zoom this is what the public is
hearing
this isn't about if you want to
wear a mask or not and so I just
want to reiterate that this is
about recognizes those we've
lost and giving folks an
opportunity to grief and that
that's what this is about.
Mr chair my response no let's
carry just responsibility did
not as we do I was closing and
then he ask Senator on excuse me
excuse me senator you said
that's my final statement I move
to my Estes and he said may I
respond so I let him respond to
you I did not have a question I
was.
I did not pose in question he
responded my closing.
If you're thank you senator
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
Chairman served up.
Not I I like your elected to
emphasize is the loss and then
after the remarks of the
gentleman Senator Hickey I was
thinking of the losses of my
personal losses.
Above and particularly grateful
and moved by miss getting to
testify resume and
Was moved by her her and fend
familiar and we moved by her
experience and send my love to
earn our mom and our family the
real quick on page four it says
send the send the moral to this
that the other and then on lines
five and six it says the Santa
Fe city council and marked by
COVID New Mexico what does that
mean is that the Senate type
borders that means something
Mister chairman Senator the
organization marked by COVID so
that's what Jennifer was talking
about okay that's the actual
nonprofit organization and so
it's a national organization so
she's running market by COVID
New Mexico I'll think we didn't
capitalize.
Will the committee.
About us hi and thank you
Representative we already have a
motion we already had
emotionally okay secretary will
call the roll Senator roll
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senator smitteez no Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente center to subpoena yes.
Five six one look at to do that
Senator Senator Pinto last bill
of the year.
I don't think you really sure
about that.
Yeah we may we've I I shouldn't
say less but we may have you
again.
Senate memorial sixty seven gun
violence.
Prevention task force yes to.
Terry.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so this is
requesting that the crime
victims reparation commission
convene a statewide gun violence
prevention task force to study
gun violence in New Mexico and
make recommendations to address
the issue and in the memorial
will see a listing of those that
are going to be invited to be
part of the task force
and the crime victims reparation
commission is responsible for
eighteen enumerated crimes and
also allocating the victims
there appropriation the possible
in the stand for questions Mr
chair.
Anybody in the audience want to
speak on behalf of this.
Yes revert to how it will not
come up in
New Mexico we stand in full
support of this memorial okay so
to the nurses.
Yes.
The online service okay members
of the committee.
Mr chair yes.
I'm a co sponsor of this bill
and we got a little little
feedback that I thought that we
should maybe that address and I
talk to the sponsor and the the
prime sponsor and she's okay
with it online twenty four of
the eight and on the line to for
page one thank you
The leaks online twenty four and
law enforcement shootings the
only reason it's there is
because
homicides were the first the
first of.
The number one the because there
are the number one of type of
gun deaths in an accidental was
second law enforcement shootings
with third but the reason we
want to take law enforcement
shootings that is is we do not
want to mislead that the task
force is going to address law
enforcement shootings because it
it sounds like the way that okay
I wouldn't talk a shootings just
take out and I'm sorry in law
enforcement I'm sorry yes.
Where you're.
So online online twenty four on
page one take out and law
enforcement just to the to the
state and the shootings but.
And the homicides and accidental
shootings.
Because it is that you consider
for the moment yes yes but
sponsor thank.
Well it's technicality but that
I don't know if you need.
It doesn't really change the art
how many long forty three yeah I
I don't remember how many were
homicides how many were
accidental and how many were law
enforcement I guess we could put
accidental in New in lieu
thereof put in other.
I mean gentleman Senator the
officer of a law enforcement
shooting is a hoax that's yes it
could be that is by fact okay
okay then then as I because of
the that's a statistically we're
not twelve not necessarily from.
With Dave statistically counted
separately no I don't believe in
that.
Although they did and what we
read any other discussions that
I have a motion for do pass.
Any other discussion are you
going to leave that in no we're
taking it up your.
Secretary will call the roll.
Adopted the amendment to adopt
the amendment.
So that was there any opposition
to the mid.
No seeing none the bill as
amended now will take a vote on
the bill as amended.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maintenance.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman.
Senator Ortiz piano yes.
Six five six two one.
Us thank you all of your
patience sitting there for two
hours was rewarded thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
One point four right.
Or.
So it will be.
That's right Frank thank you
thank you thank you everyone a
good year we may need one more
time but I'm not for sure.
