Thank you for the information is
a Senator Lopez available for
Senate bill one ninety two.
She's in judiciary also Senator
you need to move on I guess
there is some of our renewable
okay thank you for that
information pending
Senator Hemphill available
Senate bill fifty one charter
school enrollment preference.
The U. at Texas I I'm I'm I'm
texting Senator Lopez.
Okay.
Well
Well I will also text Senator
Hemphill to see if she's
available.
Okay thank you
Hold tight for a few minutes to
see if I Senator Hemphill Lopez
available otherwise we'll move
on.
I could afternoon Mister
chairman Mr Senator Padilla I am
here for Senate bill two oh one
whenever you want me thank you.
Okay thank you.
Senator Padilla will up.
We'll just hang tight for a few
minutes and
thank you for letting us know
that you're available.
So.
Well we're waiting as senator
did you have any stories you'd
like to share with us.
no Mr chairman but thank you for
asking.
Senator common sense ideas here
why don't we do him okay.
I'm sorry to bother you about
that.
Other senator bill is on now I'm
here thank you Mr chairman okay
thank you thank you Senator
Hemphill of please proceed with
the.
Explaining a Senate bill fifty
one thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's an
honor to be here today and have
this opportunity to sponsor an
inter to Senate bill fifty one
which provides enrollment
preferences for students whose
parents are employees of charter
schools I believe I have my
expert witnesses here with me
today.
Casey Bennett B. this and tied
now this this particular role
that preference is already
provided in traditional district
schools in New Mexico and in
both district schools and
charter schools this is my
twenty six year in education and
I have four children of my own
and I know that when my children
have been able to attend the
same school that I'm working and
it's made life so much easier
not just for myself my husband
and my children but also for the
students and families that I
work with we've all heard the
oxygen mask analogy when we fly
on a commercial airline we are
instructed to make sure that we
first put on our own oxygen mask
before we're attending to
children or others because we
cannot give what we don't
possess and so I I am as a
school psychologist I've also
learned that the state of mind
state of the doll dictates the
state of the child if an adult
is common feels valued and
respected children in his or her
care are also going to feel calm
valued and respected so a child
can't be and higher brain state
than in adults and if they don't
stressed the whole class the
whole screen is going to be
negatively impact impacted by
that stress releases cortisol
which negatively affects
learning and memory so providing
this enrollment preference for
students whose parents are
employees of charter schools
right ultimately reduces stress
on the employee and their
children and the students that
the
that the employee is working
with they're going to feel
calmer and be it's going to be
more conducive to learning and
memory charter schools often
require employees to work longer
hours and parents are often
required to be more involved
with regular contact with.
Teachers and volunteering for
events and extracurricular
activities so this all help
employees meet those increased
demands so Mr chairman members
of the committee I hope that
you'll support this enrollment
preference built especially
right now when so many employees
and our schools have done so
much for children and had to
indoor so much during this
difficult time over the last
year this is one thing that we
can do to help those educators
and employees I have a little
less stressed and their lights
and Mr chairman I would like to
yield to Tom this now this.
Okay thank.
Thank you senator.
Go ahead the.
Mr Cruz.
Mr Chairman my name is Todd now
said school of New Mexico
international school thank you
members of the committee met
first just I thank senator
Graham have built for bringing
this important bill to the floor
front to help address the
connecting inequity that I think
was not intended to result from
the language of our current
charter school enrollment
preference law
and I would really hoping that.
He can see just how important
this is to address.
Employees needs to have their
children be treated the same way
that employees districts schools
are treated throughout the state
this is a moment preference
that's
Madam in other school districts
around the state and that is
explore expressly excuse me
expressly permitted and federal
non regulatory guidance for the
charter school program from the
US department of education so I
really appreciate the
opportunity to answer the
questions that the committee
here.
Thank you Mr Cruz.
Senator have built we have any
other of expert witnesses thank
you Mr chairman I believe that
Casey Bennett B. this is also
on.
She.
Okay thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Casey
Benavides on and I'm the
director of Santa Fe was
international school in
Albuquerque and I was is a dual
language charter school with a
Max capacity of four hundred and
twenty four students so every
year we host a lottery which is
primarily for incoming
kindergarten students and a few
spots here and there that may
become available partner the R.
lottery yield about three
hundred lottery applications and
with only limited spaces
available less than ten percent
of the applicants actually get
accepted to our school so right
now in state state law there are
only two exemptions one students
who have been already admitted
to the school so we'll say
students who are already
enrolled at the school may have
their siblings admitted to the
school.
The other exception is for
Those that are already enrolled
obviously they get accepted for
the following year so Senate
fifty fifty one will assist in
two things number one recruiting
so I attend lots of job fairs
around the state and it's very
difficult to recruit teachers
high quality teachers if their
own students their own our
daughters or sons Count attend
our school without having to go
through this lottery the second
thing Senate bill fifty one will
assisted with retention I have
highly qualified teachers at my
school and some of them have had
to go you know two or three
years through a lottery until
there's there's there students
or their own Sunder daughters
are accepted to the school.
oftentimes they may choose to
just go work at a local public
school aware of.
Lotteries or these exemptions
are not required as Mr now says
mentioned.
So
If the exemption could also
existed founders of the charter
school in governance council
members that would also assist
in finding and keeping quality
council members that have a
vested interest in our school I
have a I have a couple of
bullets I'd like to point out
currently I have four staff
members that are desperately
hoping for Senate bill fifty one
to pass for the additional
exemption I have a kindergarten
teacher was how the way the
total of three years to get her
student into into our school I
have foreign exchange teachers
and for the language school I
recruit a lot of teachers from
Spain or Mexico or other Spanish
speaking countries who find it
difficult to have to move from
another country and enroll their
students their son or daughter's
at different public schools
before they're accepted here at
my charter school so
this the if this bill is
considered it's not going to
require any additional funding.
And will not affect school
operational fund and I hope I've
given a little insight on to how
the six exception would greatly
benefit not only our charter
schools but other charter
schools around the state.
Thank you in advance for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr.
If you don't for the your
presentation Senator a.
You have any other a.
Persons wishing to speak at this
time.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I believe that's
everyone who's available at this
time so if there's any public
comment we are we can move to
public comment thank you Mr
chairman.
No thank you senator Trevor do
we have.
Time will take a what the
audience to speak in opposition
of Senate bill fifty one Trevor
do we have anyone.
Waiting in the wings.
There's no one in opposition.
Thank you Trevor at this time
we'll take a people wishing to
speak in favor of Senate bill
fifty one Trevor is there anyone
available.
First we have Kerry robin.
Thank you Trevor.
Go ahead Kerry.
Hello Mr chairman and members
the committee Kerry robin
groomed I am the registered
lobbyists for public charter
schools of New Mexico we believe
that this bill is a great job
and creating parity for
enrollment preferences between
charter schools and traditional
schools and look forward to your
support today thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Brander.
Trevor do we have anyone else
next we have surfaced you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is prince
Philip senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce Jeepers only
supports this bill.
schools often operate on
different.
The public schools
from the sound quality.
A little better thank.
okay what you want to come back
to me you know trying to make
with my phone.
Okay you are.
We'll take up.
Thank you Sir we will listen to
you in a few minutes Trevor do
you have a anyone else available
last lastly we have Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico kids can like Education
Act this organization we also
stand in support of legislation
thank you.
Thank you Jason.
Is a.
Trevor do we have a server.
Available now.
I think she still trying to get
a human.
Well.
I lex.
Let's move on.
Members of the committee anyone
wishing to speak.
Concerning Senate bill fifty
one.
Who has.
Senator Sedillo Lopez go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair I just have
one question is this how it's
handled in in the non charter
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
yes that's correct this is
enrollment preference available
to other public schools.
That's what I thought it seems
like a really good idea and and
brings parity.
Thank you Mr chairman senator I
agree.
Thank you Senator.
Next we have Senator Stefanics
with.
Well I'm thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you senator
Correa Hemphill for bringing
this forward
I think some of the point you
made about the stress and the
cortisol in the children and the
families was very interesting
for me to think about this in a
different way and
we raised our nephew he was now
I nice young adult but I have he
certainly had a lot of stress in
his life so understanding the
impact of of family to trial to
education was really nice to
hear so thank you for your
presentation and I will be happy
to make a motion if and when we
were ready thank you.
Thank you Senator Stefanics I
don't see any other hands up so
Go ahead I'm.
Sure you don't have a quorum
right now.
and.
So I guess we'll up.
So can we move on to the your
testimony from that from the
next a bill.
Mr is well I'm not sure about
Mason's visit isn't the role
that when you once have a quorum
then quorum continues or is that
different in Mason the since
that is different we have to
have a quorum present for a vote
okay.
But you don't you don't need a
quorum present to hear of bills
now we don't but we do need to
be very transparent with the
public about everything that
we're doing and we need to
notify the public what we are
doing.
Okay
at the moment we're we're not
gonna.
Take a vote on the Senate bill
fifty one because we don't have
a quorum how are we are going to
move.
To the next bill here's
testimony regarding Senate bill
one ninety four public
corruption Act Senator Moores
Senator Moores and and
Representative McQueen available
to.
to intensify regarding this
bill.
I guess.
Okay hearing no response the
next bill Senate bill two
hundred.
RTZ Senator Ortiz panel but he's
not available but I believe
Senator Padilla is available for
Senate bill to all one nurse and
LESC.
Independent roll Senator Padilla
you.
Available yes Mister chairman
and I do believe that my experts
or almost I think all of them
are here thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
a the nurse and this this is
independent
I'm sure the nursing Senate bill
two oh one which is going to
amend the nursing practice act
which essentially allow
certified registered nurse
anesthetists siRNAs that we're
all familiar with to function in
full practice
and remove the inter dependent
relationship between siRNAs and
other health care professionals
this puts them right in line
with the other nursing
professions that have the same
authority and it also allows us
to proliferate
an increased number of health
care professionals around the
state the folks that are in this
in this condition are in in this
field they they tend to have a
great deal of education like
most others in their field of
six point ninety nine percent of
our nine years of college
education plus two or more years
of practical experience before
they would be we would remove
this interdependency with others
other health care professionals
and they're typically master's
or doctoral degree to
individuals and they do have to
pass the exams just like any
other board certified
professional in this area I do
have to say Mr chairman that
there is no fiscal impact to
this particular piece of
legislation as the number of
individuals that would be
addition receive the additional
certification the fees coming
into the board would be
commensurate with that so there
would be no financial impact to
the state by doing this
whatsoever it would help us to
bring health care professionals
to some communities that have
never had a health care
professional before if you take
a look at a lot of the summers I
have to say Mr chairman this
particular group came to me and
they might be in the top five of
the most prepared advocates for
what they're trying to
accomplish they have fully armed
me with everything you can
imagine and I hope I can answer
any questions that you may have
I will say that if you take a
look at their safety record for
the that they're measured really
every five years going back they
just have a tremendous safety
record as well I have if I were
in front of you Mr chairman and
showing them to you right here I
have eight let.
is that are just glowing
recommendations on why we should
do this and why it would be
important for our state these
are at the hospital The New
Mexico hospital association to
individual counties individual
clinics to various agencies
including anesthesiologists The
shipment mainstreet and
anesthesia I have a ton of of
folks here the normally hospital
district there's a lot of
support to get this done I'm
very confident that that this
would be a really good move for
us I also have.
an editorial about which I know
that you've written several of
them Mr Chairman along the way
and your legislation but this is
an editorial that really study
to support on why we should
remove C. R. N. A. supervision
the supersonic supervision role
so that we can maximize our work
force around the state and and
and work to to you know expand
that because you know when we
bring health care professionals
to communities that are never
have them and we reduce the
impact on the entire community
in terms of cost and
deliverability and of course
improve health outcomes I do
have some individuals here with
me today Mister chairman I as I
mentioned very very prepared
group of individuals I'm very
happy to be working with these
folks and some of the realligned
them on the more technical
aspects of this this particular
piece of legislation of Angela
freaks who is the chief C. R. N.
A. in Los crucis and current
amendment New Mexico association
of nurse and that's with this
president for New Mexico mia
Austin and she's actually in her
scrubs right now I think she
stepped away to be with you Mr
chairman I hope that you give
her some time as well and she is
the chief C. R. N. A. in
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho and a
past president of the New Mexico
association and we also have
Shannon Allen who's done a great
job of of coordinating all of
this and she's from a rural Lee
County so you have Albuquerque
you have leave you have for
rural non rural you have metro
rural it cetera Jeez the past
president of the state
association and the current
government relations committee
chairperson and then we also
have Chris Bolzano who
represents them across the state
with the work that they do so Mr
chairman I did ask them to keep
all of their comments to about
five to seven minutes but I
would like if it's with your
permission to give them at least
two to three minutes apiece to
speak.
Thank you senator Padilla now we
hear from expert witnesses and
Senate bill two oh one Trevor
you please a allow the first
witness and thank you.
And thank you Mr chairman I
believe all three of them
actually are in the room so if
we can start with the with
Shannon Allen I'd like her to
just jump in and then we'll jump
to to drive Austin I'm sorry me
Austin and then over to Angela
Frietze Shannon can you give us
about one and a half to two
minutes please.
Chairman committee members thank
you so much for letting me speak
I am from Lee County where I've
worked independently for decades
as a C. R. NA I have full
support of my community is the
letters that they have sent in
front of me I just want to say
impact about our safety seventy
percent of the anesthetics in
New Mexico are actually
administered by C. R. NH one
employer said that out of forty
eight thousand anesthetic
procedures last year C. R. A.'s
provided forty one thousand
those so if you take that and
you compare that back to the
national practitioner data bank
and the very few
Malpractice claims we had that
is an actual huge statement on
our safety and so this is really
important for those of us who
are down here in rural areas
because our compositions of
teams changed throughout the
years and what this bill does is
allow hospitals to be sure that
they're in a speech of teams
work to their full potential and
so thank you so much for letting
me speak thank you
Shannon and if we can ask mia
Austin if you can talk through
that mask there would love to
hear from you for about a minute
and half thank you.
Hi Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is mia Austin
I'm the chief staring at UNM
Sandoval regional Medical Center
or the hospital use that
utilizes the RNase provide
anesthesia and an independent
role when COVID was at its peak
I created a procedure team to
help out the ER and ICU tumors
are duties included emergency
managing Airways of COVID
positive patients are gently
inserting different types of
lines in the most critically ill
COVID patients we also provide
all services that we needed by
the hospital UNM's discerns the
administration commended the
CNA's for helping hospital get
through some busy and difficult
days in the example given you
can see that Sirius practice
independently and every county
every single day play a vital
role in the functioning of
hospitals around the state
especially during the current
pandemic this bill ensures
counties continue to work
independently by codifying the
nurse practice act language
which helps the part that C. R.
needs throughout the state
continue to be able to support
our communities during this
pandemic and future health
crisis but the state then
director please vote yes on SB
two oh one thank you for your
time and consideration.
Thank you me and thank you for
stepping away to make to be part
of the hearing today would like
to hear also from Angela free to
the chief C. R. N. A. in Los
crucis in the current state
president for an imminent NM
Mexico association of nurse
anesthetists.
Hello.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name's Angela Fritz
and I will just pass over my
introduction because Senator
Padilla did such an awesome job
I just want to point out that I
worked in urban areas as well as
rural parts of New Mexico
throughout the past several
years.
We ought we also have even in
urban areas like Los crucis we
still have trouble recruiting
anesthesiologists we've been
without achieve our M. D. for
over a year now so I'm currently
the only chief leadership on
site at our facility in Los
crucis where we have fourteen
point eight zero needs and three
anesthesiologist we do work in a
collaborative practice but we
all perform our own case does
independently and as the
president of our state
association it's my
responsibility to help change or
improve our codified legislation
that helps affect our
membership.
According to the National
Council of state boards of
nursing sometimes modifications
of practice acts are just the
formalization of changes already
occurring in practice within the
profession so this bill is
exactly that formalizing the
changes that have already
occurred over the past twenty
years with our security practice
in New Mexico is suggests that
practice acts actually should be
updated every five years and R.
C. R. N. A. practice act is long
overdue.
So along with that this
legislation just codifies the
language to reflect what we're
already doing and I feel it's
very important to update this
nurse practice act with this
language because it really does
clarify things for hospitals and
administrators and other
facilities seeking to utilize
anesthesia services as to just
what is allowed and what is
our legal so the current
language is ambiguous and it
doesn't reflect the full
independent practice that
Tierney's are already performing
all other advanced practice
nurses have this independent
language in the nurse practice
act so I ask you for your vote
of yesterday for this important
piece of legislation H. B.
thirty five in SB two oh one
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Angela I I could not
have said it but I think this is
fantastic that's why we have the
experts I think it was
absolutely handle properly there
with how we introduced this this
piece I want to also welcome
doctor Sasha pool from the New
Mexico board of nursing I did
not ask her to be or did not
list her as an expert witness
because I do believe she needs
to be independent and her role
but she is here also Mr chairman
I think to also answer questions
on this matter and we're ready
to to take some COVID and some
question thank you Sir.
Thank you thank you senator a do
you now we will turn to the.
Members of the committee and
will there be public comment Mr
chairman thanks yes
Of course.
Sir Trevor.
Do we have any.
Persons in the interested in
the.
Expressing any opposition to
this bill.
One person signed up with terror
would be our.
Okay from our I.
Right.
Yes we can.
My name is Dr terrible in our
I'm a physician
anesthesiologist I work in
Albuquerque for a safety net
hospital and I am a member of
the New Mexico society of
anesthesiologists I just want to
voice my opposition to the
passage of this bill this is
something that has been in the
law for years now and anyone
who's been practicing
independently and feels like
this bill should be changed to
reflect that has not been
following the letter of the law
it's been the practice range CCL
distance hearing aids for for
many years now that we work
together or that the serenades
work with another procedure less
in the operating room in order
to better coordinate patient
care I feel like this is a
pretty important safety
mechanism put in place to help
insure that there's good
communication from both sides of
the operating table and help
ensure that patients health
through a very dangerous
precarious situation such as a
surgery I feel like what's
happening is that we are
addressing a position shortage
by instead of recruiting and
trying to attract new positions
we are just eliminating the need
for the position involvement.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
There are.
Have any other.
Persons interested in speaking
in opposition Trevor no that was
all that was signed up for
opposition okay thank you have a
move on to persons interested in
expressing our support for this
Senate bill two or one.
Turner do we have anyone yes we
have session pool.
Okay go ahead session.
Mr vice chairman members of the
committee social pull the
executive director of the New
Mexico board of nursing I just
want to share that I have been
working with the New Mexico
association of nurse
anesthetists with the authority
by the previous and current
board chair for over a year and
a half to get this language
passed it is reflective of
changes that occurred decades
ago in two thousand and two when
governor Johnson signed an
executive order to allow
serenades to.
Practice independent require
physician oversight for billing
purposes and it is serenades
provide safe care and it is the
standard that all other advanced
practice registered nurses in
New Mexico enjoy so with that
thank you.
We can't hear you Mr chairman.
Thank you
do we have anyone else
interested in speaking at
positions this bill.
We have.
Support yes we have Christmas
on.
Go ahead Chris.
Good afternoon Mister chairman I
am Chris falls on a on the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico association of
anaesthetists and and and be on
behalf of the State RNase and
our state we stand in support of
this bill keep in mind members
of this committee Mr Chairman
that the the the sister bill the
this the H. B. thirty five pass
will not initially on the house
side after a very good debate
and now we're here with hot
Senate bill to align and we
appreciate the sponsor bring
this before this committee three
point someone of that committee
to now that.
This bill does not.
Increase.
Scope of practice and anyway
this not expand.
CNA Stratix at at all and I was
on the creating thank you.
As.
You can start Cherry.
In I just had in the the noise
in the background that and does
not increased drugs and
medicines so does not expand
that's not increased batic's
Medicine and does not change
scope of projects and I just
want to.
That the members of this
committee be aware of that so
please on behalf of this year
and ace support this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr president and not
sure I believe we have one more
a person wishing to speak in
support yes Pamela Blackwell.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Pamela
Blackwell and I'm the director
Policy for the New Mexico
hospital association we stand in
strong support of this bill this
bill as you've already learned
it codifies what is already been
practiced for close to twenty
years on since two thousand to
our New Mexico securities have
been eligible to practice
without the supervision of
physicians this practice has
allowed our New Mexico hospitals
especially in our rural
communities to access all of
these necessary anesthesia
services on legislative buyers
urinates in those include
surgical services spectacle as
well as peer management services
these services help to ensure
the New Mexico residents may
receive the quality care closer
to home where they need it I was
notes that Federal Trade
Commission has weighed in on
this issue and has said really
quite plainly that it does not
support physician supervision of
siRNAs in fact it says the F. T.
the F. T. C. stated that
requiring security supervision
actually can impose significant
competitive cost of health care
consumers and patients it can
impede rather than foster the
development of effective models
a team based care so this bill
does not change the importance
of collaborative practice
working in a team model is very
important in providing care
across our state us your knees
are also leaders on our
hospitals critical care teams
and they work collaboratively
across health care professional
disciplines during this pandemic
they have been particularly
necessary playing a critical
role their training and
experience in life saving
critical care and your we
management as well as ventilator
support advanced patient
assessment have helped to save
the lives of those most impacted
by COVID nineteen so thank you
for your consideration of this
legislation please.
Or this bill thank you for the
opportunity to present.
Thank you for your presentation
and now we will turn to.
The committee members with a
canister chairman with your
permission I do believe sherry
Dodson from A. R. P. was also
she's had her hands up a couple
of times now I don't know if you
allow her to speak as well.
Okay sure go ahead missed also
that.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr vice
chairman Tom and the members of
the committee my name mystery
Dawson and I am a volunteer
advocate for a a RP New Mexico
we stand in strong support of SB
two oh one and as a retired
registered nurse I have had
experience with a C. R. N. A.
and whom I found to be very
highly qualified and ethical
professionals SB two oh one will
improve access to health care in
our state and especially in our
rural areas thank you very much.
Thank you Mr president for your
comments now.
If you'll turn to members of the
committee further questions and
comments I don't see any bodies
hand up.
I'm sorry your we have
Senator Stefanics go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
indicate that I respect the.
Education and training that are
advanced practice nurses have
and I've been told I wasn't
supposed to use that term I
I do have one question when
anesthesiologists and nurse
anesthetists certified
registered nurse anesthetists
are in an operating room.
Do they manage more than one
patient at a time.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators to panic I'm gonna ask
a doctor Allen to respond.
We take care of one patient at a
time at some of the models where
they work in teams of position
will oversee several C. R. N. A.
or maybe working collaboration
with them where I work it's all
C. R. N. A.'s everyone has their
own patient wanted to time so
this one.
And where do you and then where
do you work Dr I I would get
more leave hospital in Lee
County in Lovington okay thank
you very much Mr chair that's
all I had.
Thank you senator.
Thank you senator next we have
a.
Senator McKenna wishing to speak
go ahead senator.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator.
The for bringing forward this
legislation
I always appreciate legislation
that's helping our state deal
with its.
Health care providers because we
know there are many challenges
that are facing us and and I'm
curious chairman and senator.
Well this legislation
it.
When it because it doesn't
affect the certified nurse and
Anaesthetists professional
insurance.
Thank you Mr chairman center
mechanic another great question
I when they refer I'm in the
defer that to doctor Alan.
Our insurance rates continually
go down and I have a statement
from the A. N. A. as compared to
nineteen eighty eight
when you put in for the
increases in the amounts of
money but we have actually got
thirty eight percent lower
premium now than we did the and
our insurance actually
continually goes down every
single year because of our
safety record.
Thank you doctor.
One more follow up question
chairman and senator.
So I.
My
Before she passed away I'm my
sister in law was a.
Nurse and that's a test and.
I'm this is one question I was
unable to ask
before she left us and that is
If something goes wrong I'm in a
situation in the O. R. in the
theater.
What what happens is there is
there another nurse anesthetists
on call or is that when
A physician anesthesiologist is
all down to the room.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator McKenna and I want to
ask me a Austin if you wouldn't
mind feeling that one for us
please.
Sure I'm so in the practice that
I work when it's it's
collaborative and yes I'm an
emergency happens for instance
in my room I also there's
usually as the army available or
an anesthesiologist available to
come give me a second that
happens.
Thank you thank you miss Austin
thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Padilla those are the
those are my two increased thank
you thank you senator.
Okay thank you senator
I don't see any other hands up
any other senators wishing to
speak.
Senate bill two oh one.
Also do we do we have a quorum.
Senator I believe chairman or DC
Pino has a question Mr Chairman
from okay.
Go ahead Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
joined toward the end of the
comments in favor of this bill I
was in and of the committee and
I but I was wondering was there
anybody who spoke in opposition
to this at all.
Mr Chairman and Mr Chairman yes
there was one individual that
spoke against terra I believe
I didn't quite I'm sure that the
Trevor your.
Zoom Meister might be able to
give us the exact title I think
she still on.
Is she still on.
It's just it's Dr terrible more
some of the session
anesthesiologist thank you
thank you thank you Mr chairman
that was my only question I
wondered if there was any
opposition at all.
Thank you doctor I wasn't
writing it down quickly enough
my apologies.
So.
Thank you.
Anyone wishing to make a motion
to Senate bill two oh one.
We do passed.
We have to do passed we have a
second I can't second so we have
a motion to pass a please call
the roll penny.
And Senate bill one center guy
it goes excuse.
Senator.
I'm gonna apologize.
Your.
How do you won't be.
What bill are we all.
that seashells okay
Mr chairman I'd like to vote
yes.
It's good for our area thank
you.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Thirteen you know yes.
Seven to one in favor of the
bill thank you penny and the
Senator Padilla you have a do
pass thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and thank you to the
expert witnesses thank you.
Yes.
I would like to move would you
pass fifty one.
Okay do we have a two passed we
have a second.
This is the act charter school
preference enrollment.
Thank you.
Okay we have a motion and a
second please call the roll
penny.
I'm bill fifty one.
Thank all of.
Mr I'm gonna pass for me that I
did not hear this I'm trying to
read through some of it I I know
it's charter school with
I apologize I'm not prepared all
pastor.
Thank all.
Yes.
Yes.
The Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes it was thank you.
In a yes.
Mr Chairman where those the only
two bills you talked about while
I was injured G. Kernan.
Those are the only two.
Also Senator a.
I inadvertently skipped over a
Senate bill one ninety of I
believe the Senator Hemphill
still here.
Bill is been rolled over to when
she was told.
what one ninety has okay.
Senator
Mr chair that.
We skipped over the first three
bills because the.
Senator by Senator Lopez weren't
here but maybe they are now that
you may know there still tied up
in Judiciary and they've asked
me at the end of the agenda
today okay so the next
governments Mr chair Senate bill
one ninety four Senator Moores
Representative McQueen.
Senator Morris is also on
judiciary and he's just.
Your Santa Fe so you listen you
senator Morris.
Thank you those use it five
Representative McQueen can jump
on a quick us that he was here.
Heros Meister.
I'm not I'm not seeing.
Okay I'll text again okay going
to get started thank you Mr
chair this is a bill that we've
actually seen in this committee
and we've pass about couple
times the past Senator are
Representative McQueen I've been
working on a number of years
well that would as part of why
don't you go into the details
will no with the use cases I'm
sorry of judiciary on the
background internet on.
but one of the oddities is that
after a public official is
convicted of all public for
corruption that they're still
able to keep their pension we
can go to the examples of that
on both sides of the aisle it's
something that the
Representative could McQueen and
I very passionate about and so
bring this back for us that one
sort of collected Fishel is
convicted of their crime of
violating their trust to the
people as part of their sentence
and transmissible now no longer
get that tax funded
a pension in some cases and so
for us Representative McQueen is
not on yet of these happy to
answer questions.
You're on your your muted
Jareth.
Is there anybody in the public
wanted to comment on this
program Senator queen is just
entering the room.
Representative McQueen welcome
representatives.
You Mr chairman Matt was very
brief
so some bill if you want to add
to it.
Mr Chairman center Moores I was
doing my best along on this fast
as I could I heard none of your
your brief presentation so I've
no idea what what material you
covered what you.
It was articulate and compelling
so
Etcetera etcetera no doubt but
if if I might add it may be
slightly repetitive but the
public corruption Act.
Holding elected officials
accountable and if you abuse
your office that you should be
off the state payroll once and
for all.
And would be happy to answer any
questions.
Is there anyone Turner wanted to
speak on on behalf of or against
this bill.
So I see a great Trujillo.
Mr chair he'll go ahead.
Is that after Mr good afternoon
Mister chairman members of a
great trio on the interim
executive director with the
public employees retirement
association of the board did
vote to support this bill so
we're just putting support and
happy to answer any questions.
Very good thank you Mr Trujillo.
Anyone else.
No there was no one else.
Okay.
Members of the committee.
Any questions.
Yes so the lowest.
And thank you Mr chair I I
noticed that the bills it's is.
The relates the provisions of
this section are not applicable
to any felony conviction for an
offence of relates to.
I guess.
I'm trying to understand the
provisions of this section are
not applicable to any felony
conviction for defense it
relates to arises out of or is
in connection with the offenders
holding of an elected or
appointed office is committed on
or after July first twenty
twenty one so.
Could you give me some examples.
I think this is a great idea
just trying to understand
whether there are exclusions or
limitations.
Or to the extent there are.
Mr chair center course if I may
yes please.
so there's a little bit of
confusion on page seven of the
bill.
It would be seven of the bill is
doing is amending existing laws.
And we do have a this provision
in existing law this other
provision.
One eighteen fifteen point four
which has effectively.
It hasn't been very useful.
Because of the way it's worded
it's too difficult to enforce so
despite it having it been on the
books it hasn't really been use
so what that language on page
seven is doing is it's it's
ending the applicability of the
current law after that after the
effective date of the new law we
didn't just want to repeal it we
want to leave in place in case
you know up in the fence is
discovered at some point in the
future that occurred prior to
the effect of this new law you
they would still potentially
have this tool to use but
they're really they're really
two separate provisions.
I'm sorry so maybe I have to go
to read the previous law
because.
I'm not sure that I'm reading
this correctly.
For some reason I'm reading it
is backwards from what you
intend to do so I'm missing I'm
missing something and I I guess
it's the new it's old law over a
the Mr Chairman center city
Lopez so it's the old law in or
ending the whole law.
So the law doesn't carry forward
so can you can you just give me
the citation to the old law yes.
Mr Chairman center city office
is right there in section four
page six point sixteen has the
statutory reference.
Thirty two okay.
So it's thirty two thirty one.
I think thirty one eighteen
fifty okay.
Go on to some yes I just I just
wanted to
To understand how this is
working I I got confused because
I didn't go back and look at the
a lot so that was that was my my
failure so if you could go on if
and if I can reserve the up to
ask questions if this is my
question thank you
Senator Representative McQueen
were you about to add something
to your explanation you have
that do exist thank you Mr
chairman that the existing law.
This is when the separate
funding a fact by the Trier of
fact it is has a bunch of
requirements that make it
difficult so for example if you
reach a plea agreement there's
not a separate funding attacked
by a Trier of fact.
And so it they haven't used this
provision in recent corruption
cases.
So that's why we're bringing
that the new law which we think
will be more effective than the
the law that's on the books in.
If we adopt a new law that we
don't need the also we ended on
that date.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank
you.
Senator Morris and
Representative between for
joining us this afternoon I'm
curious do we know how many
former legislators that were
found guilty of felonies are
currently beneficiaries of their
retirement.
Of the state retirement
programs.
Mr chair senator I don't know
the exact number I did purposely
do that research we all know of
high profile cases we brought in
many mock Babel
what's with all of us but I
don't wanna get into you know
looking back at those particular
cases because our our people
would serve federal prison time
who are still getting
legislative retirements and I
think you in yes some of the top
you're at.
Yeah I'm I'm simply curious a
chairman and senator
Representative
Yeah I I can understand how many
feel the.
The disappointment and outrage
if you're still collecting.
Retirement and you're found
guilty of a felony I'm just
curious.
Once their time has been served
What the duration puts them in
it in financially.
I'm just using about this I I
understand the rationale for the
legislation swipe it is.
Many are still benefiting from
their budget.
But that's all thank you
chairman thank you
representative thank you
senator.
Thank you senator McCain an.
I had a question I don't see
anybody else with their hand of
Senator Sedillo Lopez did you
want to return to your.
The.
I think I'm getting to to the
interpretation that
Representative McQueen of
indicated.
I just had a question is senator
Morris or Representative McQueen
These are only elected officials
that we're talking about in this
this legislation.
But some elected officials.
As in my case.
I had already retired from G. E.
R. and we're trying P. R. A. and
I suppose can be drying E. R.
and then it's it's when they
were elected.
Does this apply.
To all of their previous
retirement benefits are just to
those they were and as an
elected official.
Mr chair and representative
McQueen can jump in on this but
New Mexico one of the high okay
this is I meant sure would have
this bill would only address and
the
for all legislative retirement
would not addressed her time as
for would register elector
efficient I'm not as as for time
with the state and the county
beforehand.
Or even the legislative time
before there are any election
time.
You the the Mr Chairman said of
course if I may but you're right
Mr Chairman it only applies to
the time is an elected official
because we thought if someone
you know put in twenty years in
law enforcement or seeing or
whatever and then went into
public service
that we should go back and take
take that tension so it really
is only their elected elected
time if they move from office to
office we get they moved from
the house to the senator from
the Senate to the governor's
office you would include all of
their time as an elected
official but it would not
include prior time accrued as a
staff person in the Paris
system.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you
senator.
Any other discussion from the
committee.
What will of the committee.
Mr chair I move it to pass.
The second on the second.
We have a motion from Senator
Sedillo Lopez seconded by
Senator Gallegos any other
discussion or debate.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Funds one ninety four Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Thank all.
Thermacare.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Tomlin's yes.
Can you say pass I have a hard
time distinguishing between yes
and pass.
My apologies to me I'm.
I just have to read something
else I I vote yes thank you Sir
to.
Yes.
Congratulations senator and
representative you do test.
Thanks committee thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Now we will move to mention.
We will move to see we have the.
Yes the lady out here or Senator
or how to meal yes Mister
chairman I am here when we will
go to your bill so we'll start
with your two thirteen.
Thank you Mr chairman and
texting Senator how to me all
right now.
Senator Candelaria Mr Chairman
I'm here.
This thank you and thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm gonna keep myself
off of video just because I have
a very unstable broadband
connection today and I don't
want to cut out it's a Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Senate bill two
thirteen is legislation that
would prohibit what is commonly
referred to as the gay and trans
panic defense in the state of
New Mexico now what you may ask
is the gay and trans panic
defense the game trans panic
defense is a common law defense
that is typically raised an
individual has been charged with
intentional murder or
intentional acts of violence and
the defense goes like this
the the defendant argues that
the mere fact or they're the
discovery of the mere fact that
a person is gay or transgender
all or that a gay or transgender
person may have made a non
violence non aggressive romantic
sort of an invitation or
inclination towards the person
that those two pieces of
evidence those two facts are
are so troubling so morally
reprehensible.
that it overcomes a person's
sense of reason and so they
cannot be held culpable fully
under the law.
this defense as has been noted
by the American Bar Association
which has published a paper
calling upon all states to ban
this common law defense in their
jurisdiction harkens back to a
time where it was socially
acceptable if not the social
defaults to consider and treat
LGBTQ persons as objects or
persons that need to be feared
as somehow morally flawed or
failed and the basic premise Mr
chairman that underlies the
defense
that.
Being in the presence of a gay
person our trans person is
enough to reduce your criminal
culpability if you commit an act
of violence against that person
is simply not the standard that
are law should strive to so what
does the bill do those very
simple it states that no
criminal defendants may.
Introduce evidence in any
criminal proceeding of two
things one.
The fact that learning of the of
somebody's sexual orientation or
gender identity had on the
person so for example and this
happens quite often in this
country far too often you have
an individual who perhaps begins
a romantic encounter with
another person who is trans
gender may have had reassignment
surgery and then later finds out
that the person is presenting
now not with the same sex they
were assigned at birth.
And commits an act of horrible
violence if not murder against
that person.
The second place scenario where
this bill would take effect is
it prohibits criminal defendants
ensuring evidence entering into
evidence that.
they the effect of being
romantically proposition.
Threatening are non aggressive
manner by a person of the same
gender.
Transgender
This Mr chairman again and what
I'll note here is in both cases
the evidentiary exclusion is
very narrow.
the defendant can still
introduce evidence all the
attenuating circumstances they
can introduce evidence I was at
a bar I was propositioned by a
man I then beat the crap out of
him and sent him to the
emergency they can still you
know introduce all of that
evidence but they cannot
introduce the psychological
evidence of the fact
several other states Mr Chairman
have passed and enacted this
legislation I sincerely hope
that New Mexico will join them
this year all you'll need my co
sponsor senator Lee a Hotmail
for any other comments Mr
chairman thank you for the
committee.
Senator out of me welcome to the
committee thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
good afternoon thank you Senator
Candelaria for that introduction
that would appropriate trader
uses an L. G. B. T. to panic
Defense they're claiming that a
victim's sexual orientation or
gender identity not only
explains but excuses a loss of
self control and the subsequent
assault so I fully or partially
acquitting the perpetrators of
crime against all G. B. T. Q.
victims this defense implies the
LGBTQ lives are worth less than
others and as a member of the
LGBT community I strongly
believe this needs to be
addressed now when our state
allows these defenses to be used
in court it does that the
disturbing message Mr chairman
that violence against LGBTQ
people is understandable and
acceptable now it center and
kind a lot and I want to do is
ensure that our state recognizes
the humanity of LGBTQ people and
ensures that homophobia and
transphobia cannot be used in
court to justify discriminatory
violence this bill will help to
protect New Mexicans to protect
the L. G. B. T. to community
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
let's go to the public for some
comments from the public and we
have.
Speaking in support.
Speaking in support of this.
Trujillo from gold futures and
Benedict Baur from the public
defender's office.
Are they here.
Hey.
Okay Mister hill let's start
with you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's Federal look
through here and I love policy
associate with bold features for
many young women United we stand
in strong support of SB two two
one three eight prohibits the
use of someone's sexual and
gender identity as a deaf
Defense for violence well G. B.
B. T. ng because community has
historically been subject to not
only prejudice harassment also
violence often in many times has
led to death we have been
criminalizing ostracized for
hundreds of years and to this
day we are often that that we
discussed in competitive with me
we just simply existing as a
speaker today my very own civil
and human donor bodies love the
person I choose to love is
barely recognize we need to
ensure that every new Mexican is
protected equally under the law
and that there is no loopholes
that for people to live by the
upon someone just because of the
way they express themselves all
over the country trans people of
color disproportionately
affected with violence sexual
assault and death the fact that
my sexual expression identity
could be used as a defense in
court is offensive and shows the
prejudice and double standards
of the law when it comes to
marginalized communities
especially who only.
You.
Perhaps Mr chair Mister vice
chair by can.
I'll go ahead and do my public
comment.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Bennett
power I'm the chief public
defender of the law offices of
the public defender.
The public defender's office of
course is committed to making
sure that legitimate defenses to
criminal charges remain
We've looked over this bill and
understand and support the
efforts by by the sponsors to
prohibit fictional defenses are
ones which are designed to
appeal to discriminatory motives
rather than to reason by a judge
or jury
we still have some concerns
about a few things in this bill
but of we are committed to
working with the Center condylar
yet on this on some possible re
wording and we support passing
this through this committee and
working with the senator if
there is if we have continuing
concerns on the language to
working with the sponsors are.
In the next few days before it
gets to Senate Judiciary.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr.
Okay somebody will Marshall
Martinez has been contacting me
trying to get on.
Can you send give him it
Senator Kim somebody send him.
The.
The zoom link so you can get on
the public comment.
He wants to speak on this bill.
Mr Jones.
We'll take your public comment
now.
Jones I have you have with the
hand of would you like to make a
public comment now.
Yes good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is parents also with a still you
Mexico we support this bill
because I'm as Fernando Trujillo
mentioned now we we don't
believe is just that someone's
sexual expression can be used as
a court often violence are
listed upon them so thank you so
much for and we asked the
committee supports legislation
and I apologize it allows to
make a comment but I see there's
a waste of thank you for the
opportunity thank you Sir.
And.
Marshall the Martinez Maria
Marshall Martinez was able to
get on.
Senator now okay great.
Thank you.
Go ahead with your comment.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for the
patients so let me get on here
my name is Marshall Martinez I'm
the executive director of
quality New Mexico the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights and advocacy
organization.
Also be did you people have been
on a long journey toward
liberation in this country we
need to people have been victims
we have been resilient survivors
of violence throughout the
course of modern history from
the hate crimes we suffer
significantly higher rates than
are non LGBTQ appears to the
police station violence we
suffered throughout the fifties
sixties and into the seventies
the age of the Stonewall riots
where modern fight for
liberation began.
In New Mexico we have taken
strong stands to support our
queer and trans community
including strong hate crimes
legislation.
And nondiscrimination bills.
Having a so called panic defense
is a critical step in continuing
this effort to achieve
liberation for queer and trans
New Mexicans well trans women of
color specially continue to
experience outrageous violence
murder it is appalling that we
would continue to allow the
alleged perpetrator of violence
to defend themselves by claiming
that they panicked because of
the sexual orientation or gender
identity of the victim in
quality New Mexico and LGBTQ
people across the state of New
Mexico strongly urge this
committee to pass this
legislation so we can make it
abundantly clear to our clear
entrance of Lang's from corner
to corner of our beautiful state
that we loved and accepted and
recognized the humanity of all
of the members of our community
and we will not stand by and
allow further violence against
them thank you again for the
time to speak and thank you Mr
chairman for making sure I can
get into this meeting.
Thank you Marshall.
Trevor is there anybody is
signed up to speak against the
bill.
Anybody else in the audience
wants to speak against her for
this bill.
Bill Jordan is trying to be
recognized.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee of Bill Jordan
with the Mexico Boyce's for
Children I'll be brief not to be
repetitive I want to thank
senators Candelaria and our meal
for bringing this today because
this defense implies a
discriminatory intent we just
believe it should not be allowed
in the courts and therefore urge
your support thank you.
Thank you.
Okay let's go to the members of
the committee that.
is there anybody with a question
or comment.
I notice in the FIR something
that I wanted to bring up
Senators.
The bill user let's see.
according to the office of the
district attorney's.
The attorney general's office in
noted is a definition of
romantically propositioned and
non violent or non threatening
manner.
Could be considered a.
Because the statutes are
strictly construed in favor of
the defendant.
Definition of the terms would be
helpful have you given thought
to that Senator Candelaria did
you see that if I or in common
the of our yes Mr Chairman
respectfully disagree with the
attorney general's office
statutes become unconstitutional
you bag when there are two or
more reasonable interpretations
of the language that cannot be
reconciled
you know it is not
unconstitutionally vague when
statutes such as these set forth
broad categories of conduct that
may constitute the elements of
the defense of the crime and so
I I I I respect I appreciate
them raising the issues
regarding the rule of Leedey are
legally as or for academic
pronounced it but it's essential
that they're talking about I
just don't think it is implies
here.
Okay.
We'll go to Senator Gatos in
senators to fax.
Chairman and senator thank you
for the discussion.
But the chairman was going to go
to my question and it's also
showing that of the office
district attorney had some
conflicts with the evidence the
rules of evidence evidence in
center Collett Colin that it
have you visit with them on on
those conflicts.
Thank you.
Mr chairman I did not have not
have been in answer to Senator
Gallegos is question I have not
had a direct conversation with
the a GA about that particular
observation the F. I. R. I will
say I did code review the
evidentiary rules that they're
referring to again sort of just
respectfully disagree that we
have a real issue here that said
as sort of the case with the
public defender's my office door
is open on this bill I want
everyone to hear that so if
there is clarifying language in
any stakeholder would like in
the bill in a previous than.
We'll talk about it.
That.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator I guess it goes to
my my next question because you
know I I'm I'm just wondering if
if you visit with anyone on
spring court because I would
hate to have to go to.
A a court hearing find out if
this your
Nolan void and I just wondered
if you have any comments from
the Supreme Court state New
Mexico so Mr and you know that
way is the.
Yes there's I mean at the a
smart lawyer and a motivated
litigation is going to.
Find grounds to challenge a law
if they want to challenge all
and I think you know our task is
to from.
Senator.
Your your broadband or year
whatever.
We're losing your connections.
Okay I'm back and.
R. A..
Sorry Senator Gallegos on your
question I have not specifically
have that discussion with the
Supreme Court but what I will
say is it any smart lawyer and
motivated plaintiff is going to
challenge the law if they want I
think our obligation is to
identify these potential issues
in the law have the discussion
as we are right now and and
craft the best statute that we
can I feel confident that in
this bill there is not an
constitutional vagueness or
unconstitutional or otherwise
contrary provision to the rules
of evidence like I said I look
forward to if if folks have
language that they think could
articulate and that need to go
into the bill as amendments
either from the AOC or AODA I'm
more than happy to consider
those amendments.
Mr Chairman Senator at thank you
for that and I'm glad that
you're open to that goes back to
Mr Bauer talking about him being
a proponent on the bill
hopefully you still be working
on the bill that's that's my
question I'll have to
Less regressive discussion
I would hope this would be all
those entities would be
Brought forth in in the
discussion had for clarity cause
us I currently I think I'll be
voting no on it but I'd like to
be able to vote yes on the
Senate floor if all those
questions rancher Joel with that
I think you nailed.
Thank you senator was Senator
Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair I do support
of the bill and
if there are ways to improve the
bill
with language that the office
will would like I see no problem
with doing that to make it
stronger and when the time comes
I will be happy to make the
motion thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator.
Else.
On the committee was questions
or comments.
Seeing none senators actually
were ready for your motion Mr
chairman well thank you past on
Senate bill two thirteen I
second.
Any other discussion
Senator is that we take to heart
the the comments made by the
Senator is a license to fed ex
those issues raised in the FIR
will definitely get raising
Judiciary.
And you can wait for the
importance to come to you.
Or you can take a more proactive
position and and reach out to
them to find out what the
problems are otherwise you could
you could
have some difficulty in the next
hearing.
But with that we'll go for a
vote to the secretary will call
the roll.
I'm bill to thirteen Senator
gargoyles.
No matter what I'd like to
explain my vote.
angle.
Yes.
It's.
Okay.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Senator Schmedes he's on I
believe I didn't hear it
Senator.
Yes.
How do you vote Senator.
You are muted.
Senator Schmedes.
Yes.
I think Senator and data but
words I think you did vote yes a
couple times I thought I heard
into I just was hoping for some
confirmation.
Let's listen is a test and then
if you because that's what I
heard and.
Good lesson is the the vote and
said any.
Third is the piano yes so
senators congradulations German
do pass from this committee and
good looking Judiciary but I'm I
would reach out to the opponents
rather than wait for them to
reach out to you thank you care
can I explain my vote.
Yes yes I'm sorry to Senator we
confuse our Senator Gallegos had
just to explain his phone.
Not a problem Mr I just want to
make clear that I just have the
conflicts that I'm reading on
the F. I. R. I would prefer that
we go ahead and resolve them and
committee so that way it be a
clean bill going up and I
understand that that's really
hard to do now I do expect to do
sherry to taking a stronger look
at those issues but what that I
just want to be able to explain
that thank you Mr thank you
senator Davis.
Senator Candelaria will move to
your other bill now thank thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee and thank you to
senator Hotmail and I think
that's maybe that's his first
bill through this committee C.
as in and sponsor so we always
want to celebrate so Mr chairman
members of the committee and now
present for your consideration
Senate bill two sixteen Senate
Bill to sixteen again does
something very simple but very
profound.
it takes the maximum penalty
that may be assessed for the
crime of the simple possession
of a controlled substance and a
controlled substance from being
a fourth degree felony to being
a misdemeanor.
As documented in the
FY are.
Treating addiction and substance
use disorder as a moral failing
that should be selling items not
only has resulted in.
The mass incarceration of
persons of color in our state
and across the country.
Yes
The school.
Comes at a significant cost to
the state bye estimates from LFC
we spend nearly ten million
dollars a year.
Incarcerating persons in state
prisons when their highest
charge for which they are
incarcerated is a fourth degree
felony for simple possession.
If this legislation is enacted
prosecutors district attorneys
will still have the discretion
to charge individuals who
possess very large amounts of a
controlled substance or in
possession of a amount of
controlled substance in
conjunction with you know scale
baggies a list of clients.
Quality the session with intent
to distribute once installation
does is it targets narrowly
targets the penalty that we just
ask when someone simply has an
amount of.
A controlled substance there's
no indication that individual
wishes to sell that to anyone
transfer it's anybody else's for
their personal use on the
legislation I'm still treats
that behavior as a criminal act
a misdemeanor under our law is
punishable by up to one year in
jail and the imposition of up to
a thousand dollar fine so there
is still a criminal
Penalty imposed by making this a
misdemeanor Mr Chairman number
one reduce the cost and we
reduce the workload on both the
public defender's the dust and
the courts number two I believe
this is a more appropriate
criminal charge for this crime
if we are going to continue to
say that addiction should be
charged as a criminal act at all
I believe it should be a
misdemeanor let this court know
that other misdemeanors under
our law include.
Battery that doesn't result in
severe bodily harm or death but
you can still basically kicked
the crap out of somebody as long
as you don't put them near the
point of death or they haven't
had to have something amputated
that's still a misdemeanor so
this is the same level of
criminal culpability that we
impose upon pardon the term
garden variety acts of violence
those acts of violence don't
include a deadly weapon or
result in great bodily harm or
death on as noted in the FY are
Mr Chairman data from our own
LFC
data quoted in the FIR and data
from across the country just
confirm for us as policy makers
over many years that increasing
the criminal penalties on
addiction on simple possession
does nothing just reduce
recidivism it does nothing to
improve public safety all it
does is guarantee that
predominantly low income
predominantly persons of color
who are convicted of these
crimes become felons they become
subject to the civil death that
accompanies a felony conviction
in our society and they become
ensnared in the jaws of the
criminal justice system for
which they have little hope of
escape so Mr chairman for those
reasons and all the other
reasons cited in the analysis I
respectfully ask your support on
Senate bill two sixteen.
Senator thank you we have a
number of people who signed up
to speak in support of this bill
and we'll start with the Kim
Chavez Cook from the office of
the public defender.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and we do stand
in strong support of this
legislation I don't know if I
can say it any better than the
sponsor just did but the
collateral consequences of a
felony for what is a public
health issue of substance misuse
or substance use disorder it is
wasteful of taxpayer dollars and
not only does not help address
the underlying root causes of
substance use but actually can
make people more dangerous it
can increase recidivism for
someone who went into the system
with a substance use issue they
could come out worse than they
were when they went in and while
I do think that this is a
critical piece of addressing the
issues that of course that would
need to be accompanied in the
long run with it increased
access to treatment so I want to
give a plug for that as well but
I'm very grateful to the senator
for bringing forward this
legislation the amount of time
that people spend in prison for
addiction is really shameful and
I think it is wonderful that
this body is looking at a way to
address the issues without
incarceration thank you and
please vote to support this
bill.
Thank you.
The next is Emily Kaltenbach the
drug policy alliance.
Right here number at the end of
life.
Four four we are on.
For many years I just want to
note that this is a policy that
we it is not necessary cutting
it back over nineteen states are
ready at your.
It's hard from a felony to a
misdemeanor or never felt nice
to begin with our in our
neighbor home managed to pass
this measure through a ballot
initiative Katie
With your support.
Also working against the.
All.
you can further out than this
measure with it so it's a
realistic approach for New
Mexico it stops the verbal war
we know we're struggling with
addiction in our families and
our communities our state we're
also struggling with
as mentioned the consequences of
so when I say
that had huge consequences for
families four years after the
initial so we urge the committee
to support.
Thank you Emily.
Fernando Trujillo of the gold
futures.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is of that
number who's your and I'm all
policy associate with bold
features and we stand in support
of legislation that would help
reduce for the correlation of
substance use so we stand in
support of SB two sixteen I'm
not enough value to someone's
record would help reduce
barriers that are imposed by
society and I collateral
consequences of having a felony
on your record as a form of the
incarcerated individuals
presented will this substance
and the reasonable with
substance misuse disorder I
believe that this bill would
help work towards the direction
of helping reduce the for the
criminalization of substance use
which should be a health issue
not a criminal legal issue.
I will miss it is have only
heightened the community in
which I grew up in which is just
one life hi Streeting and for
the committee the shin does not
highlighted that since you well
only for the stigmatizes
substance use or misuse at all
requests has only helped
contribute to my substance
misuse even if I was
incarcerated and low level drug
offenses have only helped a mass
incarceration and have been used
as animal in the wild drugs
which has devastated communities
of color and New Mexico this
kind of could penalize ation of
possession of substances has not
only contributed to for the
sting led by the ship also to
the death of countless people
due to overdoses because of
incarceration beach Lorena
presents tolerance and not being
able to handle the amount that
the use of hundred these are by
misjudging the amount that they
use so we need to stand in
support of SB two sixteen thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
The next is our from the office
of the public defender.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Ben about
our and the chief public
defender I'll focus on a couple
things that people haven't
talked about I hope and when we
just thank the sponsor and and
tell the committee that I think
this bill and a change that
could bring about is both
profound and this I think that
the need for it of the war on
drugs has really been a failure
in terms of reducing of
problematic drug use but it has
been successful unfortunately
encouraging a pattern of
policing and prosecution which
really focuses in the New on
arresting and charging people
who often have simply.
Drugs that are illegal in their
possession and what I can tell
you someone who has defended
cases like this in many
districts around the state is
that they often start with
somebody was walking down the
street or driving down the
street or riding a bike and is
stopped for perhaps traffic
offense or something minor even
if it's not legally pre textual
a stop for for instance speeding
can turn into a police officer
questioning and then searching
someone.
With the purpose of finding of
drugs like this often small
amounts even sometimes so small
that it's merely lining a back
or or or something else.
And so I I think many of you
would be shocked by how people
can be brought into the system.
The damage that's done in the
costs the system isn't just
reflected in department
corrections budget but most of
these people really go in and
out of county jails over and
over have been told open laws do
apply and so somebody is
convicted at some point and then
arrested again they are looking
at mandatory incarceration this
often at that point in prison
and
in many districts in many just
records are this kind of fourth
degree drug possession is the
highest charge in one quarter to
even the thoroughness of the
felony cases so imagine the
savings that we could have
within the court system if these
were misdemeanors and that we
can take and put into treatment
Lastly I just want to say that
while there are some good.
Pre prosecution diversion
programs that a couple district
attorney's offices around the
state have that often comes into
play after the rest and after
the person part of the criminal
justice system so they don't
address the kind of concern that
this bill would do and there are
many places in in the state that
don't have functional pre
prosecution diversion programs
so for all those reasons I I
would ask you very strongly to
support to this kind of
fundamental yet this reform to
the drug laws of the state of
New Mexico thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr.
And then finally speaking is for
that we have Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam I'm sorry I just
switched up committees I
apologize Mister chairman
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of Senate bill two
sixteen we identified this exact
measure as a priority for our
legislative session of twenty
twenty one we think that this
strikes all of the right balance
we encourage you to support we
for the last several years as
far as I've been involved we
have been advocating before this
body for positive criminal
justice reform and by addressing
substance use in this manner
takes that step that necessary
step that we all need and so I
encourage you to support I also
wanted to just briefly remind
members Mr chairman and
committee that we have a broad
base of experts in the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association if you ever have any
questions about the
technicalities please reach out
to us if I can't answer your
question I will find somebody
who can and we want to be a
partner in this collaborative
effort thank you again for the
time thank you to the sponsor
and advocate.
Thank you.
The.
Jones has his handout Mr Jones.
Thanks again chair members of
the committee my name is
Barron's also with the ACLU of
New Mexico and.
Lactis thanks for bringing in
this this is groundbreaking
legislation that has so many
folks have much more eloquently
and I have state will make it
cemex have a tremendous impact
on our communities most harmed
by the war on drugs and I would
like to add that we think about
how this legislation when it
becomes law.
The state all will affect
individuals we should also think
about the positive impact would
have on families.
We incarcerate one individual
when cars right right we are in
fact incarcerated whole families
and New Mexico I'm not sure but
when it comes to that was at
risk assessment and and yes the
mission of I can't mention it
sort of say it but adverse risks
and this show childhood at first
risk factors and that's all New
Mexico ranks high on that list
this all because we are hyper
punitive measures black people
for simple possession and thank
you so much in our walls or
slaps.
Thank you Mr Jones then we'll go
to the committee.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for.
Bring forth the such a common
sense long overdue piece of
legislation.
according to the FIR New Mexico
is incarcerated people for drug
crimes at a higher rate the
national average that's kind of
discouraging and disappointing
so two quick questions to turn
into related why it takes so
long to access your common
sense.
Piece of legislation and.
Was so Senator legislation
tried.
to get an act in the past and if
not what was a problem.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
know at there's a there's an old
saying in the legislature right
there's no new ideas we just got
to remember when it was last
done the Harry Truman also said
something like that you know
this I went back and looked a
bit at the history of this of
the of the statute as it
pertains to the felony
To the felony portion of this
that they have the the that that
the criminal penalties a felony
and you know over the years
there have in fact been multiple
attempts to re classify that
down to a misdemeanor
I think that the reason it's
it's it's taken so long to to
really to really get to this
place.
Is is really alluded to in the
FIR is there's been such a
tremendous weight place behind
the idea that addiction as a
moral failing that just needs to
be you know punished with the
state's full force.
Wall that's been a very powerful
and very dominating narrative in
in politics since the early
nineteen.
And you know it's it's sort of
like turning the Titanic you
know it doesn't turn on a dime
and so hopefully now Mr chairman
we have the body of evidence to
clearly demonstrate that making
felons out of our family members
who are addicted and suffer from
addiction is not smart public
policy quite the opposite is is
terrible our public policy it is
terrible public safety policy.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator for your response thank
you.
Thank you Sir Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
I'm Senators.
And I'm you know for bringing
forth this overdue legislation
Something that I thought of
right away
And Senator Candelaria
especially I don't have the
legal background the to do
obviously I think would be
really important for this
legislation to have that's not
there already.
Is that once it passes and I
really hope it does that does
currently serving for like
charges
our.
Our.
Released I'm and I don't have
the right terminology for that
but could you comment would with
those currently serving for
these light charges serving time
be released and with their their
criminal records be modified
thank you.
Mr Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you Senator
McKenna that's that's a it's
very astute legal question quite
frankly
The the the technical term that
you would typically have to pay
a lawyer about three hundred
dollars an hour for a given to
you for free.
The the the the technical term
is basically a modification to
sentence and SO in the in the
context of a person is currently
serving a sentence the
legislature certainly can
direct that the courts for any
particular case that involved
let's say a conviction of simple
possession is a felony we could
certainly directed courts to
recall all of those sentences to
then re sentence them
appropriately under about as a
misdemeanor if appropriate
that is not included in this
bill and I think as this goes on
I'm glad we're talking about it
I initially thought about
including at maybe I've been
around here a little too much
that even I'm getting a little
too conservative
but but I think would be a
friendly amendment and so I'd be
happy to have that discussion
for individuals that have
already completed their sentence
the there are two issues that
are implicated one is a pardon
right which restores an
individual to full rights so the
second amendment right to bear
arms for example
and then expungement which which
basically removes the record of
the offense conviction what have
you from public access right
expungement alone does not
restore somebody to full
constitutional rights.
so you need both if you want to
achieve true I think you know
one hundred eighty three sixty
degree justice and so the
legislature could certainly
with regards to expunge Mets
could certainly provide for the
automatic expungement of any
records it so chooses I will
tell you as as a practitioner
who does represent individuals
in expungement right now under
the existing expungement law
the most frequent charge that I
have people coming to me paying
money to have removed is a
fourth degree felony for simple
possession either a charge or
conviction that is the highest
thing that has made them a felon
for twenty or thirty years and
so I think automatic expungement
expungement makes a lot of sense
and again I didn't included
because I was there hang on just
being conservative in the scope
of the bill
I know it's probably some people
who think it you know I think
it's hilarious that me saying
I'm conservative but I am on
some things frustrated enough
members of our own pockets
but in terms of pardoning
partnering is where the money's
get watery there's sort of an
open question of whether or not
the legislature can border not
dogs order a governor took part
in some.
Right so I certainly think in
answer to your question with
respect to sentencing and
expungement we could certainly
either do another bill or
incorporate elements into this
bill that would provide for
automatic sentence re education
and automatic expungement I'm
sort of undecided of whether or
not we can order the governor
departed if I was governor I
would pardon all of the full
drug offenses for suspension day
one in office but that is
ultimately a political decision
but our constitution vests
pretty exclusively with the
chief executive so I hope I give
you a sense of that and I will
say Mr chairman I was remiss at
the beginning offer not
mentioning that Senator how to
meal is also the and to sponsor
on this bill we've not updated
the the the system I don't think
yet but I would really want to
thank him for supporting this
and I don't know if he's on
still on Mr Chairman loyal to
him I apologize senator on me
up.
Senator do you want to add
anything there's no need to
apologise Senator thank you Mr
chairman the one thing I just
wanted to reiterate is how this
affects communities of color and
how we can definitely with this
passage of the bill help
communities of color move from
this this would also lower the
penalties for drug possession
which would likely decrease the
population of New Mexicos
presents and reduce long term
costs to the general fund and so
that's one major impact in
addition to the benefits of of
communities of color who have
like Senator Candelaria said
found themselves on the wrong
side of allow for small amounts
that they possessed and so thank
you again Senator Candelaria for
including me in this bill and
thank you to you you Mr chairman
and the committee for listening
thank you.
Thank you senator senator
McKinney you still have the
floor.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senators
Yeah and how to meal.
Thank you for explaining that to
us Senator Candelaria I just
although and if you if you could
amended a bill like that to
include.
those who are currently serving
those like charges I once this.
Once this bill passes which I'm
really optimistic it will that
they get to reassemble their
lives just like those
charged in the future like wise
I won't have to experience what
many of our
Bill New Mexicans and others are
going through in our.
In our prisons
so I just say Bravo if you can
do that I'm I'm all for it thank
you sirs thank you for raising
the issue Senator I I will reach
out to I'd love to include you
in the office.
Thank you senator I think I just
realize we lost our quorum.
We only have four voting members
here at the moment.
Thanks Senator six of the of the
State.
Mr Chairman.
Is no we need Senator Sedillo
Lopez or Senator one of the
Republicans to join us otherwise
we don't have a quorum.
So we.
Senator guy a goes got knocked
off again he's still trying to
get back on.
Let's wait just a few minutes.
You madam so we can get him back
on.
We can take a vote on this
otherwise as a Senate committee
we can debate and discuss it and
ask questions.
We will be able to vote.
It is Senator Sedillo Lopez
presenting in building
Judiciary.
sent Mr Chairman odd she
indicated to me that she was
presenting she said for me to
texture of need to come back I
center so I'm whole crossing my
fingers good thank you senator.
I'm also happy to stay on the
line Mr chairman for awhile if
you want to move on to other
Canadian business and then if
the one once the corners
reestablished you know I I I I'm
fine staying in waiting so you
want to move on other business
and come back I want to keep all
of the committee's time either
will we can do this we can get a
motion and a second okay and
then as soon as we have a quorum
we can act on on that motion and
second so do we have such a
creature before us R. Murrow a
new path.
It's been moved and seconded
Senate bill two sixteen received
do pass and will come back to
you when we have a quorum
Senator Candelaria and senator
you thank you for waiting thank
you I will be in the summer I'm
enjoying the rest of your
committee hearing it's like old
times Mr chairman.
Good to have you have okay we'll
we'll go now to Senate bill two
fifteen.
The senator about incomes are
less increase reimbursement in
the aging network.
And welcome Senator Gonzales
thank you thank you Mr chairman
of thank you.
With so Senate Bill Bill to
fifteen of Mr chairman members
so this is a request a five
point two million up
appropriation to increase
provider reimbursement of the
eighteen network.
The number of meals provided to
seniors during the COVID
nineteen has increased by more
than thirty percent.
The non metro will triple play
which administers the aging
service throughout the Mexico
except for Bernalillo county and
tribal lands.
As spend of fifty five percent
of its FY twenty one budget as
of December thirty first two
thousand twenty almost all of
these funding has been spent to
provide home delivery and grab
and go meals.
Mr chairman members so our high
expectation right is occurring
now despite having more than
fifty five million in additional
funding FY twenty one.
This includes so the increase of
more than one billion in state
funds and nearly four million
from the cares Act and the F. S.
C. R. A. the cares Act in the
yeah C. R. A. funding will not
recur in the future years.
Well the non metro triple a has
registered more than six
thousand you consumers for meals
since March of twenty twenty.
Non metro triple a does not
expect the additional demand for
meals and funding to return to
normal in FY twenty two in fact
we believe that the need for
additional funding will be
greater because of the cares Act
and also with the FAM C. R. A.
funding will be depleted and
other services such in home
service it is a cool fitness
transportation will return S.
public health.
Restriction are listed currently
funding for this service the
speed bag worded and cover the
increased demand for meals
during the COVID nineteen.
The eighteen program as already
significantly.
Under funded before COVID
nineteen and underscores the
fact that they five point two
million appropriation is
justified regardless of COVID
nineteen.
Well Mister chairman of we have
a little more information on
this but I also have some expert
witnesses that would like to say
a few comments we have well
Money co beta who is so the
director of north central
economic development in the I
believe we also have Dr Pauline
riddle me.
That are also as an expert
witness and with that I will be
able to them.
Thank you senator welcome.
This is a it's good to see you
again.
What we.
Go ahead with your your
testimony to.
Afternoon Mister chairman good
to see you good to see all the
members of the committee I'm
Monica based on the executive
director of the north central
New Mexico economic development
district where the council of
governments for the north
central part of the state and
also with me is crystal Sanchez
who is the director of the non
metro trip away so I'm just
going to give a little bit of
that a context for the bill and
and then just go into some of
the points that Senator Gonzales
already made so basically the
triple A.'s area agencies on
aging are creations of the
federal older Americans act and
the federal jury Americans act
is the legislation at the
federal level that.
Funds and provides what we call
aging services those include
nutrition Sliq nutrition
nutritional services like if you
get a meal at your senior center
for you have delivered to your
house that includes in home
services transportation for
shopping or medical appointments
case management adult daycare
all of that whole range of
services is under the older
Americans act and the federal
government to give each state
dollars every year to provide
these services those that
funding goes to the aging long
term Services Department and
every state in our state very
generously matches those funds
with state dollars then the
aging and long term the state
agency in our case aging long
term service contracts with the
trouble As like us and then we
get the money out to the
providers the people that
actually do the work.
The monitor those funds we make
sure services are being provided
properly we assess those
programs and we provide them
technical assistance so not
triple a is the largest triple a
in the state and that we cover
thirty two of the counties in
New Mexico metro triple a is
Bernalillo county and the city
of Albuquerque and then the I
triple a is the Indian triple a
that covers the tribal program
so there's basically three
trouble is in the state with non
metro triple a we have fifty
five providers some of those
providers operate more than one
senior center sometimes you know
I two nine senior centers and so
we have a very large program
that covers the entire state I'm
last year we came to you and we
requested a four million dollar
increase and that was really
because no one had seen an
increase since two thousand
sixteen the federal dollars had
been declining the state to cut
funds by five point five percent
in two thousand seventeen and
the costs for meals and labor
we're going up and we were
having some of our providers
saying we don't know if we can
stay in this business we don't
if we can afford to stay in this
business of the legislator
January generously awarded one
point four million dollars in
appropriations so that was very
helpful but as you know the
world has changed this year
dramatically and no population
more than the seniors of our
state have felt the impact of
this change so in March all of
our providers were asked to
convert all of their meals to
either grab and go and or home
delivered meals they did this
very successfully but when that
happened we saw a huge increase
in the demand for meals across
the aging network non metro
alone we have six thousand new
consumers of meals just in our
in our program in our state do I
providers I'm.
We're also serving meals to
children and older adults that
are younger than sixty these are
two new populations of the
senior centers were not serving
before COVID nineteen now
fortunately this year in fiscal
year twenty one we have the
resources to cover this we did
receive that additional funding
from the legislature non metro
triple a just speaking for our
agency we received four million
and cares Act and FCRA funds
that's the families first Corona
virus relief act but that
funding expires and goes away
and from what we're seeing right
now we think it's going to be
fully expended by June thirtieth
that means that we really start
fiscal year twenty twenty two
just with the non metric trouble
a would like a four million
dollar shortfall we still have
all these people signed up for
meals we still have to feed them
and as the public public health
order starts to open up the
providers are also going to have
to start providing in home
services transportation some of
the programs that currently they
are either not providing or
they're transferring those funds
over two meals so I'm and on top
of that we have a growing senior
population we feel that this at
five point two million really
just puts us into position for
where we need to be to fund the
aging that we're going forward
and it would be divided up among
the different PSAs by the aging
and long term Services
Department crystal do you have
any is there anything I missed.
No I think you've heard it all
Monica I do want to reiterate
though that we are currently
serving in population
which has been shut it accounts
for a portion of that meal
increase we are serving children
now as well as seniors under
sixty and then the children are
usually picking up meals with
grandparents so their
grandparents raising
grandchildren or those who have
taken on their grandchildren now
during the pandemic and he at
home learning.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So have on Dr Pauline when
Dhoni.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
like to say that all
Representative Gonzalez was very
generous in saying that I'm an
expert witness I am a volunteer
with the A. R. P. and your
expert witness was a beta and
was passionate certainly covered
everything that needs to be
covered on this bill what I
would like to say Mr chairman
that
as a volunteer to A. R. P. A. R.
P. as in high support of two
fifteen and would urge you to
vote yes on this bill.
Thank you thank you.
With that Mr chairman will stand
for questions.
Before we we go to the
public wants to speak.
I did have a request from the
secretary of aging and long term
services.
And we're trying to get a link
to her.
Senator senators so we'll we'll
we'll give her a chance to speak
in just a second.
Secretary Trina from lotus.
Mr Chairman then.
Continue all she gets on yes it
is a moral good thank you I just
wanted to say that this mirrors
this this five point two million
dollar request mirrors a request
that the aging Department is
making for additional budget for
the aging network they are
requesting an additional six
million and five point two of
that is for the aging network so
just to practice the secretary's
comments.
The secretary is with us now so
madam secretary would you want
to say about this bill well
first and thank you Mr chair for
giving me access to do this I
know I didn't do it the right
way or timely so my apologies so
what I would like to stay in
this is that it's it's so true
that COVID has devastated and
impacted our senior populations
not only in the long term care
facility at as you know in the
community itself
in long term service we talk
about our aging at work we also
talk about
articulate that that Mr beta is
talking about so it's a whole
network that we're working with
through this time we didn't
exactly know how much to ask for
terms of an increase because we
still continue to see increases
and people who qualify for.
Or for grabbing.
And so it's been hard to gauge
what to ask for in the future
but we believe that between five
and six million dollars is where
we need to go we are asking for
money in our budget as well
In order to help cover the also
but the great thing about the
pandemic if there is anything is
that it has alerted people to
the services we provide and
people are enrolling and what we
also know is by twenty thirty we
will have hi is your populations
sixty and over in the country
and so we're going to see these
numbers rice regardless and we
and then this doesn't take into
account our other programs like
the in home services at all day
care which are much are not okay
now because of COVID so you know
you you see our desperate need
here you know we we have our our
advocating for you know money to
be put in restored in our budget
and then we we are providing
technical assistance and silent
support for this bill as well.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you
is there anyone else in the
public who wanted to speak on
this bill and we've gone through
our list of.
People who requested in advance.
Go and Senator Sedillo this is
just coming back into the room
so we will have our quorum
restored.
So let's go to the committee
then.
anybody in the committee with
the question I have one to see a
started.
Yes it would be for the
secretary or for Monica Mehta.
Did any of the.
Any of the discussion of this
massive new.
Relief bill into my in
administration is proposing does
that include money for these
services.
You know I think that's a great
question Mr chair members of the
committee we will find out more
details you know we were able to
get dollars for care as Act
funding that we did utilized I
assume that they'll be more in
here but the state where aging
and long term services yes is
that these numbers are going to
continue to grow even after the
federal funding runs out and
that's really our dilemma
knowing that we probably have
over twenty percent population
just here in New Mexico
individuals sixty and older who
are at or below the poverty line
and so our numbers are going to
continue to increase long after
we don't have we long long after
federal funds run out.
Mr Chairman I have not seen in
the bill I will double check and
I didn't see that there was
anything for the this population
the FCRA and the cares Act money
as you know the federal
legislation was passed before
the end of the year gave an
extension to to December thirty
first the contracts with
providers right now or through
September thirtieth but the way
we're seeing them drive down the
funds and they're doing it on
expense basis so as they
expended money they request
reimbursement we don't expect
very much of that money to be
left after June thirtieth if if
any so we're treating it kind of
like it's part of the fiscal
year budget at this point.
Thank you.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Thank you senator for bringing
forth this bill is just one.
I'm sponsoring a bill to.
Appropriate five million dollars
to the food banks throughout New
Mexico
They took away his their food
from the I a.
Regional of food banks included
in Roadrunner.
Mr chairman I believe some
individual programs under that
work with the triple A.'s may
access some of the food banks
but it's not through our program
directly
Secretary crystal do you have
anything to add.
So Mr Mr chair as senator Tom
and I don't believe in terms of
purchasing food or gaining
access to food that is happening
through the food banks we have
utilized them for food boxes and
we do refer and work with
local food banks to have food
pantries either in senior
centers or.
Or directly go in and to get
additional supplemental
groceries but that is not not
covering hot meals and the and
the grab and go meals that we do
Sir.
Okay well thank you Mr chair
thank you Secretary for your
response thank you for.
Any other discussion from the
committee.
What will the committee.
so move.
Senator Tallman moves into just.
On Senate bill to fifteen
seconds with the second
time Senator Stefanics.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
I'm.
In.
There was.
Ingle.
Yes.
So.
The deal okay.
Yes I will.
While a state only.
I'm hearing something Senator
ordinary.
Either I thought I heard a
voice.
Go ahead.
Did you hear me.
As part
of this bill.
Yes thank you.
takes place.
With regard to.
Go ahead please Sir Thomas.
Yes.
In a.
Yes.
She just got a way to Senator
Sedillo this well she's here.
We'll go ahead and take us
Senate bill to the vote on
Senate bill two sixteen senses
Senator Sedillo Lopez we.
We had comments we had a.
The committee discussion we had
lost our quorum so we're going
to go ahead and vote on Senate
bill two sixteen Senator
Candelaria and senator meals
bill to.
Eliminate all to eliminate
felony.
Conditions for positional
position of controlled
substances.
Reducing it to a misdemeanor
charges.
So.
Do you have any questions on
that bill Senator Sedillo Lopez.
No I did not.
We have a motion from from home
there's the drugs made the
motion our top and seconded okay
well let's take a look on Senate
bill two sixteen.
Senator
Ingle.
Gas regulate this position on
the message
waste resulting from the files
yes I was.
Okay.
Yes.
Right now.
Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes thirteen you know yes.
Legislation centers you have a
new passes well thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
So if you had a new passes well
so thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman we
appreciate
supporting our field.
Thank you all of the X. through
in this is madam secretary and
money crystal and everybody
thank you so much Dr Antoni
thank you.
okay moving right along.
Can you let Senator Lopez snow
that we're ready for.
We have your Teledesic
definition bill.
Okay well let's let's do that
really I think that'll be fairly
fast listen to Senate bill two
hundred and Senator Tallman.
Can you share this meeting
related reason Senate bill two
hundred and I think we have a
committee so does everybody did
everybody get to we don't have
the committee so it's an
amendment we have an amendment.
Can you the amendment for us to
refer to ensure.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
This is Senate bill two hundred.
And Mr chairman and committee
members followed well he's
putting up the amendment a
explained to bills about.
This is a bill that we passed.
Last year.
Maybe it was two years ago and
when you're having fun and just
flies by.
but it was vetoed after you pass
both houses and it was vetoed
because of the some concern over
working.
We we dealt with the wording.
In the original bill.
But we we wanted to make sure
and so we have the the current
amendment before you.
And.
I'm not sure what Senator is if
I might help walk through the
amendment that would be really
good if you could because if I'm
having a hard time even reading
it.
The only changes are right in
the title we add another
activity that this bill is that
are going to clarify that.
Dentistry is extended to not
only dentist for to their hi
Janice and to dental services
practicing and right at the end
on the next page of the end of
the next page you'll see the
only other change the amendment
accomplishes I'm Trevor if you
could take us to the end of this
amendment.
Right at the end it is just to
the fact it's another section of
the dental practice act about it
is about disciplinary
proceedings and it says that
this tele dentistry is also
subject to disciplinary
proceedings under the uniform
licensing act the dental board
so it's just a very simple
amendment to be inclusive that
this tele dentistry is part of
the overall activity.
So with that Mr Chairman will
will stand for questions on the
amendment.
Okay or or comments the I do
have an extra witness with me
and and
She might want to comment on
this or you may want to wait
until we.
The delay here until we take
action on the on the bill itself
and that expert witnesses Mr L.
park.
This agency.
Mr Chairman I'm here good good
afternoon Sir.
It I'll defer to you chairman or
teens and the building did you
want to say.
Mr chairman and and al did you
want to say anything more about
this bill I mean about this
amendment.
Mr chairman if I might just say
briefly because the moment
really is down the bill I just
want to take an opportunity to
to think doctor script small
from the dental association
Senator Ortiz Pena was correct
with this is our third year
working on this piece of
legislation
on the real goal of the
legislation and really what this
amendment does is incorporate
the language from our very
progressive forward thinking
telehealth act in incorporated
into the dental Health Care Act
what it does is it updates the
definition of tele dentistry to
include store forward technology
includes all the modern
technology that we have it
clarifies that this is available
not just to dentists but also
dental hygienists and dental
therapists your honor of your
sorry Senators.
A little too much time in court
and that it.
You in working with starter
scripts more they want to be
clear that this was an issue
that was subject to to board
discipline if necessary so we
are section F. under the
at the very end of the of of the
amendment Mr Chairman but also
simply that this is the
culmination of three years worth
of work that I think that we now
have a very good compromise and
again Senator I do want to thank
senator Ortiz Pino Dr scripts
will without their efforts we
wouldn't be here today.
Thank you Mr part and
Senator a do we act on the
amendment our later no.
Time Mr chairman and I would
move to the the amendment number
one to Senate bill two hundred.
Here and now we have a second
from US senators to provide X.
any please call the roll.
I'm the amendment to Senate bill
two hundred center guy it goes.
Ingle.
There McKenna yes there sure is.
There's a Lopez.
As excuse
I mentioned into considering at
the moment so because until we
feel it is.
It's an amendment on center
Casey Pinos talent in the
street.
yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes thirteen you know yes.
Senator you have a.
We have an amended bill and Mr
Chairman yes thank you I was
waiting for to give the county
have amended bill Senator so.
Please explain the bill thank
you.
Mr park is explained it in
basically is a and intend to and
bringing our.
The the technology telemedicine
into the field in dentistry as
well and we wanted to be very
careful about the language we
think we've got it right this
time and with that we'll we'll
stand for questions this Mr part
wanted anything else.
No thank you I appreciate Mr
chairman thank you thank you
Senator I just want to give you
an opportunity to.
Talk more about the bill but now
we will proceed to.
Comments from the public to
shepherd we have anyone in
opposition.
We do not.
Thank you to ever do we have
anyone wants is wishing to speak
and support yes we have Tom sure
seems.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you I will be labor what's
already been said about the bill
I think you have a pretty good
handle on what's going on I want
to thank god Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and Mr park for the work
that's been done on that I think
we reached a good point with the
and I do think it's going to
help us that facility using
dentistry and in practice thank
you.
Thank you Mr Shipp saying.
do we have anyone else.
That was.
Okay thank you now we will turn
to the committee Hey Committee
members wishing to speak I don't
see any hands up.
Mr chair.
Senator Stefanics go ahead are
you ready for a motion.
Yes I would would you pass as
amended.
Compact.
Okay we have a due pass.
For Amanda bell and I hear a
second.
Mr Chairman.
And we have a second thank you
senator penny please call the
roll.
And Senate bill two hundred
amended center guy goes.
There Ingle etcetera etcetera
yes.
State.
The bill that you were saying so
we start on page five going to.
That there's a subsection the
staff.
Your is there are go ahead.
There's a deal okay.
Yes.
Yes to home yes.
You know yes.
Okay graduation center you have
a do pass thank you thank you
very much Senator Tallman in the
committee and Mr chairman of the
committee.
Anyone's going on isn't Senator
incidence of yellow roses in two
hearings and once so when you
call in she on mute so she can
speak for tenure here the
background behind her it's going
on thank you.
Okay so let's is Senator Lopez a
little.
We have a single only two bills
left on our agenda we're three
to by Senator Lopez and one by
Senator serve on this they're
both in Judiciary but if we can
get Senator Lopez a group just
to hear this bill these two
bills of hers we can we can move
ahead so we'll wait just a
second while we try to get her.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Are you in Judiciary.
You.
There is a better.
Senator I need to go to
Judiciary since it's my bill and
they're asking questions and
also Senator Lopez is there an
ad asking questions so it's.
But I'm gonna give myself and go
to.
And.
Thank you.
So.
It's almost four o'clock we'll
wait a little while later made a
rollover Senator Lopez is built
again.
Five minute recess that would be
great when we take a five minute
recess will return and for I
hopefully will have the Senator
Lopez available at that time.
Hello.
So we I think.
Dilemma.
Can you hear me can you hear me.
Okay.
Dilemma we we we have a we're
right on the edge of having a
quorum when we have a one minute
to the next minute we don't.
Okay we have a.
Senator Tallman is not quite
back in from his break so soon
as he gets in the room we'll
take the vote on Senate bill.
One ninety two.
Because we heard all the
testimony last Friday E. mail we
and I think we even have a
motion to we.
Penny are you there.
I know REC.
I'm looking at it I don't have
they don't have the.
motion our second my records.
Do you remember.
But.
I know Representative.
We have a second do you
remember.
I don't remember.
You remember.
Senator there was no second on
the no REC okay so is there a
second for Senator Stefanics no
REC.
Okay seeing is there an
alternative motion.
Chairman.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yeah.
Well you chairman I.
Our first question so I wasn't
able to answer
appropriately.
The question was is there a
second for Senator Stefanics
motion to the move the bill
along with a recommendation to
the next committee.
You know a second that motion
just just so so that the bill
can move on.
So I'll seconded any.
Is there any discussion on the
amendment on this motion the
senators seven short explaining
in where you moved to no REC.
Mr chair I don't need to explain
no.
If you want to try to sway if
you vote your way.
I think this is a complicated
Madam and I think that we did
not have a full robust hearing
because of people coming and
going.
Okay.
Secretary will call the roll.
Those.
Then go.
Yes.
Lopez.
Thanks yes.
Tallman.
Yes.
She's probably.
Yes this is.
Is it is.
Yes No REC I mean yes I.
You know yes so Senator Lopez on
that bill you have a a no REC.
And we'll go now to your bridges
across New Mexico program.
I'm gonna close the door hang on
just a second.
Then we do have a substitute the
bill I do believe everyone races
to.
Bill Senator.
I believe everyone has received
it.
Okay.
Mr chair this is where we look
at the expense of amendments on
Friday decide yes or clear and I
was going through the substitute
bill and it aligns beautifully
with the four pages of
amendments I really appreciate
the effort to bring this up.
Thanks.
So this should come as as a as
an attachment.
Or was.
We.
One ninety one point out with
the express what.
It.
What the package Senator okay so
we have the handout.
The.
Yeah.
Okay so so the material that Kim
sent out.
She said she center at twelve
fifteen.
This.
Twelve fifteen today.
Yes yes.
Okay I see extra is very good.
Also while you're there are on
the Valassis of ideas on some of
these well it's on that same yes
it's on the side of.
What else came in earlier well
this one is right although I see
yes okay.
All right so how
do you want to walk you through
the system and and what we've
done with this.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate the opportunity
I know that if I could misty
hill I know did give some
testimony on Friday afternoon
but I did believe that there was
one person who still needed to
if I could ask the committee to
adults for at least two more
persons to give testimony before
we go into the discussion of the
bill or would you just prefer to
do the bill.
Well.
In brief testimony that would be
all right Senator okay I
appreciate it and I know that
we're all managing are different
committee so I appreciate your
intelligence but Mr chairman I
know that we do have I believe
other Vincent Chavez.
Who also is up to you to testify
in areas yes and then
I believe there's also one other
person again all.
The Lopez.
Well as is.
Or it could be.
I have again Lopez.
Lotus okay we'll just go ahead
and then we'll get an extra.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman or DC Pino
Senator Lopez and members of the
committee I'm of father Vincent
poach this pastor St Therese
parish in Catholic school the
north valley of Albuquerque I'm
a member of the board of
directors of the greater
Albuquerque business alliance.
The board of directors of the
near north valley neighborhood
association and a member of
Albuquerque interface.
I ask you to support Senate bill
one nine one.
Thank the well being of the city
to which I've sent you.
Pray for the city to the lord
print seeking its well being.
Find your own.
This phrases from the book of
Jeremiah of the the Judeo
Christian scriptures and it it
says clearly when we seek the
well being of others the little
ones the vulnerable we provide
our own well being we provide
our own contentment the brief
history of the phrase was the
people of Israel
insulate in another country and
and Jerusalem was totally
destroyed their their their
culture their civilization was
seemingly at risk
and we've experienced that in
our in our humanity and world of
this pastor COVID nineteen
pandemic year.
On Palm Sunday decades ago in
the midst of of a of a public
crowd of prisoners a man
seemingly off of the streets
came up to me and asked me for a
dollar.
And as I was assisting him with
that request hi I would end up
brutally assaulted bye bye this
man and of the prisoners rushed
to my defense
calling in the nearby police and
calling the ambulance.
So because of that assault and
memory is is is is the key
hearts whenever I pass
a panhandler at intersection or
a homeless person or someone
with them.
Mental behavioral health.
the assaults always remains
because a memory.
And my the man that assaulted me
he's been in the the state New
Mexico of mental hospital in Las
Vegas since then and he'll die
there
incarcerated
because of of his his his mental
illness you can't be around
With the end of public society.
Senate bill one ninety one
addresses behavioral health.
Which is also one of the causes
of homelessness and homelessness
in New Mexico and we're I live
here in the near north valley we
are we are in the midst of of
health agencies and.
And the high concentrations of
people
living trying to survive.
on on our streets.
For your will be.
For the well being of your own
families and for the well being
of all residents of New Mexico.
Please support Senate bill one
nine one.
And I'd like to thank you this
afternoon for the privilege to
present to you.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez searing engagement
did you want to Jason marks to
speak.
I'm Mr Chairman yes of Mr marks
is on yes.
Hey Jason please Mr marks.
Chairman Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Lopez good afternoon I am here.
To be a technical expert and
help respond to any questions on
how this bill might interact
with existing statutes and I'll
just wait until see if there are
any such questions.
Thank you Jason thanks for
coming.
Senator Lopez the the services
before us now
we need to.
The motion.
from committee.
So that we can deal with
Is there a motion.
Senator Tallman motion is to do
not just to Senate bill one
ninety one but a due to us to
Senator.
Public health and public affairs
committee substitute percent of
bill one ninety one.
And for discussion purposes and
I notice it Senator McKenna got
knocked off she's trying to get
back on can we letter back in.
I know rationally we will.
We getting the water is these
days and you're easily knocked
out so.
So Senator Lopez could you could
you just it is not showing the
cap capture for us what the what
the.
Substituting does the other bill
didn't do it just took all of
those amendments is that my
understanding and and and
meeting comply more closely with
the house version of this bill
Mr Chairman that is correct what
the the the plaster of Americans
we have in front of the
committee on Friday this is much
more feasible Russia is a it's
easier to read.
Essentially what this does Mr
chairman and it does comport
with the house measure in it
what it really did was just what
I call cleanup and line up a
little bit more specific looking
like on page one of the original
bill it had talked about
representation from different
point north south east and west
what the actual amendment does
is that clarifies it should be
representation have
representation from the six
state transportation commission
districts so that will be evenly
distributed across the state
there is in other clarifying
language Mr chairman members of
the committee that actually just
streamlined more of what the
request is from the original
bill in the final
amendment that was made that was
an increase on page four line
twenty the original bill had
fifty thousand dollars as an
appropriation and the this
measure will actually bump it up
to two hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
Let's go to the committee then
for questions and to discussion.
Senator.
I thank you Mr chair and thank
you Senator Lopez for coming
back with the committee so I
believe it's
more easily understood and I
appreciate your work on this to
align with the other side thank
you very much and when you're
ready Mr chair I'll second the
motion or make a motion
whatever.
Okay thank you senator Senator.
I don't see her back on let me
ask you a couple of questions
while we're waiting for to get
back on Senator the
The department of Human Services
behavioural division.
It has not really waiting on
this I'm I'm I'm.
Way that would be the case
because
this clearly is.
Yet for eighteen
H. show on your.
This this clearly is with you
know within their jurisdiction
the this one do pretty much the
same thing that.
We expect him to do under the
law.
How how do we avoid
Whatever it would be called
redundancy duplication
Doing well what we expect M.
ordinarily to do.
Mr Chairman if I could Mr marks.
This Mr chair us Senator Lopez
The amendments one of the
amendments.
Is designed to integrate.
What bridges across New Mexico
will do with what HSD and the
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative currently do and I
would refer yourself in the
committee to page four and
paragraphs E. and asks.
And while you're going there
I'll keep talking so I we don't
waste your time and.
The distinction is that the
existing process that the HSD
chairs and Dr Bo and I believe
at ably does is focused on state
agencies and their existing
vendors the bridges across New
Mexico collaborative some tended
to bring in stakeholders who are
regional local government
officials
Businesses others that's all
listed in the first part so
these are
complementary approaches and
it's a different group of
stakeholders but with these
amendments and I'm looking at
Ian asked here the consultant
who is hired to facilitate these
bridges meetings and develop a
plan.
Will submit that plan to the
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative allow them to
comment on it use our expertise
and.
With respect to those comments
or with
Recognition as COVID it'll come
a final plan will be prepared
and presented to legislative
interim committee and I would
expect that concurrently HSD
would be able to.
make presentations and say what
they like what they don't like
about it but this will allow the
legislature and our state to
create a plan based on a variety
of input that's not happening
now and for the legislature to
get this plan
and make decisions on how to go
forward with that.
Senator mission area.
We're trying to richer Senator.
Well we're waiting for Senator
McKenna Senator Tallman thank
you Mr chair and thank you
center for bringing this bill
forward was this bill discussed
a variety.
Yes we we had we had the
discussion of in Freddie
remember there were a whole
bunch of the amendments.
It I I missed it.
I wasn't.
So yes we did and then we to the
public comment the the.
We have our public comment and
and then the we didn't have a
quorum so.
Because I wasn't that well one
reason I'm actually for this
bill there was a quorum and
believe we just and to to put it
into the form of a committee so
which is what's before us now
because they were.
Can I hear you say use the
that's so material sent out
around one o'clock this
afternoon.
I didn't get it well yes I did.
So.
And maybe I Mr in one sentence
or more can somebody explain.
Why the the amount of money is
been increase two hundred
thousand dollars.
The.
Mr Chairman if I could Mr marks.
Mr chair a center of Tom and it.
My understanding is that there
was miscommunication and the
regional drafting and the fifty
thousand dollar budget was not
what the.
Miss Vigil had proposed and
And so to begin with it was an
adequate for the three meetings
in the regional bell with the
amendments with that being
expanded to six regions being
expanded to create a draft
report and a final report
The up what is Vigil and and the
house sponsor came up with.
The best estimate of the new
budget
and I know that.
They did concerts they did talk
with a firm that's not in New
Mexico but is done this work
nationally and also in New
Mexico about what it would cost
to hold.
Three stakeholder state three
stakeholder meetings and my
recollection is there estimate
for that was around seventy
thousand dollars
and so with more meetings an
additional level of a
draft and final report and
presentations Miss Vigil in the
house sponsor Representative
bash came up with two hundred
fifty thousand dollars.
Thank you for that and
I certainly be the first to say
that we
You madam on and we spent on the
mental health Sir and the status
or in an adequate have a big
believer and that doing a proper
planning before we throw money
at a.
And our problems so thank you
for that explanation thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you senator Solomon I have
enjoyed working in the
background sorry keep muting
myself and.
What question did raise another
issue for me to look in the last
paragraph it says this bill
appropriates fifty thousand
dollars.
For calling in which is we're
going to.
I mean
we legislation usually is worded
I mean it it seems like that
would be.
Pretty clearly a more.
Donation yes exactly.
So.
I mean I would I was gonna say
it when when Jason was talking
as well keep in mind that this
maybe this money will be going
to the Human Services department
will decide who the contractor
is not the two groups in brought
this idea forward.
The way this is worded.
To contract with a professional
behavioral health policy agency
to assist some bridges across
New Mexico behavior health
consortium.
You may run into some real
problems with the anti donation
clause Senator did you want to
respond to that.
that wouldn't be the case.
Mr Chairman if this bill of
course does move forward I think
but we could look at just to
make sure that we don't do the
and come across the anti
donation issue just for
clarification purposes I think
what we're trying to do is to
make sure for guidance purposes
that it if it with this amount
of money of course it have to go
for an R. F. P. a request for
proposals which then of course
would mean that it would be open
to anyone else within our state
or where ever to apply for these
monies
so I I I do know that we usually
don't mention which I think is
what the amendment was trying to
do is to contract with a
professional behavior health
policy agency it may be
instead of just mentioning the
bridges across New Mexico we
could you know maybe tweak some
of that language just to make
sure that we're not singling out
wanted to deport.
With that that's a constructs
that we can address also causes
I think we'll go to finance
also.
Senator Lopez go to another
committee before finance.
I don't have my.
Second let me get my book.
It does not.
Binance next finance okay.
Well.
Will we simply and it is amended
here or do you want to try to do
that in in the than extremity.
Mr Chairman if you feel
comfortable to do so I'm I'm a
minimal if not I'm sure that we
will be doing in finance.
Then I would propose an
amendment.
Things.
For.
To the online twenty three.
No online twenty four.
To.
Delete the rest of line twenty
four.
All of this.
Twenty five.
So a.
And insert the instead there of.
To develop.
I would say develop.
The statewide action plan to
present to the Human Services
Department and the legislature.
That way if if that change were
to go in then the bridges
consortium or any other
consortium could could be
involved could be it could bid
on it could could work with the
ultimate the winner of the
contract but it wouldn't specify
them so that it wouldn't try the
Human Services department's and.
I'm fine with that.
I'll make a motion.
Thank you so Senator Tallman
also second your motion.
Is there any is what the motion
is everybody.
Anybody have any questions on.
Mr chair just to read it back to
you of our current yes.
I.
So I'm lying on page four
starting on one twenty three
and two thousand twenty three
contract with a professional
behavioral health policy agency
to assist develop a statewide
action plan president of the.
Our.
To develop yes if that works so
just be deleted as well.
I'm sorry your you don't want to
be assessed so just to develop
very.
Any discussion of the amendment
Mr chair just a point of order
we didn't take a vote on the do
not just to pass the
Committee so but do so we need
to do that first.
Now I think we need to amend the
committee so.
I'm not sure you could amended
you have adopted but I differ.
Yes it's still in discussion Mr
chair in the committee.
Okay so so this amendment to the
committee set up and then we'll
have a motion to adopt the
committee so to to do not pass
the the original one and you
want to adopt instead the
amended committees of.
That we're.
Yes.
The opposition to amending the
committee so with one amendment
that I put on.
Consider the committee seven to
be amended and go to senators to
thanks for a motion on the.
On the committee so.
Okay so Mr chair I would move
a do not pass on Senate bill one
ninety one and I do pass on
Senator the committee substitute
the.
Back to the Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety.
And it banking it I don't think
we could be amended because
we're just adopting a committee
set up and it with the
committees
okay.
Any other discussion in the bill
I see that we've been joined by
Ginny's only from the Human
Services Department I don't know
if you had a chance to see the
committee so.
Order to the amendment to Mr
only did you want to say
anything.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members
I had the amendments last week I
don't have the substitute I
can't follow what you're saying
frankly at all I apologize I I
thought maybe I could help the
conversation here but I I don't
have the documents you do I I
don't know.
I I'm at a loss I apologize.
Okay.
For those
Well basically the committee
seven Justin corporate all the
amendments you saw last week.
Less right.
And then we just amended out
language specifying bridges
across New Mexico as.
The organization that would that
would work with the contractor
leaving it open to any
organization that was all that
work the one.
You know only one.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members so it's essentially the
same set of amendments last time
just integrated into the site
which I haven't seen that and
then you were talking because I
I tell you I was a little
concerned about the.
About that I think you're what
the witnesses last time
mentioned very specific
contractor that you wanted this
funding to go to and that would
that would be very difficult for
HSD to.
Yeah range that's it's that we
we cannot especially now that
the dollar amount is up to two
fifty we we can't possibly.
Are you a sole source contracts
for that that level of the
funding.
Absolutely not so that would be
my response on that and and in
general even with the amendments
as I think I said last time
even with the amendments HSD you
know sees this as as largely
duplicative of your HSD spends a
lot of time doing strategic
planning be HSD the Planning
Council consortium regional
planning councils there's a
whole network of of folks in
your working hard to do not
dissimilar strategic planning
and so.
We we still kind of see this as
a duplication of all of those
efforts be nice if we could
coordinate and work together
rather than.
Yes duplicating.
Thank you.
Try to send you the the US and
then you'll be able to see what
are amendment into the.
Any other discussion from the
committee.
We will call the roll.
No.
Senator is the motion is.
Senator Solomon second thank
you.
I need clarification are we
voting on just the sub or the
sub as Amanda this is Amanda as
it's now this so so that's what
we're voting on with that
amendment part of it thank you
Sir.
Sir guy goes Senator Ingle Sir
McKenna yes.
There is a deal Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Allman.
Yes.
There are to see pandemic yes.
Thank you senator lotus.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you all for
coming and testifying Friday and
today for two days we have one
less bills.
To be clear on my my senses that
this will come out when we make
the amendment as a point to
committee so they'll be no
actual amendment will be the
some of the as eight point two
okay.
Right.
Thank you Senator Lopez and
thank you everybody who came to
testify.
thank you looking.
So we have Senator survive this
is bill but he's still sharing
Judiciary.
What I would suggest on this.
We rolled it over once less
start next week's the next
Wednesday's meeting with this
bill will be the very first item
of the city did for me today in
his committee.
And maybe we can get.
The little head start on his we
start a few minutes before his
committee would have started.
On Wednesday we will have a
meeting on Wednesday I believe.
The because we have a floor
session but the floor leader
doesn't think it's going to be a
terribly long one.
As a result we we should be able
to to end in time to have a
committee meeting.
And we'll start with senator
survived this is bill on
Wednesday.
We have another one that we we
have a couple of others we
rolled over to so.
Thanks articulating.
Any other issues committee
members want to bring a.
You can go ahead with us thank
you all for for participating
today.
Thank you have a good day you
too Senator.
