The sponsor is asked that that
not be heard.
So that's two bills were already
happy through agenda this is
moving right along
your source when she got there
will start with you.
If he gets here before survived
as we'll go ahead and hear him.
One twenty six.
You can change can you change
the number on.
Okay.
Senator source will start with
you and and you've assured me
that this is a quick.
I didn't do it I did do it
i'll talk away.
Okay
mister john this has to do with
a reimbursement rates for
legislators in particular but
it's actually any state employee
up and many of you.
I can talk from way back here
many of you know that i'm a
pilot for an airplane and so
when i'm flying the interim
committees and the various
reimbursement rates for mileage
everything that we do for
reimbursement is based on the I
r s reimbursement rate except
for aviation and so by fly a
personal airplane it is based on
the two thousand and four rate
that was book into statute which
has not been updated in twenty
years all this does is change
that from wet that two thousand
and four rate for flying a
personal aircraft to flying a
personal aircraft and others at
the irs rate it is updated on a
regular basis makes it easier
for
the people that do the
reimbursements that they don't
have to look at two or three
different saturdays for what
rates things are it makes it
upgrade.
On a regular basis based on
whatever happens with inflation
it makes it simpler for all.
Yeah.
Senator.
Yes
senator may asked us center my
cution center mechanic yes
senator neighborhood
is
senator tall men center it is a
pino yes yes thank you mister
chair appreciate you getting me
and quickly send you a survivor
sendville sixty nine.
Thank you good afternoon
everyone
said a bill sixty nine relates
to the fourteen day waiting
period I think you all have
probably become very familiar
with it from press accounts in
from past session and this bill
did pass the set last session
and was not heard in the house
the fourteen day.
Waiting period as a forty with
the emiss on the fourteen day
really was and my initiative
last session principally because
at the time my analysis was that
hawaii was on the outside.
My car spoke really be well of
of the waiting period of what
was acceptable and what had been
at least to that point time
upheld in the courts so that's
where the fourteen days comes
from I know there's been some
discussion of late whether you
count.
Part of the discussion but
one of the things that we've
done in the interim and
throughout the last two sessions
in the judiciary committee is to
look very carefully what the
united states supreme court has
had to say of late when it comes
to second amendment
responsibility to rights in the
limitations and restrictions
i'll tell you that issue is even
today still up in the air some
of the latest ruling from the
supreme court with suggests that
the only restrictions that are
permissible under the second
amendment or those with a
historical precedent senator
smith and I had to just talk a
little bit about that and he may
have some questions.
I suspect weapon many was
suspect the spring quotes about
him back tracking on clearance
thomas is opinion without regard
because the challenge right now
before the supreme court waiting
a decision as weather guns can
be denied in connection with
domestic violence cases and I
know center city alopes is
working on that issue i'll in
that closely too.
My point is that the federal law
in the area of the second
amendment and got a restrictions
and in gun safety is a moving
target and we tried very hard
here from my perspective to only
be looking at laws that we think
have constitutional merit
and so i've been resistant to
those bills that are show bills
when I called theater gun
restrictions which are those
that are clearly going to be
overturned is unconstitutional
and I will submit to this
committee that i've waiting
period
seems to be sustained by the
courts at least today there's
been no successful challengeable
waiting period the other thing
i'll have this committee
hopefully consider is that there
is evidence that a waiting
period can save lives.
Certainly in the case of
individuals with suicidal
ideation people in crisis the
idea of giving them some time to
cool after four purchasing a gun
is got data behind it.
And among it the bills that are
introduced this session in last
that are trying to address gun
violence some have some utility
in my opinion and some do not
this is one that does.
I think it's also important for
the committee know that i'm a
gun owner have been as long as I
can remember farm boy ranch
person we grow up are using guns
as tools we have a healthy
respect and I think those of us
that are gun owners responsible
gun owners are the ones who
should be taking the lead on
what are reasonable and and
actually effective gonna
restrictions and i'll just tell
you in the past when I have of
the was a particular weapon fire
that I wanted to purchase and I
had to wait purchased it.
I'm line and had to wait few
weeks to frit come in and go
through the process by which it
had to be approved here in the
state and licensed in the same
source and as a responsible good
owner it did not bother me one
bit to realize that I would wait
for that particular weapon to
come in and I think those of us
that are responsible gun owners
are not going to have an issue
with this bill
the difference between this bill
and some of the house versions
and early versions also is there
are some of allowances some
considerations and some nuances
for when awaiting period might
not make sense and you have
those in the bill as well as
it's been modified to trade him
and find a place for those
nuances transfers between a law
enforcement officer as a prime
example in others transfers
between family members within a
certain relationship so
misgerman I I think this is a
well balanced in nuance bill
that um.
I'm confident may save lives it
may be very few.
This is certainly not going to
address the mass murders that we
see in that we fight so
deplorable but this has the
pote.
Yes etc mister minor I do this
is some parallel to myself and I
have a licensed frequency will
carry weapon and i'll just tell
you it's a very it's not an easy
process it's a full weekend of
school classroom training and
that shows the level of
responsibility once again would
suggest that that exception is
not somebody who's in christ.
To purchase a quiet weapon when
them when their bulgariable and
so that seemed like a reaso.
The.
Very well let's go to the
audience let me get some idea of
who might want us first who here
is in support of this measure
just raise your end first.
And who here is an opposed to
this measure raise your.
Okay we'll listen to anybody who
wants to speak on it we.
Let's start with you.
Come up and use the mikes of.
You can use the handle I do
zandle
it
experience breakdown chair
members of the committee my name
is miranda of a squalico
president of new mexicans to
prevent gun violence we stand
and strong support of this piece
of legislation gun violence is a
multifastered problem that
demands a multipronged approach
and that's exactly what senate
bill six nine does it address is
both suicide prevention
reduction end crimes of passion
rubber suicides are sixty four
percent of our gun deaths in
addition to that it would close
the charleston loophole and
we'll hear a lot of testimony
probably on the other side about
domestic violence it actually
helps prevent domestic violence
because the risk that prohibited
purchasers will be able to buy
guns the default default proceed
transactions is particularly
acute and the context of
domestic violence because lawn
forcement agencies often times
do not have time to complete the
background checks waiting
periods give law enforcement
that additional much needed time
thank you very much
thank you more ended anybody
else want to speak and support
this bill.
Yes.
Hello
thank you thank you mister chair
and a members of the committee.
I know that there are my name is
nation and i'm a personal
disabilities in the disability
advocate I know that there are
certain.
Options that may be unpopular
but I think something that is
very popular is every life this
we're saving and the delay does
get back will have period of
time and it also does give the
time for someone who may not be
a bad person but maybe
experience it a bad time in
their life be able to make a
better choice thank you very
much about mrperiod chair
members of the committee.
Mrperiod chairman committee
members my name is tom patterson
and the president elect of the
new mexico cattle growers.
Association respectfully we
opposed to at bill sixty nine
the fourteen day business day
it's not fourteen days it's
fourteen business day waiting
period
sixty nine will have a
disproportionate impact on gun
buyers and rural new mexico.
Firearm retailers who serve our
rural areas may have a customer
radius of up to a hundred miles.
With this bill a gun buyer from
a rural area like luna where i'm
from would have to travel that
hundred miles to fill out the
appropriate forms for the guns
store to initiate the background
check even if the fbi gives the
go ahead for the sale to proceed
the buyer would have to drive
the hundred miles home and then
almost three weeks later the
buyer will have to make another
tutor mile trip round trip
receive the firearm the
incremental cost of this bill
and a lot of biting citizen from
rural mexico is the second
tutored mile trip.
The travel time the three weeks
have not been able to use our
own that we may really need and
likely infringement of a
constitutional right according
to the attorney general we have
bill sixty nine.
Thank you mister perison who's
next go ahead please.
Hello hi terror mitchell with
the national rifles association
in opposition to senate bill
sixty nine
simple sixty nine will not
provide for more thorough more
improved more enhanced or more
expanded fire and background
checks it will change nothing
about how fbi investigates
potential gun buyers fb I will
not initiate a second background
check on a gun buyer after the
fourteen business days have
elapsed to search for any
updated data and the national
instant check system what the
spill will do as unnecessarily
delay law biting citizens
ability to exercise their
constitutionally protective rate
to purchase a known firearms
they delay the fourteen business
day delay applies to all firm
sales except concealed hanging
licensees but it placed all
other firearm sales not just
cases where there is a delay
response from fbi.
So it applies to people who
clear the background check and
get a proceed from fbi
the cooling off period wouldn't
have any impact on the nearly
two thirds of gun buyers who
already own a fire.
And according to atf the average
time to crime fire tracing is
nine point three years so i'm
not sure that this is going to
have an impact on impulse of
crimes when the average time
from purchase to ending up on
the street for a firearm
involved in a crime is nine
years thank you.
Thank you anybody else.
Yes
a my name is dare scott
yes sure
my name is derscott I also in
the chair of
lpm which is the free
libertarian party
we i've been contacted to be
speak about this bill in the
sense that it's not that we
totally oppose it there's a lot
of good things that we feel
concessions were made that we're
good and we feel like especially
considering conceal carrier
because yes we do go through a
lot more i'm conceal carry
myself
we do go through a lot more
background and repeated
reclocation so yeah I really
hope you guys keep that in there
the problem we have is just the
extensive amount of time called
period usually is only applied
to three three to five days.
After that it's never mattered
because then what they do is
they'll go to black market or
some other direction to get the
firearm so forty days is way
high I think if you bring it
down you might find a good happy
medium for everybody to swallow
but I appreciate that you have
at least try to make some
considerations in this we do
oppose it to a certain stand as
in were liberty we think there
should be no laws in a way but
we understand you have the
majority so it's on you to task
to find a middle ground so
that's all we ask is you help
find a middle ground with all of
us thank you.
The.
Mister chairman members of the
committee.
I'm doctor william fires and i'm
a retired computer scientists
you're in santa fe as such i'm
interested in legislation based
upon real data.
Waiting for
sorry about that waiting periods
are meant to prevent it pulse of
desperate fire.
However senator sarante's is
pointed out this is meaningless
for those who already own th.
I applaud senator savantes for
his exemption for concealed
carrier licenses but I have to
ask for relief for the other
millio.
I also ask you to reconci.
There is no data documenting
life saved by this length.
As representative of romero
admitted yesterday it is a got
feeling.
As the bill stands I ask you to
vote pass and I think.
Thank you doctor.
The.
Ok so we have somebody named
chris michaels on zoom.
Did you want to speak in favor
of this bill
yes i'm word chairman thank you
and members of the committee I
am here from the alliance for
gun violence solutions and I am
a member of the santa fe branch
of the end of cp
new mexico rates the forty
second
state in the worst analysts and
suicide rate in the country and
we have a rate of twenty point
seven suicides per hundred
thousand population so.
Our savings live in clueses
miranda said earlier a multiprom
approach to gun ownership and
gun usage I applied this
fourteen day waiting period
because it does allow those who
have a current concealed carry
license to buy another gun and
it does allow those who have
currently passed the federal
background check to also buy a
firearm so I did not see it as
impinging on the rights under
the second amendment I urge the
committee support and passage of
this bill thank you.
Next we have and I don't know if
they're for against they'll just
call your name and you you tell
us if you're for against
a nate escu.
Thank you mister share members
of the committee need asking
here to oppose this bill on
behalf of the over seventeen
hundred members of the arrival
and pistol club here in the
albuquerque area.
I'd invite you do it and gauge
with service and rent has on the
legalities here
under the bruinstander which as
the center knows as the current
star under law when the second
amendments plain text covers and
individuals conduct constitution
presumptively protects that
conduct.
He then asked justify its
regulation by demonstrating it's
consistent the nation's
tradition of historical firearms
regulation keep arms necessarily
implies threat to acquire them
this bill puzzle in firms know
the goods and delay of their
acquisition by fourteen business
days therefore in this case
service about as to you must
justify its regulation by
demonstrating the consistent but
the historical tradition of
fires regulation.
Terrorist around his himself
knows very well the relevant
periods of history that must be
looked at others in easy case
under those periods there were
no waiting period restrictions
on firearms or any other arms
anywhere in the united states
before nineteen twenty three
when the first waiting period
law was an active in california
at a one day wait minority of
other states and act in such
laws in nineteen twenties and
thirties under the bureau and
standard analogies from the
nineteen twenties are far too
late to offer any insight in the
original public meaning of the
second minute
thank you
thank you
thank you miss mister resky.
The scott siegel.
Yes hello.
Thank you for listening I
imposes bell.
As fourteen days will now upset
years much as restrict right
if the availability of their
available data says waiting will
help consider three to five
days.
Also I don't know the law but
could there be a differential
between people that get
proceed to purchase versus a
weight I know new york state
does thirty days after.
I think the fourteen days
comparing us to hawaii is very
different you could be in hobs
and six hours whereas hawaii you
have to take a flater boat.
This bill.
At.
Does have good merits but I
think that we can find a middle
ground on it.
The.
I believe that
we should study more on the
length of time and not just say
fourteen days to be equal to a
state that is very divided where
or not thank you.
Thank you scott and finally we
have someone simply known as
patrick.
Oh yes i'd like to speak against
the bill can you hear me.
Hello yes we can hear you go
ahead.
Okay i'm sorry I think there was
a delay at my end
I live in albert tricky I would
like to speak against the bill
I don't think that this bill
will save wise I think it could
cost lives on when that delay
period is going on for people
who are legally able to purchase
firearms if that person is a
victim of a cry within that
period that could delay that
person's ability to defend their
lives in albuquerque which is
one of the most crime ridden
cities in plate country that is
a real concern for a lot of
people so I believe that this
could cost lives and those are
saying that there are reasonable
parts of the spell I strongly
disagree with that because this
bill is part of a context of the
anti gun done grabbing this
decision making process it's
being conducted here new mexico
and I believe this bill is just
one more way to widdle a little
way and I can't stitutional
rights and our ability to defend
ourselves all this does doing
it's not addressing crime it was
doing is is its persecuting law
bidding farmers owners and I
believe this bill is part of the
context to this hour new
mexicans and we see that with
other bills like that so my
automatic band this is part of
an agenda that is ant high fire
on anti constitutional and this
will and those other bills will
open up new mexico to a lot of
legal are being sued and a big
legal problems and a lot of fees
and this is going to be a huge
waste of time to not willing to
save lives it can in fact harm
lies and it definitely harms a
constitutional rates thank you
thank you peter did you want to
give us your last name.
Oh i'm sorry yeah it's.
Marine.
Yes thank you
senator detailed response to any
of the comments raised I I
appreciate the opportunity
to quite a bit in there so I
think i'll probably better
survive taking questions from
the committee mischairman
although I will again reiterate
a few things one is the notion
that this part of some gun grab
ignores a couple of things for
so i've not signed onto other
gun legislation i've been very
purposeful to recognize that the
fourteen day proposed here
is something that i've signed on
to and support because it it has
withheld screwed into this point
in time when other states we
didn't pick hawaii because they
have boats and we don't or
because we have trucks and they
don't it was purposefully
selected because it's which
stood screening to this point
the reference was made to the
bruin rat reliance I think we'll
probably get some questions from
center committees on that
initial swall or wait for that I
I just I think it's important to
reiterate in response to the
cattle growers opposition a
point that that I made briefly
but i'll reiterate I grew up on
a ranch a group ranching group
farming i'm old enough to
remember there there was always
a rifle in the back window of a
truck it was a tool we will
respect it.
I think the notion that cattle
growers will be the disconvicted
inconvenience by having to drive
into town to do this frankly is
absurd
every cattle grow I know grows
up with guns they usually.
Grandfather before him the
notion that i'm i'm gonna be a
cal grower and not have a fire
to meet his comic.
With all respect I think some of
the arguments here are hyperbole
and overstatement and ignore the
fact that some of us want to be
re.
Let's go to the committee then
anybody on the committee have a
question.
Senator smeaters will start with
you.
All right.
Yes I think for the presentation
and and certainly certainly.
Whoever's listening I assure
you.
Been very thoughtful and
deliberate.
Be very efficient with the
legislature's time to discuss
seriously.
The.
The.
Despite.
Senator and you know as you know
we had a big big court case the
bruin decision and and then the
new standard you know.
Moving away from intermediate
scrutiny and to step process and
they're saying that you know our
any regulation has to be
consistent with that historical
tradition a regulation and so
naturally my question sender is
that is a fourteen day waiting
period consistent with our
historical treati.
The chairman so senator applied
you for again following the
current supreme court and
requirement for restrictions on
guns to be based on historic
tradition it's an absurd ruling
minutes and observe ruling that
will not stand I don't believe
the next six months I think the
supreme court will reverse
itself and recognize the
absurded new absurdity of
clearance thomas's opinion now
that sounds pretty arrogant of
me last crucial's lawyer a
street lawyer to say that I just
on the supreme court wrote an
absurd opinion but i'm going to
stand by that and i'll give you
an example clearance thomas with
the majority held that any
restrictions on guns had to be
based on historic tradition
yet we as a country do not allow
guns in this capital
some of you may disagree with
that but there's no historic
tradition of not allowing guns
in a government building we
don't allow guns in the
courtroom as a lawyer I can't
take a gun into a courtroom I
think that's a good thing you're
in there with people that are
getting a divorce that are
having their parental rights
terminated that are of risking
sometimes in my cases hundreds
of millions of dollars
were not lowing guns in a
courier is a good idea there's
no historic tradition for that.
Back in the thirties when
alcapon was a running the
country arguably we banned
automatic weapons machine.
That restriction remains in
place congress abandon automatic
weapons back at that time
there's no historic tradition
for that.
I can't own a rocket propelled
grenade.
And there's no historic
tradition for that we can go on
down the list of all of the
things and the reason the
supreme court has now put itself
in a terrible box and they're
figuring it out.
Is that the issue before the
court now is weather and
individual who's got a domestic
violence protection order can be
restricted from owning guns we
have historically said people
with mental deficiencies mental
suffering for mental illness
cannot have gone as there's no
historic tradition for that
either are we gonna back away
from all of that when you when
you take the supreme court's
argument to his national
conclusion that you say there
has to be a historic tradition
to limit guns.
If it's an absurd decision in
the supreme court's going to
realize that I think pretty
quickly otherwise people with
with mental illness we're gonna
be allowed to have guns balance
who we've decided to
as a policy probably should not
yet will the own firms I think
those gun owners that I know and
i'm one of them agree with that
as a policy agreed that people
would mental illness should not
have guns but to clear thomas
ruling all of them would be
allowed to have guns.
And and I think the supreme
court realizes it's put itself
in a terrible box it'll reverse
itself shortly i'm sure.
Thank you mister center.
I at least on my reading of the
burning session I I do discredit
in fact they specifically
mention some historical
traditions as an examples they
they claim thomas says it's not
an exhaustive list
but they mentioned that they
didn't allow guns and in
sensitive areas which is why
i've been telling people quite
openly I was just talking as to
senator morris in my opinion the
only constitutional gunville
i've seen is the election
pulling bill.
Because constructive
specifically says.
That we have an at a historic
tradition allow guns and
courthouses right when the
fourteenth amendment was
ratified when the second was
ratified no guns and courthouses
very clear historic tradition.
And so sensitive area and
election of pulling places a
sense of area.
Constitutional at least I mean
in my opinion.
So III think we have quite a bit
of once again the court doesn't
say it's exhaustive
they also say.
This is claris thomas like most
writes.
The right secured by the second
minute is not un.
Sensitive spate sensitive places
he goes on to say
about.
I'm sorry dangerous and unusual
weapons.
Historic tradition not no dange.
So so they they they do have
have a list
sender and and so I am but I I
would I would rear reiterate the
question of i'm just you know
your opinion I I and maybe
maybe we'll just try to guess
what what the court is is going
to say in the future but but
presently.
Have you looked at that issue
that it was specifically brought
up in nineteen twenty three
firearms.
So I saw i'm i'm i'm taking your
answer is maybe maybe not a
strong argument for historical
tradition but.
Still your anticipation of of
what the court may do in the
future is that is that fair.
Yeah mr you're right and point
out clarence thumber said this
is not an exhaustive list here's
the problem with us as lawyers
too many times in the low we
can't do a good job of defining
things in the best examples
always pinography what is
photography while we know when
we see it and have a standard
you just said well class thomas
said there's a historic
tradition for banning guns in
sensitive areas what is a
sensitive area well that's under
five.
Likeways you said well the court
has said you can ban dangerous
and unusual weapons well what
you and I made consider to be a
dangerous and unusual weapon is
going to be a source of
disagreement.
I have not signed on to the
assault weapon.
Because I don't know how you're
going to define what is a
dangerous and unusual weapon I
don't I don't think that's going
to be an easy standard to define
and I look forward to trying to
do that but but but you're right
there's these ambiguities in the
law and and I I think we have to
leave some room for that.
I'll note for those that think
that i'm part of some gun grab
are the day after the governor
announced her executive order
banning open and concealed carry
in berlio county I publicly was
the first and probably only
democrat at the time to suggest
that she resend that order
because.
And I see a disadvantage to
spending our time in our
resources and energy pursuing
things that are clearly
unconstitutional of course the
federal courts have agreed with
my day old interpretation and
struck down that executive
orders on constitution
somethings are clearly
unconstitutional and and I don't
see an advantage to spend our
time and resources pursuing
things that are early on
constitutional but but here i'm
persuaded i'm very confident
that this is a constitutional
protection thank you mister
sander I think the.
On my end of things I wanted to
steer away from the the interest
balancing because the courts
pretty clear in that opinion
that wouldn't were no longer
really doing interest b.
Tradition and it says you know
the second amendments playing
text covers the individuals
conduct the constitution
presumptively products protect
that conduct so it's it's a
presumption of your your conduct
you're right of access to a
firearm for self defence
and so.
So that that's where I have the
problem with it is we we have we
have an opinion that says and
not just an opinion we have the
second member that that clearly
says
you know that you you have a
pris.
The.
And lastly on that topic.
I've I found this to be really
interesting in the in the bare
decision it says the second this
is in the
the court opinion still and I
quote the second amendment is
the very product of an interest
balancing by the people.
And it surely elevates above all
other interests the right of law
bidding responsible citizens to
use arms for self defense and
that's really the heart of my
opposition to your bill.
Although I have a lot of
openings to have product a
discussion with you but my my
problem is is my understanding
of this issue is we are
disproportionately
going to I I think it you'd
agree with me you might use the
word disproportionate
but we we were clearly going to
be disproportionately applying
waiting couriers to lie biting
citizens I mean there's not just
numbers why statistically we're
not seeing tons and tons and
tons of criminals get turned
away with instant background
checks right most of these
people the vast vast vast
majority are law bidding
citizens they're doing the right
thing they're going through the
background check they're going
they're doing in all those
things
and so
when we have a ride that
elevates the you know the
interest of these law body
responsible citizens and we're
disperportionally affecting them
and I realize you're trying to
balance in interest for public
safety III realize that but
that's that's my my key
opposition to your bill so I I
think I just have one last kind
of question and that's the fact
that.
When someone goes to purchase a
gun.
And they get an instant.
Approval.
They get a pass.
That's one thing.
When they get a delay.
That's another thing.
So I don't know if you would are
you at all open to applying the
waiting period only to those
that have been delayed.
Or or do you still want the
waiting period for the folks the
law bodies.
So a madam chairman center the
the difficulty with your
analysis is that if you if you
apply the waiting period only to
what you're calling those who
who are flagged.
You're you're going to.
You're gonna love the bridges of
guns to people that are incre.
So if you're only going to make
that waiting apply to to home
people that are flagged in that
background check i'll just tell
you as a gun owner there's
there's plenty of times i've
gone into my gonna go into a
sporting concern I walk out with
the gun it might take me an hour
an hour and a half to do the
whole thing paperwork clearance
selection the whole bit
and as I said what instance
where there was a particular
fire that I wanted and had no
trouble at all waiting two three
four weeks because.
To answer your question directly
having the waiting period apply
only to those who are flagged
well.
Screening
I think if he had been real
careful mister.
In the area of guns I I tried to
avoid hyperbole I try to avoid
emotional emotionalism all of
the overstatements both sides
both sides overstate their case
all the time
this is not going to curb
gun violence in albuquerque this
is not going to curb criminals
this is not going to curb ma.
Don't believe for a second.
Mister center I I appreciate
that answer.
I mean that's all the questions
I have for you I appreciate the
discussion like I said I I am
still remaining opposition to
the bill open have the
discussion but I I think that
when we have.
And we're going to restrict that
they were not.
The constitution says you have a
presumption but.
Where we're not going to act
like it because we're going to
pass the law to make you wait.
It to me there are still a
conflict but I but I understand
I understand.
Discussing with you.
Thank you senator smith we have
senator said the lopest senator
nibert and senator mccutch
thank you mister chair I don't
want to start by commending you
on I think is unless cruises
sometimes these things blind
the the
deep diet that you took the
interim committee into with
regard to the guns I found it
very helpful.
In this time right now we're in
a time of uncertainty about what
the second amendment.
It we're not wearing a state of
flux from the hillary from the
hillary case to ubto clearance
thomas's case was pretty
dramatic difference in heller
was seemed seemed at the time
very dramatic when it came out I
think that clearance time is.
Step into the texture list
originalism that scalia
truck you know with the was the
founder of I guess that that the
brain child behind that and and
the thing is is unfortunately
supreme court just.
And so I agree with you I agree
with you that this opinion
was will it ill advise when
you're when you're thinking
about.
Originalism in the context were
so much his changed.
It just doesn't make sense and
so I I agree with you and I was
persuaded very and I should also
say cause III said this once in
people almost fell over I
deplore conduct I I deplore them
however my eight father I grew
up in a gun owning family and my
father used to say if we he
doesn't want to live in a
society in bridge only criminals
and.
That would would not be a good
place to be and I agree with
that.
So i'm not into a gun grab
either
but I do see the data.
And I think it's really
important that people understand
the data what you said mister
chair about this may save.
Maybe not not a light of lives
but you'll save some I think
it's really true that it will
save more than you.
Because the statistics show that
people in states that have.
A gun safety.
What I will call well the states
that don't have reasonable guns
date safety lives and this is
just damages correlations just
looking at the rod data so
the only question I I have and
so I I again I want to commend
you I think I support this bill
but I I was wondering.
Why the choice what is the
reasoning behind the fourteen
business days I I know you said
hawaii
did that in so you were looking
at cases and and looking at the
but what was the analysis of why
what is your analysis that comes
lands on fourteen days the
business days fourteen
businesses thank you mister
chairman center so it my
parallel i'll be very honest
with you when I introduce the
fourteen day originally the the
house last session had to trust
a ban with a shorter period I
don't remember what it was seven
days whatever it was.
Um.
When I began to work on a bill I
looked for the outer envelope of
what had passed constitutional
mustard that's generally what
i've done when you talked about
what our committee is done in
the enermous how far have states
been able to go that's been
upheld by the courts.
When I will look for what that
waiting period could be I went
again to my peril in cataly I
looked for the longest waiting.
Very honestly I did not look at
the distinction between.
To compare us to hawaii at that
I simply looked at hawaii as the
outer envelope for what had been
in the books and had sustained
whe.
Because as they said earlier I
see no point in passing laws
that are going to be immediately
subject to an injunction
immediately seventy three
hundred I went to after the
governor's executive word in
brilliant account and went to
the hearing room full of lawyers
of thirty forty lawyers they're
all billing their three and four
hundred dollars an hour and I
just couldn't help it but
realize the resources that were
being expended on something that
had a foregone conclusion and of
no value really i'm so I don't I
don't see a point to passing
laws that are going to get
struck I don't see a point
passing bills that are going to
be enjoyed.
I know some people think that
sends a message some people are.
So that's how I came up with a
fourteen days again that no
distinction between business and
calendar days and very cataly I
suspected that there might be
room for negotiation from
fourteen days based on some
reasonable effort to try and
find compromise with opponents
but very candidately the
opposition has not expressed an
interest in some compromise or
some logical argument about why
fourteen days or less would be
oh many.
It seems very arbitrary for them
to suggest otherwise mister
president I was thinking about
the case and it was a few years
ago so.
Okay
mister chair
I was thinking about the case in
it's been a while the case where
I believe is an less vegas
nevada where he was on a no on a
no cellist but he had been sold
again because there was not
sufficient.
And so what I was thinking about
the fourteen days is that this
would allow for a searches of
multiple it wouldn't just be the
f b I records but you could look
at military records I believe he
was on a million military record
if I recall it and they had not
they had not showed the data and
now I understand there's more
data shadia sharing but at the
time it's just was really.
Devastating that he should not
have had a gun but he was so
begun because in the immediate
he he they didn't come up
immediately
and so I think awaiting period
is good to do a thorough check
and I just want to get it on the
record that fourteen days.
Integrate that if there's no
record integration that there
would be a sufficient search so
I appreciate this bill I think
that I admire you because you're
very thoughtful about this
and I also believe that you will
see.
With that.
I don't want to see president
you look presidential mister
chair i'm done which president
i'd like to
the president is eighty two i'm
only eighty one
federator neighbors you're next
followed by senator.
Ah.
Thank you mister chaired center.
I wanted to talk a little bit
about the fourteen days fourteen
business days and.
It if I understand your test
money correctly you just picked
fourteen because hawaii had
fourteen and so does he wish
wall have fourteen calendar days
or fourteen.
Mister chairman senator I i've
tried to follow this issue in
the press and that's really
unfortunately where i'm d.
But I I believe the the issue
has come up in a prior committee
that hawaii has there there's a
fourteen calendar day.
Actively window then
I opened I want to make sure
that i've been clear with you
that this was not an arbitrary
thing for me to say well hawaii
has this
word like huawei.
What what i've tried to do and
as they said earlier
consistently in all of these gun
laws is to look at what the
courts have upheld those what
can a state do and what will the
courts uphold allowing states to
do the fact that hawaii had put
a fourteen day period whether
it's calendar business days and
had not been enjoying or a
struck down by any court
suggested to me that that was
constitutional and so so that
that becomes the modeler i'm a
big fan of taking the position
that we don't have to reinvent
the wheel many other states are
doing things far better than we
are in mexico why don't we learn
from them follow their lead and
example in the for.
So mr chairman.
If you will
let's look at some of the states
that have waiting periods and
you just said that we would be
the longest always fourteen days
california's ten days district
of columbia is also ten days
washington state ten days.
Maryland minnesota new jersey
and rhode island seven days.
And then you get through florida
melanoi.
Which really tracked the federal
three day requirement for
those who cannot have the nice.
Background check completed its
three days.
That those folks have to wait
to.
So you said you wanted.
It seems to me that the standard
should be something less.
In this bill.
So if we want to standard.
Seems to me that we ought to.
Of all the states
the purpose of the legislation
as I understand your test money
mister chair and mr chair is
disabled lives and.
You pointed out to aside.
Of suicide or that suicide
constitutes sixty four percent.
So what let's focus on that for
a second.
The.
The.
Idea that most gun sales are
made to people who own guns
already.
Would you agree.
They already have guns.
I would respectfully disagree
senator but it's a it's a pretty
naught's point if you like an
explanation i'll tell you why of
course if I have a gun owner in
the household already has guns.
I agree with you it's not going
to be a.
In any way effective when it
comes to the.
I do think there is an.
The fact that people wait this
is going to be a pretty deep
dive so you'll forgive me.
The.
This is hard meeted there's
discuss with you publicly but
i'm gonna discuss my failings as
a human being when I go to a
sporting good store in there's.
The.
And I see uniting and I hear not
in behind i'm.
There is a visceral reaction by
me to say that's a that's a
really great thing that i'd l.
My kids are no different they go
to the checkout standard target
or whatever else in the stores
all know this they put them
objects next to the door that
you might want to pick up and
they
going down gun sales having
people think twice about it I
think candidly.
Well.
Reduced the number of guns in
our p.
I'm i'm giving you a motivation
that's not directly behind this
bill i'm just.
I think there are too many guns
in our s.
And I think slowing down the
sale just as a consumer frankly
not to restrict second amendment
rights not the right one again
but just the whole
again i'm i'm amused by the
nodding in the affirmation so
i'm getting behind me and
watching the committee that
people are home may not see it
but we're we're all smiling
because we know exactly what
that feels like.
I I go to the hardware store
here in santa fe the have my
favorite my favorite hardware
store in the states regular
saturday and i'll go into buy a
plour or hammer hoe shovel and
there's
weapons and guns.
I'll peruse the case.
And i'll think boy.
The.
The.
You know should I own that.
I don't I resist that but if I
had to wait fourteen days I
think i'd.
Mr mister chairman mr carol.
You're reaction in my reaction.
We're not.
We're not looking at th.
Yeah.
Suicide.
We are looking at that as.
Like everything else.
Dresses for some people suits
for others i'm I mean we have.
The items that we
really.
Like to acquire and possess I
guess.
Good.
Looking at it.
To commit the work to fulfil a
desire to kill ourselves we are
going there to fulfil whatever
other.
Desires that we may have.
The.
Like of of guns or our like of
automobiles are a like of
fashion or what happened but so
there's a bit of a difference
there
I I just wanted to make sure
that.
The purpose.
Really
discern what what the purpose is
and and you set out if the.
With your feelings
trying to restrict.
The number.
Is that something that weighed
into this or where is that is
your
expressing what's the settlement
in your heart do that rates the
less way said I say this is some
peril when I give you my answer
note that that is not a
motivation behind the bill I was
simply being very honest with
you that respect you so much and
I I do that as I said i'm i'm a
lousy politician and i've had a
limited ability to advance
myself politically because i'll
say things that are really
terrible to say which is yeah I
look at a shiny gun case of the
judge you're like to buy that
that's an emotion that I have
and I think frankly that's an
emotion that a lot of us have an
unblake i'll step really into it
it's it's a reaction that I
think man in particular have
over women and boy my stepping
deep into it is that a motorbig
motivation is at all absolutely
not i'm not a social association
i'm not a psychologist but but
you asked me earlier whether I
thought that this waiting period
would would slow down the sale
of guns and there's no doubt
about it I mean if you go into
any store they put them the
stuff they want you to buy.
At the counter or in the aisles
or on the proper display
I love this you know my wife's a
book offer you'd be surprised
how much effort goes into
deciding which books go with a
facing out as a post of facing
the spine in which books get
quite at eye level in which was
don't all of that's designed to
sell us as.
And i'm simply admitting to you
a weakness that I have as a
consumer which is yeah sometimes
i'm attempted to buy something
on an impulse that awaiting
period I know would slow me
down.
And so i'm i'm glad that to hear
that.
The.
That that
we're gonna focus on you know
prevention o.
Purpose purchases.
I don't I want to talk a little
bit about that.
When we when we.
Look at.
Data wondering if there's any
data available.
Thought of committing.
The.
That thought them.
In that bonus.
Time period is because if that's
the focus.
It seems to me that there are to
be some data the jess.
This.
Well there's two parts to
question if I may madam chair of
chair whoever.
Okay good to the chair I think
there's two parts to your
question first while in my way
of any such data
I i've got to believe it exists
but I don't have it for you and
I have not rec.
I do want to take your question
though because you mentioned it
and you refer to it earlier for
for the fourteen days plus out
of the air.
And then you talked about a
standard you compared us to
other states I didn't want to
address there.
I think it's important that we
compare new mexico other states
in many things that we do is
policy makers if we look at what
our income tax should be it's
very important for me to know
what they can come tax in their
past or texas is twenty miles
away because my two law partners
are residents of taxes and they
pay no income tax and I pay new
mexico and come tax comparing
our two states makes sense.
For many of our policy decisions
when it comes to comparing us to
other states for the waiting
period there's no in my mind
it's an unsecurity people on
this I would state to live in by
the waiting period I don't think
you were going to move out in
mexico because there's a better
waiting period and the other
state so comparing us.
As a standard to use your word
it did make sense for me to
compare other states simply as I
said and I I don't think I use
the word standard but if I did
the only reason that I compared
to their states was because.
And that gave me an idea of what
the hour.
Go and safety regulation s.
That's the only reason I made a
comparison but not to say that
well let's take a poll of the
other states and if half of the
states have ten days or half of
the states have five days that
to me is.
Mister jerely.
The point is I I think that.
The business days has a problem
because it does take us.
I do think we we do need to look
at the data.
With respect to the issue of
that period of time when one.
When they look.
They're going to look at.
As a state.
Justify.
Taking.
These car studio rights are
restricting these constitutional
rights and their ha.
Public purpose that's trying to
be
address.
May may support what you're
trying to do.
I might suggest that it doesn't
but but you know I think we as a
as a body.
Possibly.
Um.
Everybody's focused on you know
the second amendment article two
section six of our constitution.
Which deals specifically with
firearms but.
It was interesting this summer
as I was reading the c.
Article two section four.
Really.
Resomates with me with respect
to this issue.
M section four says all persons
are born equally free and have
certain natural and inherent and
and alienable rights among which
are the rights of it.
Of acquiring the scene and
protecting property.
And of seeking and obtaining
safety and happiness.
M what residents with me is that
we have an inherent and in the
alienable right two protect
ourselves.
And the concern I have with
respect to a waiting period if
we have somebody who is in a and
i'll use the words that were
expressed earlier a vulnerable
position.
Not because they want to comment
suicide but because of the fact
that somebody.
Whether it be of spouse former
spouse
with neighbor who ever if they
are in a vulnerable position and
our f.
This bill.
You've been it becomes law.
The.
From enjoying the constitut.
They cannot go to the guns.
Purchase.
The fire.
And armed themselves to give
them the safety that they
they're so desired and and so I
I have a real concern with that
aspect of it and.
The.
If we if we look at the bill.
I'd like to look at the top of
page two lines one and two
and have a couple of questions
there.
We have a number of places in
the state and a lot of
outfitters in the state who.
Have fire arms and
allow their firearms to be
utilised by.
Wanna know if in that context
and out fitter or.
The the one out that I know for
mail park up in cap call fax
county.
If somebody comes to their
place or higher than.
Are they
a seller of a firearm for a
temporary period
during that hunt and is the
client a buyer for that
temporary period if they use
that outfitters or that
game parks.
Firearm for purposes of that.
So
chairman senator the the answer
the question I think is on page
one lines twenty three through
twenty four which make this law
applicable to the sale of fire
and the transfer of the fire
there's no the word add their
means that the two concepts are
conjoined meaning there has to
be a sale and transfer together.
The example you gave
I guess could be argued to be a
sale if you're going to say that
allowing them.
But I don't think it's a sale of
a fire and and against senator
you as a lawyer who have a lot
of respect for.
You and I both know much of the
law and I work in requires an
exercise of judgment and
discretion on the part of
prosecutors and judges.
The example you gave I I don't
think would be so
the exactly gave a so absurd not
no notice respect to you that I
can't imagine a prosecutor is
going to prosecute an individual
under those circumstances it is
given a gun for a period of time
to go out on a hunt by seller
and proscute them for violating
this as a failure of the waiting
period I don't think any judge
or jury is going to believe that
there's a good beyond reasonable
doubt they would lead a
conviction of this law I I can't
imagine anybody with the.
And mr chair the reason why
question is.
It says transfer in.
Or physical control and well I
see the word sale on the first
page.
I I see that three things
qualify.
As.
Further in that and that's why I
wanted to understand whether the
client would be deemed a buyer
and whether the
outfitter or the game par.
What you're saying.
Not one that to be an issue and.
I I don't want any law
enforcement or any day thinking
that this.
Meets.
I want to make sure that nobody
could reasonably read that into
it so I appreciate your answer
and.
The.
Scoots that case would never be
elected
in some counties
and maybe a hero and others.
With respect to the
comments made by by mister
patterson.
From the cattle.
I I too
I did not.
I I think it's a real issue in
in my part of the country.
We have to travel
right destin.
We don't have to have access to
many of the things that that
those.
I do
particularly in some pretty
remote areas of the state.
Apple because it's literally out
in the middle.
Having to drive
is is an issue for them so I
would certainly say that that
that that comment is is a real
concern and that
there are instances where that
delay could prevent them from.
Engaging in the very pursuits
that they need to engage in
protecting their flock.
The.
Protecting their animals.
And if they're having to to to
travel.
It could
you know again it's a extreme
hypothetical.
And certainly.
Um.
The.
That.
The goal was to save lives and
you.
The.
A lot of people.
M and so again the
constitutional analysis
requires us to narrowly tailor.
These types of bills to.
The.
Over that there's a legitimate
public interest and it's well
defined and that it is maril.
Yeah.
Real need.
Yeah.
When you look at waiting.
We're going to have to do two
things.
We have to I think find s.
The regulation is going to.
The.
It goes be on.
Where really because.
Also.
So.
Have to wait.
Terminate with.
So we we do have some federal p.
I'm not aware of any supreme
court decisions dealing with
five days seven days.
Maybe that answer will be
addressed but I don't.
Miss miss chairman may may just
address something briefly yes
that are neighborhood you know
you you have raised the issue
that i've read about in the
press.
Again the issue between calen.
I think the better solution
would be.
I and the others who in the room
who are attorneys now we have
you and I have an entire rule in
our rules of procedure to define
how we count the difference
between calendar days and
business days and it turns into
which are federal holidays and
whether it's a sunday gets
catered on some days and whether
the money you're going to have
an entire book of law and how we
count what are considered to be
business days under the law.
There's an ambiguity sometimes
at least even disputes and and.
Calling a calendar days would be
more clear would lead to less
confusion would not require a
lot agree to determine whether
you're going to count the
holidays or what holidays you do
count and don't count it it
should probably.
The.
I don't know whether that's a
motion that you prepare prepared
to make but I would consider the
friendly amendment number one
number two give you a great
chance to welcome yourself to
the s.
Mr chair mister jarwit would you
consider three calendar days
you're you're pushing yourself
a little bit center and wanted
to give you a moment of
welcome to the set and and it's
a good suggestion that's a good
recommendation I think i've
given a reason why I think it
will make a clearer law for
people to interpret but well for
the record I would prefer three
calendar days but but I will
certainly make the motion to
strike the word business and put
in calendar because I do think
that's more clear although I
still have a problem
fourteen days.
Page two page wind line twent.
Like the word business after the
word.
Calendar.
Thank you mister.
Wanted to take a look at the
title and it doesn't we don't
need to amend the title.
It is military lead to a clearer
law that could be interpreted by
late persons and not require an
understanding of was it rul.
I'm looking at my law school
professor in my colleagues I I
think it's rural six but we for
those of your dollars we haven't
entire set of rules on how you
compute the number of days we
don't want to go there calendar
days calendar i'm sorry I don't
mean just respect to sir my
sister for your your over here I
might say to you know this we
all don't want to know how to
read the.
Calendar days
even though I made the motion
you know I still employ your to
look at.
What I w.
Yeah.
The.
Even though we aren't now at the
extreme we are at we're joined
hawaii.
Frankly the fede.
The committee appreciate it
very.
He's got being somebody that has
to drive a long ways i'm always
looking for a good new book so I
will book it pulled up earlier I
would sure like.
If we can get no
good a good listen and on the
four hour drive back to back to
god's country down there so.
Senator thank you for your
compliment of my reading ran
out.
Fumbling.
So we apologize for that however
I would strongly recommend to
you a series of audio tapes that
you can download called the
history of wrong and it's
fascinating there they started
in fifteen hundred so it's in
the eventually ground to thirty
cover ramulus remiss right
through the republic for five
hundred.
Actually amazingly.
Killed itself about the by
ego's at the end of the day but
how amazingly stable the world.
And everyone raised color creed
none of that made any difference
it was you were if you were.
Were from the east and west
that's fascinating sorry about
that well so we I think it's
just
you know I I just miss chair I I
will just give one morning.
They were just little comically
cut the tent yeah
awesome okay thank you so much
mister jerry sort of
started here for just a.
There's a run center servant as
much gerstner sarantes
I do appreciate the the demeanor
and and reasonable ness and the
truthfulness in which you have a
present your arguments here
I too have to wait through some
of the unreasonable arguments
for this bill one you know i'm a
rancher i'm going to disagree
with cattle girls on this you
know a ranchers got a few guns
lane around that you know and
for example I bought my about my
son a rifle for christmas we'd
ordered it month before didn't
show up so.
For five days before christmas
we bought another gun that's not
a reasonable argument I
understand though that would
have been.
We know that some of these
arguments simply do not hold
water
but let's agree if you will.
You know how our examination for
discovery here I guess in
finding some of the common
ground that we have that.
What we're talking about here is
essentially domestic violence
and suicide is that can we agree
on that.
Settle with regard to waiting
period yes okay I think that's.
So the heart of the heart of the
issue here is.
And and suicide both of which
are extr.
The.
Can you walk us through the
process just quickly on how we
buy firearm you've obviously
purchased many what what is that
what is the process right.
Mister chairman center.
You know you said you couldn't
get a gun that we are expecting.
Um let me let me be clear what
is involved in what is not
involved for example.
You'll have one in alberto I
can't go into cabellas in all
past by going I can't buy.
Well as.
That doesn't work.
Shop around the store for a
twenty or thirty minutes while
they run.
No civils I get now that's
that's one yeah that the other
example was.
The.
I'll just tell you to again
again it might perild bomb
really put my heart out there
with all of you.
Period of one month or two
months by that gun there were
more than.
Gets back to the whole.
Hope that's the same exper.
And let me just go back I want
to thank you for at least
acknowledging that some of the
arguments we get.
It defies
any common sense or logic and.
Described it as a ranch we had
we had more than afghans on the
ranch one.
Five hundred miles to stay in
business for my cattle business.
I'll just walk a little bit
through what the background.
So you walk.
I believe it's a form.
I call the federal.
Off of being able to.
But after that in the pr.
Assess all these.
Mister chairman servant is does
the fair fail the federal
firearms license the dealer at
that point is he obligated to
give that pers.
I'm i'm not sure and follow your
question entirely so but i'm
going to try and see if I get it
okay
you're touching on something
that's I think far field of
this.
Put a proposed bill but it's
it's important discussion to
have
I don't want the press is still
here i'll pray get myself in.
This is where congress is.
With the public
I think we've heard indirectly
will let's be clear for everyone
if you run this background check
and and there's a flag if I meet
anything.
Fl the dealer is obligated to
hold that.
And not allow the purchase for
three days.
To presumably allow for greater
inquiry and invest.
Congress is got less is that in
the federal law that the next
step is that if they don't get
back to in three days to deal
with you should.
So that the presumption of the
default is to give you the gun
even when they haven't had time.
And they're terribly dishonest
because we think that there's a
background check being run but
th.
Whatever reason there is for not
running that background check
the presumption is we'll give
you the gun
it's an absurd.
Way of doing business and and
it's congress is way of saying
we're we're we're doing this
background check but
it's a pretty half house wave of
doing.
My question was that if you walk
in a.
You know maybe alcohol or
something like that but you pass
everything perfectly or your
you're talking you know about
hurting your wife.
The the
the the dealer that told him the
federal firearms license is
obligated not to give you the
gun even though.
Because well sorry we've we've
had some we've had some things
come up in.
They are at risk of having the.
Just as somebody in the alcohol
serving business have certain.
Who's beyond capacity they are
now responsible if that p.
That is a that is AAA doub.
There is a point on that.
So security know.
It's compromise.
And we do have some checks in
that going back to something
that was said earlier about the
impulse buying.
Okay.
Silencers there is a waiting
period for si.
The.
For that reaso.
Because.
Three months and just get one
cause but you buy silences in
lots of silencers so I go
through you do this or speak in
hypothetically well I have
purchased them in lot and that's
what and that's what a waiting
period does for me I go woman
have to wait for three months so
I miss well b.
So that you know
you know my first has been
quinched or whatever that may be
and so I would submit that if we
go back and look historically
whenever firearms bills are
introduced that the best stock
to be trading.
And glock and all of the.
And so I would submit that in a
fact
we could have the potential same
lot bine.
And you run in there and you say
well i'm going to wait a few
days or you know whatever it is
you know I only come to town
once ever two years come
arrangement wherever.
I will close with just one thing
I am.
Obviously not a doctor or a
doctor of jerusalem separate.
But in the new mexico state
constitution article to section
six and you're familiar with.
It's the right of the citizen to
keep and bear.
And still not being a doctor of
jears prudence as many view.
Fourteen day waiting period
whether it's business or
counterdays.
Would deprive a s.
Thank you senator next we go to
senator hicky to be followed by
senator mckenna.
Mr caesar.
The.
Thank you.
And hell to obvious here
and doubt.
To my colleague who is dreamed
as bill forward
i'm gonna come at this as a
doctor of matte.
Mental health it d.
I am not a.
Psychiatrist.
So I don't.
The.
But
senator servantes may be us.
But.
I believe that I recall that
most gun des occur.
A family member.
Or friend
much more or the majority than
random what have you is there
and i.
Thank you
so
knowing what I know from my
years.
My own family lived experience
around.
And uh and.
The.
In the two often.
I always have a double diagnosis
I can tell you that.
My oldest.
It's one of the most delightful
wonderful.
And experience.
Could still be that charming
person that also be a monster.
Very very capable and I think if
we all look at our own family
experiences will find some.
Evidence of addiction vari.
It's a lot of it is genetically.
The.
And the mixture of that and
emoti.
And conflict particularly.
In indiv.
In experience yesterday.
Can become through a
circumstance.
To themselves.
And to be able to procure a
firearm in this kind of and who
may be able to very may not have
a past record anywhere but may
be able to go in and get a fire
are and react to the emotion and
the influen.
And a
and sometimes these flares in in
people with metal and stability
and or addiction benches or
whatever you want to have they
can last for days maybe even
weeks I am very afraid that
without a lot.
The deaths.
Are people who really don't mean
it
who in there more normal frame
of mine with realize that they
had
had a flare of the mental
disconnect and and had they had
a firearm and of course people
have firms and how was already
in or could use it but often and
the impulse go on by
and then you know in many ways
for just finding out about the
brain and the the shiny object
senator survived is that you
talk about I mean we're all
subject to it it is a normal
human.
Reaction and how the shiny
object and.
Time of individual instability
in emotional health whatever
reason
they cross over.
And there's no background i.
It's mostly interesting or put
our personal personal.
And and having seen it in my
practice
certainly.
Metal health in my family and in
other families and in so many
friends.
Confidence.
It's very pervasive and I think
it has a great d.
And therefore I can not see an
understand why other than we all
got to shiny object impulse in
this I get it.
Why waiting fourteen days as any
detriment and and and your
mercurshen able.
You know what's the matter with
the planning ahead but with the
potential of.
The motional disfunction.
That can be go over a line I
mean I think we've all seen it
in our s.
Compounded.
And with a gun potentially
entering into an equation then
there are.
And so as a physician.
I strongly support.
Given the circumstances that we
are all.
And therefore it really makes
great sense to me because
usually within a fourteen day
period there's some intervention
from someone to c.
And that I think is absolutely
worth the waiting for and highly
support.
Thank you senator hickey next is
senator mckenna and will be
wrapping up the senator
tomorrow.
The.
Okay all right thank you
chairman thank you senator
sirvantes for carrying this bill
I wasn't going to comment this
committing meeting but I decided
I need to
I have lost seven family and
friends.
To a suicide by firearm.
Two of those
due to murder suicide.
Five of the seven here are new
mexico.
And the reason why I am sharing
it publicly.
Is because my experience in this
state is not an outliar.
New mexico has the eleventh
highest rate of gun violence in
this country.
Eleven.
The.
New mexico has the fourth
highest rate of guns suicides
and attempts in this country.
New mexico in new mexico sixty
percent of gun debts are
suicide.
Compared to fifty seven percent
nationwi.
And we all are the population of
our state.
Every year in new mexico
approximately two hundred and
ninety three people die by
firearm.
I do not know.
Where those seven people secured
the firearms to kill themselves.
I do not know if they bought the
firearms themselves or if they
had easy access to.
I'm supporting this bill because
it's gonna likely reduce
suicide by firearm here new
mexico
because empirical evidence
suggests.
That they act in the moment.
It's brief.
But there is heightened
vulnerability when they do it.
Ninety percent of suit I suicide
attempts and and death.
Compared to all other.
And mr chairman and senator
colleagues.
This this is brightening and
this is where I think this bill
should have become wrong.
Is going to affect this these
alarming numbers.
So there was a study in houston
and that they asked people ages
thirteen to thirty four who had
survived a near leather suicide
attempt.
They were asked how much time
had passed.
Between them when they decided
to take their lives and when
they actually made the.
Twenty four percent said less
than five minutes.
Forty eight percent said less
than twenty minutes.
Seventy percent said less than
an hour.
The.
And eighty six percent said less
than eight hours.
So with this bill.
Waiting the fourteen what we
amend it to calendar days.
Will definitely affect.
Whether some.
The.
The.
So this bill.
Is right for us is right for new
mexico and you have.
Thank you senator mckenna
finally senator tomorrow thank
you mister
thank you center civilized
bringing this
bill forward.
I say I was
applied to for that
like it is so.
The senator so.
The.
A concealed weapon permit.
Question training making
application for for a year.
That's correct.
So.
Successful and getting a
protective.
It goes out.
So she has no is never used
again.
The.
Without the training.
Know how to properly and safely
use the guy.
That correct so you would say
she be at a distinct disad.
I'm sorry not only disadvantage
I think statistically in
imperatively towed the guns
gonna be taken from where it's
gonna be used against her
i've i've.
I've been around so long so the
right carrier the concealed.
I was a deciding vote to approve
a concealed carry law new mexico
and at the time I insisted in
return for my vote that the
trading that's required now was
a condition for my support.
As a deciding vote at the time
in the house unless that
requirement was imposed and I
bring it up to response to your
question because i'll just tell
you that they're I think that's
very important I think your
points very important which is
anybody who's going to carry a
farm should demonstrate
proficiency and those of us that
are responsible good owners.
I think do that routinely and
demonstrate professions he will
weapon could because you're
right you can give that weapon
to somebody who's in experience
with it or untrained with it and
there there are a greater danger
to themselves.
Oh thank you I think it was.
The.
Very high.
Study.
Dead.
Researchers find zero evidence
of any kind of protec.
Most americans don't say they
own guns.
To protect themselves and there
are love ones but a study
published this week suggests
people who live in hand owners I
shot the death at a higher rate
those who don't have such
weapons at home this was
conducted by
its stanford.
They found a zero evidence of
any kind of protective effects
of living at a home with a hand
gun
who was the option of the study
was published in the analysis
internal medic.
In particular researchers found
people who live at the hand
going orders had a much higher
rate of being fatally shot by a
spouse or internet partner the
vast majority of such victims
eighty four percent or women so
living with a hand going on a
particularly increased risk of
being shot the death and
domestic violence incident and
did that provide any protection
against being killed at home by
a stranger.
So.
The united states.
Among the minor industrialized
countries we have the highest
percentage of of killings.
Hi got.
This country.
Voda bill defense.
As a man as amended.
Yeah.
Senator hickey
yes center in my sts yes center
mccurtin
center mechanic yes
senator neighbor
centers maybe
center city a lot of yes senator
tommen yes center to the pinoch
yes
mister when I know you've give
me a lot of time I appreciate
the committee you know
consideration in a good debate
discussion if I can just add one
last minute of your time well
we've been talking about book
reviews here today let me
commend to those of you who have
been asking entering a refers
principles i'm in the middle of
reading it right now it's a
combination of both what you're
talking about it talks about the
founders why should in jefferson
hamilton and they're reliance on
roman
wall and greek principles and
ideology it's a terrific read
and I i'll just tell you that
every time I come into this
session in any session I spent a
lot of my time reading the
writings about the founders of
the country because recatively I
think they would be sorely
disappointed in us with with the
democracy
as it finds it herself today and
I do that maybe reaffirm
why i'm here and what I am
trying to continue for their.
Sir thank you very much senator
servant will go to senator
branch and besides the bill
we're going to start with if you
want to do your second one will
do that right away.
So this is
the committee sub percentage
bill eighty seven.
Okay we'll be passing it out.
We're going to get that rate so
if I leave that one on we'll
have a problem yeah
again in these mikes so so not
really
we have the committee sub now
it's been passed out did you
want to run through that with
yeah thank you mister chairman
and in this one's quite a bit
different first while we took
out the section that we passed
last committee meeting because
obviously we don't need to pass
that twice we had already moved
that forward so that was taken
out of this
worked with the union and and
basically adopted their
suggestions
demands whichever you want to
call it but I think there were
well thought and then we we
added some more players um so if
you look on page eight and this
was dealing with some of your
comments senator on making sure
that we're covering the office
of the courts out of things like
that's if you look on page eight
that's where the expansion comes
in
besides what the the.
We added in the courthouse
security officers emergency
medical dispatchers emergency
medical technicians firefighters
and public safety
telecommunicators so that takes
care of all of our dispatch it
takes care of our basic girl our
first responders so that they.
The definitions of all those.
Theme.
Entry the kind of interview
thank you that that's very and
so this this does keep everyone
at the entry level positions
thirty six months is what they
come back for they have to have
already been retired so by
december of last year.
Needed and was messed and then
they have to start it back by.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience and see
if there is anybody who wants to
speak in support or get support
or against support will take you
first.
You want you come up and use it
we have a hand held mike
yep that's the one
on my headline to the
thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is joyous person i'm the
executive director for new
mexico counties what you see
before you is very similar to
what we have been working on for
the last two years we were
facing a crisis situation with
vacancies specific to detention
centers and we brought that
before the legislature last year
we did have opposition from the
unions we worked to put in guard
rails that they were comfortable
with to make sure that we're
really getting the focus on the
areas that we need this year in
the fall we had ongoing
negotiations to talk about other
areas of public safety that also
needed assistance with that
we've had several discussions
with sponsor brand we are
thrilled that they are listening
to this concern for front line
for public safety that's much
broader and with that our entire
board has a voted this is a
priority and we would appreciate
your support thank you sir thank
you thank you missus person a
kid or bundy and then you'll get
to check.
Hi mr chairman members of the
committee carter bonded with
asked me I cannot think senator
brand enough he really listened
to our concerns I know there are
a lot of issues with vacancies
around the state we thought it
was critically important that
this focused on front line
public safety workers and I
think that's exactly what you
have in this bill I will say
that the only piece I cannot
come in on is the firefighter
piece just because they were
going to be respectful of if
i've asked them to weigh in
santa brand his graciously
agreed to talk to if if we need
to cha.
But you know I think we're going
to get more people on the front
lines without hurting the
overall labor market for any of
the stuff I think it still gives
incentives for compensation
increases and the kind of
activity we need to really build
robust work forces on the front
lines for public safety and I
think that will actually trickle
up to middle and upper
management as well I want to
think this committee for your
keeping it here in really
holding all of our feet to the
fire and again center brand
absolute pleasure to work with
you and that we hope to get this
through.
Great
chief.
Good afternoon again try we
search even to mexico state
police
i'll be brief since I talked for
a little bit longer now when
they reference this bill but we
do still stand in support we
know several changes have been
ma.
Thank you
mr secretary.
Thank you chief mister chair
members of the committee I will
also take the sponsor center
breath to bring this forth of
been standing in front of
committees for several years now
advocating for this to make sure
that we can continue to bring
people back to law enforcement
as that said in previous years
where losing talents they go out
of state and it's really been
very regretful and people want
to return the work there are
very many people that can help
us with the shorts that we have
and so dps we stand in strong
support.
Standard support of this bill.
After new members of the
committee and mr chairman I
think if this was a handheld
burrito would be more popular.
The greater alba cookie chamber
of commerce summer registered
lobby lobbyist for support
senate bill eighty seven at this
offers a concrete financial
incentive to help trained
officers return to work by
allowing some retired members of
the public employees retirement
association return to work and
keep their pension benefit this
program has a real chance of
increasing the number of
experienced law enforcement
corrections and probational
parallel officers in our state
and the chamber of commerce
strongly supports the bill thank
you.
Chairman my name is great
personally maybe a little
misleading in the uniform but
i'm actually also the deputy
county manager for burning
county and I have the youth
detention center who falls
underneath my umbrella and I
stand and support this in an
effort to try to take our
staffing that is currently at
forty two percent up higher
hopefully with some who have
retired and have an insistent
coming back to work so I was
support in that aspect.
And you heard my my comment.
Thank you.
Oh
I speak in and support.
I just didn't sometimes I can't
capture the words in the sounds
in there hearing in the additory
processing now at the same time
my apologies mister chair is
their chairman is in the
committee I stand and support
this bill.
I believe that
it will create more
opportunities than them as there
are quite a few retired folks
that are volunteer firefighters
are volunteer empties and
doctors to get as it is one of
them i'm not speaking on his
behalf it's just someone that I
have who has a great deal of
experience and I support this
bill I have family members that
have been in law enforcement in
fire.
In empties and also with the
fire department in other states
but thank you very much.
Hi my name is derek scott and
you hear me before but I mean
mister chair members of the
committee.
I'm definitely in support of
this this is the one I was
really looking forward to when I
saw this come up I was so
excited because.
I was will chair bound but come
to find out I still have my
issue but I was also looking
spinal fluid and that's what was
keeping me in the chair.
It was a medical issue but it's
been resolved to where I can
walk again and i'm looking
forward to getting back into law
enforcement.
From my red medical I was
medically retired so i'm really
in supported this behalf and so
is the the f l m m l p.
And also a lot of other people
that I just talked to that are
saying yeah I mean we have a
massive shortage in albuquerque
bernardio so.
This can help I think start.
The process of getting it
forward and when I was running
for sheriff in berliel county in
the primary this is one of the
things that I would suggesting
was that we bring back
retirement and also people with
maybe my disabilities or had
some type of issue they they can
come back maybe a spatch or some
other position to get more
people back out on the streets
so I am profusionally hide
supported this bill and I really
thank you guys for let me speak
thank you so much.
And mister chairman I will say
i've never had the union
actually say it's been great to
work with me so yeah we're word.
I'm working for it
I could.
The.
Center.
I will
express some concerns I know you
you've probably reached this
compromise and yeah.
The.
I try to hire a road
or a heavy
equipment operator in southeast
new mexico at this p.
To my right can confirm this but
I wrote departments have been a
horrible time because there are
so many jobs available on the.
Retirees come back as heavy
equipment operators and stuff
they're not on the list
and some secretarial positions
would not be included and then
the other thing I point out is
that.
Only people this would be
applicable or people who are
already retired before the
effective date of this fill and
then it.
Seven.
So I see this as a bad day to to
fix part of the problem but it's
certainly not fixing the problem
that that i'm aware of and and
my county with respect to the
br.
Reforming tasks for the citizens
of my ca.
I'm glad that we we may have.
Fully address I think some of
the needs and some of the
counties probably again.
May be fine for all.
I agree.
I think.
The bridge.
To give us time.
Mainly dealing with law
enforced.
We can't address every.
When we have people that either
don't want to work or are no one
move into new mexico so we've
got to cha.
I think that's the.
I'm hoping that this provides a
subredge to deal with some of
our crime issues.
Which is the biggest emergency
we have
but there's a lot of other fires
going.
I want to congratulate you
because I can see this is a lot
of work for you and the bill
drafter and a lot of eyeballs
i'm sure saw this before it was
ready so way to go
and yeah i'm really excited to
s.
Senator higgie.
Yes center mast s yes senator
mccurten
center mechanic yes senator
neighbor.
Center is that you're looking
yes senator tomman
center it's easy penalty.
Yes and you have a due pass
senator brent congratulations
now you have two other bills but
I think let's do the one o two
right now the racketeering and
we're going to hold the
revertable presumption to the
end because it's yeah.
So let's do one or two now thank
miss chairman and and.
I chairman hopefully my expert
will come back and but
your
this is the reco statute and
which deals with organized crime
as I met with the attorney
general i.
Secretary steel both of them
said if I could pass one thing
this would be at
and then and listening to
testimony in front of the lfc I
was listening online so
you can let people know that
occasionally some people listen
online.
Maybe it's just lawmakers in our
part of the committee but as I
was listening to the days
association they actually
brought this up as their number
one concern it was our
ecostation
and so we took those those
concerns began working with them
and and crafted this bill to
expand and it's a it's of large
expansion our rego statute was
very narrow
it did not address
at least directly some of our
most haines crimes like human
trafficking and sexual
exploitation of children was not
covered under our current recost
atching this now does and it
does very specifically the other
area that wasn't really covered
in this which is actually where
we see a lot of the concerns is
a gang activity they were not
actually included in organized
crime and so we actually
specifically named them and
organized crime and then defined
what again.
And so this is making sure that
we can go after our gangs which
is actually where most of our
organized crime is coming from
nowadays
now I kind of had the old school
idea of doing a gang to ask for
you remember when we used to do
those.
And they were like well i'll do
respect we know you're a little
older but that is not the way to
be fight that type of crime
anymore
and we really need to do it
through the reco statute right
now most of our reconstatute
violations are are done in
federal court because our lawns.
You could come in we've been
in senate rules we've been
confirming
over the less several days and
weeks several members of the
governor's organized crime
commission yes and then that's
who supposed to be here with
yeah they were they were an
entity that was on the books for
a long time and and kind of
fallen into
this use nobody nope they were
doing anything they stopped
being appropriate money and it
is kind of better but they're
still on the books we ask them
what are you working I know that
we revive this and governors
crime organized crime commission
and these are the things.
These are the things they're
working they're working on a
human trafficking they're
working on
criminal
sexual exploitation of children
now if if you could if you could
help us just what's the point
all these are illegal already.
Why is making it eligible for
records status
help or in any way change things
well what what we see isn't and
brought harders on his way back
to be my expertise.
Think there was some crossing
communication they thought maybe
this wasn't going to get hurt
but I don't know if the chief.
A press yeah it's really across
prosecutor of thing to make it
easier to prosecute so if you
can prove that this is an
unbrella of organization behind
these activities of a group.
The reacos at you one of the
other areas where you saw this
used.
Is to go after the mafia.
Where they couldn't get the head
of the snake but with the reco
statute they were able to
because th.
So if you turn.
Mexico stay police I am not a
prosecutor in attorney nor did I
stay at a hardly and expressed
last night but I will do my best
wing the this parts are
racketeering is basically a.
It's a statue specifically
designed to target or organize
crime organized.
It allows for enhanced
enforcement allows.
Here's your expert.
So you'll get saved from the
organized crime commission good
so the question was all of these
activities are already illegal.
What's the point of making them
eligible.
When we add these things to the
rico statute.
It gives prosecutors more tools
in their toolbelt acc.
The overall.
So one not just an additional
charge but a charge such as
attempt to comment racketeering
that allows them to charge other
people within th.
So allows it allows other people
in the organization that maybe
didn't just they they
participated in some of these
criminal activities.
But they are in the main person
who who did whatever these
numerated crimes.
Human trafficking.
For example human trafficking
these have been this is turning
to a very complex network the
cartels are using multiple
people on the chain i'm a lot of
these people are one person's
warning the stash house that's
answering to somebody else so if
we by adding human trafficking.
Two the reco statute were able
to attack every chain in the
organization and is this this
legislation endorsed by the.
Mister chair yes it is
absolutely
mister secretary did you want to
add anything to.
And support this legislation as
well when a senator brand first
restaurant to the part of public
safety looking for initiative as
you mentioned.
Of being a commission member of
the organized crime commission.
At that particular time to have
a director hard here take a look
at some of the pro.
Provisions provided for.
I can tell you that director
hard here has been doing nothing
but working on organized crime
and understand.
Excellent good senator in this
german I also got a note from
from one of my other experts
that it also makes it a second
refelony
and makes it where you can
forfeit the items that are used
utilized.
Did you used to be a prosecutor.
Okay all right let us go to the
audience yesterday it's your
heart just to clarify so.
I I don't want this to be
confused it's not civil asset
this is an entirely different
process so it's criminal asset
for future it's also me it can
be done lightly it's something
that requires a lot of effort as
a should but it does allow us to
to pursue those types of avenues
where going after these criminal
organizations okay
all right let's go to the
audiences or anyone here and
supported the spill yes.
The.
They thank you mister chairman
of the committee i'm jady
bullington representing the grab
greater alba cookie chamber of
commerce and I just want to
briefly re emphas.
This legislation offers though.
To deal with c.
So can target the leaders of
such enterprises who solicit or
co ors other people including
biners into being a member.
Yes sir.
The new mexico state polices.
Support of this bill in just
like mentioned before we could
it actually.
We could go after the chain of.
Illegal activity not just the
lower.
Anyone else anybody in
opposition to this bill.
Yes
sorry mister chair members of
the committee i'm dear scott
it's not that I too oppose it I
think everything's great in it I
just think there's a little
wording problem in the end where
it says groups three or more of
a group it's I believe that it
should be three.
Persons three or more persons.
Committing a crime because
groups it's like well they could
just go after anybody who
organizes as a group with three
or more meaning.
Somebody like though my party
for instance you don't like they
could be like all while you're
you're you're a group down so
you're criminal so that's just
our concern of it is that it
criminalizes an organized group
and not an organized people as
committing a crime.
Anybody else.
Members of the anybody.
Members of the committee senator
said the olympics you're first
thank you I really appreciate
the purpose of this bill.
Because we had a presentation in
courts and corrections.
I don't even remember if it's
this summer or those summer
before.
Brought the issue to us were all
of the all of the non profits
that work with the victims.
And work what you know and so we
got to type.
And one of the big points they
made is that new mexico is an
attractive state for organized
crime because our laws are so
weak so for that I really really
appreciate this build
there's a just a.
But if you would be willing to
do this is be amazing but there
are just a few things that I
think about this bill and that
is a lot of the people who are
traffic are not.
And one of the issues that they
have and they brought to us
is that sometimes they have
difficulty getting the u visa
or the tea lisa.
Timely in a way that they would
feel comfortable cooperating
with law enforcement.
And this build is an address
that problem and and I think we
need these tools in the tool box
and III doubt if you'd want to
bend to put a whole uvisa into
tv process to ensure that.
And i'll just tell you some
problems we heard about that
some of when particular surf
sheriff I guess it the prior
shirt I guess we should remain
unnamelist but i'll say he was
from burning the county would.
Apparently.
Use his judgement about whether
or not there'd be a t v sir and
safe you know you know you
worked as a prostitute we're not
gonna we're not going to process
which is not his.
The is not law enforcement's
job.
Line enforcement.
It needs to certify whether the
individual cooperated or not
they should not be exercising
judgment about whether this
person deserves it or or is
entitled to it that is something
for the federal government in
the immigration process to do
it's not more enforcement
role but particularly that put
that share if we heard stories
of really inappropriate.
Decisions being made which is
also hampering the the
prosecution of these cases so I
I just really want to highlight
and raise that issue if you are
interested in working with me on
including something to protect
the individuals the victims and
I mean victims listening to some
of their stories are erasing I
would be thrilled to work you
with your method and I
appreciate you ask me to sign it
and.
I I one of the things that I
always do is I tried to talk to
his close to the community
affected by this as I can I
wasn't able to talk to victims
who showed up but i.
I don't see the nonprofits that
were complaining about the.
The.
The last year a new mexico.
I would like to see them before
I sign off on it I want to
attract them to this bill.
And I want them to look at it
and see if it doesn't have any
unintended consequences from
their perspective cause i'm
always surprised when I think
something is a good idea and
then I take it to the people who
are affected and they point out
how this is going to affect them
and to me the thing that jumps
out on me is this bill doesn't
protect the victims who are
coming forward when you use this
act.
In an item and I I think yes we
need to make the law stronger
but I I think not having that
tool to protect the the victims
is going to make this law not.
Not his i'm not going to say not
effective i'm gonna say not his
effective his it could be in
tackling the problem of
human trafficking and sexual
sole other things like that all
of the things criminal sex
sexual prinities
and iteration all of the things
that you're adding without that
element.
I just worry about this and so
until I see that support from
the the advocates work directly
with the victims i'm not going
to sign off on it i'm going to
vote for today but I will tell
you if I hear problems from them
between down the floor i'll
vote.
Problems that they suggest to me
I just have been too busy to be
quite frank this week to have
that conversation with them
german senator I I totally
understand that I have been.
So if you hear from any of those
groups.
Please tell him to contact my
office I would be glad to meet
with them I do unders.
Talk about that is in the human
trafficking buildings in the
house so this is the first time
I that it's been brought up I
have no problem actually
considering that lo.
But we can look at doing that I
want to make sure that if
someone is a victim I don't.
And if they are of the democrat
then we need to make sure that
they're able to come forward and
that crime is able to be
prosecuted with the reason
they're here.
I am documented is because of
the trafficking.
Right absolutely.
Consider doing that and work on
that between here.
Two folds I had the way the
organized crime commission has
looked at this as more this is
overall for racketeering it's
brought and then we have a human
trafficking bill that we're it's
in the house that's more fleshes
out specific.
And and what that's going to do
is it how offers a lot more
protection for victims it adds a
lot more in these.
I will just regard a new visa my
understanding is that while it
is the state that can get the
ball rolling at the end of the
day there's a very little weak
we have very little power over
whether those are granted that
kind of thing and so we.
We had some question as to how
much language we can even add I
don't I don't know that we're
able to actually constrain the
federal government by adding
language regarding them thank
you mister chair I i'm been
working on a you visa bill for
about a year and I agree with
you it's ex.
Because.
And and this is what i've come
to believe by working on this
bill which I didn't ask for a
call it's kind of a long story
but.
You we can direct the law
enforcement and the
prosecutors who certify the tv
sir.
It how to do it in a timely way
and we can also direct them not
to use their judgement about
what someone is worthy and
direct them to stick to the
federal criteria.
And so I think that's the way of
just while we can control the
federal government of course not
we can inte- control the state
piece of it that feeds into the
federal government and that's
what i've been working on with
this and i'll be working on the
visa.
For quite a while I had a bill
last year that had some problems
I went I understand but i'd be
happy to show that research
I think it is.
If you want to do it in this
biller or however you do it I
would be happy to share that
resource that research end up
and provide those protections.
To
to people who.
Miss german and thank you center
and and with more of the
explanation of what the human
traffic being bill does you know
this is just pulling that into
this.
So that human trafficking bill
should be where I think that tv
says addressed and hopefully
they're gonna h.
That human trafficking bill
will address that issue and then
this bill just picks up that
human trafficking under what's
in the law for human trafficking
is covered under rachel.
Mr chair what would happen if
only one bill mak.
The.
And then I agree but that's what
we currently have I just don't
know if we put it in here.
The constraints of this bill is
to bring in what what.
What crimes are covered under
racket hearing does that make
sense it's I don't know if we
want to go into explanations of
what those crimes are because
then we're we're completely
rewriting the crack criminal
code as we did that on every
single issue in.
But I am willing to check
thank you mister said i'm
working on this complete I i'm
going to vote yes in this
committee with those
reservations.
Thank you senator anybody else.
Possible the committee
we have emotion for a dupass
from senator tom and seconded by
senator neighborhood.
Any other discussion questions
secretary will call the rule
senator hiki center my asked us
center in my curtain center
mechanic yes senator neighbor
senator smith is center city a
lot best yes center at all men
yes center disappearance yes.
Yeah that's right well thank you
you have another due personal
senator you're betting one
thousand today
we have two more bills we're
going to take up so we're going
to do senator gonzalez's bill on
the telstra medical facility on
our grid the only bill in our
grid today and then senator had
a meals bill for the
firefighters.
And that's it we're going to
roll if anybody's here for the
presentative.
Rebuttle rebuddlable presumption
against release we're gonna rule
that
thank you senator.
So now we have the tous.
And that's one are grid we have
a grid somewhere
it's in the.
Senate bill one thirteen
senator gonzalez welcome good to
see you
thank you all mister chairman
voiced her members with the
sooner bill one thirteen member
system this is asking for
thirteen i'm sorry fi.
And though what this would do
is right now with the the
hospital in towers it's very
limited in space and this would
give the opportunity for the new
doctors that have been hired to
be able to have adequate speech
to work with no well the land is
available we have the land
little telescony is the owner of
the facility and they're in
agreement to be the physical
agent and then I have to expert
witnesses in about they can give
you a little bit of more of a
detail you know where we are as
far as the need so where mister
james kaiser the ceo for a holy
cross hospital and mister brent
had a meal test county manager
mr kays are go ahead thank you
center members of the senate i'm
james guys around the holy cross
medical center it's our name
implies are heritage dictates
that we provide care particular
with preferential treatment to
the poor and vulnerable.
Sinter gonzalez we are a small
rule independent critical access
hospital we are not managed to
own by some out of state
corporation.
And that allows us to serve in
the best interest of the people
of our area and not dictated as
a call center to try to cut
ourselves to prosperity.
Our purpose are mission is
response to need.
A center gonzalez and some
county commissioners or at a
recent board meeting and our
heart overheard our challenges
we surveyed the community and
the number one request and unmet
need is access to primary care.
We have aging positions on our
community and at a minimum to
meet our population's demands we
need at least six additional
physicians to provide primary
care services and tales ca.
There's an investment a return
on the investment for primary
care.
Already and they are seek those
that can have to trouble great
distances the santa fe are
albuquerque just to get basic
primary care those that don't
have the means over on
overwhelmed are emergency
department.
We are seeing fifty to a hundred
patients every day and i'm to
department.
The request was for access to
primary care and urgent care or
a walk in clinic.
That can be a focus on wellness
that can deter downstream cost
by keeping patients healthy and
not showing up in our merchant's
department as train racks.
And having very costly care.
We have the ability to even with
a national shortage to recruit
primary care positions to our
area.
We simply do not have the space
and we were sharing.
The need we were looking for
existing space and tales
counting to renovate it just
simply doesn't exist.
We are currently leasing
approximately five clinics most
of which goes a some of thirty
thousand dollars per month.
Most of which is almost a robert
baron mentaliting going to the
out of state developers.
We could directly investor in
the care of our people.
And help maintain this facility
this complex.
Centre gone gonzalez and it's
not the first time he
recognized.
And took the initiative to
respond to need.
Our county has stepped up and
supported us as well the county
owns the building and built it
approx my thirty years ago.
On county property this building
would took become by the county
and beyond county property.
We have not had the mean to
storically to maintain the
facility which is our lease
agreement.
And we do now and that's how we
would apply the rent that were
currently paying to outer state
developers to maintain the
building if this is constructed.
We hope that you will support us
in this effort.
There's.
Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for hearing this bill yes
tas county stands ready to be
the fiscal agent for this
project.
We are the current property
owners of the vacant land that
we would construct this facility
in which is next to the existing
hospital and we've had a long
history of partnership with the
hospital with maintained a lease
for close to forty years with
the existing building obviously
there's been renewals but we
have a good partnership with the
hospital in the board and when
the senator gonzalez approaches
on this it was a no brainer for
my county commissioners to
support the hospital and we
stand ready if the bill is
passed and signed by the
governor to
see this project to the wishes.
Thank you mister chairman my
name is.
A lot of projects.
Conjunction with the senator in
the community and towers and if
you don't have primary care in a
community everybody can end up
the medical center the emergency
room we need synergism we need
access and we need a a good tool
for a recruitment and retention
so we stand a strong support of
this and.
Thank you mister chair
more of a comment than a
question.
You know our rural hospitals and
frankly the entire rural medical
providers are inde.
In the summer.
A group of us we've doctor hit
he was there as well
met with some of the ceos of
some of the rural hospitals
around the state and they are
all in desperate need.
Difficult time of attracting
doctors.
The.
The.
Medicaid reimbursement rates are
not sufficient to.
Pay.
Hospitals are having to pay the.
The.
And we have to address these
issues and in rural nam.
We're not going to have.
Hospitals or clinics available
in virtually every.
That.
I have to travel.
Hundreds of miles
to to seek medical care care and
some of the larger cities last
crucials albequer.
So I support this but I think
that we have a legislature need
really look at the overall issue
and not just work at towers but
we're we're gonna have to look
at santa rosa and I believe
we're tallis and and las vegas
and yeah there were a variety of
ceo's from these smaller
communities that were expressing
their desperate need for help
from this body.
Appreciate this forward I think
we need to support.
They are in very desperate need
at this point.
Thank you mister chair and and
senator no develop
the
senator consiles thank you for
bringing th.
They have.
Some some observations but also
a couple of questions is is this
money for an outpatient facility
is that what you're referring to
or a new hospital out patient
personal okay thank you very
much and
so it is reference and context
mister chair and the company
members my history with the
towers medical community and my
coffee and his colleagues goes
back to my university da.
And I will say you have an
exceptional group of
practitioners there from the
nineties who in many ways were
were ahead of the nation in
terms of value based care and I
won't go into defining all that
but a pretty difficult thing to
bring and and they they did it
um.
They are I like doctor coffman
we are growing long in the truth
or whatever you want to say and.
Well need replacements and the
you know houses are beautiful
place
but when you're a medical
student and resident and you're
looking for some place to put
down roots as doctor coffin did
years ago and his daughters
internet with him
but today it and I know some of
the others i'm just thinking
back some of my medical students
and so forth.
Today.
That kind of I don't want to say
the idealism isn't there any
more.
Our medical students are so
played with medical debt.
That to go into primary care are
very low paying relatively
speaking and and another venue
i'll give the history of how th.
Procedures.
And anyway but it it is what it
is but.
We are going to have to just
look at
the levers we can pull and right
now there are long term levers
in this morning we had a bill
putting people in the pipeline
with mentorships that's huge.
But it isn't it isn't going to
deal with today.
And today we are in an extreme
shortage of primary care
physicians and it.
And and you have to have both
you just can't replace you just
can't say well I have advanced
practice no I mean people have
been through medicine
it residencies and so forth
obyen that's lots of years we
need those folks and so looking
at what can we do now and so
last year we came forward with a
hundred and twenty percent
payment.
Versus seventy five percent of
medicare for these folks well.
Great intention the problem is
how do you do it it's a lot more
complicated than to say we're
going to pay you more well
they're not getting it.
And i'm not being critical of
HSD it is really difficult to do
all these codes and i'm hoping
that in this health care
authority and i've gotten some
group some consultant groups who
could help them but not only do
we have to do the codes r.
So that's part of one part two
is in the lege.
Governor's budget includes
moving the payments to a hundred
and fifty percent.
But budgets being budgets where
they are it's not.
Not quite sure where it is but
you you need to speak to people
and in the house and so forth
and hopefully here in the senate
about getting that number up
because to even get close to.
Competitive I mean and when I
talk about close i'm talking
about angrinates close you know
it is just it's still a huge way
away it's got at least be a
hundred seventy five percent.
We don't have a commercial
population that will you
normally do what's called the
carship to come in and you
charge them a whole lot more
because they're they're working
at companies and make up.
Such is in and medicare are
probably and I know you know
this sitting in the hospital in
your revenues I mean you're
you're dying and and and senator
neighbor.
I've said that I mean it's going
on all over this state but there
is some things that we can do
now and that's the press to get
the hundred and fifty percent of
medicare pay in this in this
legislation secondly I I will
work with hsd this is all my
background to bring in companies
who can say how do we be sure to
get the money in the doctor's
pockets and I will come forward
with the bill next year raising
commercial payments there are.
Overseen by the open the osi so
that we the only liver we have.
Is this compensation that's all
we have for immediate german so
but why is the other thing it's
gonna be fundamental is is there
a plate once we get some of that
stuff working and it becomes
more attractive to come and stay
in new mexico and we do it the
long term things then we can
have a good place for him to
work.
And a building that is viable
that can appropriately move
patience rule in the way that
they don't feel like their
cattle that they feel like
they're human beings and that we
are actually not seeing a
patient every fifteen minutes
has got you know that I mean it
were saying maybe two and a half
patience and hour and and we're
we're giving the dignity back to
our patience of listening to
them and the dignity back to the
providers that they need to keep
working because what's happening
to the doctor coffins and the
working themselves to death.
Take because the others are
leaving they're getting more and
it gets to a point where it
becomes intolerable so I am
taking an opportunity and I
apologize and I know we got a
lot of work to do but this is
super crisis and and also would
ask people here's go get an
appointment.
If you can from a specialist
anywhere.
In that and have been less than
six months it's more like a year
it's more like a year and in
primary care it's that way as
well and if we don't fix this
compensate I mean this is
america people can choose and if
we don't fix this compensation
issue and do it through the
medicaid which is now our
conceptor we're not were we're
just gonna say why aren't we
getting there so all these
issues do have solutions they
are in our hands.
But I understand it's it's
budget its competitive but it is
in our hands and the health care
of the state.
You know you you can do all the
health insurance and all the
medicate if there's nobody there
to see it doesn't matter.
And if there's no place to be
seen.
Where they can work that's next
to you it does it matter so
I just want to I know how hard
it is going to get this is going
to be to get through finance
it's going to be profoundly
difficult and now probably get a
well which you want your stack
or do you want theirs you know
what with the money we have in
the crisis we fit we are face.
Health care failing.
And this is this is part of the
evidence and again I just wanted
to my colleagues it is in our
hands who we talked to who we
lobby and our colleagues about
getting healthcare paid
attention to infunded otherwise
we're all gonna be gone well see
we get to fly them to scotsdale.
And get in and get seen but the
mail clinic.
Ninety eight percent in mexicans
cannot do that.
You know we we are most of us
have ppos allows to go out of
state or whatever you know we
can we can fi.
But the people the new mexico
can't do that.
There are people died today.
Because they can't get to care
we just it's not written up it's
not there just chronic disease
accurate exacerbations no one
there to treat them.
And they're dying.
And that's on us.
I know that's a big york trip
it's an as to try and.
The military situation and get
it to be one where people have
access they're not dying and
they're getting.
Started that process so please
please please push this
thank you.
I looked to the hospital and ta.
It will be adjacent to the
hospitals and all this record.
People.
Often times patients to save
money we'll go to an urgent ca.
It's almost cut off they'll go
with chest pain.
Physicians will be in that.
So it is a medical complex to
really meet the primary care.
Visiting specialists from.
For example we have almost five
hundred patients a year for the
past five years traveling great
distanc.
But senator because for bringing
this bill for.
About fifteen thousand.
The reason he said.
The.
So what
are mister chairman a senator
talbot yes that's what we're
looking at is about a thousand
dollars a square foot that's
what it's been going for and
house are for new construction
over the last few years so yes
this building would be a
approximately fifteen thousand
square feet.
But wait didn't mention his
there's already been a plimon
every design that the hospital
has paid for in the past so we
would have to revise those plans
and bring m.
Bring in a new architecture
work.
I only had one question and that
is the board of finance as a
program to finance miracle
facilities have you approached
them about.
I think they're low interest.
Partially grants.
No having the ability to pay
that would be a challenge of.
Only manager a mail spoke.
This will not generate revenue.
Just to pay staff.
And it will not be profitable or
hospital opt.
Period with interest.
I would or would urge you to at
least talk to market russell
sends you have you already done
that.
It it may let's say you only get
six million from the this may be
how you could bridge.
But members of the committee
what's the will of the.
There are second seconded from
senator city a locust the
secretary will call the role
senator hickey yes center in my
assess center my curtain
center mechanic yes senator
number centers meetings center
city a lot of yes senator tomman
yes center to zipino yes.
Eight zero you have a due pass
senator congratulations and good
luck in the senate finance
committee but since you sit on
the senate finance committee you
know how to handle those goes.
Thank you very much why is you
thank you thank you
my sister was a primary care
doctor in telstra twenty five
years
yeah.
All right senator how to meal
with the less bill of the day.
Senate bill twenty one.
The.
Thank you senator representative
borrow welcome.
Thank you senator representative
let's go to the audiences or
anyone who wants to show their
support this way of your hand.
Anybody feel compelled to
actually come up in say
something in support.
Okay yes missus person.
Thank you mister charles of the
microphone behaves a little
better we appreciate both the
senator and representative for
bringing this forward this is a
priority for new mexico counties
the things that we really like
in the spill as chief pet is
mentioned is the fact that it
also supports our volunteers
which are the backbone for about
eighty percent of the fire out
in rural communities we also
appreciate the fact that this
includes an ems component one of
the things I want to stress is
most people are familiar with
new mexico firefund the focus of
that fund is on structural
agnibility it's specifically
excluded salaries so that's why
this is particularly important
in addition the ems bureau gets
a little over two point eight
million I believe that it
distributes every year so we do
not have a great partnership
with the state currently to
provide that ems infrastructure
which is another key point for
us so we appreciate your support
and consideration of this bill
thank you.
The.
Anybody opposed to this bill.
Anybody online members of the
committee.
My question oh yes you had to
cl.
Sure.
The.
So this is kind of a kick
starter f.
And senator this doesn't.
We give you an example if we
hired a firefighter at sixty
five thousand dollars a year and
so this would be a three
commitment with this thirty five
million and here's the breakdown
on how it would work so it's not
that the base space is sixty
five thousand this is just an
example year one this fund would
cover the sixty five thousand
dollars of that employee's
salary you're too it would then
kick down to seventy five
percent which means it would
cover forty eight point seven
and in year three it would cover
25 percent of that firefighter's
salary which.
Which is the total cost of a
hundred and thirty at year for
the municipality or the county
would then have to take the full
responsibility of paying that
firefighter if we were to think
of sixty five thousand dollars
being across the state.
Just as that example that would
be a hundred and thirty k per
firefighter which means that
would just recruit two hundred
and seventy two hundred and
seventy six firefighters from
across the state of new mexico
the thirty five million sounds
like a lot but in those three
years it would be a full time
firefighter and that's two
hundred and th.
This is a three year commitment
and any money left after that
thirty year would ribert to the
general fund.
That is correct mister chairman
after three years the county or
minister would.
Rural areas would be the ones
who would have better.
The.
Thank you senator to told me no
none of that is in the bill.
The bill simply says we give
thirty five million to the fay
and they're going to work out
some details now you've come up
with some real explicit.
Details that that's not in the
bill the mister chairman that's
an ex.
But it we are leaving enough to
the effect you're comfortable
with that leaving it up to
mrperiod chairman all of us have
agreed they would be the best
person to help us in that local
firefighters I would local fire
departments would be the best to
determine what their needs were
if it's not going to be the s.
You mentioned how this would
benefit volunteer for
departments the dixon volunteer
fire department which is an
exemplary volunteer fire to they
they do great work.
But they've been telling me
either it's getting harder in
harder.
Because.
They can't reimburse for mileage
predium they go out two in the
morning to to
fight a fire right record help
somebody in the empty date.
They may spend their own money
going out there take a couple of
hours of their sleep away go
late to work the next day I mean
it's a real expense for them to
do is there some mechani.
So mister chairman not in this
bill but with this bill does is
if a volunteer firefighter would
like to join a department that's
fully funded they then could
move let's just use dickson as
an example they then could work
at the espinella fire department
or the tous fire department this
bill but it covered them to make
that transition from being
volunteers to being paid
firefighters.
Which doesn't remedy what
volunteers are filling but we'd
need to come back at a later.
Could could I mean.
Theoretically df could somehow
use a portion small portion of
these funds to do that
the way this bill is written
mister chairman not with this
bill but we'd have to circle
back on one floor.
The.
It does however mister chairman
and urge them to get certified.
Anything that volunteers do
because we need them in rural
new mexico but we'd have to fix
that in a different bill.
Okay members of the committee
what's said.
Hmm.
Executive or the lsc budget so
mr german this is one of the
executives bills that she would
like to see taken forward
to see you
the government supports this the
governor supports that thank
you.
But it's not in either the lfc
budget or in the executive
budget mister chairman you are
correct
senator
thank you mister chair maybe i'm
a little confused so this.
Bounce here firefighters no
this good mister chairman this
could take rural volunteer
firefighters who could then go
to a department that's a paid
department so that they could
become paid firefighters versus
being a volunteer firefighter is
that then be their full time
career verses.
Sorry that I spoke our senators
so I will.
If you are.
They then.
For them.
And the reason behind w.
Yeah.
Definitely benefit the small
volunteer departments that are
across the state in the hope
that we can take them.
To respond to dixon is an
unincorporated municipality pin
your schools and incorporate all
those little villages that have
their volunteer
they would have no way of
picking up the twenty five
percent.
So this achievements and then
thinking of that example he
would then maybe follow the
county of rearing maybe you have
to county would.
Will you have a lot of sweet
with the country.
All right good we'll count on
you to do that next year
anything else anybody else would
say will the committee
we have emotion for a dupassion
senator tomorrow seconded by
senator.
So the locus.
Discussion
secretary who call the rule
senator high give yes center
mysteries center marketing
center mechanic yes senator
neighbor centers made
center city of office center to
tom.
Thank you mister chairman and
things to the executive for this
bill as well and i'm running
after judiciary for the next one
thank you have a great weekend
wonderful to work with you and
members with that we conclude
our work for the week will we'll
be back monday with the we'll
start with the always
fascinating revertable
presumption bill.
