The first bill we're going to
first again let me repeat
investment about the Senate bill
one seventeen we will not hear
that today that's being rolled
over until the the the wording
is exactly appropriate and so
and then it will start then was
senator Stewart's bill Senate
bill one thirty two and you have
a the sept.
Yes and then okay good.
Okay we have a at the committee
member make a a a motion on this
stuff I move the state forward I
don't know if you know I I move
a do not pass on on bill one
thirty two thirty two thank you
I I move a do not pass until one
thirty two and a do pass on the
committee substitute for
discussion purposes for
discussion purposes only right
okay so Senator you want if you
want to tell us about the bill
and this of.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this bill tries to
rein in a huge increase we're
seeing all across the country
and New Mexico in particular and
sexually transmitted infections
we're doing that by focusing on
preventive care in this case
treatment is prevention
there are three of these
sexually transmitted bacteria is
there the worst especially in
New Mexico and it's chlamydia
gonorrhea and syphilis we have
what we call the congenital
syphilis and that is passed from
a mother to a baby and we had
one of those cases and twenty
seventeen and forty two and
twenty twenty so across the
country don't know why I may be
in the pandemic everybody stayed
home and did whatever but the
whole country is seeing an
increase in these infections if
you don't have a cold pay for
your screening and your
treatment your prevention of
early treatment then you're more
likely to do it and that's what
this does it takes with the
copay for screening and that
prevents preventive care that's
all the bills that preventive
care.
into that will be preventive
care is what you would see a
doctor that the antibiotics
creams etcetera but if you do it
early before you have a full
blown K. then you can prevent it
from spreading from getting
worse and spreading it to others
that's the problem with with
these infections so of this
legislation gives us six months
doesn't go into effect till
January twenty twenty four for
the insurance industry to
implement this
The problem with these
infections is that people don't
know they have them there a
symptomatic and that's why the
screening is so important and of
course they fall on that younger
group you know fifteen to twenty
nine they often don't have
money.
Don't have could health
insurance so this is why we
think this is so important.
the subject to this because we
have tried to change these I see
years this.
So the also state of the
insurance department office of
the insurance what we call
office of the superintendent of
insurance OSI suggested that we
put the definitions preventive
care sexually transmitted
infection and costsharing in
each of the five sections that
we are amending and so the
amendment was four pages in the
bills only I which is the point
of the committee set up.
Can't find one more thing here.
The committee so yes I do.
Yeah so we are amending the
group health coverage we're
amending the blanket or group
health insurance policies health
Care plants or certificates of
health insurance that section to
section three is health
maintenance organization section
four is a nonprofit health care
plan and so we had to put the
definitions in each of those
sections that's the purpose of
the amendment and why we're
bringing this up
You know so so there is no we're
not trying for a coverage
mandate this is not a mandate
bill but the so the requirement
that the state would defray the
cost is unnecessary this is only
for those insurance companies
that provide this kind of care
to not do the copay for the
screening and treatment so that
that's a good point so just to
be clear.
We're not requiring insurance
companies to provide this care
but if they provided the
committee group yes this
Medicaid and Medicaid doesn't
have copays anyhow so that no
problem okay right.
So that's really quick this is a
killer hearing who will mop up
after me I forgotten anything
major.
Thank you welcome to thank you
Mr chair and members of the
views and make it hold it right
up to your mouth.
Yes I'm very soft spoken thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Kayla herring and I am the
director of public affairs for
Planned Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains in New Mexico we've
seen rises in rates of sexually
transmitted infections for a
number of years and we know that
this piece of legislation will
be critical in reducing those
rates because it addresses four
key pieces that we've seen
inhibit people from getting
regular testing so the first one
is that we need to remove the
copay requirement and any cost
sharing for testing treatment
and prevention we know that in
this case with sexually
transmitted infections that
treatment is prevention because
these are passed through sexual
contact so when we
take care of someone sexually
transmitted infection they're
not going to pass it on.
The other critical piece for why
removing the cost sharing is so
critical is that it increased it
increases the likelihood that a
patient is going to seek
sexually transmitted infection
testing because they won't have
the fear of if something is
positive will I then have to
make a is large payment for my
medication so we appreciate
Senator Stewart for bringing
this legislation fourth because
we need to reduce rates of
sexually transmitted infections
in New Mexico and we believe
this will do it right thank you
anything else and I think the
question is go to the audience
is it just by show of hands who
is here in support of this bill.
Is there anybody here in
opposition to this bill.
Good will go fast let's take it
but don't take more than one
minute and don't repeat anything
that anybody else that are just.
Go ahead who's who of speak
first Marshall.
Then use the Mike us right
because as soon pick you up and
make sure Mr chair members the
committee thank you so much a
martial artist executive
director of equality New Mexico
where the statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization.
Queer and trans people face
multiple barriers to access to
health care all across this
country stigma and shame around
our identities and our sexuality
being the first economic
instability because of a
lifetime of discrimination being
the second we want to say thank
you to Senator Stewart and to
Planned Parenthood for leading
on this charge we believe this
is an LGBTQ justice issue we
should be doing everything we
can to make sure that every
queer and trans person in New
Mexico has an open door for
health care anywhere they choose
to stick it thank you thank you
Marshall.
David LCS we'll just go right
around and you go ahead.
If.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Haley
is often I'm from the southwest
women's Law Center removing
barriers to access to accessing
STI health care is absolutely
imperative allowing diseases to
go untreated can have disastrous
effects like becoming more
success susceptible to further
in for infections and even
infertility this bill would be a
step towards reducing the high
rates of STI's in New Mexico and
this is why the Sappey pushing
the button down.
Can.
I can hear you yes I'm sorry
about that I don't know the
holdover just keep up okay.
The pretty loud so hopefully
everyone heard so this bill
would be a great step toward
reducing the high rates of STI's
in New Mexico and this is why
the southwest women's Law Center
strongly supports this bill
today thank you great thank you
doctor.
Just keep you have to keep the
button pressed down you have to
keep the but this down because
yes.
Is that better that's better
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Sandra
pan a family physician retired
formerly medical director of the
penitentiary and formally public
health doctor at Stanford clinic
and I have seen the results of
people not getting care in time
and passing infections on to
their children and to their
partners it is very important
that we make it easier for
people to get care without any
further barriers as someone who
supports universal health care I
think this is a step in the
right direction thank you right
thank you doctor pent yes
anybody else yes please.
Thank you.
And data Middleton and I'm
representing the area in the
area here in New Mexico for that
you're pushing the button down.
That.
I think I did okay yeah keep it
does that though okay.
Sorry so Mr chairman and members
of the committee I'm here today
in support of this bill and I'm
with the national organization.
And for all other thank you some
slipped all of the reasons just
simply because of it you just
have to keep it that.
And it down.
All the reasons being fed.
What this bill thank you thank
you very much.
One back that you demand that
Mexico toppers Network father
reasons previously stated we
support this issue coming
forward also we have seen and
intensifies I'm in Natalie
substance exposed newborns but
newborns who are have as TI's
upon birth and so we know that
this is a pretty significant
epidemic what we would call the
neonatal units so we support
this strongly think that
representative or senator for
bringing forward thank you thank
you Maryland.
Good afternoon a chairman and
committee my name is Mike
Martinez and I am the president
of the student group generation
action Planned Parenthood on
UNM's campus and I ask you to
say yes to the Senate bill one
thirty two because it would
remove barriers in accessing STI
health care but not surprising
families with outrageous faster
for Bennett preventive STI
treatments said preventive care
would also include STI services
that miners can access under
their own consent thank you
thank you.
Who knew Mr chair members of the
committee my name is jade Roscoe
with the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs as an
organization supporting
survivors of sexual violence
across the state that is deeply
committed to prevention and
ending stigma we strongly
support SP one thirty two the
ability to identify and treat
STI's without unnecessary
barriers is empowering it helps
decrease the stigma around STI's
and it fosters in people a
positive rather than shameful
relationship with their bodies
and sexualities for survivors
especially decreasing obstacles
around STI treatment is another
way we can support them and
regaining their sense of bodily
autonomy we support SB one three
two and hope that you to you
will too and help make New
Mexico safer and healthier place
thank you thank you very much
and we do have one of given
Marla did you want to speak
Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we of
course stand in strong support
of prevention and treatment of
this TI's we do have a few
concerns relative to costsharing
and what that ultimately made
due to premiums and we would
like to work with the sponsor
and the advocates a bit on the
definition that if it's the will
of this committee to move this
out we will seek those
amendments and work with the
advocates before the next
committee thank you thank you
more often.
And then we have one person on
the zoom who's signed up or
called and wants to speak Janet
got can.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
Senator Stewart I'm I am also
representing Santa Fe chapter of
the national organization for
women and we strongly support
this bill which would expand
health equity and reduce stigma
around SCI's I think it's an
important step toward universal
health care for New Mexicans
thank you thank you.
Okay we'll go now to the
committee members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I love this
bill this is such a great thing
the to that you're bringing so
thank you for bringing it I just
have a couple of questions
Just based and and forgive me if
they're off base but I remember
a few years ago we were dealing
with the issue of children or or
a miners who would end up
getting the invoice going to
their parents so that their
privacy was violated will this
help that problem because since
there's no copay their parents
should get an invoice.
Mr chair and senator yes the in
the F. I. R. T. O. H. indicated
that because there would be no
cost sharing there wouldn't be a
requirement for an EEO be to be
sent which would support any OB
explanation of benefits which is
was the concern we it we're
talking about a few years ago
this is a great way to solve
that problem too excellent okay
so it's so if you could save
multiple multiple budget bill
and then the other question I
had is it possible to decide not
to cover it up is or isn't
required under the affordable
Care Act isn't I'm I just don't
know.
So the life you know yes I if
any of you know no problem I'm
just curious.
Mr chair and senator thank you
for that question the federal
guidelines around coverage of
sexually transmitted infections
is extremely confusing and a
little ambiguous so we want to
make sure that it's consistent
in New Mexico and remove that
coping costsharing so we reduced
the fear of getting a bill for
you know testing positive for
sexually transmitted infection
but it says it's broken down per
infection and has of vague words
like young and high risk without
defining them all okay thank you
will I I think this is an
excellent bill and it seems to
solve a lot of problems and I'll
be proud to support.
The.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
You know I think your bill's
straightforward have.
I think any questions I come
from a different perspective a
couple of of thoughts
One is is you know I sometimes
we agree sometimes we disagree
we were just talking about I I I
like to see legislation.
That fosters relationships and
doesn't break relationships.
And so we have kind of a
partisanship here but
To the point from Senator Lopez
we are driving a wedge between
parents and their children.
We are separating them
with various aspects of
legislation where and I realize
in extreme circumstances.
Parents can can do a better job
or be abusive and neglectful
that's where the truck the
children's code.
but good parents need to be
involved to protect
their children especially in
this day and age and especially
when women are treated widely as
sex objects and it just huge so
box for me it's ridiculous how
our society treats women in this
country.
And how so many women are
abused and objectified.
And they have to look at these
ridiculous standards when the
going to the store when I wait
in the line of the grocery
stores and see all this fake
stuff and they're expected to
live up to that expectation well
all the men are addicted to ****
it's ridiculous.
And so we want to drive a
continued wedge between parents
and their children especially
young women that young teenage
girls need they need help and
they have it with a six decided
there for that they're stuck
with growing up in.
And so I have that problem with
the bill.
especially as a father of four
daughters.
The the second problem is more
of an insurance issue and I I
apologize for being late
usually the insurance folks come
up and oppose these types of
pills and do they do they oppose
the bill or no no the data they
support those the statement one
insurance company has some
issues that wants to work with
me I'm Scott other insurance
lobbyists have already contacted
me and said they are not going
to oppose the bill and and you
you understand it only
eliminates the copay yes yes
okay Mister center so yes in and
like I said in on a our
technical fire the coverage it
just a limit if you offer
coverage eliminates COVID right
right yes yes and so it's it's
it's interesting me because
historically in insurance comes
will come in and oppose these
bills because they say well
people are chipping and stuff
but I don't know high insurance
companies oppose this
legislation because they they're
the gatekeepers of our health
care system you don't get to
make a decision between you and
your doctor anymore.
You have to ask Big Brother big
sister from.
Hartford Conn if you can do
surgery prescribed a medication.
And how they do this is they
hard robbing the American public
in the middle class by forcing
us to pay these increasingly
rising premiums and so what this
bill will do by by taking the in
in my view this did by taking
copays away from the people it
disenfranchises the patients
because they no longer have the
money in their pocket to pay
they're not seen as the customer
everything's been prepaid and
these oppressive health care
corporations they get it from
you every month already the
money's already gone out of our
pocket and then they get the
dictator Care and so the more
that the patient is actually
transacting the the the a nice
mom and pop the the practice
will say wow you you are the one
you are the client you're the
patient here the you are
providing us with with the
income we're gonna treat you
more like a like a person the
Human
and and so anyway the the the so
so the two res to sum up and
close it out Mr chair driving a
wedge between children their
parents I have to be against it
because we've got a faster
stronger family relationships
with the legislation number two
in my opinion this is actually
facilitating more control for
the health care companies
because they're just gonna grab
up the premiums and all the
stuff that we do and and and the
the patients when they transact
and and pay things and last L.
say this there's good data to
show that when the patients are
paying the money their health
care outcomes are better because
they're more invested so I just
say come will soapbox there so
thanks for bearing with me but a
lot of the problems here and I
are very respectfully I I get
the heart of this bill and I I
thank you for that hard
but I for those two reasons have
to oppose the bill thank you
thank you senator Chamisa
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you Mr thank you madam pro
tempore.
And I apologize for being late
also I didn't hear anything on
the of speakers we're already
starting up Mr Chairman Madam
protiv.
I'm trying to understand the no
copay so if a child twelve
fourteen eighteen comes into the
clinic then they're not going to
pay the copay but do they have
to have the medical card for
instance my granddaughter as a
Blue Cross blue shield which you
have to have the card to be able
to start the process Mister
chairman Senator.
Mr Chairman yes this is an
insurance company issues so she
has insurance Madam her
insurance would be required to
not charge a copay.
And Mister chairman Senator then
what that's without.
Parental guidance for
consultations at risk for
screening for disease that's
what this is about screening if
I have this disease or not but
Mr chairman center there still
no interaction with parents it
would have to Senator Gallegos
since nineteen fifty three
miners have had the ability to
consent to medical care if you
look at page seven.
It's section six.
Is all current language we're
not changing any of that with
the exception of adding
preventive care.
So miners already half this
consent.
You know it's my experience that
the vast majority of miners get
medical treatment with their
parents or other guardians or
their aunties or their uncles
the the vast majority of them
some do not for a variety of
reasons but we have allow minors
to get medical care without the
consent of their parents for.
Seventy years Mr Chairman Madam
pro tem so of the version you're
talking about I have to appear
this is a it if we're working up
in the sense what is the number.
eight two eight point one point
one I apologize because my
version only has five page so
I'll have to does not following
well I say no it's not it's
going up five eight digit
reference page seven so so you
don't have this version no I do
that as well yeah I was
referencing this bill will all
move that away so I don't have
to worry about it but so thank
you for that detail and all have
to read the legislation
Mr chairman.
And madam pro tem in.
I apologize I didn't get your
name but up I'm trying to find
out has have we looked some on
school board we had a school
board association day yesterday
have we done any kind of shark
research nationally on why this
is increase on STDs.
I I know you know there act but
I'm just wondering why this is
grown so much Mr Sir Mr chair
and senator thank you at the
department of health has done a
lot of research on why these
rates are increasing and there
isn't one clear answer so I.
Can share the report with the
committee after that the O. H.
presented this summer but there
isn't necessarily one clear
reason why.
Mr Chairman certainly one is to
have to pay for
the cleaning have to pay for
the.
So it no it discourages some
people from moving forward and
the other issue with these
Bacteria these infections is
that they're often a symptomatic
for a long time.
So
women that are pregnant and half
and half this can have babies
that have all kinds of problems
called congenital syphilis so
it's just important that the
screening becomes more routine
and it will do so if it's not
costly.
Thank you for that Senator Mr
chairman Madam pro tempore
I appreciate the dialogue I I
stand with.
Sure smitteez on the
And I understand no first been
in the past but I still think
now that parents should have a
little bit of dialogue in this
and in I know we're on opposite
points on that so facility of
thank you thank you senator
Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Stewart gentle lady so
just just as I'm looking at this
is essentially a.
Page and a half built in for.
Parts of the statutes.
And then it and then of course
that the the trailer at the end
which is in both versions
Which is great public policy
that's been around for decades
so that's kind of the to learn I
I
As you as you know Mr chairman I
was of when I was a young man
was a committee organizer in
Seattle Washington and I I was
in my day job was HIV aids
educator this was in the dark
dark days were you thought folks
that you can get HIV right
playing basketball and stuff
those heavy educational
component to it the and there is
a stigma there is a stigma there
is apprehension there may be up.
One or two percent that have to
pay the whole cost because they
don't want folks to know but the
vast majority will either
We may not seek seek these these
these examinations or whatnot so
this not only cuts costs on the
margin but I think will increase
public safety outcomes by having
more folks comfortable going to
these examinations and not and
not and and dealing with these
transmittable infections if and
get them back have a so it's
great public policy thank you
madam chair thank you Mr thank
you madam.
Senator McKenna.
Right and we have to pass when
you're ready chairman of quicken
we have a motion for a do pass
is our second seconded by
Senator Sedillo Lopez discussion
from senator Tom.
No discussion just a quick
comment I support the bill but I
just want to echo what Senator
schmidti said no really with an
upside down world when.
Insurance clerk.
Have to get permission from
insurance clerk in that the
doctor to have a.
And a procedure and the video
people think
Congress is running this country
they're setting the state can
score rations are running this
country good to them unlimited
amounts of money which explains
why.
The Congress passed a law in two
thousand four so the federal
government could negotiate drug
prices.
And
It would insurance comes are
just a really unnecessary
middleman there's soak up a lot
of money we have a single payer
we can limit on this and that's
claims why America spends twice
as much money as part of this
Spence twice as much as their
GMP on health care the next most
expensive country which is
Switzerland and and they have
universal health care said tell
have thank you Mr chair thank
you senator just quick question
for me up to the school based
health centers to do this
screening is this a bit I I'm
not sure with the screening
Intel's is it like a swab the
blood tester what what is
screening involved.
Thank you Mr chairman for that
question it's dependent on the
kind of infection that you're
screening for so with sexually
transmitted infections it's
really important that for
screening that involves swabs
that they're done in any place
where an individual might be
having sex and not just
the heteronormative ideas that
so throw the China **** and then
there are also blood tests for
testing like HIV and and they
don't do you know if they're
done at the school based health
center at Mr Chairman I'm not
sure I think at that school
based health centers determine
their own care but I'm not sure
who in New Mexico is doing what
testing there's a COVID in the
FIR about DLH does this now and
if this were done by insurance
companies more route without
because of the delays will do
without cost but you have to go
there and that's what led me to
ask about school based health
centers which would be so much
more convenient okay any other
discussion any other issues
seeing none the secretary will
call the roll we have a motion
of the.
I should probably clarify the
mall yep please so chairman I
move to do passport do not this
I'm sorry do not pass on Senate
bill one thirty two but a do
pass on Senate bill one thirty
two committee sub.
Thank you senator and senator
Tillman no Senator Sedillo
offices seconded.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos member I'd like
to explain level.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes and
explain my vote.
Senator Tallman yes.
Center to the budget yes I have
to explain both Senator guidance
and then Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you Mr chairman Madam pro
tem I like the idea of
prevention treatment but I would
like to have an age limit and or
parental notification so I hope
that does you go forward there
to be some discussion on that
thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you I think
that this is a great bill and
one of the other problems it
solves is situation vast
majority of of people in the
circumstance young people will
inform their parents but in
those situations where they feel
that they cannot this all the
really important problems so
thank you so much for bringing
so by a vote of five in the
affirmative to the negative.
Is to not present you have to do
yes and congratulations.
Well now go to Senators
Stewart's second bill of the day
the catalytic converter sales
records.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
That is Senate bill one thirty
three thanks.
So this gentleman I think we all
know about.
Can I begin please.
I think we all know that Kelly
converters here's a short story
how I know about them about four
months ago my brother filled up
his truck forty gallons for gas
a parked it outside his
apartment and that night they
cut his fuel line and in ski it
impeded.
So he took his part of the Shaw
we loan to him our Honda three
nights later as the Honda sat in
his parking lot at his apartment
they cut out the catalytic
converter.
So the insurance would pay for
it twenty three hundred dollars
to replace the catalytic
converter so they are primary
pollution devices they're
required to be on in Bernalillo
county they have high value
metals that's why they're stolen
ten minutes of work can you can
get three hundred Bucks for it
what this bill is trying to do
is added to our already good
metals a statute that talks
about when you're stealing
things we're requiring
full full first let me tell you
that thirty eight states have
already passed legislation ten
twenty eight or ten or
considering it.
Arkansas South Carolina and
Texas require a scrap metal
buyer of catalytic converters to
maintain records and that's what
we're doing we're requiring
proof of ownership documentation
of purchases documentation of
identifying marks US Congress is
trying to pass a bill that
requires pin numbers on these
catalytic converters they
haven't passed that yet so we
are trying to rein in the
staffed by taking away their
monetary incentives by having
the buyers or the people that
are there being offered to to
have to
keep track of where came from
who sold it with all kinds of
photo identification and then
they have to report to a
database we do have an amendment
yes the amendment local the
local governments reached out to
us they would like to be able to
impose some right right their
own reporting requirements so
we're allowing them to do that
we're changing the shall not
impose till may impose so that
local governments could do that
and
And that is essentially the
amendment
I have with me Mr mark yes so
just to follow up on your
amendment so it would.
It would be if you leave it up
to local government yes if they
want to impose other reporting
and port for further reporting
other reporting requirements but
they have to at least do what
we're asking for they still need
to those scrap metal owners will
have to start keeping track of
all those catalytic converters
and does Albuquerque or any
other municipality currently
have extra reason reporting
requirements so it already in
place I think so and I think
they're the ones that are best
for this ammendment you might
have somebody waving their hand
in the audience for anybody in
the audience waving their hands
over their your.
Okay we'll get you of this great
to a utility answer my question
is time so your expert witnesses
Senator.
I'll let him introduce himself
but let me tell you I happen to
have in my Senate district the
most at independent a used and
used car sales in the state and
let me tell you Wendy states
find a lot of cars together it's
a day for them jump over the
fence that cut up catalytic
converters and they're gone in a
flash.
Martel okay mark the.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for
including us this is obviously a
profound and growing problem
across the country and we do
hope that you will support this
bill and who you with more I'm
sorry I'm with the New Mexico
into the executive director's
New Mexico independent auto
dealers association very good
thank you.
On the amendment the we want to
move the amendment.
Seconded by Senator Maestas.
Any discussion from the
committee on the amendment.
Is a pretty clear for everybody
understands.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
bill to been amended will go to
the audience and first I would
love to hear from the City of
Albuquerque.
What they're doing to do is to
stop this and why they need this
and when we go ahead.
But.
Mr chair members of the
committee it's my pleasure to be
here before you I am Albuquerque
city councilor Renee grout and
I've Representative district
nine in the southeast part of
our city I've been getting calls
from constituents about
catalytic converter theft since
I took office a year ago I also
own my own auto repair shop and
I see too many of my customers
come in with still in cats.
Thieves may get a few hundred
dollars for a cat at a scrapyard
but they can cost upwards of
three thousand dollars in damage
to cars in in the process of
cutting off that cat I've seen
insurance companies total the
cars because the cost of
replacing the cat is more than
the book value of the car in two
thousand twenty two thirteen
hundred catalytic converters
Report reported stolen in in the
City of Albuquerque in the last
ninety days alone three hundred
and nineteen catalytic
converters have been reported
stolen in the city limits.
That's an average of seventy
seven thanks thank you a week
more than ten per day we have a
real problem and I think it's
important to note that that the
stats don't even include all of
them I've had customers that
don't even report them to the
police or AFP file please report
because they don't think the
police can do anything stealing
catalytic converter is so easy
and it takes just minutes that I
knew Enforcement alone couldn't
do enough to prevent these
deaths so I wanted to work the
problem from the other side by
making it harder for thieves to
sell stolen cats when I talked
when I started talking with city
staff about how to do this we
thought we'd add it to the
second half to the second hand
metal dealers to the city's
pawnbroker ordinance the
pawnbroker ordinance would have
required a scrap yard to take a
them present a photo ID and a
picture of the seller along with
a picture of the catalytic
converter.
And upload them to the APD leads
database however at this moment
the state law in M. S. fifty
seven dash thirty dash eight
prohibits many municipalities
from requiring reporting from
the Steelers and eight online is
a reporting system.
Well so I understand and passed
by the union of catalytic
converter right.
So I think Senator am Stewart
for bringing that amendment
because that is something that
will help us make that change a
lot better I am the sponsor of
twenty two dash sixty one a new
ordinance that was introduced to
city council in December it
requires scrap metal dealers to
keep records which will be kept
on site and available for
inspection by by APD and if the
other state statue is is amended
we can immediately amend our
ordinance that will require the
reporting to the eight online.
under this ordinance every time
someone brings a catalytic
converter that's not attached to
a car for sale to the scrapyard
the dealer must collect the name
address date of birth that's on
the ID they'll have to get a FM
thumbprint and a picture ID a
picture and then they'll have to
note that the year make and
model of the vehicle that that
cap came off of these cats are
identifiable often times so we
can identify if it came off of a
Dodger for came off the Toyota
Prius Toyota Prius I'm catalytic
converters are very very
expensive or are us sought after
they they have palladium rhodium
and platinum in them and that's
what the cap that thieves are
going for.
K. the catalytic okay I reset
that we are also going to
require a copy of the
certificate either either the
title or something else the
registration or the insurance
cards so we can identify keep
those together okay on the
second hand more metal dealers
have to keep these records and
make them available for
inspection to APD the first
purpose of this ordinances to
prevent property damage due to
catalytic converter theft and
the second one which I think is
equally important is it should
help prevent scrap metal dealers
from unknowingly participating
in crime I hope that make by
making it more difficult to sell
stolen cats it will it can make
a higher risk or the risk so
high that the return on
investment is much lower so
thank you very good thank you
Representative counselor graft
through
anybody else want to speak in
favor of the bill.
we have several let's start with
the Representative Roybal.
Thank you Mr chair in senators
it's a delight to be with you
this afternoon
I'm a former account city
councilor and now state
representative from Bernalillo
county and I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward I also have two brothers
in the auto dealer businesses
independent dealers and I'm also
here to speak on their behalf as
well I am also registered to buy
and sell vehicles in at in
Albuquerque at the auction so I
speak on behalf of myself as
well
I A. speak in favor of this bill
and I just want to tell you a
really brief story about my
mother
so my my mother is elderly and
lives alone and my brother who
had a couple of extra vehicles
parked in front of her home this
summer and because they you know
you don't want to give the
appearance that a ninety five
year old woman is living alone
during the evening some time
someone came into her yard and
stuff and this was in in Santa
Fe County up north and stole
both of the catalytic converters
right out of her yard and so I I
bring this forward to you
because I think it's important
to see how dangerous this is and
this issue is dangerous for many
many people not only in in
northern New Mexico but in
Bernalillo county and I think
they have brought forward to
light how dangerous this issue
really is
so thank you for having me here
today and I hope that this bill
passes very good thank you yes
Sir officer.
and pulled it up.
Mr chairman members of the
Commission I'm really honor
first of all I'm my name is Jeff
and heading in the newly
appointed one of the two newly
appointed undersheriff for
Bernalillo county sheriff's
office.
and I think the more so the what
the bill does this bill one
thirty three with the stopping
what is commonly and
historically known as this
second had metal shops for being
a hub for stolen goods for that
affects everybody is what
addresses for them more besides
selling a catalytic converter.
People that based on data and
based on my personal experience
people that steal Dick this co
lead competitors and have an
easy access to Selim it is for
the purpose to purchasing
narcotics so we're not only
attacking the issue of the
filling the filling good but as
for the more what else people do
buy sell and and the revenue
that they're they're getting
from selling this good so we one
hundred percent personally and
often office we do one hundred
percent support this bill and I
think that it makes it harder to
secondhand metal shops to become
a hot for stealing that.
Thank you very much W..
Mr Taseer here good to see you
good afternoon builders.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Ken Ortiz be executive
director registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico auto dealers
association we represent a
hundred and twenty two auto
dealers in New Mexico and we
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward all
of our auto dealers throughout
New Mexico are facing this
pandemic in fact with there's
some security cameras cameras at
or security footage at
dealerships were a catalytic
converter has been stolen in
about forty five seconds and yet
it costs the dealers between or
anyone between three to nine
thousand to replace it depending
on the year making model so not
only businesses are being
affected by these catalytic
converters are being stolen
right in front of us folks home
so we we stand strong support
and also just want to mention
thank you sponsor thank you Mr
it is good to see you again if
you do.
The salary welcome thank you
good afternoon math Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Vanessa lady and I
represent the city of Espanola
and for all the reasons stated
before we strongly support this
bill and we think that president
pro tem and all the sponsors
thank you thank you.
Mr chair members the committee
Jason Weaks a representative the
responsible metal recyclers
initiative is a coalition of
metal recyclers that try to
operate in a responsible way
basically scrap yards last year
we passed the we've supported a
bill that expanded reporting
requirements the very reporting
requirements we're talking about
today are now being extended to
catalytic converters the state
is regulating this but they were
previously requiring any
reporting relative to catalytic
converters now they are after
working with the sponsor and
some of the advocates we came to
some what we feel is really good
fair language that allows local
governmental entities to also
impose report reporting
requirements on the act of
selling in purchasing catalytic
converters what's good about
this is that when you're
operating in an above board
manner in these scrap yards that
are licensed they can actually
act as a deterrent to criminal
activity they can also act as an
aid to law enforcement because
when folks come in and try to
sell stolen catalytic converter
they're collecting some of this
information even if the
transaction isn't fully
processed they may get a name
they make it a photograph to
make it part of the picture of
an ID then they will try to turn
that over to law enforcement so
they can actually be a
collective effort the city
actually will help gather this
information it probably
streamlines the communication
between law enforcement and the
licensure requirements because
essentially you're adding
another regulatory entity APD to
the mix they can chase down a
little bit better we stand
opposition we think this is
really good legislation and one
thing I mean sorry support.
I've been opposing everything
lately is off I'm sorry.
I'm sorry we stand in strong
support we think this is a
really good resolution one bank
the proton for bringing it
forward.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for
enterprise rent a car and we to
stand in support of this bill
we've had thirty three catalytic
converter stolen in just the
last twelve months that's a cost
us your your thumb slipped up an
extra that's that's cost us
about a hundred thousand dollars
in damages and that doesn't
include the downtime for the
cars not being out on the road
in one instance
at the airport they cut the
fence got into the got into our
yard it was about a ten minute
gap between when we the alarms
went off and someone showed up
and just in those ten minutes
three cars were hit so these
guys are good and gals I don't
want to and anyway
but anyway yes Representative
anyway but we enterprise
supports the bill and thank you
madam pro tempore.
Is there any go go ahead Sir.
See that in the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is brandy
kept assigned me license
secondhand mental dealer and I'm
here to stand in support of this
this bill
it's we're already it's called
the restricted metal now in
catalytic converters fall under
that and so the ability to buy
is there
I think that bill needs a little
more pushed Madam with may be
having a check issued a week
after up catalytic converter I
agree with what the under
sheriff said and a lot of times
they're trying to get fast money
to go about their date for it I
think organized crime has come
into the catalytic converter
systems also in in big
quantities
said was nice enough there's a
copy of a true life repair
estimate from insurance company
belongs to a neighbor of mine
that owns a towing service he
got his of catalytic converters
stolen he was out of work for
ten weeks one man one truck
thousand dollar insurance
deductible was was on it so.
Well we try and do what's right
on our end I think the the the
element of cash being able to be
given out at this point.
Is a cabbie at the could be
worked on and there's some other
things to be worked on but I
already understand it's at the
bill thank you for your time and
I'm happy to stand for any
question to saying I have one
quick question for you so we
have a similar requirement now
for copper wire right that's
correct is that slow down the
theft of copper wire.
According to the home builders
association it has
That my Mr if somebody comes in
with wire we try and look them
up in the regulation and
licensing to make sure they're
licensed contractor license
electricians something of that
effect I'm a smaller yard so I'm
got a little more time than than
others but we trying kind of
weed out because once they show
up they don't stop showing up.
Okay good thank you very much
anybody else anybody in
opposition to this bill.
Members of the committee.
What's the motion.
But we're ready for motion I
think nobody has any questions
yes I go ahead Senator McKenna I
have a question
thank you chairman thank you
senator Stewart
so I'm part of that club someone
took my catalytic converter here
Mike is it over the phone.
Get meet me start again
chairman Senator of Stuart I'm
part of that club I lost no I
didn't lose it someone took it.
My catalytic converter last
summer and I was told my
particular vehicle happens to be
in just to be and those that
look for these kept the
catalytic converters do you know
other targets they like the
SUV's because they're bit higher
yes so to get their clothes
dirty that.
So so I I'm curious chairman and
senator who is who's at the
after market who is buying the
palladium after it's extracted
from the catalytic converter.
The reserve middle cannot.
You go to questions they get
away.
He let go there is who buys that
from you.
So in the state of New Mexico
there's one person that
specializes in catalytic
converters complete I don't
think anywhere in the state of
New Mexico their scanners
counters that'll cut them up and
mount them I know that some of
our neighboring states to happen
so everything that's happening
here in my opinion is a complete
catalytic converter that either
gets if it's even the innards
without by and by weight right
they'll they'll say okay you
have X. and it's worth this but
as far is going farther than
that I don't think that's
happening in the state of New
Mexico I think they're all being
shipped somewhere else complete
or if they're broken up when
they're taken off a car they're
being put in the home depot
bucket and sent away it by
weight so that so just a follow
up that's a great question so.
There's still enough of a car
here they're sold as complete
units.
To somebody somewhere else who
needs a catalytic converter
because their car was hit.
No there there still because of
the precious metals in their
their several apps that you can
subscribe to the melt them down
over there had there not that
someone else and and with those
apps it'll it'll tell you by
number what kind of vehicle it
came off so even if this bill if
they were to go a step further
and say that registration should
match kind of where you put it
on the second had metal dealer
it's an extra step but.
Ninety nine percent of all of
them have numbers and that's how
they're purchased by numbers
because they know the precious
metals inside of and they know
what kind of vehicle they came
off of.
Thank.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Stewart and the
gentleman thank you.
Yes Senator Gallegos Mr chair is
ready to make a motion anytime
your financial just had a those
incredible discussion and one
more question for the gentleman
then approached him if I could
ask him another question.
Mr and center in gentleman what
do they do with these that wants
a melted down I guess what is of
value I understand there's a lot
of value you know what they're
using the resources for
afterwards.
They're just they're just
selling them like you what if
somebody melted down gold spot
price whatever.
Whatever it is on on the bigger
picture than that.
You know a much higher level
they're selling it off to
wherever it goes it at market
price per ounce per.
Pound thank you for that Mr Mr
Chairman center I guess I'm
gonna do some research because I
know we go to China for precious
metals and offers the batteries
for the test was and stuff like
that just wondering if that's
the components that they're
looking for but thank you for
that you're itching to have here
thank you.
Thank you bill now Senators
committees you want to make a
motion Senator one thirty three
percent seconded by Senator
Tallman.
As amended yeah.
Any other discussion secretary
will call the roll.
Senator gave us yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Schmedes yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator Tallman
yes Senator to the penal yes.
Seven.
But to seven in the affirmative
zero negative with.
To.
Representative three thirty six
thanks in the affirmative zero
in the negative three halves
absences at a new path thank you
so much thank you very much
Senator let's go Senator Padilla
here we go again yes I think we.
We technologists she hasn't
responded okay motions let's
take he's on his way always does
with focus that will wait just a
couple seconds for Senator
Padilla to deal with.
Yes we rolling souls we would
have said yes.
Okay.
Thank you Mr.
Okay thank you.
You you heard senator do we re
rolling souls of yes Senator
Gallegos million I just
mentioned it to me thank you
for.
If.
There is good.
We have an expert witness with
you Secretary Probst.
Good Senate bill one twenty
four.
Director executive director of
the hill from committee Mr chair
come up come Senator yep.
Thank you senator and go ahead
and start.
This is a movie body across the
building structure.
Thank you so again we're here
out with Senate bill one twenty
four of secretary Probst of IDFA
and executive director.
Representative review from a
parent and we have
Issue here today to allow
employees to move their and
their retirement work up while
they're in their original
portion of their employment with
the any pair program up to one
hundred percent if they choose
to do that that at any point
they can do that they can take a
a by year retirement a full
twelve months then return for
another thirty six months Max
the only additional time thing
come back to work for in that
period they would continue to
receive their their para budget
but they would not accrue
additional
twelve any kind and the but they
would also because they're
filling a position they would
pay their fares in the state
would pay their portion of the
retirement contribution would be
required to continue to help the
fund to be solvent.
The.
we do have an amendment that I
believe yes is sent through I
just Miss America is is a friend
of mine this it is actually yes
that I would work with him yes
did you want to move the
amendment etcetera.
So it basically puts a six six
year old.
Okay so what is the chairman and
and senator Maestas was very
open minded and and and and the
food was very kind to work with
me in putting this together but
essentially after.
After six years you'd you'd have
we have a full you know what
period of time we could take a
look at how this is going for
the state of New Mexico for the
fund itself for the employees
that it would affect and and
then we would either take the
sunset off or or the program
would would go away.
Is there a second to the
amendment Senator committee
second sent.
Any discussion of it Senator
Maestas thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for the for
sept in the friendly the up.
You know it's a big the big
enough to we've been I think
return to work ended in two
thousand ten.
and there's just a lot of
variables that need to be gauge
over over time not just para but
just is it working and one of
the unintended consequences
site.
Appreciate the the.
Appreciate accepting the
amendment and and encouraging
the members to it to adopted it
would essentially
creating create if this bill
were to become law would only
become off for six years.
And then we can monitor what's
going on and and hopefully it
solve the problem of the all of
us want to solve the problem
it's just it's just a how do we
go about doing that and I think
the the problem is immediate
it's not necessary ongoing but I
think it's it so I think this is
a reasonable thank you Mr.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Question of the.
If.
If you're Mike on.
I thank you.
Mr present with having this
period of time isn't that going
to affect negatively the people
who.
Don't get it the cut because
they're not in the period of
time where they miss out on it
or they you know I I just think
that it's going to raise some
fairness issues.
to you know to have this.
This period of time I mean I
will talk about the bill later
but I just looking at that.
Thank you Strittmatter so what
you're saying about evaluation
but you're kind of playing with
people's planning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator you yeah we we did
consider that but this is such a
large fund and it is so volatile
when every a little percent yet
tenth of a percent has a massive
impact on this thing so I think
that this gives us the ability
to kind of move around maybe to
make some other changes to it
while we're in the six year
period because twelve months
from now things but folks in
Star participating in four years
later still within that six
hours that's I feel like it six
year window we would have a a
ton of of information data
center we have one group working
the thirty six months following
off of it so that we can make a
decision as as a people that we
want to continue this or not so
you know it might be this that
work love it and and and so
therefore we would come with
feedback from other pre existing
Kirk members were making
decisions to
to help us take that sunset off
if that's if that's the case.
Mr chair and all along those
lines take this and it also
guarantees it in a way for six
years what if we have a debate
the minutes downtown downturn
next year and we need to make
adjustments by putting this in I
think it's kind of be harder to
come and make an immediate
adjustment if we've already put
a six year.
Evaluation of it thank you Mr
chairman Senator yeah I I could
that that's one way to look at
another way is any legislature
can do anything so therefore
week we could certainly stopped
this in two years we wanted to
three years four years so yeah
but but I think that's one way
to look at it but we can always
go in trust sunset period if we
need to.
It may take.
Mr Mr chairman.
And this is a I apologize with
the mask but we've been exposed
so I'm trying to protect
everybody else around me
So
This is friendly to you and you
your accepted it is Mr chairman
I think that's a smart move
again as I described earlier
really wouldn't start this for
you know for about twelve or so
months it invented begins then
you have a so that's one here in
thirty six months and this is
for years and five years is
another sort of a and then we
began as a legislature to take a
look do we remove the sons that
are not.
Okay thank you Mr chair just
just follow up on that why would
we started for what would Mr
July one it would but it would
take a full year to get people's
really beginning to license
assess themselves and get
themselves retired if they chose
to or not okay thank you.
Senator McKenna on the
amendment.
So what we're still yeah we we
never have adopted in India
we're still debating the
amendment bill that we may be
ready to vote on the amendment
is there any other discussion.
I think thank you did you do it
yeah you did already and the
hoops of this committee seconded
it Senator committees had to run
out that is something that is
good so
but he already seconded it is
there any opposition to the
amendment.
Okay so then let's take a vote
secretary will call the roll.
Yeah.
But.
Done.
Senator Gehrels Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna no.
Senators maybe Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Senator Tallman.
Yes he didn't buy his first
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You.
Senator to the penal yes the the
the amendment is adopted and now
we're back on the bill anything
else you want to save up to just
one I I know that when we do
this process gets a little
garbled and what have you but
but essentially what we're doing
is we're we're we're in a
situation where we need to find
a way also to motivate folks to
want to come back and start
participating the process again
this is is someone that this is
one way to do it they're going
to be able to continue to
receive that their budget while
they come back for a maximum
lifetime Mexico thirty six
months as I think it itself of
the state from that standpoint
the solve the fund is protected
with those to come back because
they do pay and their portion
the state pays in their portion
I think that we're setting
ourselves up for
solving some very big problems
we have right now but then also
now and I appreciate you wanting
to put up to allowing us to put
the amendment on but with the
sunset to evaluate that way not
just just might my experts is
that like to add anything else
that I didn't cover the original
introduction and now.
Secretary folks could see if the
see you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Andrew
props on the kind of secretary
for the department of finance
administration of the executive
this is a stand strong support
of this legislation we
appreciate the amendment created
it will allow us to evaluate how
this is working but we do
believe it addresses some issues
both short term and long term in
terms of retention of employees
I can tell you at the department
of finance and administration I
have at least five employees
that are eligible to retire that
I'm very worried about what will
happen at the department they do
retire and I think there's
probably that could be said for
every agency usually this is
seen Mr chairman as a public
safety measure but it goes
beyond a public safety I do
appreciate that the Senator
Padilla has included the twelve
month waiting period of from
retirement before somebody can
come back I do think that helps
with concerns have been
expressed in the past Mr
chairman members of the
committee about a revolving door
but I also want to thank the
senator for including the
increase in the ninety percent
to a hundred percent because
that too can serve as a in order
to keep of hundreds or thousands
of employees perhaps Mister
chairman but it is certainly is
going to be an enticement for
some employees who want to work
longer to do so and and earn a
higher benefit and retirement so
Mister chairman and members the
committee thank you for allowing
me to be here with you today
that's the same incentive we
just signed the police a return
to work and also if I could I
can call this out but secretary
Propst is here if you take a
look at the bottom of the bill
this is a G. O. G. bill this is
a governor so I didn't I didn't
call that out for the committee
before but you should you should
be aware of that is Mr through
did you want to speak thank you
Mr chairman in a Senators.
Thank you Mr chairman senators
great.
With P. R. A. I just wanna make
it clear that the pera board has
not taken under a position on
this bill but everything that
the senator said as well as a Mr
props is accurate so we I'm
happy to answer any additional
questions.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience list
Liz just give a show of hands
for so I can see how many people
are here about this bill who's
here in support of this bill.
Okay who is here in opposition
to this bill.
Okay what we take
When we take for people from
each side and give you three
minutes each to speak
we'll start with the secretary.
Secretary bow did you want to
speak on this bill.
Mr.
Sure it's on hold the button
copy that Mr chair members of
the committee we are in support
of this bill we have had a lot
of challenges filling the ranks
nudges on commission side but
also on a non commissioned sites
Ilyin staff is the the the
challenges the same and so at
the end of the day I always get
frustrated when you push back on
some of these issues and I know
we've been talking about two
degree like the whole down
positions they come back and
return to work right away and
that sometimes stop the ability
within certain organization for
people proposed potentially to
promote my arms very simple the
collective bargaining agreements
for those individual agencies
could address those things with
our city every every city has a
different need and if you in a
large metropolitan area have an
issue with people returning to
work holding down positions
that's a collective bargaining
issues you can work out with
your city that might be a
different issue and you would
have a smaller jurisdiction
where they might benefit for
someone return to work and I
don't mean to pick on any
jurisdiction specifically if you
have a lieutenant to captain
from a major metropolitan area
that has experience might be
able to offer that experience to
a small agency somewhere in New
Mexico why would we not want to
hire that person we have
challenges within law
enforcement we need the
experience the state as it is
currently people are leaving the
state in order to to seek
opportunities elsewhere to put
their experience to use I would
ask the committee to support
this thank you Mr chairman.
It is okay
next yes Larry.
The server and.
Mr chairman of the committee
leader and register lobbyist for
the New Mexico municipal league
over the summer the mint
municipally get the full board
considered return to work as a
as a priority and adopted a
resolution in support for return
to work it's been an initiative
we've been working on for years
and I appreciate the secretary
secretary bows comments about
law enforcement but we represent
all the municipalities
throughout the state including
the small ones and some of our
challenges aren't law
enforcement related it's it's
water and wastewater operators
that are very difficult to feel
and I go back to when Mr folgen
Eddie would have stood and made
this argument years ago and it's
always been water and waste
water for us and then Senator Mr
chairman I think you and I were
here in twenty ten when they
repealed the return to work
prior to that repeal in the
statute was an exemption for
return to work for deputy chief
of police and undersheriff that
got swept up in that repeal so
not only could you have a
command level staff from from
state police or another agency
that could go and become a
police chief or deputy chief and
one of our smaller are smaller
entities the used to be able to
do that prior to twenty ten now
you can't and so we think we're
trying to work is good
especially if you put some
guardrails in and it's targeted
for areas where we need it and
so I think this is this
legislation with the return to
work pieces an attempt to do
that thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr current yes ma'am.
But.
Yeah.
Thank you chairman members the
committee my name stress person
I'm executive director for New
Mexico association of counties
and we stand not a formal
position support will go to our
executive committee on Thursday
for that discussion but we
certainly want to acknowledge
the sponsor and the governor for
addressing an issue that's
impacting all of our counties in
all departments as one of our
priorities the chair
specifically addressing our
detention crisis we're seeing
upwards of twenty five or thirty
percent vacancy in staffing but
it's not just attention we're
seeing and all of our
departments that creates a
trickle down effect we're are
currently existing employees are
getting burned out they're more
likely to have an accident
because they don't have the time
and the energy to efficiently do
the things that are not normally
shared a few more employees
that's the reality of it so with
that I just like you know we are
very appreciative of this we
hope it continues to move
forward and addresses many of
our needs that we have thank you
thank you Mrs person one last
comment in support to us to be
the Representative for please.
Yes yes yes good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is sergeant
homesick Oscar junior the
president for the New Mexico
state police association and US
that supporting this of this
bill.
Main reason is we are very short
handed right now as a lot of
people a lot of agencies are
but right now I don't know if
you guys know the the number not
we started academy class started
with their team members I
believe and we're down to ten
this is week to
ten people to help supplement
officers that are retiring or
leaving I know standing here I
got up.
A lot of yelling at last year
from other other unions because
I stood in support but I'm not
worried about those of the
unions I'm worried about our our
our situation right now in the
state police and ten officers
door ten recruits in there is
not help with it puts a little
dent in it but it doesn't help
us that much I fully stand in
support of this an open pass
thank you very good thank you
now we'll go to those in
opposition and we're looking for
a for people in opposition do
you want to start John and then
we'll go here okay John.
Come on up.
Use the Mike so we can hear on
soon.
Who's at risk from.
Okay just a clarification the
less speaker were of of could
you right right now I just which
which you here Representative.
State police.
Thank you thank you okay John
the Mike is in Senator Padilla
sense.
Senator Padilla can you handle
my supposed to share this with
people are speaking against the
bill.
It's only fair the bottom.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
Do obviously we've heard this
bill in many different forms in
both chambers of the house and
and or both chambers and once
again hi are you know we've done
this many times before I
certainly want to thank the
sponsor and thank the governor
for trying to address the real
problem in the state we
definitely have vacancies in our
a public sector law enforcement
that definitely need to be
filled so thank you very much
for focusing on that issue a
young I'm here John that youth
representing the New Mexico that
New Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO we represent thirty four
thousand workers across the
state public sector private
sector we don't represent
management we don't represent
the municipalities are the
cities we represent the workers
that are doing these jobs and I
am here to tell you with that
well this is an understandable
idea to possibly fix this
problem it is respectfully not
the right idea we definitely
have a problem we have solutions
that are in place to help solve
this problem and we can improve
those solutions as well we need
to give them time this isn't
this is and effort that has been
tried before and unfortunately
it's not work and I understand
why we are trying to bring it
back but I really do hope that
you are willing to listen to the
workers that are in these jobs
already and take their site or
at least hear their opinion on
this is just not to the right
idea for what they are looking
forward to do their jobs better
to get the help that they need
so for those reasons and you'll
hear much more expert testimony
from others we respectfully very
respectfully ask you to oppose
this measure thank you thank you
John.
Yes Carter.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Carter when you
pass me we absolutely are
grateful to the sponsor and to
the governor who is supporting
this very strongly for their
effort to fix are very serious
staffing and vacancy problem
there is nobody who wants these
problems fixed more than our
members and I'll just be blunt.
Our corrections officers are the
first ones we're gonna die when
the rate goes down this is a
life and death situation so we
take it seriously this is
absolutely a shared goal of all
of ours we don't think this is
Walt for solid we should give
peace we love moving from ninety
percent to a hundred percent so
we hope that that will move
forward in this vehicle or
another because what you get out
of that is an extra three to
four years of service and to be
blunt what happens is yes it's a
higher retirement and people
work for that but you're going
to pay out that retirement for
three to four years less
obviously because they were
working the whole time so that
part of the bill we think is
terrific and we especially want
to thank the sponsor for that
and there are some other bills
and have that as well
This is with all due respect to
deeply flawed bill and this one
in particular more than most
double dipping bills so for
example there is no restriction
on what retiree can take
advantage of this that means
current people right now some of
the double dipping bills you'll
see they'll say they have to
been retired last year the year
before current workers can
retire taking a year off and
then come back and essentially
make double their take home pay
so let's say you have twenty six
years and and you're planning to
work thirty Max out your pension
well now you have every
incentive financial and
lifestyle to say I'm going to
sit out the next twelve months
and then I'll come back and it's
really double the take home pay
because it for making seventy
five or eighty percent in your
pension remember you're not
paying all your payroll taxes
and dues and other things so so
it's basically doubling your pay
so if I got four years left to
work and I can retire under this
for input for all year and then
come back I can make double my
take home pay for the last three
years and have a full year to
travel the country hang out with
my kids do anything want which
is perfect but we we never blame
double dippers because you'd be
crazy not to do this it's that
could deal but what that means
and by the way there is no
limitation if you look at
The top of page eight section J.
which is really main part of
this I don't think there's any
restriction it does so you have
to have not worked for the
affiliate for twelve months but
it doesn't say for twelve months
starting at the effective date
of the bill or starting at the
beginning of this year so as
long as you've been out for
twelve months you can do this so
there will be people who start
coming in and taking advantage
of this right away.
More importantly twelve months
from now or what will start
happening soon is just becomes
effective people will leave for
the exits in droves of course
they will because as soon as
they can take that year off
which is pretty nice then
they're that much closer to
getting three years of double
take home pay again we don't
blame anyone for doing that but
this creates a real short term
exacerbations.
Over shortages problem and then
in the middle of long term this
is been our general opposition
to a double dipping forever.
In the middle long term what
you're doing is you're using
para and again it may be neutral
to the fund although because of
the incentives because people
going forward can retire earlier
than they otherwise would have I
think that kind of actuarial
analysis would probably show
that it is slightly detrimental
the fund but even if it's
neutral to the fund what you're
doing in terms your payroll is
you are suppressing wages
because part of your payroll is
being covered by the fact that
people are coming back to on
double so if you can do that
that means that you aren't even
paying market wages while places
like Phoenix and flagstaff in
Austin el Paso in Denver and all
places we compete against
they're going to actually be
paying market wages so when you
start this bill we might be ten
or fifteen thousand dollars
behind all those other
jurisdictions state
representative state of Colorado
state of Texas by the time
you're done in six years and by
the way I think it would be nine
years I haven't read the
amendment but I think people can
jump in at the end of that six
years and then have their thirty
six months by statute so it's
really I think and nine year
whether it's six or nine years
from now how much farther we can
be behind pay this is a
tremendous opportunity we have
in front of us this year and
hopefully over the next couple
of years where we have
significant surpluses at the
state level that we can share
not only to make sure that we're
paying market wages at the state
but the we can share with our
cities and municipalities to
make sure that they're able to
recruit and retain the best
people that we can especially a
home from people you've all
heard the stories of people come
here they live here they take a
job in Albuquerque or even units
or whatever they're taking their
job and then they go to a place
that pays more we're training
the region's workforce so we
think for a lot of other
solutions we are grateful to the
attention being paid by the
sponsoring the governor and
others to fixing this problem
but we think this particular
bill and most of the dipping
built over willing to look at
some there are exceptions
because I think it probably
could work for some there are
exceptions but we think the.
This is way too broad in you're
going to actually make the
problem worse instead of
improving it and certainly our
members feel that and they're
the ones who are in danger thank
you for your time thank you Mr
Bundy.
Anybody else want to speak in
opposition.
We don't have anybody on the
zoom still right of the members
of the committee Senator you are
you with your permission I'm of
the critic yeah with your
permission Mister chairman so I
I I have had several meetings
with the with the folks already
during the session Josh and and
and Carter and his team I do I
will say that the retired public
employees of New Mexico also
fully endorse the legislation
City of Albuquerque is in favor
of the legislation is endorsed
it through the by the more not
the council but by the more
And
The mayor of the Espanola mayor
John Ramon V. Healey he's also
in favor as well on the point
that that one of the speakers
said that Mister Bundy talked
about
in the scented to retire early
yeah well that but also but even
before that you with regard to
you know the safety in in our
presence and what have you will
this is going to get more help
more manpower into the facility
to help in those situations well
I appreciate and respect the
comments that were made I just
think this is actually going to
help that very sad situation so
I just want to make that mention
thank you.
What about his comment about
this could be a actually it to.
Any incentive to retire early
take that year off on your
retirement income back at
double.
That that is definitely one
would look at it you still have
to do all of the requirements
today to get to that point so
that that's one very important
factor in what was described
there but also now you're gonna
be completely encouraged to work
up to the one hundred percent
that we have as a provision here
because you're gonna get that
extra ten percent for the rest
of your life not just those
three years or or beyond in the
next a period of time you're
gonna get to draw that until you
fall six feet in the ground so.
Okay.
Members of the committee.
Senator Stewart Senator McKenna
Sedillo Lopez and Tom.
thank you.
You guys are thank you chairman
thank you senator for the
I've got some concerns about
this bill and it's the the two
of them are out is on the
analysis page two
number one how will this affect
new recruitment and number two
parent in the past has
repeatedly said double dipping
will result in adverse
consequences to the funds what
will this bill due to retirement
funds and then thirdly as I've
been thinking about it chairman
and senator.
Say a.
Yes maybe a supervisor in the
state police.
Does retired.
and then gets the opportunity to
come back.
Does that
retiree.
Are there any limits in the when
you're raised are there any
limits of what kind of position
that returning officer will have
for the state police.
Thank you Mr make sense thank
you Mr chairman and senator I'm
gonna take item number one I'm
gonna ask Mister tribute answer
two and three on the recruitment
I think this is actually going
to be I I feel like this is
going to be over of the
recruitment bonanza it is going
to make the state of New Mexico
in state jobs heck of a lot more
attractive to come to because
you're gonna have this
retirement that suddenly like
with this one action is going to
push you all the way up into one
hundred percent that that's a
remarkable benefit if you choose
to make a career out of working
for the state of New Mexico
somewhere in state government so
I think it's going I don't know
that that's a but an issue of
significant issue and about the
system significant issue in in
the good direction someone just
Mr through here to respond to
the next.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
McKenna you are correct return
to work programs like this
across the country it does alter
retirement behavior the original
iteration of return to work only
had a ninety day lay out period
and I I wasn't too involved with
that was around but I I am told
that that ninety days was ripe
for abuse it's easier for an
employer to keep a position open
for ninety days and then put
that same person back in that
position the twelve month lay
out in this bill could still
affect retirement behavior but
it's much different much more
difficult for an employer to go
that long without feeling a
position and and as a the
senator mentioned it also gives
a carrot for those that want to
stay on longer working longer
painting for a longer period of
time and taking a benefit out
for a lesser period of time is
it is a generally positive to a
fund and on your other point
Center McKenna but there are no
no safeguards would like you say
about what position somebody
else could potentially come to
but but even with that that's
not something para can relieve
police we don't get to job
descriptions we don't know what
the member is doing in their
position we are getting their
wages and their hours work
that's kind of the.
That's the only data we have to
to police anything with.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator and thank you for
responding thank you thank you
Senator McKenna Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair
I thought that part of the
learning path.
Learning a lot about.
Sorry it was really good
learning a lot about these
return to work bills and getting
a lot of different perspectives
and people who like it and
people who like it tend to be
people who are close to it and
think that they can go back
You know it's a all all the
range but one of the most
disturbing things I I heard from
and these people did not want to
be identified was of.
In the end I know small examples
make you know make that policy
but you know with the department
of justice decreased.
Some of the.
Problems are people who really
need to be gone.
And so these ghetto these bills
make it hard to get rid of of of
employees who should who need to
need to prove up move on and I
understand that that's that's
just one example but you also
see a lot of in the university
contacts with the E. R. B. you
know a lot of deadwood's I mean
I not to be insulting but
But people who really should
should move on and and you know
because they have enormous
respect and they've built up
such such a career but then you
know they get a bad teaching
evaluate you know it's it's it's
it's rough and.
And and I don't I'd like to know
more about the guard rails and
what would what would because
you can get a lot of angry
people if they can't go back
because Intel have that
expectation
and how are you going to make
sure that there's some
discretion about maybe there are
some people who really want to
go back
and then and then I always worry
about the younger generation
leaving the state because
there's just no opportunities
here because you know they can't
move up because these people
stay in state and state so those
are concerns I've had about the
the double dipping I think the
hundred percent is a really good
the hundred percent of cap is an
incentive to P. people keep
people on at the peak of their
career.
And so the so I I you know what
three years when they're like
really know their job hopefully
will be training people and
hopefully moving on but this
this idea of bringing somebody
to double dip because then
you're getting double your
salary you're never going to
want to leave.
and that that's just been
bothering me about these double
dipping bills since I first got
here you may recall I has as you
know and I really appreciate
both of you
Mr secretary and and you know
helping me understand that the
whole pension issue and and has
you know I worked on pension
issues when I was at the
university because I was the
chair of the government the
government rations Committee
when they did the last ERP thing
so so this this issue has a lot
of residence for me and I'm
still troubled I I I don't know
you said there are guardrails
and and I'd like to hear a
little bit more about the
because I'm troubled.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for for all of those
points the role very well
received in very salient I would
say three things one is we we do
cap this again at three years
and that's it for you you're not
gonna sit out another twelve
months and come back for another
three years and now that that's
first item I'd like to mention
forty second and that's a chart
real second I believe is you do
a lot of living in twelve months
you go through a whole cycle of
everything in in in twelve
months so instead of the
previous ninety days which is
what it was before
you sort of another age also
when you started working so
you've got a lot that happens to
you maybe start a business maybe
you know you become the the
rules in the home the CEO of the
home Raul flips one way or the
other and now you're responsible
for all the things going on
about so I don't know that
everyone just automatically
going to you know want to Hey we
gotta go but but back after
twelve they're waiting for that
twelve months to expire and then
the third thing is
you're not going to
automatically pick up the phone
and go right into that role
twelve months from now that
departments had to live without
whatever you were doing with for
them for twelve months and so
suddenly they may have already
filled that role they may have
readjusted the department
because your skill set that was
very lengthy and you had a lot
of experience was reconfigured
and spread across a couple of
different folks or whatever
you're gonna have to I'm a
business owner I have to
interview people and hire them
at different times and fire them
at different times and correct
their behavior different times
so suddenly what you're gonna
wind up with this you're gonna
have to go through that
interview process all over again
and you're gonna have to get
selected for that role and so I
think those are tremendous I
think those are just the right
guard rails to have in place for
something like this and I I you
know I do hunt of fall back on
the six year deal that we just
did a few moments ago to give
this thing a yes Representative.
Thank you Mr chair I you know I
those those concerns I I don't
think aren't necessarily
addressed and
I mean I understand that there
are a way toward it but not all
the way and and particularly
with our young people of not
being able to stay because the
positions here so low level and
they just can't seem to move
move up and and that's that's
just really
Retirement is there for a reason
and I thought about it also with
this then another issue I have
with this is it's just so broad
it's not targeted at you know if
if the issue is is
I don't know of let's say you
want police officers to be to go
into corrections.
That's one way of targeting it
but it but are you having police
officers to stay there and stay
there and stay there and
corrections officers stay there
and stay there so the United
dressing a recruitment area in
in the.
In the context in which you need
to the the the experience in
positions you know you I don't.
We did express that very well
but but like I said that the
deadwood problem it is big to be
and so I think if you move
somebody okay they they retired
from the police department and
then they want to be a
corrections office officer you
know that that may make sense
given their skill set and
whether it makes sense but going
to the same department and doing
the same job and competing with
younger people who don't have
the experience they have just
gonna keep those young people
down.
Thank you Mr chairman I I I have
to respectfully disagree with I
really appreciate that analysis
I think that's that's one way to
look at it I I see it and all of
the different light which is
what I mentioned before which is
a a really great couple great
recruitment tools as well before
if you came back to work for the
state you could work up to a
hundred percent that as we just
laid out here and you didn't
have that opportunity to sit out
yourself and come back for three
years at that's going to be if
if we take that sunset off at
some point the person starts
today that's going to be
available to them at some point
we we don't know but but there
they were off a lot of
assumptions are is all I'm
saying thank you and and just
respond to that because of the
sun said it's not going to be a
recruitment tool because they
have no idea whether it's going
to be around and I and in the
sense that I had a reservation
about it because if it does
sunset you know if you have
people who just barely missed it
and and you know all of those
kinds of a fairness issues I I I
think it's a really really hard
issue
and you know I understand we
have a high vacancy rate I I I
get that but I don't necessarily
think that the response is
keeping the same people in the
same position.
You know they have but I I
appreciate the bill I appreciate
you know I know that it's a
government and that's very heavy
that it's that that the governor
wants to accomplish this and
feels that that it is needed
throughout state government
That's that's very very
important to me and I I it makes
me really think about it but I
don't know I just never like
these
So thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you Mr Senator Senator
Tallman you're you're next.
Yep Europe already thank you
thank you Mr thank you Senator.
Because of.
The level of this you know.
J..
The arguments of.
Both ways so this is a problem
because of her pension system is
so level that people are
retiring too early.
Mister chairman Senator I'm not
necessarily sure people leaving
is because the pension is so
good
it we have I will say our our
average age a retiree has been
trending upwards you know we we
see very few of.
Retirees leaving at you know
cops retiring at forty years old
these days I I believe our
average active member at this
point in time is about forty
three with eight years of
service so how it was in the
past the our membership has
evolved as it staged.
that this thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that just so.
That forty two for long for so
with that for the.
Non law enforcement people Mr
Chairman so we have and senator
Tom and we have two tiers a
budget for those members and non
law enforcement that were
employed prior to June thirtieth
of twenty thirteen just a
billion employees most of them
have to work twenty five years
before they can retire.
and and most most of them get to
three percent per year so they
could retire at seventy five
percent of their salary after
twenty five years of employment
we have a second tier which is
tier two and that's anybody that
was our time or employed July
first twenty thirteen or after
they now must meet what's called
the rule of eighty five so their
age plus our service has to
equal eighty five so if if you
started at say twenty and you
worked.
Thirty two and a half years at
that point that's when you would
get to eighty five or around
that area and the pension
multiplier that they get is two
and a half percent for most
members so it is a reduction
from the the older tier so it is
going to take a longer period
time for them to qualify under
just the general requirements.
So they pay a lower
Premium set Mr chairman and
senator Tallman the eater one
enter two they still pay the
same exact a contribution
amount.
not very well versed in pension
since I've never had one.
Well it's got four oh seven four
fifty seven.
I did well anyway so why we
having such a hard time the
first was senator Munoz.
I heard him say several times
last fall under the finance
interim committees the number
one Madam problem.
Was
The high vacancy rates.
So I think this is a question
that we have a I do we do
implies a what.
Why we having such a hard time
hiring employees.
Well Mr chairman and and Senator
I don't know that that that is
really not the purpose of this
legislation but what I will say
is that there are recruitment
issues there are salary issues
there are the the level of
difficulty of the work at CYFD
workers workers for example
incredibly tough to to to fill
the social worker case worker
roles there case loads are
tremendous because we haven't
filled the positions that are
that that are there we just
heard from our friends ask me
the you know the difficulty in
the job and corrections
etcetera.
Where this does jump in and help
in that area to help with
recruitment and to help fill
some of these open positions is
you're gonna see people wanting
to take a look at coming back
again doesn't mean they're going
to they may have been out long
enough to where I'm never gonna
go back to that again but here's
another option for them to come
in and it's capped only at
thirty six months so that they
can work up to that point in the
make that position available to
somebody else.
Mr prop.
Mr chairman and senator.
Just perhaps add something else
to the that discussion I think
part of what the status patient
facing right now with
particularly with retention
issues I see it every morning
when I look in the mirror.
We have an aging population.
I've heard Mr chair he'll
testify believe it I pock and
and other committees that within
two or three years I will be
more retirees receiving our
benefits an active employees
paying into the system and it
that will that imbalance will
continue for a period of ten to
fifteen years after that it sort
of starts to reverse but I do
think as as an employer in the
state that part one of the
challenges really is that aging
population you have employees
who are older they're eligible
to retire they really have no
incentives to to state so we
don't have an incentive to stay
past ninety percent as we give
immense incentive to stay
perhaps up to a hundred percent
but I think it's just it's not
you need to New Mexico the
country is is facing the same.
Demographic challenges but I do
think that it that is part of
the position that we're in right
now again hopefully over time
perhaps that kind of reverses
itself but I think that's part
of the challenges that
employees employers are facing
and New Mexico state employers.
Is there any other any other of.
Bills coming down the pike to
address this problem.
To see only one.
Mr chairman I I get I that does
not bode well yeah sure there
are several I guess it I can't
quote exactly which ones there
are there are also studies and
there may be some funding for a
statewide
Ellery survey budget you know
survey it cetera so we take a
look at all government agents
all state agencies figure out.
Why we're having some time.
And I do believe that the others
are listed in the FIR statement
that you should have in front of
you.
Bill now we go to the some of
the bills coming up right.
Yes yes this is the best time to
vote on this bill that's an odd
question but this is the best
time.
Question I think it's a good
question so thank you Mr Mr
chair Senator this morning and
the rules we we heard three
pension we third three election
election bills and we heard him
on and they decided which one
they were going to vote on it
positively so we.
You know that so that's where I
get this idea.
That's something I came up with
I can't take credit for this
idea.
So.
Did you want to address this
point.
I was gonna say how is it that
you're my bills were the ones
that got tabled center I was
happy that.
I I have no high expectations in
line with the bill that got
approved I was very
Glad to get through will show to
progress what we did here one of
the bills the only other one in
the Senate that started in the
Senate was ninety six and that's
a win for the police officers
Ripley Tennessee that would
strictly pension is ninety six
this is a whole other bank of
issues I know but the if there's
this where's is it relates to
the bill has something to do
with them and he's asking what
we hear those of those we've
heard the Senate bill relates to
it but to wait for the house
built in who knows what shape
will be entered filler make it
over.
So nobody likes my idea.
At I don't like your.
You to vote.
But I remember.
This is what we get the big
Bucks for making these tough
decisions of.
I don't this is the Senate if we
have anything.
Well I guess
and
Senator Gallegos is up to you
know you can help us out with
this thank you Mr chairman
center and gentleman thank you I
I do have quite a few questions
so just trying to understand
this so
Mr chair Senator if a police
officer retires today you gotta
wait the year would he be able
to come back as a resource
officer for your school or is
here to stay in the same line of
duty.
Mr Chairman in that scenario if
a police officer retired from
para today they can go back and
work for your B. as a resource
officer
next month different different
different different pension
system but your B. requires them
to pay in the member portion and
employer portion for no benefit
for those funds the Mr Chairman
turns it so it's different how
come for the employee
consider just what we're talking
about here Daschle appreciate
that and Mr chair Senator I I
actually talked Carter Bundy
earlier and I really liked when
the comments he made about the
free education of us going out
and educating people then
leaving I use that same argument
over the teachers education last
year the free education for
students because we are we end
up sending people to Texas now
other were in our revenue for
our investment in them doesn't
state I did have a of
clarification Mister chairman
Senator so this has a one year
out they are not working for the
year then they have the three
years that they're able to work.
But the sunset is six years and
I'm wondering historically in
the house we always use an eight
year sunset Mr answered you know
why you reduce that I just
Senator my assistant came up
with that I know that.
Just wondering why the six year.
Mr chair and and I do want to
put Center mice they do you.
I I may Mister chairman Senator
goes there but it was just up I
had some and senator actually
wasn't my idea necessarily but I
I just I'll share my concerns
similar to center see the Lopez
that.
In of itself double dipping is
bad public policy the question
is do the times demand that we
do these drastic measures to to
facilitate these vacancies.
Thank you for that Mr chair
Senator center I guess my next
question is so.
And I don't understand this but
the at the federal level we have
a three point four percent
unemployment.
I guess everyone else in the
nation's working except here in
New Mexico Lars no ours is very
high to I mean very little to is
and we are at actually a forty
year low that were challenges
may exist they can be
improvements for chairman is
folks have just walked out of
the workforce altogether there's
going to be a number of things
happening we just heard a
presentation on the committee
that I do serve on in finance
where step budget as an example
are going to fall by fifty two
percent starting in March I
think that's gonna move a lot of
folks to say wait a minute I
better if I'm out of the work
force I should probably try to
get back in and wherever I can
so that there's a number of
things gonna happen folks.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator and and those
type things I was trying to
juggle because I know that they
say we've got everyone working
you can go to a restaurant of
all over the state schools
although our departments and
they have a voice of one of
things Mister chairman Senator
that I like about this given
though it's a short term bandage
but it does give us some
opportunities to go and put
people back to work in
relatively short time to we can
go ahead and grow our own and
get him in the system so with
that are you thank you Mr thank
you secretary or senator
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir by the secretary thank you
the
No I just want echo the the
concerns of Senator Lopez that
you know.
The building was just a bad idea
but the double dipping back in
the day the person could
literally.
Retire on Friday go back to work
on Monday.
and then it's a lot of folks did
that a lot of folks did that and
so
so you know we
it was just a huge stress on
power was a huge you know stress
and and
The the the office politics so
to speak
and I just created bad
incentives you know bad
incentives the
The folks that were clamoring
the loudest to end double
dipping in two thousand and two
thousand ten then we're came
back and tried to champion it
you know in two thousand fifteen
sixteen when oil prices crashed
in.
And you know that chief
executive at a street
government.
Policy don't raise the minimum
wage policy don't raise wages
policy and so
so just reminds us not to get
too thick on the reddit because
times change and things change
and all of the
So I so anyway let me just kind
of flesh out some of these
concerns the I don't the sunset
I I would imagine we would look
at if in fact this became line
we you know in three four years
we looked at it and said we want
to continue doing as I I hope
that's not I hope that's not the
case I just so I I if we do do
this in my mind is to solve an
immediate problem that hopefully
will play itself out and and
solve itself out
with higher wages and better
conditions and and just a
healthier healthier economy as a
whole but if someone if these
returning workers come back.
Then they they they increase
their potential power output in
the future for our of I think
you I think it's good enough
page.
Do they get credit to the gate.
Do do they increase their power
output in the future by coming
back to work I thank you Senator
and and chairman and senator no
they do not actually they do pay
and to protect the fund and
protect the newer workers that
are paying into the fund they
have the deduction look like
they would today they don't
accrue additional retirement
benefit nor do they recruit do
they
No no and they don't read they
don't have any credit to their
to their time that there and so
but they do but they would be
allowed Mister chairman Senator
that they would be allowed to
that the checks coming in from
Paris result of their commitment
to state government those would
continue as normal that is
correct Mr chairman and and that
they would be
And they would receive the same
benefit as anyone else including
cause of increased things like
that there the for the of
Original retirement yes at the
all the things that apply today
to retiree would apply to those
individuals as well thank you
and so on page eight lines
twenty one twenty two and it
says retired rebels retired
member shall not accrue service
credit that service credit is.
Is the magic words for
increasing your power as a
result of working longer that's
correct at for that thirty six
month period you wouldn't and
you only have thirty six months
that's it so thank you Mr
chairman separately at but you
but that person.
And that person would not become
a member that member is a member
of para or a member of the
parent group what is the what's
the word member mean on page
eight line nineteen.
Retired member shall not become
a member.
Well they wouldn't become of
Representative contributing area
benefit in addition the center
and of Mr Chairman center
Maestas yeah we we consider a a
members somebody that's accruing
service accruing an additional
benefit so they're paying again
but they're not getting that
additional benefit they're not
getting that additional service
okay thank you Mr chairman a
gentleman so they would be up
there would be a retired member
and picked up and get the
benefits of retirement but they
would become a new member in
terms of increasing their budget
thank you Mr chairman and the
key word there is a one right
before on line nineteen which is
a retired member verses.
Just a member of a new member or
any a current member of a
working member ready in just
just for.
Just I know that Perez at the
slickest lawyer in town Mr
Chairman so having look at page
eight line nineteen it's is
retired members should not
become a member then on line
twenty five of that same page it
says contributions that will be
required for members and
employees there should be a
glitch but just just make sure
if this were to become law that
that that that's not confusing
to the to the folks the
So if they work say they come
back they the work the full
thirty six months for chairman
they're paying into a pair of
themselves their their paycheck
also pays in the para can they
recoup that or that just that
just gets contributed into the
para popped.
Mr Chairman in center Maestas
correct it is that those of
contributions that they make
with their player make are never
refundable to them so that stays
with para so Mister chairman
Senator John and so.
Although it may not be a lot on
the margin this could increase.
The Paris Ovince.
Mr chairman and center Maestas
it's not a silver bullet but yes
it did the is slightly positive
to pair up.
And then also Mr just on the on
the hundred percent
You know the amount jumped under
current law the amount shall not
exceed ninety percent of the
final average salary what does
someone have to do to get them
get to ninety percent.
Mr chairman in center Maestas
currently furniture one member
they must work thirty years to
get to ninety percent so if they
wanted to work longer to get to
the hundred percent for most
members would be about thirty
three years and four months to
get to that hundred percent okay
so Mister chairman Senator
that's important so so where it
says you know it says like ten
or twelve times a changes the
word ninety to one hundred
they're still the word ninety in
statute elsewhere as it relates
to the thirty year old at thirty
thirty workers Mr chairman and
senator we have the thirty one
different plans and other plans
have lower multipliers ago from
two percent up to three and a
half percent so depending on
which plan there in the could
take other members longer to get
to that hundred percent
threshold okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator John
so so you're not doing away with
the ninety percent tier you're
adding an additional tier and
and that intentional tier
incentivizes what why is that a
good good public policy if.
Well you could look at in a
couple ways one is like I said
earlier you work your way to the
one hundred percent the
additional ten percent you're
getting that the rest your life
so that's an additional pay out
to you for doing that additional
time in providing that service
keeping that experience in the
department where you work.
So that Mr Chairman center that
may of a levy eight a vacancy
for another three four years
with X. with an experienced
worker.
Got you all right and then
lastly
You know I understand about the.
You know I know para was the
biggest concern when we did this
in two thousand ten power with
the overwhelming concerns so I
think my concerns with
Representative with that are
elevated and maybe even I think
it'll benefit on the you know.
On the margin maybe half a
percent or whatever the I know
that folks not folks not of
rising in the ranks so to speak
is a concern and so.
My question is how does that
correlate to like new recruits
you know new recruits obviously
if someone's I have a twenty
year career as a police officer
someone coming in.
Three years ahead of them and
leaving after so you know by the
time they're a seven year
veteran these folks are gone
like I I just I don't see I
don't see it hurting recruiting
do you think up.
Do you think this complements
the recruiting that we're trying
to do in the bonuses that we're
doing at your at your zero five
and ten or do you think that
conflicts with that recruitment
effort.
Mr chairman I guess just my gut
tells me that it complements it
they still have to go again like
I said earlier through the
interview process if there's
additional training because that
particular role they weren't in
before they're gonna have to do
all of that in order to take on
that of the role so I I I would
say that it probably compliments
it I think thank you Mr chairman
and we won asked the executive
to to get into.
The reasons for the vacancies in
the struggles to fill the
vacancies because I know they're
working their tails off and
doing that but we have a private
sector of minimum wage in my
home town that went from seven
fifty four years ago to fourteen
dollars.
You know not because of the law
because of the market then you
have a four thousand.
Four thousand worker factory you
know factor so to speak the
Amazon plant that is paying just
to start sixteen hundred sixteen
dollars seventeen dollars.
Then you they were asking folks
to walk the line as a
correctional officer at MDC for
I don't know whatever twenty one
twenty two dollars I mean so
there is a crisis in my my local
county jail as well as in my
opinion a crisis at the
department of corrections with
regards to to CEOs in and out
really low and we'll get into
this with some other bills
really low
track number of workers you know
at night in these facilities the
So I think and then also what
was touched on I think by the
gentleman.
Is the it's not the unemployment
rate because then employment
rate is statistical with regards
to looking for work for one
looking for work as a job this
is awesome there's a lot of
folks that are looking for work
we have the lowest voter
participation rate of of you
know working aged adults in the
country so I don't know and I
think it's because.
You know for a whole host of
factors if we can entice some of
these folks to come back to work
that might be a good idea also
these folks can double deck
today double dipping is not
against the law they can they
can work for coca Cola they can
work for Amazon they can work
for a security company you know
and so we're competing with that
as well to bring these workers
back if we can build we can
bring back a couple on a
workers.
And kind of just fill the gaps
in the timing and maybe some to
consider
But certainly not not not
forever and not without the
safeguards what I would consider
but I would ask you to consider
if this winds down enough to
make a commitment but but up you
know in a perfect world they
should say.
You're only allowed to come back
to work if you if you retired
honor before December thirty
first twenty twenty two because
that if if folks if folks retire
as a result of this and we're
that's that's opposite of what
we're trying to achieve.
That's that's that's my only
concern thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator.
Thank you senator anybody else
yeah but so if.
News.
Of.
Yeah go second we'll get Senator
Tallman for second time.
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Michael.
Thank thank you Mr chair.
what are their strategies as the
administration using to deal
with our vacancy problem.
Questions I don't feel like I
should speak for the executive
the list I don't.
This is just the executive I'm
not sure I should be there I
think that's probably a question
better put to the director of
the state personnel office is
much more involved with that.
There are this last year thanks
to you not just the governor but
thanks to state employees are
seven percent pay increase state
police over the last several
years of received in excess of
the pay increases for our
general state employees so I
think there has been a
recognition both by the
legislature and executive that's
our is part of the.
As part of the equation
but
so that's that's what most
people are concerned about is
the bottom line I hope this year
the executive is recommended for
percent salary increase of
legislative finance committee
and on additional five percent
increase but
my experience is banned and and
I've been a state government
almost nineteen years that when
people are ready to retire
they're just gonna retire to
spend twenty years I'm three or
four years away from being
eligible to retire if this bill
passes I can almost assure you I
will not come back.
some people will but a lot of
people I think the Senators
correct thank you stay out of
here
that's a first of all as a long
time you start to pay your
mortgage for that year you have
to provide most people have to
provide state employees want to
find something to do during that
year I may have grandchildren by
then and decided they'd rather
spend time with their
grandchildren to come back to
work so it's a it's a lot of
things going into this is you
know having served many years on
investments and pensions
oversight committee pensions are
very complicated as we noted but
I do think the executive and the
legislature trying to do what
they can and I I do think the
senator to this legislation is
also trying to do what he can to
address what I again think is
potentially a shorter term issue
caused in some part at least to
the an aging population.
Thank you Senator thank you Mr
chair I I've I just wondering of
like if this is all of the above
were you know with
you know trying to trying to
have multiple strategies to to
work on this of one of the most
introspective things about state
of.
Working for the state is a
defined benefit plan and that
alone is huge but then to be
able to to collect for the for
thirty six months.
Your retirement because they
will for that one year they'll
have their retirement and then
they'll have the opportunity
come back in three years at
double their salary just seems
like not the smartest public
policy
move to double because.
At.
It it's not that it's random but
doubling of somebody salaries a
huge
It's a it's a huge huge benefit
in an incentive to come for the
thirty six months I mean I would
be hard pressed hard pressed not
to think well I could double for
thirty six months that would
give me enough money to.
Buy a second home or something I
don't know but it's it's a.
This is this is a really hard
one for me but I I I want to be
supportive of the
administration's
creativity in attempts to deal
with the vacancy problem.
But as a long term strategy I I
don't think it's good public
policy to to have a double dip
so I'm I am still struggling.
Appreciate that Mr chair thank
you senator Senator Tallman
you're my okay thank you Mr of.
Photo except three answers so I
have a rhetorical question
nobody has an answer this by the
senator Munoz to sitting out
with the union papers that maybe
he doesn't support this bill.
All of we have four house rules.
My so we have four house rules
bills.
The on the Senators issue so
just one of those this is an act
so that means it goes to a
conference committee.
To work out the differences
Mister chairman Senator fits the
six it was the exact same bill
coming back and forth and
there's a change to a bill
passed in one chamber on the
other side and their captain
there's no of concurrence
agreement but the other one so
then you the protest of the
speaker could appoint a
conference committee so it might
go to a conference committee I
know this was going to pass all
the way through a very
successful yeah I that I I
wouldn't introduce a bill
Senator unless I really want to
get it done.
Well.
Everybody thinks that.
I would that's the moving on.
we have another question of the
of the FIR says that we have a
Seventy point two billion
unfunded liability.
you know here the billionaire
billionaire so what.
Then there's the the the
technical question one of the
actual area actually through
actuarial effects of this bill.
the retirement funds Mr chair
Mister here so.
On a calculator.
Yes Mr chairman senator Clemente
so on the return to work portion
as long as we are getting the
contributions coming in and
those members are not accruing
additional retirement service
credit that is positive to the
fund on the pension cap lifting
the pension cut from ninety to a
hundred percent are valuations
currently we only we cap
pensions at ninety percent so if
this was to pass that we look at
now we're gonna cap pensions at
a hundred percent
that gives us a one time impact
of about twenty five million
dollars so that that increases
the unfunded liability
by that amount but hoping that
this incentivizes people to work
longer careers we're getting
more contributions for a longer
period of time over time we
expect that to to be neutral to
the fund that twenty five
million one time hit we expect
that to go away in future years.
Thank you for that answer and Mr
Joseph two more quick questions
so.
is there a requirement.
Mr chair and Senator that.
The employees are coming back
can.
Have to come back the same rate
pay ranger can they come back at
a lower rate range.
They can come back at a lower
rate or interest if they choose
to.
Thank you and finally Mr share
my allowed to ask some questions
somebody in the audience the if
you are an expert in you need
their input well he certainly is
an expert.
the carbon if you commit you
have you work in Arizona and
Nevada right.
So give you a much better
experience in other states with
this issue.
Mr chairman senator Tom and this
is something that really hasn't
come up in those states I think
for the most part they also have
good defined benefit plans and
most people know that it hurts a
plan ultimately certainly the
public size of people can come
back and get paid both for
retirement and their full pack
so it hasn't really come up but
they they I I would just say
this they do have similar
vacancy problems and I can speak
to the veteran particularly even
Republican governor who probably
wasn't our first choice with
very similar vacancy levels and
some were surplus is looking at
an eight percent raise and so I
think there's recognition across
party lines this is a problem
that ultimately only get solved
by paying market wages so that
we can get people in the door
and then keep in there thank
you.
Do hear that Mr Chairman.
So.
Mr chair bill.
Mr chair this goes to finance
because a finance next year
could pass here it'll go to
finance move the to pass no REC
except you just debated so you
all can do yeah.
The movie do yes no
Representative.
He moved to do pass.
Okay is there a second for a do
pass.
Seconded by Senator Maestas any
further discussion we have a
motion for a do pass.
Senator committees.
Coming in.
Any further discussions seeing
none the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Davis.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center my just this.
Yeah yes Senator McKenna no.
Senator smitteez yes explain
about.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
No explain why the.
Senator Tallman.
The week yes.
Senator yes.
We're back to square.
But but but the food so Senator
committees to explain his modem
and Senator Sedillo just a point
provision recognize our sergeant
arms Mrs I'll read any sees
people standing back here they
they made room and helped
accommodate my children who were
here during the discussion and
their friends so thank you all
so much for your kindness in
doing that that's real great
opportunity for my kids to be
appear and and listen to
committee of other up here for
those days I really appreciate
that very much thank you.
And does Senator Sedillo Lopez
to explain her vote
thank you I was thinking that
maybe and wrecked would be late
now we had our budget was yes no
and that's why I voted no to
send a signal that this
that there are there are
concerns I I just think that the
public policy is double dipping
is pretty strong and it would be
better to raise wages and make
living conditions working
conditions better but I this
bill will go on to finance and.
That's good to be more
discussions thank you members of
the committee so let me announce
the vote by a vote of five in
the affirmative to in the who
voted no and to who are excused
you have a do pass on Senate
bill one twenty four thank you
to the committee thank you we're
here so we're going to with that
as amended the assessment now
here's we're gonna do now we're
going to take our or
appropriations bills because we
think we can get them out fast
fast fast and then we'll go to
the others Senator among us.
We have a appropriation grid
we're gonna start with that and
senator Hammond I think is on
the way in.
He's here okay good most will
come on up Senator Hamblen and
getting worse you.
Justin on.
Which is in the back.
Thank you.
Mr chairman of the Senate bill
one forty four for.
Please if you'd leave leave we
still have a lot of my work to
do here so we need you to move
on that.
I want to have both the sponsors
of both of the appropriation
bills come up we're just going
to do these very quickly here
about the bill.
Not take any public comment on
them but but of unless the
sponsors want somebody in the
audience to speak but otherwise
will then go to questions from
the committee and act on them
quickly so senator Munoz to
start with you with Senate bill
one forty four.
we need to get both those number
you got a good good one forty
for this the Santa Fe state
office building this isn't the
the one that's going to destroy
the clincher TCP of the club and
building right this is a
different state office but it's
nine no this is not yet kill the
Ortiz Y. Pino club.
Senate bill one forty four easy
come easy go less for kids yeah
this is
One forty four we have the PR.
Child education.
Mr building they're no longer in
their their downtown space.
Former us PRC W. and now DFA
secretary brought this bill to
me to get the PRC home and Mr B.
is building a new building
complex and so what we're asking
is that we take state money
general fund money and by the E.
R. B. building for the PRC.
Senator at the
where will the R. B..
One is ER vegan angle they're
building a new building
currently okay.
Renewable any questions from the
committee the education
retirement for.
Any questions the committee.
No no we're not gonna go to the
unless you have something so up
Senator Gallegos incentivized us
to pass Mr chair Senator just
because I'm a contractor you
know with that investment how
many square feet that is I am
cost per square I believe the
only to this number I believe
the RB of buildings around seven
thousand square foot is it
currently sits there building a
new building I don't know where
how many square feet is being
replaced to move any of these
moving in this is a place that.
the DFA said new DFA secretary
who was at the PRC and recommend
that we do this.
My problem is my last one so do
they believe this is enough
square footage for what they
need been over across the street
was huge facility.
And I don't want to redress is
no years Mr chair Senator to
mean to cut you off at any point
but when they the PRC was there
and we created the former
senator said in this chair
created the the early childhood
education they wanted the entire
building.
No room for anybody else but
them even though the basement is
vacant in the third force Bacon
and so now what they had PRC had
to go find another home leasing
space downtown where there's no
parking enough room for
everybody and so this just.
Thanks current state building in
E. R. B. in that way we have to
do it is we have to appropriate
the money to buy it from the RP
the pension fund in the.
Thanks for that center thank you
Sir thank you senator Senator
Maestas.
We do best.
Thank you.
You're just a second question.
This is.
That the state has been for.
I don't think it's me it's me.
it's.
It was yours okay.
it sounded like a is for the for
the but okay it says it says in
the analysis
Other states have been reducing
their office space and consider
models allowing for more
efficient use of space combining
combining Delaware Pulte
telework policies with
reductions in individual office
space and more shared spaces
federal agencies of you similar
policies to reduce office space
and realize savings from lease
costs is that something that's
being considered.
Mister chair Mister chairman
Senator that that is the number
one consideration because we're
now paying lease space and with
when we purchased building from
the R. B. we won't be paying a
lease for a space and more in
downtown Santa Fe so no matter
what their for the imprint would
be the same no matter where we
moved on but they currently
paying lease rates downtown.
So but my question is is are
they looking at shrinking their
needs.
Mr chair Senator.
There's all my the PRC right now
in you can't have to our to PRC
members in the same room because
it comes to the court I met with
them individually right and and
they know that they need the
building they're all new to the
PRC they know that they don't
want to be downtown and they
need a bigger space
one PRC member they met with
didn't really know how many
square footage they need the
other one said yes we need space
so I can tell you what their
plans are exactly because
they're so new.
Mr chair so why we appropriate
money to build a building if we
don't know what their plans are.
Mr chair Senator were not
appropriate money to buy to
build a building I'm not bills
and sorry to renovate.
Or programming to buy the
building from the end of and
renovated yeah.
Because the PRC currently
solution space I don't know what
they're least right is downtown
but it's right downtown crossing
the Eldorado than six so
managing that lease rate is
pretty high at forty dollars
fifty dollars a foot there's no
parking they don't have enough
room in that office over the do
it for DFA secretary went but
he's expert that brought me this
bill I left the room let me hang
in.
It.
And and so
this was something that he
thought would fit the PRC when
he was there and didn't have any
issues with square footage or
costs.
Mr president I mispronouncing C.
in planning that we're engaging
in when we're dealing with
issues like this that's all
thank you Mr president center
when the PRC commissioners can
all have them send them to your
office.
Again the question.
Okay is is that any other any
other discussion.
We did we we get a second we
whenever consecutive I seconded.
We we do these great so we can
move quickly through them and
then we okay so the secretary
will call the roll.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey center Ingle
center my assistance.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Schmedes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes so thank
you we are Senator Hamblen of by
a vote of six six zero you have
to do that.
And now it goes on to that very
to finance committees.
Look at where for my next with
our should I yeah if you don't
mind it Senator Hammons Act
program Senator at work yeah it
is it is going to get a finance
after this I don't know if this
what is Senator when you else
but
I'll try to make this quick this
this bill has come before this
committee before last year it is
about behavior health
transitional housing what we are
asking is one point eight to
little over one point eight
million dollars appropriate from
the general fund to the Human
Services department to provide
transitional housing program for
approximately thirty two bed
facility for people with serious
mental illness people who have
substance use disorder people
have recently been released from
incarceration we know that the
find a facility like this
provides resources so that there
reduces the rate of recidivism
and also provides these
resources including psychiatric
services on site assistance and
rheostat wishing to place in the
community is safe secure place
for people twenty four hours a
day seven days a week if we need
my expert witness which is
rocking Arsia who is the CEO for
southwest counseling he's more
than happy to come up but I'm
certainly happy to take any
questions from the committee.
Thank you.
That this is gonna show of hands
who is the people are here in
support of that could raise our
and it would give you an idea of
some.
You have your expert witnesses
in favor of a good all right
give all right members of the
committee any questions for for
this this is a this is the that
we heard this this is Los Amigos
is yes it is it is the summer
when we went to the Los crucis
with the interim committee.
Any questions.
Hello I support this but.
We are not we're spending far
short of what we need to talk to
somebody yesterday when she
claimed she lost her brother.
Died because he couldn't get the
behavioural health services so.
Is there any other further bills
coming down the provides.
Similar services to address the
state Mr chair and senator I I
I'm not aware of the other bills
however I do know of many
organizations that are working
on this when we look at the
social justice and social
inequity issues that we look at
it is like a a wheel of the bike
is that there are a number of
different things going on so
there is the certainly the
coalition and homelessness we're
talking about about housing
modernization more behavioral
health of bills so I do believe
this is kind of one of those
folks Mr chair Senator.
We we need a statewide plan.
Sure we don't have a four ten
faxes reserves.
You don't have a.
Twenty
six the at all.
Thank you and I think so Terry a
houses also got a bill before us
another such initiatives Senator
Sedillo.
Senator Sedillo Lopez made a
motion is our second thing
seconded by Senator Tallman any
other discussion.
Seeing none secretary will call
the roll Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
sentiment Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator to the pain
of yes.
Six by a vote of six to zero you
have a do passed motion and and
you go over to Senator for your
witness is going to thank you
thank you committee this is
probably a record as my shortest
bill debate ever so thank you
very much alone
let me just say this about the
grid when we put something on
the grid if you have serious
questions about ask us to pull
it off the grid then we can do a
full blown debate about it and
and you know if coming from the
public and everything but the
idea behind these good things
these are pro we know that
they're not going to be funded
to you know on our state it's
going to go to finance and it's
going to be the determining
factor.
It does give us a chance to
least look at them and see
everything but but you always
have the we we always have the
option of asking us to move
something up to the grid for a
full blown discussion if you
have a lot of questions about
something that.
For the.
Well when we when we bring the
grid up we say here the bills
are going to be on the grid and
we and and and we start hearing
and you say Mr chairman I've got
so many questions about this I
don't want to use it through it
I want to really get into it I
will pull it off you have a full
blown debate a discussion.
We don't really debate we just
discuss the.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Munoz Yuri sitting up
there let's move ahead with your
bill Germans will really quickly
this was from a task for from
the state police and company to
the bench and said you're going
to be a task force and we
reviewed policies for the state
police and recruitment retention
for agencies and police before
on fortunate what happens here
in this bill is a service credit
from police members who were
hired prior to twenty thirteen.
Mr secretary with the Senate
seem in the room were have prior
to twenty thirteen are excluded
from the twenty percent service
credit that they were that other
officers after twenty thirteen
or eligible for.
With that I have let's let's
us's secretary but we did you
want to say anything about this
bill of explain why it's
important certainly Mr chairman
of the committee of and as it
has use explained obviously
there's service credit that are
forty two every member the next
slide please except when you
move on be on the care of the
the rank of captain and we feel
that this creates up to the
disparity in how they're they're
treated and is there any
assistant help us and and trying
to get our people to continue to
want to move through the ranks
and promote as well so they
still pay into the incentive
however they no longer over into
the enhanced rather but they no
longer see the benefit of that
Mr chair and and so we feel that
there needs to be parity
obviously within in the entire
New Mexico state police
structure I would also add to
that of the we had last year
House memorial thirty five in
the in that particular house
memorial a lot of leadership
Representative Representative
Rehm Representative Herndon and
center meals of course all
gather as well along with a lot
of leadership of law enforcement
to figure out what we can do to
recruit and retain a law
enforcement officers in this is
with so that was brought up for
the New Mexico state police in
particular and so we stand
strong strong support of this of
the governor supports this as
well and endorses this bill and
so at the end of the day we're
looking for really is equity for
those who want to stay you know
for most beyond the rank of
captain in New Mexico state
police.
Very good thank you Mr secretary
did you want to say anything.
Thank and Mr trio did you want
to say anything about the impact
on the Fund.
Be available for questions to
secure okay great anybody in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Anybody opposed to this.
Bill.
One in support and support
little go ahead and put our was
it.
Sherri Rhoden did you want to
speak on this bill.
I'm sorry Mr chair I forgot to
lower my hand from earlier from
an earlier bill okay very good
members of the committee.
What what will the committee.
Senator Sedillo was moved to do
pass Senator Tallman seconds it.
Any other discussion questions
on this issue we're all clear
on.
Okay secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Darius yes ma'am Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman yes center to the penal
yes.
Six six six two zero two of a
second of us on the day thank
you very much Secretary Senator
Lopez.
And it's Senator doing coming
to.
Okay.
Yep.
Do we need to call her okay.
This is Senate bill.
One twenty eight.
No.
We have one we have two more
bills we have this bill into
more the other two were the
smoking no smoking in the
receive notice and the no exotic
animals in traveling
performances Bill.
We have this.
We have another committee so.
If there's an amendment to the
committee senator Bobby.
No it's not because this is
built right Representative yes
yes yes yep and then we'll get
into.
We have a committee so we have a
motion from the committee on
this committee so.
Your
question.
One this isn't out I don't have
my analysts here.
That we've had the house is that
I have to go with the first four
percent.
Mr chairman the sub that we are
passing out it was delivered
yesterday afternoon yesterday
afternoon this is this is the
point three.
Mr Mr chair yes.
And then Mr chairman we also
have an amendment to the point
three that you have in front
also right budget just a few
minutes to.
I don't know of I think this is
okay thank you for using.
It'll have to be another
committees of.
No
The future analysis but the
whole staff and and have you.
So you do have an analysis of
the point three Senator going
with it I think it's in your
book.
Reference for its years of but
but you do get the I see what
you're talking about you get
another one yeah.
Okay so let's.
Let's get a motion from the
committee so we can consider
this the committee so for
discussion purposes only who
wants to make the.
No.
I move into the on your my
account page my conversion yeah
thank you and it's starting to
get ahead excess make up for the
I move a do not pass on Senate
bill one twenty eight and I move
a do pass I mean I move
Yes.
For Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one twenty eight
prescription purpose for
discussion purposes only thank
you.
Thank.
Thank you all right.
Senator Lopez welcome to the
committee thank you Mr chairman
and I was just getting caught up
to see what had transpired last
night because I had to leave
Mr chairman what I would like to
do at this point
Is in difference to I know some
time.
With the Senate bill committee
substitute discussion I would
like to
Introduce my expert witnesses
and then allow my expert
witnesses to give a brief
description and then we can
proceed with anything else from
the audience and you so dean
present.
so with this I'd like to
introduce first Erica.
And she currently works with New
Mexico can and she has been
working with us
Both Senator Duhigg and I serve
on the children's court
improvement commission Erica
serves as one of the co chairs
along with
It Chief Justice
Yeah Chief Justice ward from
Bernalillo county the district
could Chief Justice
strategically district chief
justice yes so if I could and
then we'll go to are other
expert witness after.
Thank.
This I just thank you want to
just give us how how this bill
what this bill does and and and
what the changes in the state of
our.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee as a senator said my
name is Erica Sanchez I am with
New Mexico can an organization
that has a thirty year history
of working to improve the
experience as a children and
youth in foster care.
What this bill was
came out of the children's court
improvement commission as a
result of the legislative
finance committee
report that came out and made
twenty twenty and I can talk
more about that if you need me
to it was developed over a
course of a couple years with
many stakeholders.
And to address the issue of
short stays in foster care so
New Mexico is one of four states
where law enforcement has the
sole authority from removing
children from their families and
placing them in state custody
and as a result New Mexico also
has the highest percentage of of
short stays in foster care so
state and foster care that are
thirty days or less the national
averages nine percent in New
Mexico's it's forty one percent
and of those children who are in
care for thirty days or less
ninety two percent during care
for eight days or less.
So we we this multi disciplinary
group works to develop a
framework to address this issue
and
the the trauma that's because to
children and families as a
result.
And the participants included
children's court judges tribal
judges in child and tribal child
welfare staff CYFD staff law
enforcement for rural and urban
communities young young people
with lived experience in foster
care and attorneys for children
and parents the group reviewed
data the current statutes
statutes and regulations and
other states a survey
distributed to law enforcement
and heard from national experts
on frameworks and experiences in
other states.
And so this bill was developed
and what it does is it shifts
the decision to take a child
into temporary custody from law
enforcement to the court
removing that burden from law
enforcement which increases
their capacity to focus on other
public safety issues and see
what if the would file an
application for removal with the
courts and allowing that that
court oversight of the the
process from from from the
inception of the potential
removal.
It also includes an exception
for law enforcement to remove a
child if exigent circumstances
exist.
CYFD in the court have the
training and expertise to assess
the situation leading to fewer
unnecessary removals and
increased use of appropriate
interventions the bill also
extends the time CYFD has to
file in abuse and neglect
petition from two days to three
days from when the child is
taken into custody so this gives
the department an extra day to
do a more thorough investigation
assessment of the situation and
determine the best way to
proceed and the third thing is
the amendment slipped off of.
Thank you and the third thing
this bill does is IT reduces the
time between the filing of the
petition and the custody hearing
so currently that custody
hearing happens at ten days and
this bill would change that to
seven days.
I'm so those are the key points
of the bill I just want to add
that the children's court
improvement commission vetted
and supports this bill as does
the children's court judges
association.
Thank.
You Mr chairman I also have
Crystal goals be.
I always just make sure she is a
who's a person with lived
experience would also like to
say a few words Mr chairman and
could you spell your last name
for us.
Yes Mr chair it's G. O. O. L. S.
B. Y. rules.
Yes Sir thank.
I'm good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee I would
just like to take a moment to
talk with you a little bit about
my experience of being removed
from home I was already
seventeen years old but I had a
lot of com a complicated
feelings about what was
happening.
The way to determine that I
probably needed to be removed
from my home.
and so they called law
enforcement to initiate this.
The police officer walked in the
room with absolutely no idea
what was going on he wasn't
aware of the situation he
started asking all the questions
I had already been asked
questions that I didn't have the
answers to our had already
answered several times to other
people.
He came across as very abrasive
and dismissive of the situation
having to repeat everything was
stressful and re traumatizing I
alternately was removed but I
feel that CYFD had already gone
through all of the things with
me and have come to the correct
decision having to rehash
everything.
Sorry having to hash everything
with the officer was very
unnecessary in because a great
amount of upset I would even
consider it re traumatizing.
My point in telling the story is
to say that police are not the
right people to be making the
decision to remove a child they
often receive very little
training on this issue and will
often make the conscious
decision to remove without the
proper proper knowledge to do
so.
As has been stated this bill
move that decision over to the
courts New Mexico has the
highest rate of short stares and
that's a huge problem not only
because of the cost but also
because going into foster care
is dramatic.
I want you all to take a minute
to imagine being a young kid or
maybe if your if your children
are young or the they once were
young imagine this being them.
A matter of getting ripped from
their homes maybe in the middle
of the night and being forced
into going to strangers homes
with no knowledge of their
culture their situation anything
like that they're just suddenly
in a place where they've never
been before.
Most of these children are
returned within eight days as
referred so it has been
determined so it has been
determined at that point that
their homes are safe there was
likely no need to remove them in
the first place this bill part
will provide oversight needed to
make the correct decision the
first time children will no
longer be subjected to the
trauma of being ripped away from
home unnecessarily please take
these things into consideration
and vote yes on Senate bill one
twenty eight thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
Mr chairman I also would like to
are recognized by co sponsor
also Senator Duhigg.
Jessica.
We're on the road.
So this is good.
Great thank you Mr chair I'm
sure that most of it was already
said before I got here but I'll
just very briefly say we want to
make sure that.
Kids who should be removed from
their homes are the kids who
should not be removed from their
homes are not that is really the
overall point of this bill hello
also be referred with the
committee I'm sure that
the state has already talked
about the fact that we we are an
out liar in short stays on so
other I don't know if you've
seen her the charts
The LFC charts were other states
heard about down here and then
those four states where law
enforcement has the exclusive
jurisdiction to remove child.
Here here here we're up here so
I'll be referring to the this is
a good way approach to started
to started to solve our problems
of short stays it doesn't mean
for states his gonna be
completely solved this is not a
panacea I think this is an
essential step in addressing our
issues of short stays here in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair.
Your.
Mr chair if I could also I also
have miss Martin who's the
director protective services
with CYFD.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name again as Emily
Martin I'm the director
protective services at CYFD.
We have worked diligently for a
number of years with C. C. I. C.
and all of our stakeholders
across the state to address
short stays and and Senator
Duhigg had mentioned that we are
still at one of only a very few
states that still practice in
the fashion of law enforcement
being the sole decision maker of
emergency custody we are in
favor and and are here to answer
any questions and address any
concerns that the committee may
have thank you.
I'm yes Mr chair the amendment
and this will be two two point
two two four eight eight zero
point one.
And what the.
Seven what what this is a
attempting to do of course is it
will strike from page one line
sixteen through page eight line
seventeen which ultimately Mr
chair members of the committee
strikes section.
And.
Okay.
Okay.
Mr chair I think we have the
wrong amendment distracting to
the amendment or if we could do
it or only.
But.
So never mind on that particular
amendment Mr chair.
The wrong way.
The ability to so don't even
look at it.
We're looking at the set Mr
chair it is two two four six
five zero point three okay.
This is the.
Hi there transaction one which
is.
Change in that section.
The entire section okay so
Mister chair I think I was
correct.
This verify with my.
Lows so it is the correct one
yes okay it's a whole section
okay all right.
Because in read anyway so if we
go back Mr chair to the
amendment that I was explaining.
again number one says on page
one line sixteen through page
eight line seventeen we are
striking section one in its
entirety.
And then I page seventeen lines
thirteen through fifteen we
remove the brackets in line
through.
And on page seventeen again line
thirteen we strive to subsection
designation E. and insert in
lieu thereof.
F. and then again we re letters
the sick the sections
Successively.
Yes.
So you're getting rid.
Mr chair correct.
Let's go to the other elements
of this deal with you and for
this anyone want to move the
event.
I'm of the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Well the.
This would be for discussion
purposes all that to amended yep
this is rural and.
Okay because of okay this so
we're not gonna talk about this.
Okay so we're gonna discuss it
yeah.
Did you make the motion is our
second.
Also give.
Transaction
of the state of Senator Sedillo
thank you and I apologize I just
took a couple of aspirin because
I have a headache so maybe I'm.
it but of.
I'm a little confused so fictive
kin you put back in and I was
disappointed to see that because
I liked this definition of
fictive kin because it had
Corona in it for me find it.
Three.
Page two three prior remember we
had this whole discussion about
current entry into foster care
and so cutting the fictive kin
definition here.
And then
Using the old one takes out of.
This kid fictive kin definition.
Which I like better.
But I or that mediation stations
that like that could you explain
the difference Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator so that the
original.
Sure.
Thank you Mr chair.
So originally the state
definition of fictive can was
put in there for for two reasons
one is we want to make sure that
we have as broad of a definition
effective can as possible but to
it was really to just to a to a
line this language with ling
language and F. PA.
we already have have deviated
away from aligning it with if
public by adding current in
their so then the only real
consideration is making it
making the definition of first
fictive kin as broad as possible
the truth is that that original
definition effective can is
really brought us so we we just
don't need to if if we're not
aligning with F. PA if that's no
longer consideration than that
we might as well just stick with
the original very broad
definition of fictive cat.
Thank you Mr chair and I
appreciate that because I didn't
I I actually just said oh I like
this definition but then I read
this and this is a broad
definition.
So it's no longer important to
align it.
With if I because I thought that
maybe that's why backed off was
because we needed to align it
and so why is it not important.
Mr chair Senator I I think there
are just competing interests and
and it turned out that that was
not the the most important
priority in this bill was was
aligning that language but the
I.
Thank you Mr chair through the
most important of priority is to
make the child safe.
And fifty a broad definition of
king of fictive kin in an
emergency situation is is
preferable.
Thank you that that helps me a
lot I appreciate that thank you.
The discussion Senator by the
thank you Mr chairman thank you
centers Lopez do a the and
forgive me I would love had to
leave the room for a phone call
the
So I'm looking at a proposed
amendment eight eight zero point
one.
And so that that that is we're
not doing that or what what what
is we are okay okay great great
great great so
So that's cool that this point
three version has.
Has that part of the statute.
But essentially we don't need
pages one through seven in a
subsequent committees of.
Thank you.
Discussion.
Of the if you were still on the
amendment.
Mr Chairman centers I guess I'm
confused so looking on item for
the amendment which says page
seventeen nine thirteen try to
section designation he can
answer in lieu of F..
With that not are be created if
you want to I don't I the letter
succeeding section accordingly I
guess there's a lot of movement
in the right in this and I'm
just wondering what's really
going on.
And Mr chair Senator yeah I
think this is just one of those
things that that it's it's the
preference of of LCS investment
you're right I think that the
they're probably both
accomplishing the same thing all
and.
you know what it's doing because
if you look on page sixteen they
put in a new E..
So while on page seventeen.
We are undoing the strikes there
that cover fictive can
we still need to account for the
fact that we had already put in
a new E. so that's why it's that
and re number in that fictive
kin will now be half and then
the following ones under number
five on the amendment would be
re re letter so Mister chairman
centers and that's why they in
item three struck the bracket so
okay tracking now.
Thank you very.
It is
really up.
Being unable to sue the
amendment to the opera.
It is.
Okay Mr chair and years in
support of this bill.
It will take everybody.
Thank three or four.
But very different job.
Let's see let's see.
Mr chair we could also just Beth
if you being the state one and
focus let's start here in the
for a lot of this is a
microphone of the thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Senators my
name is Leslie Jones I am a
contractor Attorney in the
thirteenth judicial district I
have been doing abuse neglect
work for about twenty eight
years I've acted as guardian
Adlai item youth attorney and
attorney for responded parents
and guardians in abuse neglect
cases I also serve on the
children's court improvement
commission.
I am in support of this
legislation because I truly
believe it will be better for
children and families in New
Mexico.
No one wants a single child to
suffer serious harm or even
death because they weren't
removed when they should have
been but there is nothing in
this legislation that would make
that more likely.
Child protective service workers
are trained to assess risk
that's what that's what they do
they also are trained to know
what services are available to
families to help mitigate the
risk police officers are not.
And if there is even still in
the legislation provision if
there's a disagreement if law
enforcement believes that that
child protective services isn't
taking the action that's
necessary they have a vehicle
for doing that and and having
the children temporarily taken
into custody well there are
concerns are addressed.
So that there is that safe that
safety net if people are
concerned about that it is not
going to present children at
risk of imminent imminent harm
from being removed but it does
have the real potential to
prevent removal of hundreds of
children who can be set kept
safe without removal you heard
the statistics the numbers how
many children and we're talking
hundreds of children we need to
put I put faces to those numbers
we're talking children hundreds
of children who are removed and
within eight days of removal and
out back with their families
because the issues can be
addressed that quickly.
In the meantime
they've suffered as you heard
from the person who came and
talked very eloquently and
bravely about her own lived
experience in the meantime they
suffered the the trauma so what
this does have the the the
potential to do is to reduce
trauma to children but also the
unnecessary expense and
disruption to families and
unnecessary government intrusion
into the lives of families and
all of that will result in both
short and long term savings to
the state.
New Mexico as you heard New
Mexico is an out liar the other
information that's in the LFC
report from may twenty twenty
that I think is really so
important to pay attention to is
that the data is clear loops
short and long term outcomes for
children who have been removed
from their homes even for a
short period of time are much
worse than for children who have
not been removed we're talking
about having a two to three
times higher delinquency rates
higher teen birth rates lower
earnings as adults
twice as likely to have learning
disabilities and developmental
delays six times more likely to
have behavioral problems as
adults are more likely to have
substance related disorders
such.
Short of more state secretary so
but that so all of this and more
likely to have involvement with
the criminal justice system.
In addition families who have
children removed on a short term
basis can lose their budget so
somebody who's housing is
dependent on having their
children with them can lose
their housing someone who's aid
financial aid EBT food stamps
whatever have their children
move they risk losing those
benefits as well so it's a
double whammy to them
economically as well and in the
meantime the state is paying for
foster care
and all of the costs associated
with that including attorneys
like me in the legal system and
long term is going to pay when
all of those poor outcomes come
back to bite us in the backside
again thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on Beth Kelly I'm the
new director of the office of
Family representation advocacy I
also have many years of
experience in this field over
twenty three years previously as
a G. A. L. formerly as a deputy
secretary at CYFD and very long
term at the university of New
Mexico School of Law running
this current will center for
child and family justice I'll be
very brief between.
A crystal goals be and Leslie's
explanation there's really very
little more to add what I would
just emphasize is that courts
are prepared and ready to make
the kinds of assessments that
this bill will have to make they
provide an extra set of eyes to
make sure the right kids are get
removed from need to be
protected and that children who
really don't need to be out of
their homes can stay home and
they are prepared that is what
that what they do every single
day in their in their work so I
think that putting the onus on
the courts really protects
children and families thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman also for
of.
If John or John chef Michelle
I'm here with this young person
okay yes please.
Hello my name is Joanna diljem
of former foster the right right
there is that better okay hello
my name is jointed only name a
former foster youth from CYFD
and I'm here today and I like
to.
Support hi to support this bill
because it's going to take a lot
of unnecessary stress from
police officers and directed
straight to the judges who can
make the proper decisions
whether it's legal to take the
children out of their homes and
it prevents.
Children from being opting to go
through removal of their family
being torn from their parents
and just all in all not being
able to see their families for a
short period of time and then
getting put back like nothing
happened and there's no justice
in that it's just harmful to the
families to the children
everybody and this bill proposes
that we put it in the hands of
people who know what they're
doing and.
I mean there was a survey done
that police officer rather take
the children out of the home
unnecessarily to save face from
the media then leave the child
there and some of them just
don't feel confident in the
making those decisions and I
feel that we should but there
are that decision in the hands
of people who know what they're
doing and work with these
children every day anyways
police officers see them for
like maybe the hour it takes for
them to do that and then they
never see these children again.
Jeff thank you Mr chairman.
I'll be very I know you speak my
name is John Shatner an attorney
I'm here for myself but I spent
eighteen years as a children's
court hearing officer and I've
heard thousands thousands of
child abuse cases over the last
twenty years I heard more
custody hearings or initiation
of cases than anybody else in
the state in this century so my
boss the chief judge when I
worked for the court appointed
me to this committee and I want
to say on because I had more
practical experience in anybody
but I want to say that is a
beautiful amount of work first
from the LFC David R. Sanchez
are wonderful Senator Lopez has
been caring child welfare bills
for several years now and
senator do do have joined us
this year and was inquisitive
and engaging and asked us a lot
of things we made revision after
she challenges so many times
CYFD body and case workers
deputy secretaries division
directors and it was we have
young people it was the greatest
mix of all three branches of
government and local governments
and and the community that I
have seen in so many years we
went to thorough painstaking
painstaking detail on how to
deal with exigent circumstances
so that no child would be heard
I ask you please to approve this
legislation today I think
everybody.
Have questions yes.
Mr chairman thank you thank
yourselves for the office this
is the.
Yeah.
The doctors leave.
I think opposition might be a
little strong my name is Alvin
soleil
professor emeritus from New
Mexico State University I
reviewed over fifteen hundred
cases prior way over including
six hundred cases of one time
only that where investigations
were started I I also shares.
Currently chair the social work
workforce task force you can
tell an academic made up that
name.
And we have ninety members
including two senators act
senators including the chair and
this Senator Hickey on that task
force I we have just begun a
partnership with CYFD secretary
Vigil has agreed to partnership
with the social work workforce
as a matter of fact this
afternoon she shot me a letter
of support for a grant proposal
that we jointly put in so we're
working to build the social work
workforce back at CYFD but we
Josh just begun.
my area of expertise was and as
an child abuse of course but my
focus was on family preservation
and no nationally as the father
family preservation now pry the
grandfather but what family
preservation is to keep families
together and most cases and
that's my concern is I've
reviewed many many of these case
basis that Kita today and it's
very very difficult work I mean
that what the social workers do
is very difficult and the most
difficult part our
investigations.
One of the concerns we have is
first of all nationally when I
go around and I've consulted
with thirty states and
universities throughout the
country and and three foreign
countries.
The concern is the quality of
being able to make that
assessment with the child in the
home.
And we have study after study I
just looked one article I did
for the encyclopedia for
pediatricians has a hundred and
seventy references so we have a
lot of data.
To may child abuse and the
treatment the investigation as a
social work function and I've
said this before and and no
offense standing attorney
Senator said.
But this is not really a legal
issue it's a social worker going
into a home.
And they need to have a degree a
license and social work
additional training because what
we are asking them as society
and my estimation is the most
difficult role in state
government.
And so Services it so do you
support this for what it what I
would like to see us and I was
not involved in any of this and
I don't believe our task force
were I haven't heard from any of
the four schools of social work
that they were involved at seems
to have been the legal branch I
there's anyway that you could
table this and get everyone
involved so that we can be sure
we're doing the right thing I
absolutely agree what that
removal rates its way too high
but I'm not sure we're focusing
in on the culprit.
And we may be removing.
The safety net.
And not really analyzing and in
terms of what is the issue and
to me one of the critical issues
as I'd be happy to support this
fall bill if we're back in the
nineteen nineties when CYFD had
licensed social workers were
trained we're under a consent
decree those more comprehensive
than the current one and I would
feel much more comfortable for
supporting the right now I think
we're I date years out from
having to restore the social
work expertise and CYFD to where
we can even begin to risk this
thank you Mr chairman of the
bill if it does pass your goes
to Judiciary so that may be
another opportunity beach before
Judiciary to work on this some
more to the judiciary will be
slowed them indirectly to take
this of next week by any means
Yes thank you chairman and
committee members my name is
Maryland back I am the founder
and executive director of New
Mexico child first network have
to be honest I'm probably more
nervous for what I'm about to
say than anything I've said
before you and this legislative
session.
When this came up for New Mexico
is an out liar in short stays
and I read the LFC memo and I
contacted John Courtney Erickson
AA and rifleman and I said where
did your data come from we keep
saying New Mexico is one of just
four states they give soul
removal authority to law
enforcement and they sent it to
me it's in your email.
They never did the primary
research I have a master's
degree and a master's degree one
of the first things we learn is
to your primary research they
cited a fact in correctly New
Mexico is not one of four states
that grant soul removal
authority to law enforcement in
fact out of the fifty three
states and territories there are
forty nine states that include
law enforcement and removals
only three report do not of
those four as we're saying two
of those four mandate that a
forgiving sole removal authority
to the Department which this
bill recommends that those
people who have the removal
Authority in the department must
be masters of social workers and
licensed social workers Mr
sillier drive so we sent you
information that right now less
than twenty one percent of the
workers CYFD are licensed social
workers and I think in those
social work positions even fewer
of them are I'm shaking I'm so
sorry.
Of that was I think that the
best practice and I'm not saying
I think you all have that data
that is cited with removal
statutes for all fifty three
states and territories it is
important to notice Porter Rico
is one of them Porter Rico is
not a reunification first
territory they actually err on
the side of the kit is removed
that is all pundit upon the
state to state that they should
re unifying so of one of the
four that's not even a family
reunification State.
Thirty five states of the fifty
three include multiple levels of
removal which would be the
department law enforcement most
include medical personnel
Connecticut I think it's very
weird and it says to Hampshire
three or more people can come
forward and petition what I'm
saying is that I was very
surprised and and a little bit
overwhelmed at the LFC data that
was provided to you had never
gone to the primary source I
have spoken to the man who wrote
the report I have communicated
with him directly you all have
in front of your emails and
please take this seriously this
is life or death we should not
be erring on the side of port
that if there was ever a reason
to professionalizing the
legislature and pay for staff
primary sourcing would be one.
I'm going to say that it's also
interesting and worth reviewing
as we really continue to have
these critical conversations
that in twenty twenty two both
Minnesota and Montana safe and
actual legislative studies task
force and both had probation
which I think is important to
find stakeholders who were
involved so not just a single.
I I attend the CCAC meetings I
was not involved in
conversations my car was not on
the CCAC meetings you'll hear
from more people who were not
involved in these meetings I'm
getting text messages to remind
you that the CCAC meetings that
continue to happen behind closed
doors were not open to the
public Minnesota also has sole
removal of law enforcement there
LFC findings on short stays
because both Minnesota and
Montana both also we're trying
to solve their short state
problem Minnesota never once
recommended that CPS or CYFD
gets over of authority in fact
one of their recommendations was
to provide more trauma informed
training to the law enforcement
can you can you wrap it up in
about fifteen seconds I'm
confused by the rectus pushing
this specifically this week
after we just spent an hour why
we have to wrap it up learning
about the vacancies and CPS
specifically CYFD is called out
for that we have an over thirty
percent vacancy rate with over
fifty one percent turnover rate
I want to read you the headline
of the recent search article
that hit news yesterday a ten
year old foster child was
allegedly sexually assaulted by
another foster teen at the CYFD
office building in Albuquerque
I'm also upset and I want to
state on the record that a high
level CYFD employee this
afternoon referred to that as an
unfortunate incident the rate of
a ten year old until this agency
regains Public trace public
trust we have no business
granting them soul Authority or
more forty for anything thank
you thank you anybody else yes
come on.
Get.
That working yes okay Mr
chairman and members of the
committee keep it up close to
mess okay sorry about that does
that work okay my name is
Allison and cockiness and I'm
legal director of advocacy Inc
we are the largest provider of
guardian Adlai item and youth
attorney representation in New
Mexico we have represented
thousands of children in foster
care for since nineteen eighty
six over the last fourteen years
I have been a CYFD attorney
responded attorney a guardian ad
light in any youth attorney as
well as representing children in
the mental health system I have
actively I still actively
Representative children in
foster care as an agency we
strongly oppose the this bill SB
one twenty eight it may have
been born of good intentions
however issues with the actual
language itself of the proposed
law and its potential education
will have harmful consequences
both intended and unintended for
New Mexico's children there are
a number of safety concerns but
the most concerning ones are
CYFD which is one of the most
dysfunctional agencies in New
Mexico we'll have the sole power
to remove children from unsafe
homes with rare exception law
enforcement will no longer have
the discretion to remove
children so even more powers
being given to an agency that
already struggles with making
decisions to keep abused and
neglected children safe no one
will know what is happening in
the field there will be no lapel
cameras and other forms of
accountability additionally CYFD
is already understaffed and with
the requirements of this bill
more staff will be needed not
less that will result in
decisions that are made based on
expediency not safety we need
more collaboration and insight
not less this bill also creates
a mechanism for CYFD your phone
slipped up the.
this bill creates a mechanism
for CYFD to leave children with
parents were Silva sibling was
killed or suffered physical
injury in the home unless they
themselves have been deemed
independently on safe this this
includes children who witness
the abuse or the death of their
sibling this is not a
theoretical concern remember the
disabled child Maria Espinoza
who's in the news who's left
neglected and abused so terribly
that she was dead and
decomposing by the time she was
brought to the hospital and we
also lapel cam footage showing
that lawn food was law
enforcement who fought to
protect those siblings CYFD
wanted to leave behind the
siblings other examples are the
kids that lived with the chains
jump James Dunkley Cruz who had
already been left repeatedly
with his abusers they're also
the children Texaco and Diana
McGrory siblings who ended up
disclosing the abuse by the
father and grandmother in those
circumstances we don't know if
those children would have been
removed but it is unlikely based
on the statute also with the
inconsistent and confusing
terminology requirements and
procedures created in use
throughout this bill especially
as it relates to the exigency
consensus section will make it
extraordinarily difficult to
take an unsafe child into CYFD
custody especially when working
with judges were unfamiliar with
the children's code it will
raise new questions in an ad
loopholes that will likely
result in delays in achieving
safe outcomes for children like
those.
Issues are decided by the court
system many of the concerns this
bill intended to address are
valid the short state problem is
a legitimate and serious concern
and there are ways to accomplish
the same goals without opening
the door to do more harm I am a
member of the recently formed
children Mexico task force but
neither I nor any of my
colleagues were included in the
committee that drafted this bill
this bill needs to be reworked
with input from more boots on
the ground investigators and
attorneys who currently and
regularly practice in this area
of law all from around this from
all around the state CYFD
attorneys attorneys for the
children attorneys for the
parents and since this bill is
using the terms and procedures
seen often in criminal law they
need to include those attorneys
as well so we as an agency are
asking you to please table this
bill so we can go back and be
made better one that will keep
children safe one that will do
right by our children and will
allow for the collaboration it
is necessary to accomplish those
goals thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else.
This so we'll go now to the of
of zoom and we have somebody of
the lease a deal who wants to
speak in support of this bill.
Are you there a Lisa.
Yes thank you can you hear me Mr
chairman at this get your Mike
is closed get this closes you
can do your Mike and speak up so
we can the the audio here is
very important.
Certainly and and I won't take a
lot of the committee's time here
today Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is always a
deal and I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center on
property and we fully support SB
eight one twenty eight every all
the reasons given here today and
the only thing I would add in
the in the interest of time is
that when solutions are proposed
by the people who experience the
problems those are ones that we
always get behind and so for
these reasons and the ones given
by the other comments here we
support one twenty eight and we
hope you do too thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay now we go to the committee
members of the committee.
Or did you want to respond to
anything before we go to the
committee of senators to either
of you want to say anything
about any of the Mr chairman I
think we can just go ahead and
proceed with questions from the
committee.
Senator tell Senators issue
committee the start with you.
Okay smitteez Tallman anybody
else Sedillo Lopez okay
everybody eventually but Mr
thank you
you know what what what's fresh
in my mind because the the bill
we just heard was.
and I think we all agreed in
this committee we talk we spent
a lot of times about the crisis
of staffing and I think that's
just interesting timing.
That it's a crisis and we all
agreed we have a a staffing
crisis I did want to talk about
that because it gets me thinking
You know I mean this this this
this bill of my understanding of
it is that we're we're shifting
that.
That responsibility of law
enforcement and we're we're
shifting the responsibility to
to CPS
you know and so here so not a
has a maybe I should stop in and
ask is that is that generally
correct me right now they are
they are duty to do that in this
bill is is having we're say
we're now CBS has the duty to do
that.
Mr chair Senator you're right
but I think I think.
At and I'm just approval with
with duty I think it's authority
really that that's being shifted
it's it's the authority to make
the decision to remove the child
is being shifted from from law
enforcement to to to CPS but
added in there is this law
enforcement backstop so that if
there's a situation where law
enforcement saying look I think
there's exigent circumstances
here I'm I'm I'm using the same
standard you're using CPS and
and my assessment is very
different than yours then they
have that mechanism to get it in
front of a judge and have a
judge put eyes on it and and and
resolve that question.
Mr chair Senator I think we all
agree that when when we take on
extra forty we are taking on
extra responsibility and so I at
this time I mean I I see how
there's a very well intentioned
wouldn't none of the that's the
nice thing about this issue is
that none of us want kids.
currently removed from a home.
None of us want kids go back
into a home and and be harm so
so there's that that goal that
common goal there is you know
but we have to move within a
legislation with also the about
what what's the state of not
just this agency but a lot of
our agencies and so we're we're
bearing we're asking CPS to bear
more authority have more
authority have more
responsibility.
Your decision making
and and according to the
information I have we have you
know statistics I don't know how
someone mentioned about vacancy
rate I I know the vacancy rates
are are sky high and all the
departments including CYFD CPS
with some of the mission of
training I want to ask so what
how of of of these folks I mean
what what is that percentage of
of license social workers who I
had you know I I I believe
secretary Vigil and provided
some information somewhere and
it it's it's quite low.
And I'm gonna Mr chair Senator
I'm gonna have optimally Martin
but I do want to just call to
the committee's attention that
the implementation date on this
bill is pushed out to twenty
twenty five specifically to
address some of these concerns
about staffing concerns about
making sure we have folks who
are trained up who are licensed
before this ever kicks and but
but all all let miss Martin
address that more.
Mr chair members of the
committee senators metes I want
to start by saying that the
staff at CYFD are extremely
dedicated extremely dedicated
and every day make the decision
to come to work to make the
right decision for the safety of
children.
when we talk about training and
staff is staffing levels yes we
are there's no doubt we do have
a high vacancy rate right now we
are working diligently to
address that we can see right
through with the legislature
with the executive to ensure
that we the pay is appropriate
that we can recruit and retain
staff
we we are working we are we have
developed the.
Working on developing a pipeline
with that universities
throughout New Mexico for social
workers and I also want to say
not all of our staff our social
workers I for one am not a
licensed social worker I worked
in the field I was a permanency
worker I was an investigator I
had a related degree that and
then the training that the
Department provided me on top of
that from the day I stepped foot
as a new employee through on
ongoing training and ongoing
support in coaching from our
Through our training bureau I I
believe through and we believe
and we stand ready with the
passing of this bill that by
twenty twenty five we will be
ready to implement that we will
have national our national
partners in parameters be able
to come in and work not only
with us but work with the courts
to ensure that the right
training the right rules the
right procedures and forms are
all in place because right now
we also we're in a situation
that sometimes law enforcement
does not feel like custody needs
to be given to the Department
and there's that chance as well
that we then have to at CYFD
petition the court to give us
custody and that time frame that
time which only maybe a couple
days is a couple days that that
child may still be in that home
so this bill and being able to
to provide the training have the
staffing available to do it we
will be there in twenty twenty
five and be ready to stand due
to do that.
Mr chair Senators and I mean I
hope you are.
I really really hope you are and
and I I absolutely I mean you're
you're telling me that these I I
mean I I know they are have
great hearts that's why we have
all these people here we want to
take care of these kids.
there's no question about
sincerity and I don't think we
should let it we we I mean these
extreme media examples and
brought up I've I've seen those
it's very disturbing I mean if
if anyone hasn't seen that look
health thing for back June that
camera that copy I mean that's
it's all it's it's bad but we
also can't let these extreme
things guide our our
understanding what happens kind
of regular day to day no you
know we can't just act like that
happens all the time but we can
also ignore it right
but I I think that there there's
no question about you know some
things have been said today that
that are critical but I I think
it's us I have a little
conservative pause for concern I
and I hope other people discuss
this of we're making a major
shift in authority and
responsibility were saying we
hope we can get there by twenty
twenty five in and we all hope I
will vote for more funding what
whatever it is for you guys but
to make a huge shift in to say I
I hope in policy in the mail in
the state we we hope we can get
there and do it in twenty twenty
five I think we need to hold off
for make a smaller shift.
maybe make a smaller ship this
year and and and it once we get
there once we have the social
workers licensed dealer to make
major decisions then we kind of
make the step for that that's
kind of what I'm I'm going out
but I'll leave it at that I'd
love to see what the other the
committee members
You think think about that but I
I once again big big concern
making huge shift when that when
the staffing is not there we're
in a crisis or passing bills
that kind of desperation bills
bring people back from
retirement and it's was we're
we're trying we're all trying
hard from all avenues
But I I did have
So so that just tells me that
that the crafters I mean I I
know a lot of thoughts going but
when we put a date in twenty
twenty five that just tells me
we're not ready to go right now
we're we're hoping we're going
to be there but we're not ready.
I I did I had a concern on the
short stays and I don't want to
get off I I think this might I
don't know if this is a a major
intent of the bill or or not.
But we are I was looking others
AP news report just a couple
months ago that says we are
we're not we're not liar in and
repeat.
Maltreatment of kids so so forty
percent of all injuries.
Serious injuries in children.
Forty percent of those were in
children that had prior CYFD
involvement this is repeat and
so we talk about the short state
issue.
And we are.
In extreme out learn repeat
maltreatment I'm asking the
short state problem is it
possible or even rational for me
to propose the question.
Is the problem going back or
making too many decisions to go
back with the family if we are
absolutely number one in the
country in repeat maltreatment
so are are we I understand that
this may result in less less
kids and and and being taken in
that addressing the short stay
from this angle but I'm just if
we're repeat maltreatment once
again not.
I'm not judging any sincerity
hard work at all I'm just
looking at the facts and trying
to determine this what's going
on here
I think we're asking once again
send sincere folks to do an
impossible task in to make
impossible decisions with the
resources that they have and and
and what we get for it we get a
forty percent of all injuries
are repeat injuries with all
prior CYFD involvement that that
group brings me great great
concern to help the department
to help the department do better
and and and have more staffing
but not to make a fundamental
policy shifts when we have a
huge repeat maltreatment right.
I want to ask you a question the
drafting the bill
I found interesting there's no
that you know the PS wasn't here
would have local sheriff's here
shares Department any of these
folks wouldn't have the chief of
police from out Albuquerque Mr
chair Senators are what do you
know why they're not here and
were they involved in the
drafting legislation.
Mr Chairman as part of their the
committee process of where we
sit on the commission we do our
participation from law
enforcement they have been part
of offering suggestions as we've
gone through the process so they
have participated I do not know
why they're not here with us
today but they have been part of
the process and we have had
conversations with law
enforcement
not just this year but in prior
years is put the different
legislation that we have
proposed.
Because Mr chair Senators I I
would just propose I'm used to
having the these folks here and
and the chairman has been very
gracious to let us ask you know
certain experts that that that
show up to these hearings it's a
little I will just say I think
it's a little unusual to have
such a major policy shift and we
don't have law forcing her to
ask questions that gives me
pause to I I I don't know it
just seems very bizarre to me
this is a big bill and why like
why they're not here and with
one to nothing critical I just I
just find it odd and I would
love it if if someone was here
that have come a specialty in
you know oversight overseeing
the the children that are taken
and how they do that process how
they work with with CPS and the
dynamic there and from their
perspective what could be
concerning so I I think this is
a big bill once again all all
wrapped up Mr chair I I think
that because of the the issue
that we have I wish we had more
licensed social workers here
I wish we had more staffing but
to to to hope we get there by
twenty twenty five and then all
the sudden twenty four what if
twenty twenty five comes along
and we haven't gotten there yet
we all want to be there what if
we haven't I think we are once
again more than one then we're
just should that you okay that
is so heavy upon your department
that's ten thousand pounds it's
going to come twenty five
thousand pounds overnight when
this law becomes effective and
if you don't have the staffing
in the in and what's going to
happen these kids I have a huge
concern so so staffing I want
law enforcement here to ask the
questions
and and once again repeat
maltreatment I think is is a
huge issue we look at that for
short stays I'm not convinced
this is this is the the answer
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Tallman unico
thank you Sir.
Thank you.
Center for bringing it has this
bill forward.
What what what is New Mexico
removing for Children.
That placing a more children and
with relatives in other states.
Where we an out liar.
As far as placing a high
percentage of kids of the other
home.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Tom and we
actually are we have one of the
we have recently within the last
two years rose and
significantly and have
from three percent of the
children when their first
entering custody to over forty
percent of children when they
first enter entering custody the
first placement is with
relatives to reduce that trauma
this last month I was just
looking at the data this morning
in January of twenty twenty
three over fifty percent of the
children in CYFD custody are
placed with relatives which is
getting it which is above I
believe the national average of
children in foster care.
That's the national average
fifty three percent on a yeah.
The.
Mr chair Senator bit I I'm.
Off the top of my head I'm not
quite sure what the national
averages however we in New
Mexico over fifty percent of the
children in custody in January
of twenty twenty three we are
pleased with their relatives as
a licensed foster care as a
licensed foster care home.
Okay let's move that I received
the that drive sales letter.
I was impressed with what he had
to say is impressive background.
And he stated that you know we
have seven hundred fifty social
workers and only twenty percent
a license I just assumed they
were all licensed and certified
but the other lady brought that
point up.
and Dr Salih clings said the
law enforcement people are in a
better position to make
decisions because of their
better trained than the.
Is that true.
Mr chair Senator.
The staff at CYFD investigator
the investigators that CYFD.
Our have significant amount of
training specifically around how
to assess safety risk well being
and also no the
Services that are in each
individual community to support
the to support their families
when we go out to investigate
toward law enforcement calls us
when they're at the scene of the
home when there's our children
at their.
That is a collaboration we
neither of us do do this alone
there's a shared decision making
between law enforcement and CYFD
and many of the cases when we we
are out there making those
determinations together and
it and what I would would say is
that CYFD has that much more
training specifically around
safety and risk and looking at
the whole wholistic situation of
that family to make that
decision and right now we're
doing that in collaboration with
law enforcement when we're in
the field
at the family's home and not
exact moment
and right now.
That sole decision in that
moment lies with law enforcement
what this bill is trying to do
is that CYFD does have that
ability to to make that decision
and exigent circumstances
immediately get.
Get and have the support of the
court and the court's decision
making process and that
and that law enforcement still
can make that decision it when
CYFD does does not so I feel
like this I am This bill not I
feel this bill allows for more
people to make the decision with
more experience and more
training and more support to
ensure that the child the safe
and the family is the entire
family's well being as thank you
for consider thank you for the
answer which you've already
admitted as the training for
you.
So you have the implementation
date in two years I shared drive
she's concerned that would
guarantee you're going to be
better trained into two more
years I thought of that before
you mention I agree with this as
budget amid concern.
Mr chair Senator you're
absolutely right it is a
legitimate concern that members
of the committee might consider
offering an amendment on page
thirty six line twenty two we're
right now the implementation
date is January first twenty
twenty five change in January to
June and then during that two
thousand twenty five legislative
session with we all see that.
Things have not improved
significantly with with issues
of staffing and training I will
be the the the first sign onto a
bill to to repeal this before it
goes into effect because because
these these are reasonable
concerns
so that might be one way to to
address those.
Well I.
I just wanna point center.
Mr chair Senator I think that
that makes a lot of sense yes
with the fiscal year.
Senator July not you
I would be entertainment.
Amendment to make that
amendment.
Yes
seconded by Mr Senator guidance
on that amendment thank you I'm
just trying to consider this so
in the discussion we're changing
dates now we've changed a lot of
dialogue Mr sleaze has asked for
us to consider bringing him to
the table I'm wondering if this
isn't time to look at do we want
to redo this whole thing hold
this off right now I I look at
for next year if this is
governor's priority then next
year have this come back in a
better graft so that everyone in
the room would be better
prepared for and and be on the
same side I just think there's
so many moving parts right now
for amending amended amended
amended bill and we're no
further along in the meat of the
bill so I just want to present
to the the
Sanchez and I just think it's
something that we've got a look
at I'd hate and and I'm with you
we need to protect our kids my
daughter's an investigator for
CYFD but I do not want to leave
this out in three years from now
or even two years from now we
wish would not.
Done this so Mr that's my
comment I appreciate and Mr
chair Senator the reason I think
it's important to go ahead with
this bill now is because in
order to make sure the training
around this gets going get
started and we have plenty of
time to make sure it's done
right I think we need this this
legislation done to start the
process that that needs to
happen to get us to the point
where hopefully in July for July
of twenty twenty five this is
something that that's working
well for New Mexico's children
Mr on that point so years ago on
the state four years ago I did a
training that I paid for through
capital outlay for Lee County
and they brought the CYFD staff
and the you law enforcement in
for a single training that
didn't take a bill that to
capital outlay so I'm still
worried why the bill if we are
looking at training why not do
the training as we progress this
bill Mr and Mr chair Senator I
what was significant to me about
what you just said is that was
one training that you did I
think this is going to take a
couple of years of building up a
department a couple of years of
training a couple of years of
them being able to in their
budget requests are being able
to to justify why they're asking
for more money to do this
training and it's because they
have a mandate of this this
legislation in place so.
Mr chair and senator I
appreciate that but we're
recklessly spending billions of
dollars with the B. so the
training should be a priority
right now not two years from now
I think that we in as a
legislature could make this a
priority right now we lost Santo
Nino surveyor it would be a
really good conversation to have
with them in the room because
this is priority these are our
kids there are dying and being
hurt because of non compliance
what we don't do and what we
don't know I still think I don't
need the bill to make that
education piece done because we
have time we've already put
Brooks that we have a couple
years to look at this why not
wait on the letter of the law
and start to train now and it's
just and that's my opinion you
don't even have to respond I
just think I did this in a small
segment in Lee County we as a
legislature should be expression
because we have we're over run
with oil and gas money to or in
the tune of billions of dollars
the were recklessly spending
this put it where we needed on
our kids with CYFD and get this
resolved now but there again
regional choir thank you Mr.
And I would say the Senator
let's finish up on this
ammendment and if you want to
make another amendment that's
fine of of a tabling motion or
whatever you want to do we can
deal with that but let's finish
up with this before we get into
something else on this amendment
Senator I have Senator comment
on the amendment and then
Senator Schmedes.
Did you just because women are
only thank you Mr is there
enough money in the proposed
budget to.
Undertaker some of the things
that you want to do.
Getting a pop up in.
Major increase in funding.
Mr chair at members of the
committee senator Tom and our
budget request does it include
an increase we have recently
changed our federal
It's it's another acronym and I
can't think of what our federal
how we draw down federal funds
for training now forty four E.
funding our our cost allocation
plan and so additional funding
is being drawn down for training
needs there is additional
funding within our budget
request both in both are the the
executives request and the pump
also in the LFC is request.
This okay Senator committees on
this amendment I had a.
Yes the only member Mr chair
Senators
I think it does give us more
time.
but it's also we have an
election.
All of us have an election
before then and so that's
another big check in once again
just for for having this a big
good sincere goal that shut out
so far we we start to run into
new elections new
administrations and things so I
I I I definitely appreciate the
the ma'am I'm gonna vote for the
amendment.
but just to realize that we
could have once again major
shifting this is a lot of.
You know a lot of change and I I
think the the better way to do
instead of once again I I the
support the amendment and the
thought but to offer in a little
alternative to the amendment is
instead of just pushing out an
extra six months once again
after of a big big election
twenty four.
I would propose that we we
either create if of new funding
and you can quote me on this
okay new fund a Republican said
new fund.
Write it down okay give me on
video.
But the reason is and I share
this a couple days ago a quota
paraphrasing Elsa Mandela that
the way we can judges society is
the way we treat our children
this is the very top I if I pick
to top priorities we do waiver
problem and CPS problem those
two top funding priorities for
me.
You know if I was in the
executive.
And so
I I think created a new fund if
one would be needed fund it now
do the training and then perhaps
combine it with a smaller bill
that would still allow CPS maybe
you know to remove under certain
services but still also allow
the the the on don't mess with
the status quo right now because
we're so understaffed so don't
mess with it give a little
increase authority to CPS start
the training fund it and I'm
there.
but budget just to after six
months we don't know if we get
there and don't forget the
turnover the agency to and all
the agencies not to show.
It is still a little much for me
so it it it helps me I support
it but it won't help me as of
now with the bill because I
think we could do things a
little bit better little bit
smaller if if you know I'm
saying thank you thank you
senator committees anybody else
on the amendment is there any
opposition to the amendment.
Okay the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Pena yes so by a six three
six two one six in favor of the
amendment one against and to to
absent the amendment is adopted
back on the bill as amended and
members my list Senator Sedillo
Lopez thank you.
With Senator Gallegos to follow.
Mr chair.
I.
Sir Michael.
Thank you might want me to
repeat myself for now.
The only repeat myself yeah I
think very good because zoom
didn't pick it up and okay are
you familiar with the of the
bill that we ended up amending
and passing
Recently dealing with the short
state issue.
So Mr chair Senator I'm I'm
familiar with the the bill that
you're talking about there's
there's overlap in that bill
with this one to the extent of
changing timelines for the
custody hearing but I think
that's the only actual overlap
this this bill would make a lot
more changes than than that one
one Mr chair I I recognize that
it's just a small over that
because the The approach to
dealing with the with the.
With the short stays with
completely and totally different
and actually sort of legalistic
you know kind of push it push
the timeline
and so it just seems to me like
this makes a lot more sense
to address the problem that they
were identifying
with more expertise and and more
training and because the L. all
of us want the same thing we
don't want kids removed when
they should be removed but we
really want them removed when
they should be removed and it's
always hard for me to strike
that balance the error because.
It's traumatic it the whole
thing is just such a traumatic
thing for for children
I also so I appreciate that and
I just want to say this is and I
told them of.
I I just wanna say I think this
is a better approach and then
but
I.
I to worry a little bit about
the resources and passing a law
that actually finding future
legislators and actually feel
more comfortable with this was a
smaller bill that actually
started us on this path because
I absolutely agree with you that
CYFD should is better trained
and right now you know I I I
just think it should we should
open the door to have CYFD
Be involved in making these
decisions because I think that
be better decisions.
and but at all of that to say
and I just want to share that
input but I have enormous
respect for the work of the task
force
and the thought and the
expertise that goes into it I
did have a little bit of a
question about law enforcement
I know these are the worst cases
that they have to deal with I
I've talked to to some of them
about you know what are the
hardest cases they deal with
these of the Heartbreakers
and.
It would be nice to hear from
them but you I don't know who
was on the committee but to hear
from them and and their
perspective of of how this is
going to help them or whether
you know.
Whether they have any concerns
that it would just be useful
not that we have to do it today
but has this bill goes forward I
think those conversations would
be really helpful has it goes
forward
I'm gonna support the bill has
it goes forward but I do have
concerns about the timeline
being so far like there might be
it might be improved with more
discussion and maybe a smaller
bill.
That opens the door right now
gets them involved and then set
this up for training.
So that by the time that by the
goal date that we're we're ready
and and in place to to have the
complete transition.
but again I'm not I'm not
suggesting I'm just throwing
that out there has feedback I
think it's you know I'm gonna
support the the work of the of
the committee and all of the
expertise and I thought that the
really want to commend the young
people who told their personal
stories
I really believe that your voice
is probably the most important
voice in hearing this and to
hear from young people how
traumatic it is to have a police
officer walk in and take them
out of the home
I can imagine that I can mention
that because just of the.
The difference so that's all I
have Mister Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Gallegos.
Mr chair thank you and Senators
again I actually like Senator
deal locals idea of re doing
this and and we'll get to that
later and then a smaller bill
but Mr chair Senators so earlier
on we had testimony that
The law enforcement would.
The obligation Authority would
go from law enforcement to CPS
are they currently on state site
Mr center when these issues
occur.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Kay goes.
Any time a child is removed from
their parents and placed in our
custody on emergency.
Circumstances law enforcement
has to be the one to provide
that to the Department so yes
law enforcement would be out
there
in in every situation because
they are the only ones at the
current time that are able to
make the determination for
emergency custody.
Thank you for that Mr Mr chair
Senators and so my thought was
my question on that is if we're
giving CPSC Authority.
And they are not there how are
we protecting the child of
within not being on site I'm I
guess I'm trying to figure out
the time line we're trying to
say we're going to evaluate the
situation.
Actually the first term or law
enforcement against this bill
currently in my thing is if if
they aren't on site able to
evaluate who is going to make
the valuation like as stated
earlier my daughter's
investigator but she doesn't
make the determining factor the
law enforcement officer does so
I'm just wondering how that
transfer of decision making from
law enforcement to CPS is going
to have happened and what kind
of delay are we talking about Mr
chair Senators.
This morning or that Senator.
So Mr chair Senator my
understand please correct me if
I'm wrong with my understand is
already the case is there's no
CPS and law enforcement there on
the scene with this is just
dealing with it is is who's
making that decision about
remove all but but or but it is
what I think I might hurt her
the same as how CPS supposed to
now to go make this removal if
if if they're not there and so
law enforcement would still be
contacting them when they see a
us at law enforcement sees a
situation when they have a
concern about the safety of a
child they would be as they do
now they would be calling CPS on
CBS would come
the only difference and all of
that would be the same as it is
now the only difference that
would there would be under this
bill is that when it comes time
to make that decision remover
not remove it CPS making the
decision not law enforcement but
functionally what they're
actually doing there on the
scene will be very similar to
what's happening now.
Mr Chairman centers as part
point so if the young lady you
talked about the trauma with law
enforcement there you cannot
solve that they're still there
on the facility they're still
helping with the decisions and I
understand transferring if CPS
comes in let's say there's a
delay of that power to get
some of their then CPS comes in
that Cision made by CPS employee
law enforcement still there Mr
and Senators Mr chair I believe
that that that crystal would
like to to address.
Question.
Yes thank you Mr chair just as
senator guy goes I do want to
say that in my experience
I would say that law enforcement
did make the situation more
dramatic but in my case they
weren't there first CYFD
happened to be their first call
the law enforcement so they had
no knowledge of the situation
and then came in asking me a
bunch of questions that were
repetitive and then they were
very dismissive of the situation
as a whole and I believe that
that's just due to it was a
rural area of New Mexico and so
maybe they do have less training
in that situation but that
that's just my experience thank.
Mr chair Senators and gentle
lady thank you I've never been
in that situation so I don't
understand the law enforcement
side apply they do what they do
but in giving and then Mr
Chairman Senators givens CPSC
Authority if they're not there I
still think that the situation
is exactly like it is now all
all go on with other questions
and I don't know if any of the
other committee then head read
this but concern came up in all
respects to here that she'd made
a comment on
on some of the details I'd like
to read this Mr if you could
bring okay this is Amy help you
have we just have is getting its
quarters seven we have two more
built up to this point I think
it says a and it sent all this
is hi all I've shared this with
the LFC the LESC data was
incorrect I have gone to the
direct source of the original
mammal LFC is CC tier please
check and confirm the chart I've
been in direct contact with
Verica Michigan New Mexico is
not one of the only for outlines
for states he says here forty
nine states and territories
include law enforcement in this
decision thirty to include the
department thirty five states
and territories include other
like medical personnel to cetera
only three states territories or
three safer territories are
given sole authority to CPS and
of that to the three mandate the
employees removing our licensed
Porter Rico's not a
reunification state of first
dates and actually call out
their children code that
reunification is not always in
the best interest in Mr chair
and centers when Dr drive when
center Palmer was asking of the
question about the out liar I
understood.
Good.
That he was told that we are
according to this first off are
the LFC had incorrect
information so that's another
block that's taken out from
underneath this tower that we're
basing this legislation on the
show right here that it's
incorrect and I don't know if
you guys have seen the email Mr
chair and centers would you like
to respond to this gentleman's
email Mr chair Senator all I use
a line that from that we've been
repeating recently in Judiciary
outside Mark Twain's quote of
there's there's lies there's
stabilize them their statistics
are.
You.
Well I I think a lot of this a
lot of probably how those
numbers are being interpreted
depends on how you're defining
things like law enforcement
being involved I would say this
is a bill that has law
enforcement being involved but
but I I I can't comment on
exactly what the right numbers
are or have who's who's been in
the more how.
That's certainly a trend we keep
seeing and and should the
Judiciary Committee.
Mr Chairman etcetera I
appreciate that I think you're
gonna go lies damn lies and
provided.
But that being said no in the Dr
Salinas was saying that he'd
like to slow this down because
the data is wrong and that's my
main concern now we find
different pieces of the puzzle
that aren't in alignment and to
me it's one those things for us
to go forward it should be
looked at as what do we to do to
fix this if you've got so many
pieces that aren't meshing what
our next step in you know and
and I've got quite a few
questions but it's just one of
those things that the more I go
into this the the deeper the
bleeding starts in and I will go
for with that I was going to ask
Miss chair in.
Of Senators.
In.
In not knowing this the extent
of education for
CYFD student this step I know my
daughter's got a degree in
social work and so I don't know
what else goes in but how much
training to see what do provide
for the new child abuse
investigator someone that's just
coming in I don't know if they
have to have college I I I
understood you did not have to
but in the training that they
actually give you on site how
much time to they put into that.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator guy a ghosts
when when a brand new employee
comes in no matter what their
education level as their degree
is masters bachelors associate
or associate degrees we we
provide an extensive a national
five week training prior to any
any case assignments that
training continues it's not just
five weeks and and you're done
it's on going there's ongoing
coaching from supervisors from
coaches that are designed in the
field as well as specific
training in training changes
through time based on laws based
on practice based on national
national practices across the
country in federal law state law
and so that continuous training
is.
Extremely important that we do
to meet our needs and not our
needs the needs of the children
that we are working with every
single day and the families that
we support.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
centers and gentle lady and I
appreciate that that it's it's
an ongoing process I just have
there again concerns I know how
difficult this job is pre all
I've never been there done that
but in talking to people Mr
chairman Senators there's a lot
of stress and so the the
turnaround is very high and it's
just one of those things I want
to make sure that as we go
forward whether state or just go
into training mode right now
that we're providing them all
they can have so that way they
first Oct protector money in
their heart because these are
dramatic situations that they'll
never forget but also be there
to be able to give our children
the best option possible one
last thing Mr chair in centers
and I was I was just wondering
and it talks to earlier Mr chair
we talked about pipeline from
colleges in order to get social
workers in.
Our state or into CYFD are we
looking beyond New Mexico going
backwards we're putting money
into our kids to educate them
but not obligating them to stay
in state.
Are we looking beyond our
borders for social workers in
there so pay were pay wise a
water for some of the the
borders were having to get them
here Mr Chairman centers.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator cricket okay
because we are working with our
in state universities not just
definitely those schools of
social work but also you
University of New Mexico because
there there are great related
degrees counseling psychology
crime criminal justice
Education not all feed into this
we we.
Recruit on indeed we recruit
staff we are currently working
on a project to ensure that not
only are we competitive with all
of the state salaries
surrounding us but we have the
opportunity especially in those
border counties that staff have
a if you live live in Texas live
in my back and you really want
to work in New Hobbes there's
that opportunity and so we're
not limiting our recruitment to
only
people it people residents in
New Mexico but those in
surrounding states as well
through.
multiple avenues thank you for
that I was hoping is broader
view Mr chairman and senator
final comment I know with our
Increase to teachers last year
CYFD lost a lot of staff that
are not now teachers in its
because the disparity in the
price of what you guys are paid
now versus our educators of the
the
Degrees are sure they can be a
used in both venues but I know
that we've lost a lot of CYFD
help we've got to fill that void
because each one of those losses
affects multiple kids so with
that I yield thank you Mr thank
you the Senator
I've got I've got a couple of
questions I I don't I guess I
don't understand.
I wonder if you answer.
Part of that yes so Senator
delusions Act this takes away
the law enforcement within that.
But in fact it's not that is
the.
It's not doing that is it it's
it's actually putting in the
hands of social workers to make
that initial decision and then
as I understand do I have the
the bill right the disclosure
worker makes a decision about
whether or not to remove the
child they can hold the child
for up to three days and then
they have to a good an ex parte
order when do we get the ex
parte order but they would have
to go to the district forty BDT
and with an affidavit like a
warrant system.
What what is what do you mean
immediately mean the day they go
out of two in the morning that
to get an expert during through
the child within eighteen hours
Mr Chairman.
So that so there's actually more
controlling authority now
because
a judge is making that decision
whether to take the child into
custody well that's great in
Albuquerque the but what happens
in care is also or or I mean how
are they going to get the judges
to do an expert do that best of
I'm Mr Chairman so there was a
judge from carriers other who
would lead on who led us through
this committee and and she
talked all our key college is
the president of the children's
court association and they the
children court judges
association and they endorsed
this bill is what I heard at the
beginning and they were part of
this if so they are already
doing this and warrants in
criminal cases and then the
department took to clarify
something the departments on
these cases before of our force
and most of them the department
has to wait for law enforcement
to make that decision for them
as with most of these these
issues aren't there childhood
but sexually abused her or been
or facing serious physical
injury the the the cases are
made are I'll send a lawyer
George days or the negligence
cases where the the offices
don't have time to to look for
Graham are look for an uncle and
they just say okay boom boom
your custody I can find a foster
care and those because eighty
one percent of these cases under
and negligence nineteen is the
abuse and so on those cases
where there's Buse allegations
sexual fall any of those things
serious probably harm to IT and
law enforcement are working
trust that closely together and
they're very make it any up
decisions that they disagree
with in those what will the way
that I'm missing something
though I guess the way this
reads is a child may be taken
into protective custody by the
department without a court order
when the department has
reasonable grounds to believe a
child has admitted identifies
six conditions all of which of
these these but otherwise you're
saying in an eclectic kind of
the neglect through the lack of
supervision situations they
would get an ex parte that's
when they would get the expo.
Right but other than that they
can take the child away from
those dangerous situations and
thanks to.
Mr chair members of the
committee so so the way that
this so the question that you're
asking is so in these situations
like on the scene that events
talking about it's at that point
if CYFD determined that the
child should be taken into
custody they call the judge like
like it's like they do with
warrants and so then then upon
the affidavit the judge makes
that decision based on those
facts when there's exigent
circumstances where there is no
time in that moment to call the
judge to get that application
for removal approved in those
situations the department can
remove the child and then they
have eighteen hours to file the
application for removal and so
what what what this bill does is
it it provide I'm just missing
that I don't see that in the
bill and and help me with that
Mr chair I think I just need to
go further I don't see by worry
are the just not far enough into
the bank.
Okay that's fine but tell me
where it is so I can look at it
but I mean if if I don't see a I
don't see that word exigent
circumstances for I'm looking
Wirth says when you can remove
the child page sixteen Mr chair
sixteen.
Okay there's a definition of
accidents confesses but but for
me what is it referring to Mr
chairman of funding the
procedure alright that the
penalties up the procedure that
we're talking about.
What.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
Given the eighteen hour thing
that it Mr chair it really
starts on page twenty three
The.
It's it's a couple pages long
because it's a dress and.
It it it's it's digesting
multiple scenarios but one of
the the the eighteen hour
references on page twenty four
line eleven.
But this whole section kind of
goes through what what
procedures are in in the very
situations including the
situation where there's
disagreement between law
enforcement and and see and so
CYFD correct.
And then they have seven days
after that to file a custody
professor the.
So Mr chair
so they would they would at
filed application for removal
with the court if the court
approves that removal the have
the child into custody they'll
have three days to assess the
situation and determine whether
they're going to file an abuse
and neglect petition and then at
and then at that point then
there's that this the custody
hearing would occur at seven
days.
And so really the heart of it is
if the police remove the child.
They tend to favor getting
kicked out of the hole if CYFD
removes the child they tend to
or if I trying to decide whether
to remove the child they would
tend more than the police to
keep the child at home and try
to provide services that that
that for the reduction in the
short term placements would
result.
Any other questions anybody else
on the committee Senator Maestas
thank you Mr chairman thank you
centers Lopez do excite I just
trying to read as much as I can
and learn as much as I can say.
I up should add my hand up
earlier but
But I mean I just it's difficult
because I don't know anything
about the systems and worked in
the systems
And have family members and
loved ones that have been
through the system but I've
never asked them what
procedurally what happened you
know I mean
and and that I've never seen a
bill that has such tremendous
and thoughtful pushback like
very thoughtfully mills by very
distinguished people saying
that's a bad idea.
including the fraternal order of
police and so it's.
It's difficult for me to make a
decision but but but let me just
kind of deal with the words the
words on the page essentially so
this doesn't deal Mr chairman
centers for this this isn't
necessarily the.
The the procedure leading up to
a custody hearing but rather the
initial that those first ten
days of of removal or non
removal upon encountering a
child that may affect the abused
or neglected correct.
Mr chair Senator yes I mean it
also implicates the the the
capacity here in part because it
makes of some changes to that
timeline but overall yes you're
you're exactly right counters Mr
chairman centers of these
encounters or as a result of
like and I will one call out or
more like a up what to call the
up.
R. for a rich our act what to
call the check like a welfare
check which is the initial
person at the front doors as a
police officer.
The initial person like a social
worker from see what the.
I had a lot of that is that of
the child come in contact with
the government.
Mr chair Senator Maestas the
majority of the cases that CYFD
receives are not from law
enforcement directly they are
from concerned citizens that are
calling in of with the concern
of abuse of not or neglect of a
child could be a teacher coach
and Nibert so in most
circumstances.
Absolutely the majority of
circumstances a CYFD worker is
going out to the home before
anyone else or going out to the
school to talk to a child
without law enforcement and so
we're starting to conduct that
investigation without law
enforcement there are calls
there are absolute situations
when law enforcement does call
CYFD ends and and gives us the
report were out at this home we
were called because of whatever
reason to plastic violence or
something else and they say we
need you to come out and assess
the situation with us help us
determine what is the core what
decisions need to be made for
the safety of the child thank
you so much intimate Mr Chairman
gently so home how many of
these.
Call outs
Like in the middle of the night
thank I just.
Can't wrap my arms around that I
mean ninety percent of agencies.
Work nine to five but I know
deal sees twenty twenty where
our stuff like that like how and
let me just ask just a couple
questions so on twenty five on
page twenty five.
this just confusing when you
look at twenty two and twenty
five a child they also want to
officer taking the child and it
says on the top of page twenty
two Mr chairman of child may be
taken into temporary custody.
And then you jump only to to
only a pursuant to a court order
from the District Court.
exited serves as a defined but
you know it's subsection any.
then it says with the department
determines the criteria for
temporary renewable is met the
department shall file.
you know.
But then then their situations
in which the department.
then on the bottom of page four
it says when a law enforcement
officer Medical personal has
reason to believe that the child
has been injured as a result of
abuse or neglect with the child
may be at risk of imminent harm
if returned to the child's
parent guardian the law
enforcement officer Medical
Pribilof shall hold the child
into the department is available
and then on paragraph F. on page
twenty five of the law
enforcement officers evidence to
believe exigent circumstances
exist it says the law
enforcement sort of Sir may
place the child in the temporary
custody of the department.
And then once again the
department can do whatever it
chooses to do it can return the
child can file a petition and
then just in terms of the
wording.
On line fourteen.
It says I've the department term
you know the or return the child
to the child's parent guardian
or custodian if the department
determines that the child can be
safely returned.
In the web even ocular that
means you know return to the
home with with reasonable safety
but the way I read it is like
return like safely in other
words like the car as guests and
is not gonna hit offense if
you're gonna safely returned so
it's just it's just a weirdly
worded a very.
And then then you go bottom of
page twenty five going lower
when apartment as obtain
temporary custody of a child
through an ex parte order or
through a determination of the
X. in some sense of the
department shall file a petition
within three days so so a
paragraph F. it says the law
enforcement officer may place
the child and then the
department of child file an
application or return the child
but then on.
Line eighteen it says action is
serves as calm of the department
shall file a petition within
three days it just it just
doesn't I just can't capture it
the way you guys can
so it one quick question Mr
chair Senators LEDs it the
concern I'm hearing is that two
FTE just doesn't have the
capacity to do this.
Now and I think everyone's in
agreement with that that's why
that that that's why it's it's
one of the longest push outs of
any bill overseen we pushed out
the law enforcement academy the
bill was passed in March of
twenty two and it goes into
effect July of twenty three that
was the longest push out I've
seen when we did appropriations
reform.
And that bill was vetoed in in
April of two thousand nineteen
that that was probably just more
veto in the final analysis
because the provision of
department simply was not.
Able to for I feel that drastic
institutional change of that
bill.
The probation department however
hasn't moved in any direction
towards that bill and so we're
gonna do another bill and say
and hopefully that becomes law
in July so my question is I
could do it by putting this bill
forward and putting this
extension two years out.
Is the department.
Gonna move in that direction
because I don't believe the
department will without this
what.
What.
One is where we move it to years
out I think we all know and and
is that gonna incentivize the
department to move toward that
in to fulfill these obligations
by that start date.
Mr chair Senator.
The department already knows how
our workers know how to assess
safety and risk we know how to
go out into a family's home that
is not the training that is
needed the training that's
needed is on the statute on the
bill itself to ensure that we
are able to carry out the
statute as Britain
and ensure that the policies the
procedures are in place and also
not just the department but
working with the court all of us
are have been at the table
developing this for years on how
we can make it work and so that
is where the training comes and
not on being able to actually
assess safety and risk of a
child thank you thank you Mr
gently and that's.
That's my.
That's somewhat assuring but
it's all it also.
Great to reluctance because if
you put all the DO see it people
in one room to come up with a
policy to reform appropriations
they couldn't do it.
Appropriations is out in my
opinion well to respect to all
the hard working people that do
you see in the probation
department the probation
department needs outside eyes
looking in to reform that
department
And so.
I think that this initiative
also needs some outside eyes
looking in all the outside eyes
I'm reading on on my emails
against this bill but.
so anyway it's just I guess
that's why we get paid the big
Bucks Mr chairman to make these
decisions that thank you and if
you wanna respond that's fine if
not that's fine I just want to
here's here's want to share my
vision on where I'm coming to us
and through and and I I fully
appreciate all the all the
debate in the work you put into
this.
But if if if we're to passes
with the judiciary judiciary
probably won't get to it for
awhile I don't think we'll be
slowing you down if we table it
and try to get some more eyes on
it and work on a little more I
mean one of the one of the the
thoughts that came to me is why
do you need this bill if it's
good if we're pushing out to you
can start the training you start
working toward refining these
materials a lot of this is done
within the department you don't
need a lot of do a lot of the
stuff I'm not I mean the big
changes going to be the police
you know but working with them
now could all be done without
this bill are we really in any
way slowing down reform if we
don't pass this bill this
session.
And Mr chair I think my concern
is is the example that the
center Maestas just gave with
the D. O. C. where.
You had a reform bill they
weren't ready for it it was
vetoed because of that and you
said and I haven't seen them
moving towards that at all since
that.
That's why we want to pass this
now because we want to make sure
that there is that mandatory
incentive to work towards us I I
I met here what miss more in the
same and and and I I believe her
that that these are things that
that the CYFD wants were towards
in general but overall the if we
have something in place that was
a mandatory reason to make those
moves I think we're a lot more
likely to see it happen hello in
this case is the department is
pushing this.
I mean it's not like the
probation office was pushed and.
Mr chair is not the department
pushing this it is the the
children's court and prove my
commission that this bill came
from so I think the department
is supportive of it but this is
not at the this is not an agency
bill this is not a governor's
bill this this is a Bill
endorsed mission go out of
existence is here going to be
around you still gonna be riding
herd on and Mister chair I I
hear what you're saying the
commission has no authority over
CYFD the the commission can't
make CYFD do anything we can.
By passing bills the commission
cannot if if I may Mister.
Mexico thank you.
Okay I hang on to that thought
thank you Mr Mr do extend up is
the just quick clarification
that it wasn't bill because of
that it was built on some
technical language but in my
opinion in retrospect may have
been a blessing in disguise
because the provision our office
the they couldn't create that is
to tional change necessary
within that it we pushed it back
to to January and so the
question remains and ninety
percent of that bill the
executive runs could do on its
own.
But it has not it has not so I I
so I just want to but.
Clarify the facts with regards
to the but the point the same
thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Institutional.
Your Michael you need to make.
how do you make this kind of
structural and institutional
change when you have a part time
legislature unable to ride herd
over this the commission does
that doesn't have power and so
it's it's the only thing we can
do is pass laws I don't know
whether the governor would sign
it given the the push out
Which is why I have I mean
that's the idea has just open
the door to to the involvement
open the door to training and
then move toward it you know
knowing the ultimate goal of but
I understand what you're trying
to do is set the goal up set the
benchmark benchmark up and then
and then move toward it if you
need other legislation to get
there you would but that might I
guess my question is how do you
make institutional change.
this response if I could also Mr
chairman members of the
committee we did something again
just a year with the office of
Family representation that is
going live right very soon in
fact we have our our new
executive director the judges
Steeler from sue I I know I know
I know we did that we're happy
to have her sorry.
but I think part of what the
conversation is is the intent is
to create that change and if we
don't have a goal set I mean I
know we could hope that
secretary Vigil will stay but as
you know change comes even in
administration and if we don't
have something just the statute
that is solid is it going to get
there we will not get their
because people's ideas change in
a different focus and I think
with what the commission has
been working on not just this
year but over the last few years
about talking how do we create
this institutional change this
is one of our and results as
well as for Oprah there's
there's all these different
pieces of the mosaic this is one
of them gives us an opportunity
the secretaries in favor she has
lent her support it is the bill
from the the C. Corp children's
court improvement commission but
this is an end goal is to see
it's our best way the latest
part of the mosaic for us to get
there and and and and and I have
seen other bills that had more
than just a year if that have
come through here over time
where we have extended
implementation so it's not just
these two but there have been
over time for some of us who
have been around for awhile
senator Tom and then Senator
Gallegos thank you Mr.
We would pose Senator.
I also agree with the senator I
like Senator a which is the
pandemic suggestion that we
We up.
Table is not the case but to
give you an opportunity to work
at it after taking into
consideration some of the
comments from the opposition.
And bring it back in a week or
two.
I'm done are you here okay
Senator guide Mr chairman and
Senators I also like your idea
tabling but I will step further
and I'd ask my colleagues to
think through this on my junior
money's I would offer a hundred
thousand dollars CYFD to start
the training now our kids
deserve this and they deserve it
now not two years from now so
I'll leave that offer out there
is see what you'll will visit
with me I'll get it I've got to
have a by Monday goes on to say
you don't have much time but I
would think is you know as
legislators have money in their
junior money's this is a great
opportunity to put our money
where our mouths are I thank
you.
There's committee.
The of all contributed to.
Okay.
But so will the committee will
be going to.
The table back.
That that that that that's a
it's not debatable motion.
And.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Guerreros yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna no.
Senator committees yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Clemente yes.
Center to the piano we go back
to the center mass this is is
this a DO look she's gone.
Bill we're voting teller for me
is a no no.
Do you want to wait for so if
you I mean I think she was here
all this time with a splitting
headache and she left right as
we take the vote so I don't know
I have to a sort of that chance.
Let's do it I don't know I mean
this.
With three X. nourishing is okay
we have a motion to table and
that the kids of the to bring it
back after further refinements
table yeah okay I think really
it's up to you how do you vote
in that mode oh its toll it's
it's half and half.
What.
As I apologize.
it's my vote you know what I
mean we all I'm sorry okay pass.
Hello everybody is willing to
accept you what is the vote for
to to for yes to.
I'll go along with it I I I I
apologize I have a headache I
knew that.
So yes so it's it's a yes yes
yes yes one two three four five
so but by a vote of five to and
and I'm getting the same kind of
emails that Senator Maestas
getting from people saying you
can't do this they're not ready
you're so I guess they don't
know that we push it out of
while at.
But I would urge you to try to
figure out a way around it is
confusingly worded drafted I've
at least to me I'm no lawyer but
if I can't figure it out and
then you know there may be ways
it can be improved but we will
take it when you're ready to
haven't heard and also we also
just got a new FIR from the from
LFC today just just that we just
passed that so this is still you
know it's not ready for prime
time I think is what I'm saying.
Thank you we have to final does
so by a vote of the I in the
affirmative to the negatives to
absent we've table temporarily
tabled Senate bill one twenty
eight thank you very much thank
you for the patience you
volition we're going to we're
going to do Senator Gonzalez we
can get to tell us then we'll do
using it to Albuquerque and then
I can get the Dixon after all
the.
This is Senator Lopez I don't
think this will take as long as
the smoking bill will take.
I have a nine AM no thank you
good thanks thank you.
Okay this is Senate bill.
One thirty four no exotic
animals in traveling
performances.
You Mr chairman yes we're ready
Mr Senator Gonzales go ahead
thank you Mr chairman and
members of I know you had a long
use the handheld that might be
it might pick up the.
Thank you Mr chairman and I know
you've hello.
Pretty tiring afternoon in the
federal make this short and I'll
leave more of it to my expert
witness on the Senate bill one
thirty four this amends the
municipal code code of chapter
three and M. as a nineteen
seventy eight to prohibit the
use of exotic animals in
traveling performance with the
exception of rodeos animals
rehabilitation programs animal
shelter programs and twelve
animals Education or
conservation program Mr Mr
chairman members this is what
this is trying to do and I will
yield to my witness this
Williams.
When pressed yes please
introduce yourself and then go
ahead and give us your yes
Representative.
Of.
Mr chairman senators my name is
Danielle Wilson.
I'm representing miglior.
This you know so yes yes we
you're still fighting the good
fight who is the secretary of
environment to how long ago was
that.
A long time ago years ago okay.
Anyway I'm not representing
anybody but myself but I have
worked with a lot of national
organizations and local animal
groups to come up with this and
fundamentally this bill is to
prohibit circuit traveling
circuses that use exotic animals
the specific event that
came up last last year I noticed
that the Shriners were coming
to.
To Albuquerque and I called one
of the city council women that I
know there and although it's
illegal and not.
Albuquerque it's a legal and
Santa Fe it's illegal and burn a
Leo it's illegal across many
places all across the state it
apparently it's not illegal on
state land.
So this same I don't know if you
guys know what's happening
nationally but nationally the
services are being held to a
higher a higher level based on
based on the use of exotic
animals these animals are
treated it's it's terrible it's
terrible some of them spend like
ninety six percent of their time
confined into a small space the
main.
Groups that we would like to see
bands in New Mexico are the
elephants Alliance for Tigers
and the bears
they can still do dog acts this
has nothing to do with livestock
it has nothing to it exempt
rodeos exams educational of
Bruce.
Exempt any of the groups you
know that it doesn't dilute it
simply does not allow us
circuses with exotic animals to
come to.
New Mexico.
Okay go to the audience anybody
here in support of this measure
yes please come up and use the
microphone please.
The.
Thank you for a while okay.
You hear me yes yes I'm I'm just
a citizen advocate my name is
Cindy Roper I'm from Santa Fe
County I think this is long
overdue and fully supported and
hope it passes tonight to the
next committee thank you thank
you anybody here in opposition
to this measure.
On the on the zoom we have
several people.
Okay so we have a in support
Jessica Johnson.
Are you there miss Johnson.
Yes thank you sorry it took a
second on the.
Good evening and thank you Mr
chairman committee members and
Jessica Johnson chief government
affairs officer for animal
protection voters.
Thanks Senator Gonzales for
sponsoring this bill.
The circus coming to town has
been a popular pastime
throughout history but the use
of exotic animals in traveling
Act is problematic suffice it to
say the circus environment is
far from the natural habitat of
elephants big cats and bears who
are trained to perform unnatural
tricks using painful tools like
bull hooks and electric crimes
despite the guards of federal
regulation the services that
perform or rent animals for
performances here in New Mexico
include those who have been
repeatedly cited by the USDA for
myriad issues including failure
to provide adequate veterinary
care sufficient space
ventilation and nutrition
failure to provide safe
enclosures and transport it
skipped animals and use of
elephants carrying tuberculosis
which is a communicable disease
that can affect humans they
continue to operate and bring
exotic animals into New Mexico.
Six states and a hundred and
fifty local governments across
thirty seven states have taken
steps to address these problems
by restricting or banning the
use of various exotic animals in
traveling Act you're in New
Mexico that includes the cities
of Santa Fe and Albuquerque
although the circus still comes
through Albuquerque city limits
in violation of the heart
ordinance in order to perform on
state property so Senate bill
one thirty four would have the
power to stop that and you for
your support thank you.
Okay now we have three people
signed up to oppose this bill on
the zoom John right to your
first.
John are you there.
Okay Kimberly plus plus.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee.
My name is Kimberly pas I run a
small nonprofit animal outreach
programs called island agency
networks.
We're an educational program and
rescue offers free services to
our community and education
system.
We've been in practice for seven
years now.
This bill well it's not labeled
in the bill will completely kill
our program and any others like
it I understand the need for
animal welfare laws as I have
been involved in animal rescue
for nearly twenty years.
We have animal cruelty laws
already in place they just need
to continue to be enforced.
This bill will.
Accomplice driving an even
bigger wedge between humans and
the natural world.
On the level that I work in we
already so connected
disconnected many kids or even
adults have never interacted
with any other animals aside
from a dog or cat when people
meet our ambassadors in a safe
controlled environment their
fear turns into curiosity which
can create passion and empathy.
Thank you our pregnant involves
rescue animals that help to see
audience acceptance.
In our presentations we do cover
responsible husbandry and care
for any types of ammo animal
family members and how to
respect wildlife.
Thank you Representative
Kimberly a John right I
understand you're on now if you
an interim no opposition.
Are you there John.
Maybe you're not there.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear you job.
But can you go ahead please can
you hear me now.
Yes we can hear you just start.
We went off.
Okay let's go to fill gross.
This bill gross on.
Okay.
Yes please start.
Okay can you hear me now yes.
We've been able to hear you go
ahead.
Well I can't really hear you but
I want to speak in this regards
the concern that I have right
now bills with accreditation the
Springer resume reaches a
portion of the state that is on
Representative by educational
programs we are not a credit
facility shooting for
accreditation was CA trying to
meet all the welfare standards
with ACA as well as the a the
the bill as written would
prevent institutions such as
myself to actually transported
exotic animals to schools to
other events as written so
that's kind of where I have the
biggest issue and all of this
more than anything thank you
good thank you Mr with that Mr
right.
Now how about feel grosses
ceiling.
Okay Mister gross.
Hello it's it's costs my name is
Phil Goss god I get that led to
unfortunately I turned into Mr
gross with all right well thank
I am president of the United
States association of reptile
keepers we are a five oh one C.
six national advocacy and
several of our members contact
us about this bill unfortunately
with the legislators been told
about this bill and even if they
hearing here tonight is very
agency representative of what
this bill actually does so if
you actually read the bill which
is very short it states that a
traveling performance means of
public or private event for
which exotic animals are
transported and displayed that's
only qualification there does
not have to be any animal
cruelty involved there does not
have to be any tricks there does
not have to be in your writing
these animals it doesn't mean
tiger jumping through hoops this
bill literally bands someone
taking a gecko or a small courts
make or Torrez were fair or
paired into a classroom and
giving an educational program
about that so legislators need
to be aware of what this bill
actually does versus what
they're being told by people
supporting this there's even an
online petition from a group
from a woman who actually spoke
here tonight in support of this
and the petition does not have a
link to the bill it does not
have a link to the bill taxes
not even have a bill number and
all this is asking people to
sign something that says a
oppose Services and wild animal
acts and again that is not what
this bill does it legally banned
millions of species being taken
out anywhere any giving even
educational programs on those
animals so again I want the
legislators to be aware both of
what the bill actually does
versus what they're being told
and this bill should not go
anywhere New Mexico already has
animal cruelty laws what these
people supporting this need to
focus on is you know making
enforcement those current animal
cruelty laws better and not
doing this which is punishing
good people want to get educate
other people about animals so
thank you I thank you Mr times
and I hope you stop this bill
thank you thank you.
Okay members of the committee
questions or motions or whatever
Senator I just need a little
bit.
Of your Mike here my commute.
Thank you it is a short bill of
thank you for that and.
So there is some comments on the
bill and I just wondered if you
were willing to make some of
these changes to make it more
clear because for example one of
the comments by the the that we
read about and you probably saw
it two with livestock should be
just defined as regulated by the
livestock code seventy seven
dash to dash one through
whatever and then
I do you is the order of what
you meant to on on the line
twenty five page one or was it
and.
In which exotic animals are
transported and displayed
because that would mean No shoes
or.
Or but but then is the first
part means a public or private
event for which is on about our
transport and displayed with
that I mean what about zoos.
Basically surface.
So I I I think of the way it's
drafted is broader than just
circus because it says.
Means a public or private events
you that could be is new for
which exotic animals are
transported and displayed
because they're displayed it is
so just feel that the language
right there.
Is brought because if you want
to include service then you
would say and required to
perform tricks are given rights
if it was an and well let me
respond to that and all items
that Mrs Senator I'm sorry is
the Mike so we can hear Daniel
and Mr chair I apologize.
Mr Chairman yes.
Senator
I didn't hear a lot of what they
said it was very soft but will
answer your question also if you
look at part B. it it says does
not apply to rodeos animal rehab
program shelter programs and
animal Education our animal
conservation the last twelve the
key word there is twelve that's
the that's where the that's the
issue that was raised by the LFC
by the fiscal impact reports I
don't see why it preservation
has really anything to do with
it we don't is
so why did you put twelve in
there.
Thank you where is it used to so
well I just or require I just
felt like it brings in a lot and
then it has exemptions that
would
rodeos which you know you could
argue animal rehabilitation
shelter programs.
Or animal education Anil
conservation probes accredited.
So that might maybe may or may
not be as you I and then and
then my understanding of this
and correct me if I'm wrong is
that municipalities it's
basically directing it's not
saying that.
It's it's the enforcement
provision of it is a
municipalities and local
governments because there's no
consequence here and there's no
directive like for the.
I don't know Department depict
any department to step in game
and fish to step in or or or so
it it's really
yes this is illegal except under
the circumstance it's very broad
it's illegal except under these
narrow start circumstances and
then cities and counties you
take care of this well am I
understanding that correctly.
Well no that was not the history
and not then we just sat front I
sure the sponsor who would would
appreciate any clarification.
But.
The problem is right now it it
is illegal in Albuquerque in
fact Albuquerque has a law that
the Shriners and the other
services that come are not even
allowed on their streets the
problem with the law is there's
no way of enforcing it even
though they do have a way but
but the problem is.
Feeding elephant is very
expensive and there was a
incident years ago when of they
saw this was a structure you
know and we're human trafficking
is going on and they so I your
in coming out and how they got
in there there were three
elephants one was dead.
I'm sure you remember and so
what now we're requires that you
take care of these animals they
had to be can you know if you
hold my you see run zoom so
people will hear anything you're
saying okay.
Get the press to hear me now
yes.
Sound like a commercial.
Anyway
So as it happened they they came
up with the money yeah and there
it is soon now or in other safe
places
It it the reason it was put in
is there's no enforcement.
the the cities were given the
opportunity they don't have to
take the opportunity to pass
legislation or ordinances that
that would allow them to find
the people who do this so they
would have money to do it.
It was so Mister chair so it so
I just I think it's correct it's
really telling giving authority
to the cities and the counties
to do something about it or for
actually requiring them because
it's saying that something is
illegal but we are not tell us
again this year we're not we're
not asking any state engine.
We're saying yes it's illegal
and now counties and cities do
something about it and they if
they care to they don't have to
if they care to
and and I guess I am I have
enormous sympathy to the cost I
guess I should have it started
by their but I asked whether we
have any cruelty any statutes
preventing cruelty to animals
and it turns out
we do and that's probably why
the elephants what we're taking
care of because to abandon or
fail to provide necessary
treatment to an animal is is a.
Sexual crime against.
If.
If we if we table this in you to
it's written so broadly that the
as he said is snakes we take the
state he's not an accredited
program the takes is next to the
kids classroom that would be
illegal under this hello it says
right here says twelve that's
the problem and so that has to
be some wording refinement on
the
You could just take out twelve.
We can do a lot of things with
the other that is it is you know
the definition of exotic animals
or.
I guess my suggestion is and I I
don't know if you just feel and
I know you've waited so long it
may feel bad but it's just
And I do have a headache but to
try to edit it and and and make
it stronger the language
stronger get the specific that
you want to get to we take a
while and so I I guess my
suggestion is if you could take
it back with the drafter and
take the comments to heart in
the and the the points that were
made because I mean I think it
requires a lot like I think you
want to define either define
livestock for refer to the
livestock code
do you know what I mean and
they're just little little
things in the bigger things well
that would make it clear it of.
It just make it more of a more
clear and then I'd also suggest
that you look at the cruelty to
animals thirty dash eighteen
dash one.
And and see if this adds
anything see what it adds to the
laws that are already on the
books about animal cruelty this
will not require any more laws
because for animal cruelty
because we basically have
discovered that on a national
level you know Ringling brothers
Barnum and Bailey they have all
gone out of business and now
they're coming back without
animal acts so you wouldn't have
if we can't afford to feed an
elephant how are we going to be
able to go around the country
and find out how they're being
treated basically all all we
want from this bill is to keep
services that allow exotic
animals out of our state out of
our state or even just out of
state lands Mr chair my
suggestion is to is to refine
this bill which I don't think
the committee at this time and
effort wants to do to find this
bill to get exactly what you
want and then look at it in
conjunction with the animal and
I'm sure the drive to do it the
the animal cruelty provisions
which are crime it makes it
crimes to do this work Senator
for your project if we table
with with that with the idea of
bringing it back over I tried to
kill the.
Temporary table you will be at
the top of the list for rollover
with ice whatever it is that you
do if it does have it does have
still Senator by the thank you
Mr chairman thank you Senator
Gonzales gentle lady thank you
this is kind of cool idea but
just couldn't what it says is.
It has two definitions exotic
animal traveling performance
exotic animal captures birds
captures of go to there's don't
vision life Stafford captures
well it depends what we do maybe
so I don't know where livestock
is defined elsewhere but it's
captures a pony like so if I
took a pair if I took a parent
to my kid's class for show and
tell I would be violating this
bill.
So so that's not the intention
absolutely not and so what
that's that's what we're going
to the law so that's why we're
that's why we're having
apprehension not for the policy
but for the work thank you Mr
twelve chairman because Senator
Gallegos Mr Chairman briefly I
just want to give you another
thought so the first Baptist
church here in Santa Fe brings
in an activity seen every year
for Christmas and they have a
camel because they're not twelve
they would be able to do that
people come from all over the
area the C. this nativity saying
I don't know where they get the
camel but it looks well fed and
cared for I just want to throw
that out there the we don't want
grey yes.
Yes and and we totally
understand that we've seen
things that are wrong with the
current bill so I like the idea
of those tabling it temporarily
to get it resolved but I just
want to throw that piece in
because that's real for Santa Fe
so with that you thank you thank
you thank you senator Senator
Tallman Bill Mr chair the
temporary table.
That's a non debatable motion.
The secretary will call the roll
I can have a question about that
I feel bad that they waited so
long does that mean when they
come back they'll be ahead of
the launch we are well I mean if
they if they can revamp it we'll
we'll we'll put it will put a
relief agenda yeah I mean it
we're not we're not sending it
to the Yom off very much talk to
we need to definite you need a
definition of livestock clearly
what you know.
Which and there is there is okay
rover is a non debatable motion.
Seven.
Of.
It's very will please call the
roll Senator guy addresses yes
ma'am.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna.
What I want to discuss some.
We can you get.
Welcome back.
It's an important issue.
Yes No.
Okay this.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator AUMENT yes to the piano
yes so if you can get gets you
there some parts that need to be
really beefed up.
The right words whatever it and.
Yes for two choices.
What the
That the president just.
So you know if.
Thank you for your help thank
you thank you good to see you
again then you know three
Senator Lopez.
To wind up the fun evening.
No smoking in racinos.
I move it to pass.
I
would love to.
Good evening Mr chairman good to
see you all again.
Think of all you to miss if you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we are here in front
of you is Senate bill one
thirty.
It's pretty simple
Senate bill one thirty removes
the receive no exemption from
the D. Johnson clean indoor act.
Reserve receive no employees can
work in smoke free and healthy
environments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm honored to serve
on the tobacco settlement
oversight committee and.
We had a an interesting hearing
down in Los crucis earlier this
will I'm sorry last year
in for whatever committee
hearings and with a presentation
from our a representative from
Senate park.
And your conversation came up
questions about you know the
health status because they allow
smoking in their facility so we
had a I think a very slight
discussion as to how does this
affect your employees yes
secondhand smoke etcetera
etcetera.
so I think for me this was the
genesis of the bill that we have
here in front I know that my
expert witness here will say a
few words.
I know there's discussion about
how this hurts business it has a
detrimental effect but we do
have some data Mr chairman
members of the committee that
actually shows with our native
American casinos with a do not
allow smoking.
There has been no decrease of
revenue.
and I'll leave it at that Mr
Chairman so if I could hello my
expert witness to say a few
words
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think it would be
best if you use the handheld
meixel will sorry pick you up.
Thank you Mr chairman members
members of the committee by see
that with the American art
Association I think you know
you know as far as Senator
mentioned like you know I mean
secondhand smoke you know is it
is one of the leading causes of
you know cancer according to a
cancer you know as students and
you know in in New Mexico you
know I you know what to call
racetrack casino as a racinos
you know they still of smoking
and on the other hand all
fourteen tribes in in New Mexico
the tribal casinos you know
after the pandemic you know have
gone smoke free I think one of
the big arguments you know from
from the industry is you know
they will lose revenue but you
know the research has shown like
you know that's not the case and
in some certain cases you know
the revenue has gone up so I I
will refer you to to this of
power point presentation the
this is a study conducted by the
Las Vegas based you know gaming
consultants I mean these guys
you know he'd bring me Madam you
know saying casinos and you know
as you can see you know the
let's start you know why do
people go to casinos you know
it's just the location and you
know thirty two percent of them
go through because of the
location twenty six percent say
they go to the casino where
smoking is not allowed.
Only four percent say you know
smoking where is allowed and if
you also look at the study
they've done in northeast you
know you just they looked at non
smoking and smoking casinos and
and this chart shows you know
the non smoking casinos are
performing a lot better than the
smoking casinos in Atlantic city
and not to mention the help you
know issues and I want to
mention one thing like you know
the industry says you know.
Proposals to create indoor
smoking rooms reduce the indoor
smoking area you know.
In a and hello workers
still one tear in the smoking
area I mean it it fails to
protect you know worker health
and you know working workers on
floor casino floors are largely
people of color and women and
lack of access to smoke free
deepens exit existing
disparities you know and health
outcomes and you know and and I
will refer you to the last short
I think you know the the the
story was done by Associated
Press and you know that that's
the study they've done for the
last thing I want to mention is
you know the tribal casinos
revenues
I mean referring to this chart
right here
if you look at twenty eighteen
and twenty nineteen.
You know the the each quarter
you know the the these other
times when the when the tribal
casinos allowed smoking and in
twenty twenty we got hit by the
pandemic and and you can see
like you know we the second
quarter the casinos were closed
somewhere so operating you know
on you know non smoking
basically but the real compares
and comes you know in twenty
twenty one you know what we were
still in the help orders in a
mask mandates and you know open
the casinos were struggling as
well but if you look at the the
revenues from twenty twenty two
this is from twenty twenty
twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty two these are non
smoking.
You know tribal casinos all of
them.
And if you see the third quarter
the for the third quarter of
twenty eighteen you know the
revenues I mean the adjusted net
revenues were two hundred and
four million but if you look at
twenty twenty two.
Non smoking the revenues you
know for the third quarter two
hundred and nine million.
And you know we already you know
you can see the Sandia casino
revenues the Navajo Nation and
Pablo Santana the gonna.
And you know Pueblo of this
letter so the these revenues are
late you know growing not
decreasing and we can get the
revenues from the racinos
because there racinos don't
report quarterly
they don't report individual
racino revenues the report
collectively and you know we we
have no information when they
started in allowing smoking so
we can have a good comparison
but you know as you can see the
revenues you know are not going
on in fact and some casinos are
going out thank you Mr chairman.
Video center that's where the
audience is there anyone here in
support of this bill yes please
come forward and you do want to
say something or you just want.
All right this is working yes
thank you chairman and members
of the board my name is Andreas
Archuleta as a registered
lobbyist here on behalf of an
impact The New Mexico allied
council on tobacco.
coalition formed to prevent
commercial tobacco abuse.
How we support this bill.
This bill is an issue of health
and safety in the workplace.
Due to the continuous exposure
of secondhand smoke racino
employees are put at a much
higher risk of heart disease and
lung cancer we all know the
dangers of secondhand smoke.
According to the CDC there is no
level no level of safe
secondhand smoke.
This bill would give wait staff
and gaming and plays the same
protections.
That bankers lawyers office
workers enjoy.
From the harms of secondhand
smoke.
I know we've all been touched
from cancer or heart disease we
all have a family member so I
ask you Representative centers.
Would you put a family member a
loved one at this increased
level of exposure and risk to
disease.
and that is why it we have an
impact had recommended to pass
on this bill thank you very much
thank you I'm anybody here in
opposition to that bill.
Yes miss Catherine.
Such a.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Sunland park
racetrack and casino stands
respectfully stands in
opposition to Senate bill one
thirty racetrack casinos are
being removed from the exclusion
while other gambling facilities
are not and other along with
other facilities as well the
other facilities that have made
the statement that the choice to
go smoke free had the choice to
make this business decision for
themselves we would like to be
able to have the same ability to
make our own business decisions
and just a further comment on
smoking and at Sunland park
specifically Sunland park has a
state of the art air handling
technology and also offers a
smoke free area it is our hope
that we can continue to make
these choices and business
decisions on our own adding a
smoking ban to racetrack casinos
along with all of the other
restrictions they are faced with
places them at a further
disadvantage and threatens the
ongoing viability of horse
racing in New Mexico thank you.
Thank.
Yes.
For
weeks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks on
behalf of the Albuquerque downs
racetrack and casino I'm gonna
get my point of opposition not
support right earlier today I
spoke in support but then
propose that the end policies
for that bringing some levity to
this long night basically was Mr
Shah said is accurate
Albuquerque down stands for that
position should be an individual
race tracks consideration as to
whether or not they want to
prevent smoking or not in their
casino track tribes have that
opportunity if they want to do
it they can tribes have a lot of
competitive advantages over race
tracks to begin with race tracks
the anchor point is racing and
it's not profitable and our
casinos are what make us
profitable and they're sort of
the life blood of the industry
and if an individual track feels
that that is a business decision
that promotes better bottom line
for them we feel they should be
allowed to do it justice tribes
can do it and also in this act
allows bingo parlors and other
licensed casinos
to to continue to allow smoking
so this isn't a patent ban
across all the secretary this is
targeting specifically tracks
and for that reason we stand
opposite.
Thank you.
Anybody else.
Have a question from the
committee.
Senator Gallegos.
On the website Mr chairman thank
you senator thank you I just a
second I'm sorry I forgot about
the zoom we have to allow him to
people is supported on zoom
Senator you'll you'll start to
with you Sade are you there.
Yes.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I represent the
national organization Americans
for nonsmokers rights and thank.
I'll be quick on behalf of our
members in New Mexico Americans
for nonsmokers rights
respectfully encourages the
Senate health of public affairs
committee to consider passing
Senate bill one thirty to close
the racinos exemption in the
highly popular and lifesaving D.
Johnson clean indoor air act
everyone deserves the right to a
smoke free workplace because
secondhand smoke is a leading
cause of heart disease cancer
respiratory illness and other
serious health risks Senate bill
one thirty would protect the
public and workers at racinos
from exposure to help health
hazards from second hand smoke a
report by Las Vegas gaming see
three of found the casinos
without indoor smoking
outperformed their smoking
counterparts data from multiple
jurisdictions clearly indicates
the banning smoking no longer
causes a dramatic drop in gaming
revenue in fact non smoking
properties appear to be
performing better than their
counterparts that continue to
allow smoking but this really is
a workers rights issue everyone
deserves a smoke free workplace
thank you for asking thank you.
Okay a Joanna Strother.
Yes good evening Mister chair
and members of the committee my
name is Jonas brother I'm the
senior director of advocacy for
the American lung association I
will that the disease caused by
the COVID nineteen has been
entirely negative one expect
unexpected positive trend is
that it is produced a growing
number of casinos that no longer
allow smoking indoors when they
re opened according to a list
maintained by American
nonsmokers rights foundation
over two hundred tribal and non
tribal casinos have re opened
smoke free and that's in
addition to eight hundred were
already smoke free prior to
COVID nineteen the American
lung association encouraged by
this trend which is an important
step forward for protection from
secondhand smoke and lung health
secondhand smoke is a serious.
I think you're making worse many
diseases and conditions
including lung cancer and asthma
up and causes over forty one
thousand deaths in the U. S.
each year casinos and other
gaming establishments remain one
of the few places where
employees and patrons are likely
to encounter secondhand smoke
indoors at high levels recently
the American lung association
released are twenty first annual
state of the tobacco control
reports which gets New Mexico of
the great for our smoke free air
policies we certainly have an
opportunity to prove our great
by creating more smoke free
establishments as for mentioned
everyone has the right to
breathe smoke free air
regardless of where the work or
frequent this is a public health
issue I ask you to give us one
thirty ado pass thank you thank
you very much Mr okay members
the committee we start with you
senator guy who's.
Mr chair bank in center thank
you again and I've just got a
question so I don't smoke so I
don't have a dog in the fight
but I'm wondering we're having a
huge problem with vaping and I
didn't see vaping area or
anything like that in your
exceptions of you guys had any I
know our schools talk about it
in it's becoming a problem with
our youth just wondering if you
thought about that in this bill
just.
Mr center.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos I
think the weeping is already
existence in the clean indoor
air act so wherever the smoking
is banned you know the way
building is also banned.
Thank you for that Mr chair
Senator I noticed in K. you
included the.
Indoor outdoor cameras
consumption area which I think
will still cause cancer later
put Mr chair Senator are these
locate let's thinking through
casino receive no are they going
to designate areas or areas for
marijuana said hi I read that
Adam K. page two page three.
Before we go on to anybody else
what did you just we need to get
an answer that show the of
concert.
One second.
Mr chair Senator guy was can can
you please refer to page one
page three line six advocate
some fiery.
It talks about Mr chairman
center and indoor outdoor
cannabis consumption ari
pursuant to the cannabis
regulation act as just trying to
envision what they have the
there's talk earlier about a
that's current language handler
yes that I'm guess I'm trying to
figure out if it that's
allowable and why would you not
have in an area that you
somebody wanted a no smoking
that they would have air
handlers to offset the distort.
Mister chairman Senator guy goes
I think what this is referring
to is you know in the cannabis
regulation act you know you you
can have a cannabis smoking you
know.
Through license you know you can
you can buy a license and open
Like a so like a cigar shop
right and and then you know
that's like the indoor you know
you can.
You know smoke in those areas
provided that you know it is
standalone building and it's not
sharing any you know methylation
system with other you know
structures� I think that refers
to that but I appreciate that
then I guess my last question
then is well part of a two part
question Mr chair Senator if the
Tribes are already stopped the
smoking piece why would we have
to have this in New just
thinking of I to me on page two
line fourteen
I would actually.
That's the only change I see
you've done in the in the field
of I would wonder why we need
that and why it's.
I just go back to some of the
we're seeing is talking about
it's going to be a hardship on
and I'm wondering why regulating
that if it were my bill there
again that's you don't think
you've got an add on in here is
to look it up removing that but
I'm just wondering in the whole
lot of process if if I wanted to
go to a single didn't have
signature I'd have the
capability to go to one of the
tribal casinos I guess I'm just
trying to figure out why we're
fortunate all over and not just
allow those of want to do it to
do it on their own accord  Mr.
Mister chairman Senator Gallegos
but I I think the issue is hi
you know we as a customer you
have a right to go wherever you
want you want to go and sit in a
smoke filled room for ten hours
you know that's your choice but
what we're talking about
employees who don't have a
choice.
And you know and and you talk
about competition and you know
the you know I mean someone park
you know the nearest casino is
you know almost a hundred and
fifty miles in right so there's
no casinos in Texas you know in
Farmington Hobbs you know that
there's no competition.
And you know in the past you
know the industry has argued you
know your allowing smoking in
tribes you know not you know the
tribes are allowing smoking and
so you're putting us at a
disadvantage now the point is
like you know I mean there's no
competition.
And you know all the tribes of
gone smoke free.
Because their allies to post
pandemic.
You know how many of their own
members have suffered and died
so you know.
The.
Still following an arcane
business model you know it's
it's I don't know it's it's a
good business sense because you
can see the numbers you know the
revenues and the studies have
shown non smoking casinos
performing better than smoking
proceed I mean that the
question.
You know you should ask is the
state losing revenue because of
the smoking policies not
gaining.
Think that Miss Mister chairman
Senator and I guess it was
brought up the health and safety
of the employee I'm just
wondering have we had beyond the
tribal casinos if we had any
outburst from employees that
have a reached out for this bill
to be passed I've I guess I
don't understand if it's.
If you or health and safety new
marijuana either but the thing
is I'm not sure that there's I
have not heard I live in Hobbs
are outside Hobbs I've never
heard any of our employees
complained about the amount of
smoke ditch in the facility and
there again I'm just wondering
if anyone's reached out to E. ET
all on the issue Mr up Mr chair
Senator Gallegos I think nobody
has reached out to us but I can
also understand make you know
people who work in these casinos
are low skilled you know.
Minorities and women.
And they're trying to make ends
meet.
And you know before the
the wage like minimum wage went
into effect these casinos where
plant paying nine dollars eleven
dollars for people to like and
I'll clean the place you know
Sir people with water or
whatever so you know and these
people are you know working
eight hours twelve hours sixteen
hour ships exposed to secondhand
smoke so they don't have a
choice.
And you know they they're not
just of sophisticated.
You know to say the least as you
know others to call in like.
You know that they're trying to
make a living and we can't meet
ends meet so.
Mr chair and senator I
appreciate that but if you go to
the restroom exemptions they
also have employees can they're
not being protected by your bill
it seems like we're charging the
receive those and not looking
and private clubs you know the
hotels motels those type of
items that still would have you
know the cigar bars and I know
their private entities know that
there the dirt they still have
an employees and so it's sort of
like this is just targeting one
secretary of New Mexico and not
thirty plus board.
met madam chair Senator guy goes
I think the stabilizing gaming
facilities are we have to abuse
the these are private clubs.
And and these are not open to
the public.
While the casinos are open to
the public.
So I think you know that there's
a huge difference between a
cigar club we're you're a paid
member.
So is that we have W. worry are
paid member to be in that club
if I go in I want to be a member
I can be you have to meet
certain requirements to become a
member of these clubs.
And the limitations on those is
only fifteen slots slot machines
per club so there's a huge
difference.
You know all racinos of public.
Area.
You know and you have hundreds
of employees.
And we have W's are run by the
members I don't know if you have
you know I I have friends that
therefore be here in Santa Fe
you know
they the bartender everyone is
like a member there and they
small it's their choice you know
I mean I haven't.
Looked at like you know how many
of them stop post pandemic but
you know we we have you know the
the big issue we're we're still.
Hello getting sick and so I want
all right pick up the pace here
we're we're is really slowing
down and and we do have given
anything else either just just
in closing not even for comment
but the well look that is if
this is a public safety for the
employee.
There's a lot of other areas to
look at and just receive an
audio with that thank you good
point we do have a and executive
to ask if we had anybody on
those objecting there's somebody
from the racing commission he
smile federal is the federal.
Mr you want to say something in
opposition.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee on behalf of the New
Mexico racing Commission we're
open for a I do not pass on this
bill at for the main reason that
that we feel it can to have
ended negative effect on the
racinos net take that twenty
percent of which goes to the
person's report gracing.
And then we feel that I have a a
fact on eight eight industries
that the.
Generates over five hundred
million dollars in that economic
impact for the state of New
Mexico supports a lot of people
this would be basically like
getting a cut in pay for them
thank you very much Sir thank
you very much Mr to.
Senator McKenna.
I would do past chairman.
We have a motion for a do passes
second.
A second seconded by Senator
Sedillo Lopez any debate Senator
Maestas thank you that was that
was on the list before some not
defeating this thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir Lopez
tournament the
It's great to review the.
The Johnson
Clean indoor air act so it's
great to get a refresher I don't
know what happened to limousines
I could just when there was a
minimal risk perception.
But
on page two of state license to
gaming facility that's the I
received is correct then no.
I don't think that one is.
Is in the except the racetracks
that's the ones.
My question if I can if I can
ask the Senator Lopez in the the
experts so is there a basically
the question is is there a state
license gaming facility that's
not one of the I receive.
Mr chair Senator Maestas I think
you know the the state
facilities they're referring to
the nonprofit's.
And bingo parlors.
Understood so there is so the
state licenses a gaming facility
is not a permanent gaming
facility or or is there
permanent gaming facilities
outside of the fiber seems.
Mister chairman Senator I don't
think that they are any
permanent gaming facilities
after.
Just maybe I'm sorry but
wouldn't those who liked if you
go to the VFW they have slot
machines right that's when it
really does matter I think you
know that the state gaming
facilities are leaking of those
I think there but hundred and
fifty of the non profits which
are we have to abuse and if OP's
I see
Okay because that that I think
that answers my next question
Mister chairman Senator was that
why you just delete.
Paragraph do your or chain or
toward.
Or just leave the word bingo
parlors all.
Mister chairman Senator like you
know that this this was drafted
by the council services and clip
by their legal staff so I think
you know the the the reason the
way it's drafted to to make sure
like you know it's not you know
affecting you know the private
clubs and nonprofits thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentlemen Center Lopez because
because I'm not line nineteen it
has private clubs so.
So I think I I think that for
PED's in the the F. W.'s are pry
covered this curious because I.
But I I think it's inevitable I
think of I think it's the way to
go ultimately I don't know
I haven't heard from the tribe's
you know I haven't seen a
document that all of have
banned.
Smoking in perpetuity.
I know there's a lot of moving
parts to horse racing receive
operators Indian gaming and
there's a lot of conversations
going on to to modernize and
tweak the compacts and I I think
if and when that does happen
this dish privy part of it
But I think the volatility in
this market right now is just
Somewhat tenuous anyway thank
you Mr just to follow up on your
question I am still possible
because you're right there's
private clubs are down there in
need.
Are are the are the tribal
casinos considered state license
gaming facilities.
That Mr Chairman now I think you
know the the tribal casinos are
I mean the tribes as sovereign
entities.
I think you know that the gaming
compacts are dictated by that it
is so yeah I I so that I don't
know who those state laces
gaming facilities who other than
the bingo parlors I don't know
who they are because yeah I do
have private clubs down below.
What.
Mr Chairman I mean the the
private clubs are laid it the
exception these are the
exceptions in the in the clean
indoor Act private clubs are
like cigar clubs in all people
want to like it like that yeah
that they so that's what you
know it refers to the area of
cigar bars up above.
Well using cigar clubs okay to
make a Sierra.
Senator John we are one seven
cents at work.
So it is so small.
Allowed throughout the entire.
Yes or no.
Yes.
What if they have a designated
area.
Course there at our.
With American.
Yeah San.
The next one sentences.
They do it is their decision and
in those instances of sun right
every casino doesn't do it
differently they do have non
smoking sections if they choose
have not.
Choose.
So they do that when it is.
So what prompted a small.
Why we want to let Mr chairman
and senator Tom and yes sex
almost like you know you can't
eliminate smoke by just having a
non smoking section you know the
smoke you know.
It doesn't work that way at I'm
not Mr Chairman making of the
legislation system like you know
you you're exposed to secondhand
smoke even though you're looking
your in the you know I mean I'll
you know what one last thing I
want to mention you know the the
this is the American society of
heating refrigeration and air
conditioning engineers and these
are the experts on mental ation
system and they say ventilation
systems do not effectively
eliminate the dangers of
secondhand smoke so you know the
industry keep saying like you
know we have the best cleaning
system but it's it's false.
Okay any of the debate we have a
we have a motion and a second.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Harris no ma'am.
Senator Maestas.
Help Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yeah.
Senator Clemente yeah.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no.
So now we have three to three
times.
The go forward you have another
there are alternate alternative
motion to temper table.
The program had the same type of
let's try that secretary will
call the roll a motion to temp.
There.
This.
For are they gonna fix sensor.
Just wondering a question on
that point I think it could be
written better because it's
confusing that it's a exemption
to an exempt it's an exception
to an exemption that you don't
know whether those things even
exist that you're accepting it
from right at all.
Homemaker tabling motion and.
Okay there's a motion.
The motion to table tomorrow
that's not debatable secretary
call the roll.
Senator que OS yes ma'am.
Senator Maestas.
Yes Senator McKenna no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez so.
Senator Tallman.
You can.
Then you can.
temporary.
The most with the table it and
then put the you know somebody
could make a motion to bring it
back up the table later on yes.
Yes.
We said yes okay good yes.
Senator.
Okay.
the vote.
The vote is four four favor
going handling two against and
three.
Excuse me.
Lose the.
Jennifer today.
Thank you.
