Senator before even putting the
bill on.
Thank.
Princes in judiciary that a lot
of lawyers and they know how to
find loopholes and everything
well
it was a.
The chair to get off the table
and and then asked if anybody
had objections and then just
going to be objections to to
vote on it and it did so it was
I mean they did not vote on it
Have a discussion and then vote
on it.
So that happened on Monday.
Information SB seventy five.
Senator Kernan yeah thank you
Sir I'm willing to make that
motion when it's appropriate.
Thank you.
We were up on the webcast.
So we will call the.
February twenty fourth meeting.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee meeting to
order.
And we're gonna start with
senator Kerry over items from.
Our Monday meeting and we'll
start with the senator.
Hello this is inspection of
public police misconduct
investigations Senate bill two
two seven.
Yes can I ask the question
And delightful packet of bills
today are we going to continue
to get those.
Yes very question is wonderful
currently the Senate.
sergeant at arms and his staff.
In order to stay busy as
possible and as productive as
possible.
Produce those and I I really
find it very helpful the one
thing is they're not always up
to date this morning in rules we
got a very nice staff and and it
had the original version of the
bill that it had to committee
substance to introduce infants
so but at least leases a piece
of paper to hang on to and for
that I find very comforting
thank you thank you.
Okay Senator Lopez will go to
you now is Senate bill two two
seven.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
appreciate your patience and
just kind of working through
Senate Bill Page two seven
what we do have Mr chairman is
we do have a committee
substitute
would you like to go ahead and.
That's a good.
Representative discussion as
anybody want to make a motion
Senators.
Mr chair I move a do not pass on
Senate bill two twenty seven
thank you pass this is on
committee substitute for Senate
bill two twenty seven and then.
And is there a second to that.
Sure we'll second that and we
immediately run into that
situation we have here Original
Bill.
You don't have your committees
And so in the package but we
have it online so we can use
this delightful.
We can go to the to the alliance
would you explain the committee
so Senator okay thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee
background on on where we are
where we've come from on this Mr
chairman
I am honored to serve the
governor's racial justice
Advisory Council and this last
in terms say probably about.
Part of August through the end
of the year we had different
these sub committees of the
council that we're meeting and
that you're breaking it down a
different.
CERN that were raised at our
initial council meeting and one
of our issues on excessive use
of force I happen to read of the
subcommittee meeting meetings
and the presentation of course
brought.
The attention of those of us who
were part of the the
subcommittee some of the issues
that are not just on across this
nation but here in the state of
New Mexico.
In in in conversation with Mr
Barron Jones of course use one
of my experts and he'll be
chatting a little while Mr
chairman members of the
committee we did work and come
the initial bill that was
introduced Senate bill two two
seven but since then Mr Chairman
and we did have an opportunity
to meet with us and with some of
their a person that they
represent an aspect within our
community and we listen to heard
and came out
talking ourselves within the the
the group and we have this
committee substitute in front of
you.
What I just wanted to give you a
highlight is that we what we've
taken out from the initial
introduction.
After.
Only use tear gas or other
chemical weapons the rubber
bullets and the dogs so that
was.
We take out the portion about
the department of public safety
secretary to investigate the use
of force that were submitted by
local law enforcement agencies
which was a sex it section C. of
the original bill
we did on the issue of the
escalation we qualify the
exception of the escalation by
adding reasonable and available
Mr chairman members of the
committee in the original bill
they did have forty five second
delay before entering the
premises using a warrant we
remove that forty five second
time limit.
Of the law enforcement
definition Mr chairman the
completely it specifically
states working with the state or
municipal police officer county
sheriff deputy sheriff
conservation officer motor
transportation enforcement
officer or other state employees
authorized by state law to
enforce criminal statutes so in
other words Mr chairman this
does not affect corrections
officers which is what was in
your first measure
yes there's also when we talk
about to in this measure Mr
chairman we clarified with
regards to employment or
termination of course we are
following state law so that's
just a short little overview of
what this bill does not include
we did remove that and with that
Mr chairman I would like to
deferred to I have to expert
witnesses one is Barron Jones
who is with the ACLU of New
Mexico and if I could let Mr
Barron say a few words.
Thank you Senator Lopez and good
afternoon chairman and members
the committee as Lopez said
Barron Jones a public policy
strategist ACLU of New Mexico
and it is my pleasure to be
before you today discussing this
very important piece of life
saving legislation I am joined
by my colleague paste more
national office I'll take a
couple minutes to to put you
know what's happening here in
New Mexico and and and and and
contacts and then page will sort
of talk a little bit more about
the bill and and and we'll ask
questions as needed
while I'm so.
Exams get nervous I take must
improve presenting this bill
today because before my twelfth
birthday and I would just two
fatal police shootings that left
black and that right and then my
more than twenty years here in
Albuquerque I myself of the
seriousness that supports the
let me struggle in the brief
insurance my lights and
fortunately for me I survivals
incomes but many other people
not.
How many New Mexicans or
Americans for that matter will
never stand sort of police
violence that recently took the
lives of George Lloyd and
Brianna Brianna Taylor this
brutality is a daily reality for
black natives and other more and
members of other marginalized
communities New Mexico certainly
not immune to these rural
currents within our system of
policing.
Twenty fourteen our city watched
in horror as the Albuquerque
police officer excuse me the
world watching or are as
Albuquerque police officers shot
and killed James Boyd and I'm
House man whose only crime was
camping on public land and a
little less than eighteen months
ago three Bernalillo county
sheriff's deputies shot Lisa was
there are
four point eleven wellness
of mental illnesses.
Times Memorial Day weekend of
twenty nineteen New Mexico state
police officer and Leslie are
present because the case is
still point I guess I'm
brutalized demonstrate a demand
Dimitriou Maldonado and at the
moment let done nothing to call
nine one one three four eight
car accident with this
unfortunately this groups also
include most recently caught our
tribunal who shot and killed
this past Saturday it is and
nearly a year ago we watched
some.
Adding more cameras so Alaskans
police also strangling only
about as well at following a
traffic stop that led to the
rare occurrence of a also being
arrested and charged for taking
a life however it is unclear
what happens other offices in
the same.
At a rate three times the
national average New Mexico
eight nation when it comes to
people being killed by police
that event led to
the Fastway le that led to a ban
on the net constraints but we
need a statewide use of force
policy that ensures that the
state law enforcement officers
and Lloyd by nearly one hundred
law enforcement agencies across
the nation receive standardized
use of force training and I'll
turn it over to my colleague a
Fernandez thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman I have one more
expert witness the next page
Fernandes who is also with the
ACLU.
Well.
Thank you good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee for the record mining
is page Fernandez and I am the
policing policy adviser and I'm
representing the American civil
liberties union and testifying
in support of Senate bill two
two seven today I'd like to talk
about a few key aspects of this
bill and why they're so
important.
First critical ask us well is
that it places clear
restrictions on less legal uses
of force and legal uses of force
there by updating the standard
for uses of force and all law
enforcement agencies in New
Mexico New Mexico has the
highest rates of police killings
in the country between twenty
thirteen and twenty twenty one a
hundred and sixty five people
have been killed at the hands of
the police this is in large part
because as of right now New
Mexico law enforcement is able
to use deadly force when it is
reasonable regardless of whether
deadly force was necessary to
prevent imminent harm death or
serious bodily injury whether
there were available
alternatives or whether an
officer's actions created the
circumstances that.
The use of deadly force by
passing this legislation police
departments will be required to
adopt much stricter standards on
legal uses of force as well as
less legal uses of force while
simultaneously being provided
with new tactics for them to use
de escalation tactics
specifically which will help
protect both the safety of the
officers and the public these
requirements draw on the best
practices that have been adopted
by a number of police
departments across the country
by Representative.
Is to attempt to make better use
of time space and distance
before resorting to force police
officers will be required to
avoid injuring or killing people
except when necessary it will
allow more hunters with these
including tensing captors to and
what the effective use of
persuasion and the least amount
of injury possible rather than
continuing the practices that
may New Mexico the state with
the highest rated people killed
by police in the country second
I just want to emphasize that by
reducing the use of force
standard officers will be able
to be held accountable when they
use force unlawfully I'm just
looking and I'm necessarily they
will be able to be held
accountable by their individual
departments and civilian courts
and by amending the justifiable
homicide statute will give
prosecutors the tools they need
to hold officers accountable
when they kill people I'm just
I.
I think New Mexico the
opportunity to lead the nation
here in what you do today you
have the opportunity to make a
real impact in the lives of kids
constituency Representative the
opportunity to provide a police
with new techniques and tactics
they can rely on which you'll
see both of them and the
communities they serve from the
trauma of officer involved
injuries and deaths thank you so
much for considering my
testimony.
Mr chairman that's on will stand
for questions I'm.
We go on.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm.
I'm just.
Well.
I'm looking.
Our electronic handouts.
And I am not.
The committee.
Or in the analysis.
It was in the material that was
mailed to us on the twenty third
yesterday and one oh two by Kim
Campbell's own.
Thank you very much yeah I just
got done twenty six item or the
whole bunch of items but it's in
there.
Okay.
And so now we'll go to the
committee I mean to the public
and I have a lengthy list.
People who just again Sir for
this bill I want to say right at
the beginning we're not gonna be
able to every single person.
But we'll get as many as we can
and I thought if we send.
Total of a half hour of public
comment.
Fifteen minutes those against
the bill.
Fifteen minutes those in favor
of it.
Individuals from this list
Representative organization so
we we cover as much ground as
possible.
Keep in mind when you're
speaking measures side will have
a total of fifteen minutes so if
you go on for five six seven
minutes that'll leave.
Three or four other people
unable to speak on this.
First column is the mayor of
The city of Roswell Dennis and I
are you on this Mr mayor.
To see here on.
Trying to speak peace probably
knows probably based on on the
other day let's move ahead we'll
go to grace Phillips was in New
Mexico counties.
Raise.
We'll go to Melanie majors in
New Mexico foundation for open
government.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you it's not so
much that we propose Senate Bill
Page.
However we have some concerns
about what which the current
language would increase access
to law enforcement disciplinary
records what would probably be a
net negative because courts
would read it to forclose access
to non law enforcement
disciplinary records if possible
we'd like to see either one
revise language that expands it
to cover all public employees or
take it out at some point and
seek its own amendment of the
person exceptions we understand
that a number one might exceed
the scope of this particular
bill and might also bring out
opposition but that's our
concern and I thank you for your
time today.
Thank you Mr majors.
We have Rodrick Sharpe
Bernalillo police department.
Jacque Jones of the Espanola
police department.
We're just for the Clovis police
department.
Mr Chairman I'm bill goes
forward and chief of police at
Clovis police department.
Issue a you the senators and the
this group allowed me to speak
on this subject.
I'm against the S. B. two two
seven I do understand that
they're talking about some
amendments that have.
Because we put in are going to
take place do appreciate them
looking at some of these issues
the biggest problem I can tell
you we have with this bill is
that I think I keep in mind that
when they remove the less lethal
options all of them you are
sending us back thirty years in
law enforcement.
These are the things that we use
to help in the escalating in in
not using the force it is
unnecessary in the other tools
that have come about to help us
in getting people that are out
of control and violent
infighting and raise in custody
in helping us to keep from
hurting any so we're gonna have
to.
Current legislation it is shown
in some of the stuff is pending
I have lost the six career
police officers with just the
threat of legislation is going
on now in this being one of
those bills.
Because the fear of if put in
place they would not be able to
do their jobs would and would
put their lives in a higher
level danger for doing their
jobs and trying to protect the
citizens and serve our great
communities in the state.
Recruiting has become extremely
hard in my area in in every area
of the state try to recruit
qualified people who desire to
be police officers or who have
thought about being police
officers this is made this a
much bigger challenge in this
Cup of legislation has been put
in and being placed there to try
to put in place in trying to
recruit good people because of
their fear they will be able to
do their jobs or the issues that
will cause for doing their jobs.
I do not believe this type of
legislation is gonna be helpful
to our state.
will not come to our state and
live in it will cause people to
leave our state in the specially
because public safety people to
leave the state and go to other
places for employment like we
are currently dealing with now I
appreciate your time and I
appreciate you allowing me to
speak on this bills.
Thank you very much for.
I have a number of people from
actually who signed up and I
thought perhaps.
Realize this substituting
interviews but I'll go ahead and
check on that.
Your money is if you would like
to speak.
I'm sorry Sir you called deputy
chief Jack Jones and I'm here in
the state but I couldn't on mute
on top of I will go to you Sir
please introduce yourself yes
Sir thank you for having me Mr
chair honorable members of the
governing body my name is Roger
he equipment on the chief of
police with Espanola police
department.
And just very quickly on I just
want to just talk about a
specific incident that we had in
in January of twenty twenty.
We had a gentleman who was
dealing with some mental health
issues and disorders.
In our officers encountered him
he pulled out a knife.
All because of the less the full
options we have our officers
were able to tease him and so do
the gentleman will use the force
so I understand Mister Jones and
and the the the concerns that
some of these people have we we
also believe that the escalation
issues verbal de escalation is
key unfortunately not all the
time can we use those and
unfortunately we have to rely on
our officers training and
experience and the use of those
less before pools in order to to
bring this.
it under control so you know
again had we not had that lists
the full option our officers
didn't have cover or and and the
opportunity to react
this gentleman would have been
shot and killed
so please please reconsider that
taking away these Leslie for
twins I think reimburses Connor
Tennessee versus garner allow
these options and and I think
that all these years of law
enforcement we've battled and
fought to keep these tools and
use these tools and a gain I
also want to know.
Maybe just that the board to
know that we we have vast
majority of training in this I'm
a master use of force instructor
not once was I ever asked for my
input but I think we can
probably go to the.
Go to the need together and and
actually.
Talk about some of these things
that we can do to reform and and
our training and and get.
Something that we can all
compromise in so thank you very
much.
Thank you very much.
How about Monday or Josh
Anderson from just me.
Just to speak on this bill.
Chair Mister chairman members of
the committee Carter Bundy with
past me and I'd also appreciate
if we could hear from Steven
Curtis because he handles a lot
of legal issues that we come
across New frankly this this
becomes really are tricky on
legal sense I think our biggest
problem with the bill first like
you want to thank the sponsor
she met with this this Sunday
morning and I think some of the
changes like allowing chemical
weapons which are literally the
only thing standing between our
corrections officers and total
chaos in jails some of those are
very important so I want to
thank the ACLU and and Erin and
Matt Baca in the sponsor for
listening to some of those I
think the biggest problem with
the bill I will going to every
piece of detail but the overall
problem is if you look at both
the levels required for de
escalation the numerous things
interim de escalation and the
entire section on to tell the
the circumstances the number of
of things that every officer in
split second decisions is going
to have to get absolutely right
or they will be charged with or
can be charged with battery
aggravated battery manslaughter
and murder the number of things
that they really have to get
right in split second decisions
is incredibly long and even
though there's some language now
added saying that the the
escalation has to be reasonable
and available there are so many
things that it it just it's
almost impossible standard
whether it's deadly use of force
or non lethal use of force so I
hope you'll take a look at those
things and try to imagine if you
were whether it's a corrections
officer probation parole or a
police officer having to comply
with all those things knowing
that if there's any other way
that something could be spun
later on you're going to
automatically lose your job
you're going to lose impacted
shall language you shall lose
your job and you shall be
prohibited from working in the
law enforcement in the state we
share the Sanchez concerns and
then.
The the advocates concerns what
happened George Floyd should
never of happened the officer
should be punished for that
frankly in my opinion for us was
life we're very supportive of
the idea of real policing reform
but this really creates an
almost impossible set of
standards so we would
respectfully ask you to oppose
it until there's more changes
thank you.
Thank you.
Richard and at a.
See on.
Rhodri just see on.
Stephen curry is also.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Steven Curtis on our labor and
employment lawyer Albuquerque
New Mexico.
He has asked me to address some
of the legal concerns that we
have of the original bill and I
have also analyze the committee
substitute.
My comments targeted at the
committee substitute.
Part of this bill is obviously
section six which along with the
accompanying definitions imposes
an additional eight pages or so
of new regulations on the use of
force.
The net effect of these
regulations in my estimations
that I fear is that every
officer is likely to be found
liable in nearly every use of
force incidents I see that for
four reasons one this chart of
on the mentioned when you look
at the definition of tolerance
circumstances that is to be
considered when evaluating use
of force there are so many
avenues for creative lawyers
unlike myself to find fault with
a.
His officers actions all of
those to have the circumstances
will only at the officers and
not at the
pursuant from the officers
interacting also when you have a
definition something takes a
page and a half to provide its
concern.
Second when you look at the
definition necessary which is a
component before forced to be
used
it completely removes officer
subjective fear of death or
injury from consideration.
There when you look at section
sixty.
Of the bill it has a blanket
permission at any use of force
shall not present at this year's
physical injury to a third party
in any account of return please
and
and at that but criminal that
can only be complied with it is
those are the only two people in
the vicinity.
Also six J..
Yes I understand.
As the use of course can't be
justified it's motivated by
malice retaliation rather intact
but it also includes working in
that and it would be a usual
place officer who witnessed a
Representative horrific things
that police officers witness who
would not have some anger even
if that anger is in no way
results are causes the use of
force.
The fact that.
The use of force it definitions
so stringent and would cause at
and after the fact in
termination of liability and so
we cases Mexican considering the
consequences that flow from this
but from that determination in
this bill first under section
three.
it results it will not be
considered justified homicide
even if under the current
languages that it would have
been determined to be reasonable
under the circumstances.
Second Mr Monday mentioned it
result in the immediate
termination indication of how
the police officer section six
today back under section six al
it even if the collective
bargaining agreement would I'm
having a just because provision
for termination which is usually
a employees only opportunity to
have an independent person
arbitrators from outside of the
work force chairman whether not
the employer's decision was
correctly lastly I would note
that section nine which
regulates the warrants under
section nine G. resulting
automatic dismissal of evidence
and will best probably dismissal
of any criminal charges any
violation of a through pass from
subsection II for example
prohibits the undefined use of
military style weapons including
fighter plane Renee's.
The currently use it prohibits
the carrying of such things if
those are Kerry never brandished
never used in the execution of a
search warrant it would result
in the case being costs because
of these infants being
suppressed
your need to take a look at
status bill three seventy five
which has a lot of the same
ideas as this bill but focuses
instead on training thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Curtis there
remains the affirmative or other
comments and I have.
Casey our students.
There was she.
Fred savage.
Jeremy.
Sergeant Jeremy up with our.
Yes I'm here thank you.
Mr chairman.
I just would like to see I think
I echo what chief Jimenez said.
Also what others in opposition
of this bill have said
I want to simply say.
Does.
First.
Thank you for this.
This is a very dangerous place
from which to view the world.
Most people that are on this
call right now I have no idea
what police officers encounter
on a day to day basis.
I strongly urge you to
reconsider until there's better
definitions in this proposal.
Our.
To all the stakeholders are at
the table and have their voices
heard.
There's there's a lot of work
that this state needs before you
should be able to I I feared the
that something like this goes
into place and the mass exodus
of officers and corrections
personnel that this state is
going to see the public will be
on the losing end of this thank
you.
Thank you sergeant
Josh Anderson.
Mr Chairman week we had two
other asked me folks so I'm fine
with with letting someone else
be.
Thanks Josh.
There I see Chris laws under was
here and and Chris you'll you'll
take this to the end of our time
for those who are opposed to
this measure.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm Chris
Bazan of the register lobbyist
for the Albuquerque police
officers association.
Members of this committee we
appreciate the changes on this
committee substitute we share
the concerns this has brought up
but one Wall respect we stand up
legislation the same reasons
that were presented by the
previous
public comment in opposition Mr
Chairman one of the concerns
that we have is comes when when
comes to the recruiting and the
retention of our police officers
and our CD is built this bill
this a guard the danger off law
enforcement takes away our
ability to provide safety for
community and those who are
arrested in our community not at
the time this legislative effort
involved law enforcement is a
short sighted in lax off real
work experience.
Mr Chairman in addition to that
we believe that opening day I a
personal record is to public to
the public is unfair and
promotes an environment Mr
chairman what offices will not
work in New Mexico police
departments and we need we need
those the the the good police
officers out here we need to
retain and we need to recruit
them and with this legislation
we asked the committee based in
the not support this and that's
working great in one to gather
are putting all stakeholders
together and come up with the.
On on on four police officers
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Chris we will now go
to those who want to speak those
from the public want to speak in
support of the bill.
When my assistant you have do
you want to speak in support or
against.
In support okay we'll start with
you then go ahead will Center
total again in fifteen minutes
on on the supporters.
Okay hi Mister chair Senators my
name is Elaine Maestas and I am
the sister of Alicia sero I want
to speak today on the level of
disregard for Alicia's life and
the excessive force that she was
subjected to but no one should
ever be subjected to.
We know that Alicia had been
shot four times before all of
them are loaded on my sister and
we have video of the W. stating
that she seen her bleeding out
and that he couldn't see her
hands and he couldn't see in
line if.
A question that haunts me is why
did this man sure her in her
face she was bleeding from her
chest and he couldn't see in
line clearly she was not a
threat.
There is another clip of you
saying that he remembers
thinking if she moves again he
is going to show her he thought
this will you show was lifeless
on the floor.
There is no way that she could
pose any threat my for eleven
sister had been shot in the
eighth and twelve times in her
chest that is fourteen out of
twenty one shots that were
directed to and Alicia's life
most well she was stumbling
forward.
We could do we know where you
sister and this was done by the
deputies that were called to
help her.
If this doesn't speak on the
need for change.
I don't know what will I urge
each of you to acknowledge that
we have serious problems that
people are dying needlessly and
brutally in the hands of police
in our state and this is the
fact that we cannot continue to
ignore I speak.
Where with me today this bill
offers the kind of police the
metal you should deserve that
night.
But leases case highlights the
need for this legislation this
is a factual story that happened
here in our state
needlessly gone and we ever get
her back what we can do is
change what is broken and it
will make crucial reform that
was years.
I ask you for to pass on this
life saving piece of
legislation.
Thank you.
We'll go next to tell us.
Are you just.
Yes.
Bother that was a.
An adult of thirty we've gone
down by Albuquerque police and
the.
There absolutely needs to be.
Count ability within the police
department and they need to be.
Re trained on how to lead
constitutional I have a
statement from chief of police
in Albuquerque you can look this
up yourself on that table we do
channel seven.
And it basically says are
reporter they were interviewed
the chief of police in
Albuquerque and that the.
She called the deadly shooting
the result of a systemic failure
and our ability to track
employee misconduct.
He continued saying I believe
there are people on the force we
shouldn't be on the force and we
may be stuck with them.
So.
That being.
D. O. J. and consent decrees
here and we're monitoring
Albuquerque police and they're
not getting.
The reforms done that they need
to be getting done it's the
they're spending thirty five
million dollars a year on the
casa.
Reforms and and we're we're not
getting anywhere we just now
Albuquerque police just now gone
down another veteran over the
weekend
there's got to be.
A change here and we have to
have accountability we have to
that regulation the officers of
the following but.
If we don't pass this bill
that's giving them the go ahead
to go ahead and.
Now do what they want to how
they want to do it and maybe
it'll be one of you guys
children next time her
grandchildren are relatives
because if we don't get these
crops under control they're
going to continue to kill.
please consider tapping this
bill it's just.
Simply put.
There have to be a set of
standards if you guys follow
longer and you know that right
now they're Representative.
Pretty much got the no free will
to do whatever they want
whenever they want to call it I
wouldn't fear for my life and so
I'm just going to kill the guy
or whoever because I'm afraid
for my life well that doesn't
that doesn't fly if you're free
for your life Kate program
called for back up.
You're free for your life don't
don't leave the house.
We absolutely have to have
accountability react this
regulation I appreciate if you
got the time thank you so much
thank you Mr Ellis we'll go then
to Sydney terreus from common
cause New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Sydney Tay as and I am with
common cause of New Mexico and
stand in strong support of
Senate bill two to seven today
every American deserves fair and
impartial law enforcement free
of racial bias but too many do
not receive it and too often
usually biased law enforcement
and tragedy black and brown
lives matter community
is once.
And.
The list.
Communities so many of our is.
Sorry sanctions police brutality
this is why we must continue to
invest and build power within
and between our communities to
bring an end to the
criminalization of people of
color in end to police brutality
and and to white supremacy the
public hold our police
department to high standards
when police violate the rules
they break public trust and they
lose credibility New Mexico is
desperately lacking a culture of
accountability in law
enforcement and the public is
lacking confidence that law
enforcement will put the needs
of the community ahead and
racial bias violence and the
erasure of our people after a
summer marked by police violence
we need trust accountability and
transparency within the law
enforcement for the protection
of New Mexicans and for these
reasons.
We ask for your support on
Senate bill two to.
Thank you very much Mr yes we'll
go then to Emily Kaltenbach of
the drug policy alliance.
She's not here will go to
Laurie Roberts of the innocence
project.
Hello.
If if she's the she's not here
Lori Roberts is merely going to
Rebecca all medicines are legal
women voters.
Okay will have their hands of
now we'll start with the the
first one was Diana cash.
I'm good
I'm if you to twenty seven were
to become law and I who does pro
to situation considering and
using their departments the
escalation tactics and
techniques whenever possible
could be held accountable for
escalating the actions that lead
to the use of force if the worst
how their action his or her
actions affect how an encounter
plays out that's asking for
trouble it is usually the
citizen not the officer who pays
the price for such an
interaction in a house committee
debate early on H. B. two fifty
for use of force reporting a law
enforcement spokesperson
testified against bills state
police are able to please
themselves I would hope that law
enforcement officers even in the
absence of this possible
legislation before you today
will stand up and step in to
stop existed excessive and
unlawful use of force whenever
they might witness it but I
haven't really seen that what we
do see are the outcomes when
officers do not stand up and
step in to stop unlawful use of
force or would when they do not
stand up and step in to be sure
desk the escalation tactics and
techniques are used whenever
possible again to the citizen
not the officer who pays the
price I believe that to
accountability and transparency
will lead to greater public
safety for all of us thank you
so much thank you.
Undress follow this.
Can you hear me yes yes we can
hear thank you for the
opportunity to speak on this
bill and
need to say that after thirty
years of working on wanting to
make changes regarding police
oversight that finally this
year.
Is the political will which is
what was lacking in the forecast
now that we have it we really
need to.
Get to it and make the changes
that are needed
the.
Albuquerque police police
department and other departments
across the state are not dry to
there's a few things going on
that are not justified lasting
all shootings are not justified
but.
The department of justice.
Is that.
The reforms that are being
proposed by the department of
justice being worked with the
City of Albuquerque are not
working.
Dr J. James gender Gaby skating
report on house things are not
working there's several things
that we've looked at in
particular patient we're.
Have they basically don't do use
that the house cameras and they
don't use orders of a judge or
so I I and the committee is bill
and do passed is very important
to have public police oversight
and how can we not thank you.
Thank you and I see we've been
joined by Emily Kaltenbach from
the drug policy alliance.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee Emily Kaltenbach the
drug policy alliance we
represent nearly four thousand
members across the state want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
forth this vital bill DPA is in
support of this bill because
possession and use of drugs is
often used as a pretext for
unnecessary use of force that's
led to the widespread civil
rights violations and too often
the death of black brown native
and indigenous people I just
want to list up one section that
were particularly in support of
and that's the banning of no
knock warrants a polling we've
done just in the last couple
months shows really strong
support for banning no knock
warrants for voters across New
Mexico the City of Santa Fe this
last fall fans no knock warrants
no family should ever fear that
police will storm into their
home and announced with assault
rifles and flash grenades
without identification without
allowing them to open the door
review was search warrant.
This bill is a step forward and
we'll prohibit one of the most
dangerous police practices on
the books and so we ask for your
support on this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you very much I am afraid
we're about a time we'll take
one last comment from my us
clarity.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and making fire T.
with the Sierra Club your granny
chapter representing over thirty
five thousand members throughout
the state and we support SB two
two seven New Mexico continues
to rank among the highest in the
nation for police officer
involved shootings and killings
and this bill is a step forward
for rebuilding and restoring
community trust and confidence
in our large Forsman and ensures
that citizens are not met with
unnecessary deadly encounters
that can be avoided
this past summer have eliminated
how police use of force is over
used not always appropriate and
leads to all too common
tragedies that ends in loss of
life now is the time to
reimagine and rethink policing
in our state and this bill can
do that it places where
restrictions on using legal
force and increases transparency
into officer misconduct which is
what we need for a long time
thank you for the opportunity to
speak and we think the sponsor
for the spell.
Thank you very much Mr clarity
and I regret we can't take more
public comment at this time we
just have a long agenda.
We appreciated and and I know a
lot of the ascension written
comments and that's that's very
helpful so members will now go
into the.
Committee and we'll start with
senators to thanks.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm here in the capital I'm
getting some feedback
I'm sorry to ask Miss Senator
Lopez.
Could you summarize.
The changes again in your
substitute.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
The changes that are been made
from the original introduction.
Bills that we have in front of
your committee we did take out
the proportions of the use of
tear gas or other chemical
weapons rubber bullets and dogs.
I'm we did take out the portion
Mr Chairman Senator about the
portion of that was having DPS
the DPS secretary investigate
the use of force which that was
the totality so that has been
removed we have qualified to the
exhaustion of the escalation by
adding it reasonable and
available.
no knock warrants on we remove
the forty five second delay
before entering a room of the
premises when using a warrant
we did
you go to the reference to the
law enforcement definition it
does not include corrections
officers.
In.
Madam Mr chairman any of the
employment issues for employment
in termination we are in court
in accordance with state law.
Okay thank you very much
it sounds you.
You have taken quite a few.
the comments given to to I'm in
this bill and I appreciate your
efforts I thank you very much
that's all future.
Senator well we'll go then to
Senator Sedillo Lopez well in my
Senator Tallman and senator
somebody's and then Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for bringing forward
this bill.
There thank thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator we
had talked about this.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you we had talked about
this bill before I think that
that that that of.
That this is a really powerful
thing to to do to to transform
policing in our state.
as you know US Senate bill two
seventy four which is I hope
will be taken off the table
today is it is a is not is
another piece because the way I
see transforming the the law
enforcement in this country is
as many pieces and I just want
to I've read the bill and your
bill in my bills.
The that they conflict and I
just wanted you to confirm that.
Conflict or interact with with
each other in any way they're
two different steps in the
process.
I'm Mister chairman Senator I
believe your legislation if I
may say of compliments what this
bill is attempting to do Mister
chairman Senator we have to look
at the totality of the system
and and Mr chairman there's
another bill that made it out of
Senate Judiciary on Mundy Senate
bill three seventy five.
There's different pieces
different moving pieces that are
going on through the legislature
at this point and that's another
faction another piece because
that deals with the law
enforcement academy board which
is we know Mister chairman
Senator is part of this this
whole system that we're looking
to reform and make some changes
in so I I think each one has a
part that helps to look at the
totality of the system so Mister
chairman Senator I hope that
answers your question.
It does and I also want to thank
you and gone into on taking in
the input you too from this
there's I think that that's an
excellent approach and I I
strongly support this bill.
Thank you Senators serial then
to.
I share Bill Tallman.
Senator Tallman reserves yes you
have thank you Mr chair and
thank you for Lopez for all your
work and is still.
this is curious.
The cost is kind of those.
Surprised at the cost.
Twelve point eight million
dollars a year can I did a
double take
I was just curious to know why
we.
The cost is so high can some of
the costs for you written by
those officers who are
currently.
Investigating.
Other police so just curious as
to.
Well they came up with.
Four point eight million
dollars.
In order to underwrite the cost
of.
During this of bill.
Mister chairman Senator Tallman
that how also was what the
amendments that we took out of
because the original bill was
asking the secretary of the
department of public safety to
do the investigations so when
you look is to the totality of
how much that would be I if an
infinitive costs for the
department of public safety if
they had to invest.
But as we went through our our
talk in our work Mister chairman
Senator we realize that each
department also does its own
investigations so what the bill
is referring to now is that the
department of public safety
essentially would collect all
the information in in essence
Mister chairman Senator being
like a clearing house such as we
have clearing houses for other
areas of of the law to that DPS
takes care of so Mister chairman
Senator with the and with in our
new proposal and Freddie
Committee again we removed the
current requirement of DPS to do
the investigation so that
essentially cuts a lot of that
cost at this point Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Senator Lopez so do you have a
new.
It cost.
Mister chairman Senator if this
measure is adopted by the
committee then it gets into the
system so I'm sure we'll have a
new estimate within a while if
you days maybe.
Okay.
Thank you Mr thank you.
Senator Lopez for your
explanation thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
committees.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Make sure can you hear me yes
okay.
Thank you I appreciate the
discussion so far and I do have
some questions and
you know there is a common
brought up I want to go to the
to page thirteen Senator
This of course page thirteen in
the definition of totality of
the circumstances.
And I also found it a little
Concerning that we're using the
phrase totality of the
circumstances.
And we have.
Eight.
I'm.
Requirements there were eight.
Points and all of them are on
one side so if we if we view
this as a you know a.
A relationship or a conflict you
know the good conflict
resolution people always say
there's there's two sides to the
story or we need to accommodate
both sides
And yet we have a phrase that
says totality but there's only
one side it's only the law
enforcement and there's there's
nothing in here about the
alleged criminal so Senator
could you would you be open to
adding some provisions of what
the the alleged victim
it is is doing.
Mister chairman Senator what are
your options.
Well so Mr chairman and senator.
Thank you for asking I I I I
think that what what bothers me
you when I look at some of these
things is I ask and this is come
up in some of the other bills
coming to this committee.
I I asked the question is the
alleged victim doing something
that is endangering their life
and so I I think that if we talk
about totality of the
circumstances we we probably
need to include is the alleged
victim making a threat of
violence have they said
affirmatively I'm going to shoot
you if you come through the door
or I have a weapon or or
something like that or if the if
the alleged victim is a rational
so let's say they are high on
methamphetamine were clearly
intoxicated by some substance
and therefore will not be.
Potentially responsive to the
law enforcement officer is that.
Those things I'm I'm talking
about Senator Lopez this is page
I was hoping maybe I could
provide some context on the
language in like the specific
aspects of that if that would be
helpful for totality of
circumstances.
Mr chairman miss Fernandez I
refuse just going to refer to
you thank you.
Okay great I thank you Senators
committee for that question I
think it's really important when
we're looking at that.
You recognize the incidents that
you of the eight listed things
that should be taken into
consideration are under
including right so it doesn't
mean that anything else is taken
off the table it only says
including all of the
circumstances that happened it's
important that we emphasize that
it says including and it doesn't
exclude what happens with the
other person what the other
person.
Doing is included and taken into
consideration in the legal use
of force standard in the last
Lisa for standard implicitly in
the totality of circumstances it
does refer to literally
everything that.
Right now the statute governing
force which is the justifiable
homicide statute means that none
of the officers actions
specifically actions that have
created the need for the use of
force are taken into
consideration this bill tries to
amended act so that officers if
they do create the need for the
use of force are being able to
be held accountable so this does
not mean that we are not
reference the other person is
doing that will always be taken
into consideration in fact this
section provides prosecutors the
state of New Mexico with the
tools to hold law enforcement
accountable when they behave in
a way leading up to use of force
that is an unjustified and
unnecessary but I do really want
to emphasize that all of the
person's actions on the other
end are taken into consideration
in the less lethal use of force
standard in legal use of force
standard because it's only you
know it's as if somebody is in
serious harms Y. if they might
be seriously injured or killed
this like they will obviously
can use force against that
person so I think it's important
I know some of the examples you
provided what what if this
person is behaving in this
manner if the person is behaving
in a manner the officer believes
there will be an imminent harm
serious bodily injury or death
they can use force.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you Mr then this yeah and I I I
I definitely hear what you're
saying
I know it is the use of the word
including and not limited to.
And and I think that all of
these things are very reasonable
to be included in the
totalitarian circumstances you
kind of with this kind of bill
you kind of read between the
lines and you say well why did
they list out all these things
only on one side of this of this
interaction is just and and
legally I I understand what
you're saying.
I don't know and I think for
being inclusive of of the the
totality of circumstances it
just may make sense to make a
little more balanced but I I I
appreciate your answer and I
think I can move on from from
that if that's the case under.
and I I I certainly am looking
at a lot this section
Section six I have another
question about on page
seventeen.
I'm on using the vehicle.
so I'm in the subject subsection
G..
And particularly lines sixteen
and seventeen so once again page
seventeen lines sixteen and
seventeen it goes through that's
objection need goes through
thank you know someone that
that's maybe filling in a in a
car or something like that in
but it says for purposes of this
subsection use of the vehicle
itself shall not be imminent
harm or or the way I enter this
is shall not constitute an
imminent harm.
It's so my my question naturally
is.
What if we have a and alleged
victim and they are using their
vehicle to try to harm another
person or hard like run over a
person or harm or run over a law
enforcement officer.
Mr chairman miss Fernandes.
Yeah I'm happy to take that so I
totally understand what you're
saying I think the language that
we're following here I also I
haven't stated this yet but want
to emphasize that this bill
tracks first use of force
guidelines purpose the previous
executive research forum which
is composed of current and
retired law enforcement officers
and leaders from around the
country they issued thirty
guiding principles a few years
ago and this bill tracks with
those principles so I just want
to emphasize that that you know
we're pulling off of best
practices that have been written
down by law enforcement this
language specifically pulls off
of that as well the
consideration and the line
sixteen seventeen is that if we
can still consider the vehicle
itself an imminent harm than
officers will almost always is
be able to justify shooting out
of vehicle because they could
say it could harm somebody
immediately.
So but we know the real reason
this section is in there is
because we know that shooting at
vehicles is actually faster
greater harm general public hard
part of the driver and part of
officers often it results in car
crashes that are detrimental for
all of those involved in so this
is really a provision seeking to
protect officers
public you may witness something
happening in the car as well as
the person driving the car I'm
back to my point.
In an apartment is here because
if we did not place that
language in officers would be
able to justify using force
against a car.
Okay Mr chair Senator miss
Fernandes thank you for that
answer I I I would
encourage.
The the bill sponsor the whole
team of this bill I I clearly
see that a lot of care than take
a lot of thought is been taken
for this bill but
I really you know it if we take
away too much discretion
I I believe it is it could
endanger everybody and
I just the product just the way
I read the bill and I hear what
you're saying you don't want the
law enforcement should have that
as an excuse for for doing
something that may or may not
you know be inappropriate but
you know it the way I read this
as the vehicle social behind so
the law enforcement officer says
well I I did something I I I did
this
And I you know I I I just trust
my weapons because this person
was you know I was in an alley
in this person have their foot
on the gas pedal no where else
to go I knew they were gonna be
able to turn and I had that with
the only thing I have there is
no ladders around I couldn't get
out of the way and so I use my
discretion and that was a very
you know it's a very particular
examples and I can think of or
or I can think another example
of well there's a cliff on one
side you know or or all sorts of
I mean every single interaction
is.
Unique and so I just would
encourage you to at least
consider taking that last now
because we you know once again
the way just I read the bill the
plain language of the bill and I
get your intention but the plain
language says if an officer says
I shot of this vehicle because
they were clearly gonna come run
the over that is absolutely.
Outlawed in band in the New in
this bill and I I think it an
officer should have that option
they should be able to say I was
in an alley in and they were
they were coming at me and and I
understand as best practices but
there's also trying to just save
your own life and
so I don't know if you have any
I mean did you see what I'm
saying Senator and and Mr Ames.
Mister chairman Senator I
appreciate and you know and as I
mentioned I think earlier is
that
we're we're taking notes and no
as if this measure does move out
of your committee of course
still taking into consideration
you know we're taking notes
again and we will certainly have
a discussion and see if this
merits some amendment to it
thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman and senator I really
appreciate that I appreciate
your openness and
and your your your presentation
of this bill I I'm very very
much to do so so thank you for
that just a just suggestion and
then once again I'm not a
certain on expert in these areas
but just just a thought I move
on and other people have have
comments I I did in in the
public testimony I I heard
something that jumped out at me
and it was about the word anger
and we've talked about when we
put emotions into state statutes
and how how can you prove
proving a motion and that sort
of thing and so I'm I'm on page
eighteen line ten if it's
motivated by even even in
substantial part by anger.
and I I certainly see what
you're what you're getting at a
like the retaliation word I
wouldn't mess with that but I
would love a little bit of the
liberation of of anger of you
know do we do we recognize the
humanity of a law enforcement
officer do we realize that these
are just not right you know
they're they're they're they're
people with emotions and I'm I'm
putting myself into the
courtroom now where we're a
private person prosecuting a law
enforcement officer says were
you angry that this victim shot
and killed your brother W..
And the person if they're being
honest they're gonna say yes I
was angry this is a person I've
worked with for fifteen years I
love this person and they they
shot and killed him in front of
me and and I to be quite honest
because I can't line from the
judge I was angry and then the
the prosecuting attorney will
say okay well you were motivated
you know in part by anger so so
here we go you you you fail this
whole thing so that's my concern
that scenario Mr chair and
sponsor do do you see what I'm
saying if you have a
a response for that are shared
concern with with that that were
there.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and if I could mispronounces.
I'm thank you chairman and Mr
Senator and Senator Lopez I'm I
think this language is
incredibly important I have a
few points I want to make the
first is that I think it's
critical that we ensure that
actors of the state actors of
the governments are not legally
allowed to kill people because
they're a great I don't think it
is justified ladies and I
totally senator thank you so
much for bringing up emotions
are hot hard to judge right it's
hard to tell the motion was
however there have been
circumstances when we cut right
where there's body cam footage
where the officers like I'm so
angry.
Clear at thermo impacting they
made but it wasn't eight
justified blinds jacked it that
they were trying to achieve but
rather acting on their motions
saying that I really do
recognize the humanity of
officers and I want to emphasize
that I think mental health
resources for police officers
are incredibly important and I
recognize that they are put
incredibly stressful situations
and they can have a lot of
emotions at once example you
provided I think you know I
completely here you're saying I
think cops absolutely impacting
they seek their partners and
other a police officer shot but
I don't think you know taking
one life justifies taking
another
and I think there are also
examples of you know we could
flip kind of your example on its
head and say well what if
somebody who witnessed our
family member get kids was a
great rate they would be
justified in using force against
the cop who killed their family
member but we know that there
are sad and angry family members
out there who have acted on
those actions and so as members
as government officials these
are people who are held to a
need to be held to incredibly
high standard
police officers are conferred
with the power to arrest people
to use physical force and to use
the full force in the name of
the state and the people of New
Mexico in these high and power
should be accompanied by a
heightened responsibility as and
hi in accountability and so I
think this language around anger
is important because officer
should never be acting on their
promotions are killing people on
their emotions because they are
conferred with so much power to
act as a government official.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez a mystery as I I I agree
with a hundred percent of
everything you just said and so
I I I certainly you know I what
I'm trying to slice out here is
the intent of the language and
then what is the language going
to do in the courtroom and so
maybe I could try to be a lot
more point and then I'll move on
but
I'm just wondering if if someone
is prosecuting a law enforcement
officer and they ask them were
you angry during this encounter
it is that going to cause a
problem
you know it is it going to cause
of a problem in in.
You know the the.
The defense of of the of the the
law enforcement officer.
They say yes that is being
honest they say yes I mean they
say well I wasn't you know in in
in and how did they have a
defense prove it wasn't
motivated if they're just being
honest that they were angry you
know I mean I'm I'm sure the
time of the courtroom here I I
read your intent I just I want
to know how this is going to
carry out in a court of law.
For the.
Mister chairman Senator Mr
notice.
S. thank you Mister chairman
Senator and Senator Lopez I
think I completely here you're
saying I'm so glad that we're
able to engage in this
discussion thank you for having
this conversation with us right
now
anything you know any case I
completely hear what you're
saying but I think it's
important that we say any case
brought before court we'll have
to have many different aspects
to go beyond this one section of
the bill right.
This is a legal use of force
cases brought it means that the
force was unjustified in the
moment that the officer that it
was not necessary to prevent
imminent death or serious bodily
injury right so a case will not
be brought against an officer
just simply because they think
he was angry what happened they
will have to go through multiple
stages of proving that you know
there were no alternatives
available that the person that
did prevention and.
Right of death or serious bodily
injury.
So while you're you're saying I
think that it's important that
we recognize in order for it to
even get to the point that it's
being heard in court there are
so many other part that kind of
has to check off in this bill
before getting there and I will
not be.
Eight what happens in these
cases because I am not an
attorney or defense attorney
definitely not but I think that.
You know well this may be a
question posed it will not be
the determining factor because
the determining factor is
whether it was absolutely
necessary to use of force.
Okay thank you in Mr chair and
senator I yeah and I I thank you
for that and I I I just I zeroed
in on that because will one was
the public comment but the other
one was I think session six
really hangs on on this
subsection chair because of the
not withstanding language says
notwithstanding the standards of
sections subsections be through
on a minute so it's not
withstanding the prior three
years of the bill and it all
hangs in here and that's what I
was saying as we go through all
three of these pages and then it
at the end we can say well did
you know was any of this
motivated by anger and how can
you prove how can you prove it
wasn't motivated by anger so
that's why zero down it because
so much of the of the of the
statute hangs around these these
emotions of of a law enforcement
officer but but thank you for
that discussion and I think you
know the Sanchez clearly shown
that you know she's she's
hearing things listing the
things paying attention taking
notes so I think we can we can
move on from that because it's a
we could talk about that forever
probably
and.
Lastly coming on to the no knock
section and thank you for all of
us for for putting this in there
because I actually I'm a big fan
of the of the United States
senator who had
file federal legislation to ban
no knock warrants after the
growing Taylor.
It's in I actually thought I'd
consider bringing my own bills
that I end up not Miss Iglesias
got busy and I I like the
changes that you made I do have
a couple questions on that
section if you would Senator
so I hearing so
I'm on page twenty three now.
And we are physically knocking
on the door.
And at the bottom it says.
Clearly and verbally announce as
law enforcement having a search
warrant in a manner that can be
heard by the occupants so how
how does the law enforcement
verifying that they're
announcement was heard by the
occupant.
Mr chairman Senator miss
Fernandes.
Yeah thank you for that question
I think that words are clearly
and verbally I.
And you're saying now it would
be hard to the occupants could
actually hear you writes you
can't really yell and be like
can you hear us before going and
so I understand what you're
saying there I think this is to
ensure the office using the
maximum of no is right to ensure
that you know if they were on
the other side they were
reasonable person on the other
side with date think that they
would be able to hear the sounds
that they are creating right and
it's that action I think this
language is really important
because.
This is the part of no warrants
that makes them so dangerous is
just not telling people that
you're coming in right like this
is the kind of thing that
resulted in Brianna Taylor staff
last year so while I hear your
concern I think that language is
imperative to ensure the
officers you know you could say
we said we stood outside the
door and said Hey we're here
like in a low range and you
could quit you could technically
say they clearly and verbally
stated that
but
will provide you can is critical
so that they actually do it in a
way that the occupant.
Okay thank you well I would Mr
chair Senators finance I would
suggest that you you put that
into the bill what you just said
put into the bill because I I I
don't see it in there and I see
like I said of this section I I
think you should get a lot of
really bipartisan support on on
this part of the bill so this is
not you know the this really
isn't by isn't partisan I I
think we want to make sure
people are are safe in the
circumstances and I would point
out I think in my opinion this
doesn't really I I don't know
how much we are we are changing
I mean I think there are some
positive changes but I actually
because I was thinking about
developing my own no knock down
legislation I I reached out to
some law enforcement officers
and so how has work practically
what would you guys do when you
get one of these
you know a no knock warrants in
and what what they told me
practicality there's really not
a a true no knock warrant there
there's really I think a judge
has the power to do that in my
understanding but they said they
always knock and announce but
it's immediate there's no
there's no wait they knock and
announce and they and they they
you know bust the door down and
I think impracticality that
that's already happening no I'm
not against putting in statute I
think it's great that you I I I
don't as far as that part I I
don't know how much we're
changing however I I would I
would just suggest because if if
we keep this in statute it'll
say in a manner that can be
heard by the occupants in at the
very end it says you know if any
if any of this was not complied
with all the evidence gone so
all the occupant has to do is
say well I didn't hear it I have
headphones on.
I didn't always listen to music
or I was in the shower I didn't
hear the knock and you just the
reading the plain language of
the bill it says here that can.
And it doesn't say could have
been heard if someone was within
a reasonable distance of the
door or could have recently been
heard by and and person with
average hearing acuity it just
says can be heard and so if the
occupant just as I I couldn't
hear it because I'm hard of
hearing another hearing aid
center I was in the shower or
whatever else they satisfy this
statute as it's written and so I
would just say just what you
just told me put that in the
bill and I think you satisfy the
intent in in you you clean it up
a little bit
and I do like taking the forty
five seconds out I think that
was I'm really important for the
safety of our
you know our law enforcement
let's see I think that was that
was in the very last page
clearly verbally announced they
must open the door and that
force may be used.
If they fail to respond again so
that's my last question failing
to respond.
so we knock on the door I say
I'm I'm here
I'm and you know the sheriff.
we have a search warrant.
We're gonna come in.
how how long.
Well for how long they have to
wait until the occupant fails to
respond.
Mister chairman Senator we took
up the time limit and we we have
forty five seconds wait so I
think Mister chairman Senator
that will depend of course on
the the person who is there
so with a time limit that's just
something is open at this point
without being defined in the
bill.
Yeah different departments they
have immediate maybe ten seconds
guests we just don't we have not
touch that according to and what
we the bill that we're
discussing.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman center I would just I
think that language once again
very support of the intent of
this no not.
Scenario but
I am I am a little nervous if we
leave in if the occupants failed
to respond because if if it's
what they're doing now which is
a basically in a a.
Not notify and then bust down
the door immediately
you know they can just say well
I didn't respond I'm getting one
second what what exactly are are
we waiting for you know I I
think the discretion once again
the discretion comes in of the
the safety of the tactical unit
that's going to this premise or
facility or house I think that
You know we we need to it I
think it's gonna depend you know
what the judge puts in the
search warrant and things and so
you know what I I would just in
the bill sponsor maybe look at
that again and see what they
think is there something else we
can come up with I I prefer just
to take it out I want to make
sure they have a reasonable
reasonably loud announcement I
think that yeah the need to be
uniformed all those things that
using the doorbell those sorts
of things are fine but failing
to respond
You know the only occupant could
respond well wait a minute and
they're going to I'll be right
there.
You know I'll be right there in
ten seconds sorry let me let me
put some clothes on but they're
actually going to get a weapon
so we need to be kind of
sensitive with the the law
enforcement officers discretion
in how how dangerous the
situation may or may not be
presumed to be in inside that
premise if you sing so we're I
will thank you for the
discussion I really appreciate
it center and miss Fernandez and
Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Schmedes Senator Gallegos to you
and then we'll take Senator
Sedillo Lopez for the second
time.
Mr chair Senator Lopez thank you
for the discussion I do have a
couple of questions if you for a
question on your Senate bill
twenty.
Almost number two twenty so.
Okay.
So madam Mr chairman and
Sir looking up as the surging
eight which is on.
Page twenty one one to propose
to thanks twenty two like ten it
talks about requiring law
enforcement agencies to adopt
policy route regarding use of
force by officers and and and I
perceive this as on Albuquerque
bill they have the highest.
right in the state but I'm
wondering do they not already do
this as far as
have policies regarding use of
force.
Mister chairman Senator could
you by sector the bill.
The entirety of section eight
chart on page twenty one line
to go to page twenty two line
ten.
I'm quite extensive.
Mr Chairman
Are you looking at the committee
substitute.
I don't know.
So I have a hard time finding
the committee so I know Senator
Senator someone incentive value
waited but I was not able to
find it and I had a problem with
my email account and so I'm not
evaluated so I may be totally
wrong but it would be in the
regular bill so is that a man
that.
And so Mister chair.
Just once again read.
You're talking about because
that feels different on
different pages with the subject
you're talking about.
So section is the
Yes yes.
And I'm wondering the police
departments are already doing
this I just wondered why we've
got in in the bill I would
assume that they already have a
use for falls.
Mister chairman Senator you're
asking is for the departments
to.
What they're just words policies
are.
It M..
Senator asking for a list of
that is accessible to the public
so that we as as the taxpayer
can see where worked is you know
what what is happening with
partners and I know our this is
part of their just a standard
operating procedure booklet that
they have but this is something
again that we're asking for them
to make sure that the public can
access it is very well aware as
to what their procedures are.
Okay so not.
Just build a procedure but just
have access for the public for
their procedures well.
Being Mr Chairman.
Tickets on all.
Mr Chairman if you look over at
the steep each entity each
agency to adopt a regarding the
use of force by his officers and
at this legislation does pass of
course it gives some guidance as
to where if it's law you got to
make sure that is part of your
recipe and in adopting that it's
something that the public then
knows and understands what the
HSD the officers employed by the
agency will be using our should
be using you know in in case of
an incident where they have to
use force.
Okay well thank you for.
Senator I keep getting some kind
of back three but all all can
try to.
In trying to go workers
What what they're gonna get to
the public.
In section two page Hey.
To a four it talks about and I'm
wondering if that information
would be in violation it brought
back to the disclosure
information on persons under
under the investigation have you
had any discussion with any of
the.
Of.
Law enforcement agencies on it
that would conflict.
Mister chairman Senator are you
referring to section of the
bill.
Yes.
This Mr Senator.
Mr Chairman I'm a little bit
slower.
Miss Fernandes for chance have
you found that.
Sorry Senator guy in those could
you your question yes
Representative Mr chair Senator
an expert witness what I was
looking at instruction to a.
Or I'm wondering if that will
violate it brown by disclosing
information on persons that are
under investigation but not
charged.
I.
Mr chairman and senator and
Senator Lopez thank you for that
question based on that the legal
analysis we did it with those
ACLU national legal experts ACLU
of New Mexico legal experts and
legal experts are based in New
Mexico have different law firms
this does not violate have but
we did put in consider deep
consideration into that section
because we do want to protect
the privacy of everyone
including law enforcement
officers so this is actually I
want to emphasize that we
actually did spend some quite
some time on the section making
sure that it didn't I.
Well thank you for that and then
just because comes to mind
because I know the district
attorney's analysis.
Before the committee some show
that that there's quite a few
different conflicts in in long
with what you're trying to do
and they all work right around
the big improve issue so I just
want to make sure someone and
looked at that you know during
the early.
Yes.
In opposition Mr chair Senator
Lee that we are seniors we
didn't get off and lives up my
chief of police in Eunice and I
know that Hughes against this
legislation and I just I wanted
to clarify those pieces and
that's really the only questions
I have I just want to touch base
on those to make sure we weren't
posing more of
I say Mister chairman Senator I
really believe this is an
Albuquerque area issue I wish
you would give this to the
Albuquerque city council because
I think the rural communities
have a different relationship
with her thank you officer and I
think that we could cause them
harm thanks losing them in the
same scenario that you would in
Albuquerque because that seems
to be where the problem is but
without all your Mr chair thank
you.
Thank you.
I would note that I.
I had I had called on she
foresee this but he wasn't on so
this way.
Members Senator serial your
second time thank you I just
wanted to emphasize that a real
positive outgrowth of this kind
of legislation would be an
increase increase in community
trust of the police officers
because we have a committee that
does not trust its officers it
is is really of a break down
that is very difficult to repair
Yeah Lopez brought that up and I
think that's a distinguishing
mark between rural New Mexico in
Albuquerque in rural New Mexico
we know our officers all right
cases personally by name and
that relations is already there
so this is trying to build a
relationship the we already have
a little Mexico that's why I
think this legislation should be
given to the city council
Albuquerque let them take care
of there for own housekeeping
but with that again I will.
Hello is there anybody else on
the committee with any other
discussion.
What will the committee on this
bill.
I move the past.
Motion passed some Senator
serial Senator McKenna second.
And.
Many of the discussion or debate
on the bill.
I would just some of my
impression Senator your your
substitute care of.
The vast majority of comments
made by opponents of the bill
of.
To strengthen it with your with
your amendments.
And so we'll go to the.
The secretary for rural rural.
On the percentage your tears
problems right goals.
No ma'am.
Yes.
Hello.
Yes.
Yes.
More.
Sir do you know yes.
Sierra to explain as well.
you Senator your.
We voting.
Did you Senator we thought we
are you say you want to explain
your own yes the to to do that
now or later now we just
finished yes.
Was a three what's the account.
Forty three no one excuse okay.
I thank you thank you sorry for
the.
Hold on.
Yeah.
Want to.
Senators efforts.
Regarding this important issue
I'm not against taking action
but the.
Both parties.
Get together to make some
changes to.
Bring both sides closer together
it is important.
To get the balance.
Correct and I don't think at the
bill once is.
Is correct so I would urge the.
Okay this moving on as.
So anyway I'm not against trying
to do something but I don't
think this is the right one
needs some work and
With if an opportunity a.
Arises I would parties to get
together to so that brings the
both sides closer together thank
you Mr chair thank you Senator
Lopez.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez
thank you very much and we'll
move note to thank you.
Thank you senator.
Remove to Senator does fill
Santo.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I just
wanted to read about yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes I thank you chairman.
I would like to take this time
to move that yes seven four.
Off the table.
Motion this is a bill that we we
we dealt with last.
Once here Friday.
And.
Right and
And then we can get it out it
was basically we left on the
table we try to no
Representative we tried.
Different approaches I will and
so it's been on the table this
time Senator Magennis motion
would have us considering that
our next meeting reconsidering
for for action at our next
community.
And so we'll take a vote on that
motion.
Committee secretary will call
the roll.
There are also.
No matter.
McKenna.
Yes.
Asked.
Yes.
Thanks.
Yes.
There are two.
There are.
She.
Can you repeat the motion I just
stepped out of the office it's a
motion to reconsider Senator
Sedillo this is bill Senate bill
two seventy four.
From last Friday.
Okay
yes in the bill my vote is no.
Lotus.
Yes.
The vote is yes to no one
excuse.
Okay so we will we'll add to
Friday's agenda Senator.
And with that will.
And.
We'll go to see Senate bill two
forty five Senator does bill on
the governor's leadership
diversity network.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee Senate
bill two forty five we do have a
committee substitute Lee we have
the bill was rolled over from
the last meeting all the members
got the committee substitute so
we do need a do not pass on
Senate bill two forty five and
then discussed on Senate bill
two forty five Senate Bill.
Two forty five committee
substitute.
Motion.
As we move.
Motion for discussion purposes
to do not just two forty five.
But can I do pass committees up
thank you very thank you senator
is a second for.
Seconded by Senator McKenna
thank you okay so Senator Pinto
we're considering yourself now
and I was just looking for it on
my.
Louis the committee so.
Yes.
We have committees of the Senate
bill two forty five the
committee sub just eliminated
some of the redundancy in the
language as they were well along
with that department personnel
New Mexico state department
personnel to Ricky Serna was
also by expert witness so Senate
bill two forty five would create
diversity leadership network
administratively attached to the
owner's office comprised of
members from the private sector
government education the
proposed network would support
state local and private and
public efforts to diversify
workplaces and eliminate
cultural prejudices and
eliminating.
Business and professional
certifications to certify
employees employers successful
completion of called cultural
competency program.
We would find cultural awareness
training and Legislative Council
labeling statute person act
administrative office of the
courts enabling statute state
educational institutions statute
and the state person at.
Culture awareness training is
defined as including discussions
of stress strategies for
recognizing and counteracting
the unconscious bias and the
value of diversity and inclusion
in the workplace and create and
creating a climate of inclusion.
It will require the Legislative
Council state personnel office
administrative office of the
courts higher education board of
regents and public education
departments to select or develop
an appropriate cultural
awareness curriculum and provide
culture when is training at
least once every two years
college slated employees
including session staff all
state employees whether exempt
are classified all judges and
judicial Ortiz all plays of
special schools and public post
secondary educational
institutions and all public
school personnel.
And this bill.
Was really done in reaction to
all the.
Stuff that was happening all our
issues with the civil rights and
even with the cultural issues we
had within the schools and I
really wanted to make sure that
it incorporated what we have
control over which is the whole
state personnel and all the
departments but it does put I no
longer about the governor having
to point the members but it does
put that responsibility top down
in which we do see the
leadership taking that modeling
role and being proactive.
And the reason for this is
having the membership or the
network is so that we can
respond to real time issues with
in our departments alone and
also make those correlations
throughout the state and
hopefully we're including hall
we can without any gaps and also
defining some of the things that
we talk about culture and what
is happening throughout our
state and we do have a lot is
out of state employees that do
come in.
So that was also the
incorporation of to make sure
that they are aware of the
situation there at because to my
understanding with discussion
with them when Trujillo on the
Indian Affairs Department and Mr
Ricky Serna the state personnel
office we do have some systems
in place but it's more in the
realm of if you work which
tribes pueblos and nations and
me it's all interconnected now
so with that Mr stern would you
like to add to anything else to
the discussion.
Sure thank you Senator Pinto Mr
chair members of the committee
industry concern acting director
state personnel office and.
I I want to thank Senator Pinto
for reaching out to us and and
being very receptive to some of
the feedback that myself and
secretary trico provided on the
bill right now the state
personal offices is ramping up
to really serve as a hub for
training state employees on a on
a number of very key issues and
items that many of which have
been raised during this session
including
Senator Lopez is bill Senate
bill two thirty House Bill three
hundred which has been
introduced of course Senate bill
two forty five so we're in the
process now working with the
department of information
technology to identify how
existing resources can be used
to are to better track and
manage how state employees are
are for fielding statutory
responsibilities
to to complete training center
in a timely manner we've already
begun the planning process for
ramping up in our tree Division
to be able to do a better job in
general of training on a number
of issues from the HR business
processes to our our cultural
competency in order
institutional racism and and
other things that are being are
right the status as significant
gaps and can our our staff
training so we we certainly look
forward to an opportunity to
incorporate these
responsibilities into our
planning as a training division
and all I can certainly answer
any questions the committee may
have for the state personal
office thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Senator anybody else that you
want to.
As.
No that is it right.
And I have one person signed up
guiliani who.
Hi Mr chairman members of the
committee the coalition of
sexual assault programs is being
very intentional to support
bills like Senator contos we
know that when we address other
forms of oppression we also
address ending sexual violence
so we stand in strong support
thank you.
Thank you to the next reading
guarantee.
Afternoon chair well as of the
committee repairable injured.
And archival hello on behalf of
what long thank you.
Thank you.
Chris you want to speak on this
measure.
Is Chris boson of the register
lobbyist with the neck college
are we stand in support of this
piece of legislation we are as
many of you now we we aren't
compline in Ortiz Bijan we have
implemented programs that
receive our to that on food to
bring that cultural awareness on
only with employees that are
coming from outside into our
college campuses here in New
Mexico but also working together
with the community with school
districts and their staff
members so we appreciate that
this is being brought out with
into an apartment and we support
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr also.
Anybody else in the public wants
to speak on this measure.
Committee then we'll start with
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair and I was
pleased to sign on to this and
the state of Mexico Sanchez.
And
Some of those.
Mile.
That we're.
I don't know I think.
It actually is pretty clear.
Okay now in government there
already is
And training opportunities this
committee incorporated into all
of those without added expense
and I was.
Not only.
Committee to do one of the.
Thank you senator the full
disclosure I also signed on to
this bill and you want to thank
the state personal office in the
interim.
Roger that.
Organization Mr stern for.
Not in any way.
Raise your premium any other
schools being just whole
heartedly into the Z. as in
making sure this happens.
So Senator McKenna will you.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Pinto.
For.
Legislation I.
That that's.
He.
I'm curious how much I am is
estimated of that the members of
the board will spend because I
noticed there is no plan to
compensate them for their time I
was wondering what they'd be
eligible for per diem or
mileage.
He'll to M. Mr stern.
Sure I Mr chair Senator McKenna
thanks for that
send your notices did review
that because we have.
The minute if no purview over
the boards but certainly the
format of the training can be
offered in a in a virtual
environment that allows for
those members to minimize the
extent to which they have to
travel or can be or or or submit
for reimbursement on per diem
and travel.
Thank you chairman Senator Mr
Sir not and is there any concern
that.
With the lack.
Compensation.
There are possibly act
recruitment.
Senator the the the they would
be appointed by the governor so
I don't as far as recruitment
and already existing state
employees and some training
programs already implemented in
that sense it's just an
expansion of it
that's what we gave it a two
years so that the minimum the
time frames that he could be fit
in to that time frame if we made
a time frame of course to be a
little bit more
it is imposing into their that
time.
Chairman and senator that that's
my concern is that we value our
first time when we asked.
Ogen portent words.
In the Senate Mr chair members
of the committee and senator
McCain wanted the outcomes of
this instead of that kind of
being a punitive measure where
we say well you didn't have the
training we're going to you know
the the new is a positive
mentioned which they do receive
some kind of certification so
that they can put it on their
resume and take it with them
wherever they go
So it's more rewarding in that
manner any been having a lot of
your employees under you be able
to and I'm hoping we can expand
it beyond into you know having
other companies be able to come
look to the state for that
education or training thank you.
Thank thank you senator us all I
have.
Thank you Sir.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you
I went on to this bill I would
like to
Is the this is really really
great I've taken up some of
these competent cultural
competency trainings and
diversity trainings and anti
bias trainings and I've.
One of even when it's a repeat
of one that I've taken before I
I've learned what and I think.
Okay I think this has a
possibility of really being
transformational and I I applaud
I applaud senator over for
bringing it I I did have of.
Actually I had sort of a
similar.
To to Brenda McCann as a Senator
but it's about the board
The word.
I think it is very important
that we value this and take it
out of out of the.
A lot of times these trainings
that people are expected to
volunteer and people are
expected to to
You know to do it on top of
everything else they do and I
think it's very very important
that we this is that valuing
both the training and of the
trainers and the boards are you
are built in and I'm just going
to say that voting for the bill
and I'm very excited about the
bill I I just wanted to make
that point which is really built
up what Senator McKenna said
thank you thank you Mr chair
that's all I have.
Thank you Senator Lopez and Mr
chair members of the committee
and you're welcome to sign on
with you just like to Senator
office.
Okay.
What is the will of the
committee I move the past.
Mr chair I moment do not pass
over on Senate bill
Two point forty five in a do
pass on a committee substitute
for Senate bill two forty five
or I could second it and look
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I I I I second Senator
Stefanics.
Motion.
Discussion on that motion.
Seeing none will.
Will ask the secretary will.
I told him some technical
difficulties here is here in
this office
I'll pass.
Okay.
Mr chair it's hard to hear on my
site also it's really broken but
we're here trying.
Mr chair I'm saying I'm hearing
the of feedback yes ma'am.
Really loud.
It's gone.
Bill two forty five cent guy
across.
Yes ma'am.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
So it is.
I don't know no I like to
explain my vote please.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks yes there are common.
Yes Sir yes Sir to see panel.
Yes and senator should be easy
to explain his.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
I'm voting no I I I like the
cross cultural training that is
provided in the in the bill just
have a lot of that in my career
so far it's been invaluable to
me and if that is.
Okay hear me.
Okay keep her center I really
anyway it's been really
invaluable and and so I love
that part of the bill I think
it's important and we do that
with a lot of our our our all
the staff were very very careful
when people come in the New
Mexico we're careful about
trying to make sure that they
have some cultural competencies
really my my reason for voting
no is the word inclusion this
throughout the bill and that's
that's undefined and
unfortunately has been it what
what is inclusive to someone is
exclusive to someone else's it
as as to how I've seen different
government trainings that I've
been privy to and I think wow
they're they're they're not if
this is not this beyond cross
cultural training this is about
kind of pushing one certain view
in the name of inclusivity but
excluding someone that has a of
you that disagrees with the
person that's doing the training
so I I have a just a concern
that word a if it was a more
defined I I may consider voting
for the bill later on thank you
Mr.
Thank you.
Send so many what was the final
vote on this.
We.
What no one excuse.
So Senator Pfenex in senators to
hear Lopez and Senator it's easy
enough to pass on this motion
this bill thank you senator
thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and I will take note
of your.
Comments that senator committees
thank you so much.
Well.
Your money just for a second
we're gonna go to Senators
o'neill sees he's on the board
and he's still the judiciary to
the so Senator o'neill renewal
years and we'll do money on
that.
So thank thank you Mr chairman.
Yes and not committee and Mr
chair Senator up to fifty five
supports harm reduction efforts
by in New Mexico by allowing the
program to distribute supplies
for the state per in consumption
of substances Mr chair members
the fact no problem the spend
all overdoses are really spike
during the COVID especially
during the COVID and those of
you who are familiar with a harm
reduction program in the larger
sense is to our knowledge of
people are gonna use but to try
to make sure that that they're
not overdosing and not
necessarily you know condoning
their drug use with just being
real about you know the reality
of addiction and so this bill
involves spend all test strips
and and wait Josh Swatek.
Who is the manages the harm
reduction program with the O. H.
can explain as much better than
I can but that's kind of an
introduction to the bill so Josh
did you want to take it away.
Sure thank you Sir and thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee so this bill really
will allow us to expand the harm
reduction program has centered
on the old saying we realize
that substance use happened
individuals reviews but our
program one can be used in a
manner that state that reduces
drug overdose mortality but also
under.
Related conditions article
use other health consequences
thank you want what we're
pathogens injection wells other
sort of substance use like sort
of Malcolm's program pipes are
or sorting out things like that
it also allows you know we're I
think they're called state has
stripped of the use the tax for
the president of enrollment.
You can also be mixed with a
variety of substances and it
just recently have increased
here in New Mexico a really over
the past couple years and Center
o'neill was saying go during the
COVID we're seeing more and more
of it anecdotally on the street
and would like to be able to
engage individuals in order to
program that what we people who
are injecting I'm also a wider
range because people who inject
our small proportion of
individuals who use substances
so really do you this wall with
this bill would change of some
of language in both the harm
reduction act and the controlled
substances act to allow for us
to distribute supplies that are
necessary to keep individuals
healthy to stop the spread of
infectious disease and to reduce
the risk of overt or small
overdose mortality of the
designer
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr chair and members
we can go to public comment
support opposition at setter I
think we have our and showers
for example from the O. H. and
others who are interested in
seeing this legislation passed.
We have a restaurants are
showers.
Can you hear me yes okay so my
name is Erin showers on the
policy director for the
department of health this this
bill came to us from the program
we saw that there was at a
critical need to expand what
could be distributed by the
program and a lot of it has to
do with this very dramatic steep
rise and Sentinel related
overdose deaths so we also have
you know just the reality that
the harm reduction act needs to
be updated it hasn't been
updated for twenty years and
when it was first envisioned
it was really only looking to
find that the program with
needle exchange and so injection
equipment was the focus of what
was distributed by the harm
reduction program and as Josh
was was explaining that that has
just really change we we see
that there is that there is an
incredible opportunity to reduce
transmission of these diseases
by passing out in providing for
participants in the program
other items that can be used for
safer consumption and we can
also in the you know in the
process of doing so and and
listing people into the program
we have an incredible
opportunity to provide services
to them and that's really the
bigger focus of the harm
reduction program it's it's
really getting people engaged so
that we can offer them
assistance with these these
addictions and get them that
clean so with that I will turn
it over to any other questions
that someone might have thank
you so much showers will
Senators and signed up to speak
in support family calls and more
to be followed by Ashley
Johnson.
Mr chair members of the
committee Emily Kaltenbach with
drug policy alliance we are
absolutely in support of this
bill when I think of the sponsor
and the department of public
bringing this forward not only
because it will reduce overdose
deaths but it will also reduce
criminalization unnecessary
criminalization of individuals
who are testing their their
drugs who may have these testing
kits and equipment on them that
would under today's law make
them it's it's you know it's a
criminal offence to have that so
we are happy to see these
changes it is a common harm
reduction strategy making these
that quick minutes services
available to the public not as I
mentioned before would not only
reduce the number of deaths and
hospitalizations but also really
important point is that it will
also allow for real time
tracking of local drug trends
and I think that's really
important so thank you so much
and we urge the committee to
support this legislation your
memory will go to actually
charge over racial.
Sharks you Representative racial
baseball invitational do you.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee Rachel Biggs
policy director Albuquerque
Health Care for the homeless or
federally qualified health
centers serving approximately
seventy seven thousand
individuals without homes and
Bernalillo county we are one of
the first harm reduction
programs back in nineteen ninety
eight we see about twelve
hundred people here through our
syringe exchange program and we
stand in strong support of this
legislation we know that having
access to bend all testing
strips to go a long way to
decrease seen further overdoses
and additional supplies for
super smoking equipment and
safer inhalation devices are
important tools and our public
health work additionally the
more harm reduction services
what we are able to expand and
provide will allow us to reach
more individuals according to
the CDC people that utilize our
harm reduction programs are five
times more likely to seek
treatment and are more likely to
reduce our and their drug test
we urge your support ending the
sponsor for bringing this for
any.
Thank you very much sure racial
are still a few he hollered by
Ryan next.
Good afternoon and thank you.
Chair and the Senator ideal for
sponsoring this and so if you
are reduction program manager
for the Santa Fe mountain center
we provide of been providing
production services now for
sixteen years in northern New
Mexico northern Santa Fe County
Rio Arriba county and the at the
beginning of COVID added a
southern house County to our.
To the territory that we serve
I can repeat would like to read
just reiterate what to what has
been said already
There you know since the
nineteen nineties has been a.
but growing trend in synthetic
drugs worldwide
ands of beginning in our in a
later to thousands of fennel
started the.
Began infiltrating drug supplies
around the country we've been
watching that creep closer
closer to New Mexico and in
September of two thousand
eighteen we first identified
send all in the in the drug
supply here in Espanola
Our.
The.
The changing of the of the
language the loose just the the
making it a little more general
not specific to needles and
syringes
of would allow the the
department of health and the
providers such as us to be able
to have it more quickly based on
changing drug supplies currently
for and all is the of you know
is that is the main concern that
we have but there has already in
the past year and a half been
other of different opioid
analogs that have been entering
the United States drug supply
in.
Problems.
And gas so again just
simplifying the ability to for
us to be able to respond are in
real time to.
Changes in the drug supply we
added our we've seen a big
increase and since COVID began
in as a need for smoking
supplies
and
we made a few other items
available to people and it is
really it's been and
fantastic means of engagement
for the homeless individuals
experiencing homelessness that
we have in this area that
previously we didn't have a
whole lot of contact with we
were able to increase our food
distribution efforts during the
COVID and
And having having those supplies
is has kept us in contact with a
lot of a lot of people that we
have in other ways of being able
to help and through that
engagements have been able to
assist some with housing and
gotten people engaged in one of
our in may need medication
assisted treatment programs so
The sentence strips have been
another item that we've been
able to
it's just really improved our
engagement with people and
giving us educational
opportunities with folks you
very much Mr.
We'll go next to Ryan next
followed by the legislature you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee is
right next on the executive
director Ali ons of New Mexico
we serve individual living with
me should be and those projects
substances and other drugs
across also The New Mexico we
have offices in Roswell in Los
crucis.
I've been here since twenty
eighteen one of the most
important parts of this bill is
giving us more opportunities to
save lives
in fiscal year twenty nineteen
we did we had over twenty seven
hundred interactions doing
syringe exchange fiscal year
twenty we had over thirty nine
hundred interactions and each
one of those inner at thousand
interactions allow us to prevent
further transmission things like
HIV hepatitis they're also
actions that allow us to try to
have opportunities provide harm
reduction activities in work
with individuals to get him into
substance use treatment like.
I like I said I'm a role
originally entry into and we
have an HIV outbreak that made
national news and we had HIV
rates and one county hired in
sub Saharan Africa and we have a
lot of no those substances and
like many people set up for
sleep and also here in New
Mexico now we've had many
clients report that there
substances of a hundred
different we actually obtain
federal test strips last year
I'm confident all in both Los
crucis area in Roswell area so
this is a crossover in New
Mexico and I know that these
supplies not only would be able
to help those clients is going
to give us more opportunities to
work with those clients as about
the actors I mentioned before.
Thank you very much thank you
Mr.
Trujillo followed by price
stranger.
This was.
Little rice Jr.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
on behalf of the behavioral
health collaborative and CEO
that collaborative I stand we
stand in full support of this
bill it's also note that the
state began working with pew
charitable trust last year to do
some research on what it is we
needed to change and this was
one of their to legislative
priorities for New Mexico so I
hope you will consider
the powerful impact that this
bill would have thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
The public commented Senator
o'neill generating else before
we go to the committee I would
just want to hear from the
famous CPAC Committee.
So the.
This is gaining fame with the
new name.
We'll start with that are by
chairman of the extremes
Committee senator bill following
your call and question.
Thank you Mr chair the.
This bill Mr chair and when
you're ready for to pass I will
so remove thank you why don't
you go ahead and move Senator.
So I move the.
Senate bill two five five.
It.
Motion and the second is there
any further discussion yes Mr
chair up to date the pro tem's
office another programs office
the floor leader's office
referred to our committee as the
sheet pack.
Folks are.
Will come into the new our the
the women's caucus in the Senate
the leads me to be very cautious
in many response I might make to
the okay.
We'll call the roll.
I don't care I I Senator
Gallegos.
Yes.
This.
Yes.
No.
Okay yes explain my vote.
Yes.
Yes.
Now yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I just
wanted to congratulate the
sponsor because I think this
bill is literally going to save
lives okay thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you very much the
pastoralists Committee thank you
thanks so much members of the
committee.
And I'm gonna make a couple of
announcements for Senator Baca
who has a bill in the on today's
agenda Senate bill
two five eight creating the
crime of looting.
The.
Rolled over so we will not be
taking two five eight today he's
just to just to roll it over.
I'm gonna ask Senator Tallman to
share well like present Senate
Bill.
I.
Okay thank you Mr chair one of
the wrong I.
Thank you Mr chair and the.
Hello here we will the.
Turn to Senate bill two fifty
one anatomical gift option our
license.
Go ahead Senator.
But you know.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members of the Senate
bill two five one was brought to
me by my expert witness today
miss Evelyn Rivera.
She's.
Charged with finding ways to
increase the number of.
Donors for for questions
anatomical gifts when when
somebody is is an organ donor
the majority of a little.
Price of their body after they
die for the.
For the.
Clemente implantation into the
into another person of those
parts of the body the the.
For the the card or whatever and
and and get we we we have a much
greater demand for these organs
of the need is much greater than
we have a supply of donors.
This bill is an effort
expanding the the supply of
organs available for
transplantation and so I'll ask
my expert witness to explain
what it is and we and I we know
we have a number of amendments
to this will.
The.
Come up from various groups but
I'll let her explain why we're
doing this bill and then I'll
ask to to have the committee
consider the amendments.
Thank you Mr chair chair and
members of the committee my name
is Evelyn Rivera I'm alive today
thanks to two liver transplants.
Due to the generosity of the
forty five year old woman and a
twenty two year old year old
woman who chose to be organ
donors therefore I'm very
compelled to help other New
Mexicans who were waiting for
lifesaving transplants.
According to the US department
of health and Human Services as
of February nineteen twenty
twenty one there were seven
hundred and forty New Mexicans
on the wait list six hundred and
fifty four are waiting for
kidney transplants sixty five
are waiting for liver
transplants while others wait
for heart lung pancreas and
intestinal organs the two
transplant centers in
Albuquerque performed eighty
seven kidney transplants last
year.
Currently it is a five to six
year wait for a kidney
transplant New Mexico.
Those waiting for liver heart
lung transplants must travel to
other states the segment of the
population most affected are
minorities comprised seventy
four percent of the wait list.
Waiting for a transplant is a
financial burden for many
families because many are unable
to work and it is a
psychological burden because you
know if you don't get that
transplant you will die.
The New Mexico statue in regards
to organ donation is the Johnson
Spradling revised anatomical
gift act that promotes organ
donation registration via the
department of motor vehicles one
way to increase the number of
registered organ donors is to
add an organ donor registration
option on all professional and
recreational license
applications and renewals.
In September twenty nineteen
Iowa adopted Logan's law that
allowed registration on hunting
and fishing license in the first
year twenty nine hundred new
dollars or at.
I voting yes on as the two fifty
one the number of registered
organ donors will increase
waiting times for receiving in
Oregon will decrease and most
importantly many New Mexican
lives will be saved thank you
for the allowing me the
opportunity to speak and thank
you for your service.
That
Mr Chairman I would ask to.
Remove the amendment says if you
all had the movie been supplied
to you they were included in the
large number of documents it can
really send.
In that the email on Tuesday one
oh seven.
These are the amendments to
Senate bill two five one in
there the on the top line level
of all those documents to the
right you know go through those
now with you Mr chairman if
you're ready for them.
All go ahead Senator.
So these are amendments they're
fairly technical in nature they
they can care about these
various groups contacted us
after we we we printed and and
put up the bill.
they said you know we like the
idea of the act and so these are
amendments intend to take into
account the the idiosyncratic
nature of many of the different
a license forms of application
forms in the state what we're
doing in this bill is trying to
have many many opportunities for
people to think about the
possibility of donating an organ
after they die and so the first
amendment is on page two this is
in the game and fish section so
we have on the you know we're
trying to when people fill out
the form to get a game in facial
essence we want them to consider
making also making a donation so
this ammendment.
These are amendments one two and
three they're all from the game
and fish's Department and then
the they are.
Just.
Clarifications of what we
originally intended making sure
that they fit with what actually
happens at game and fish when
you fill out one of their
applications for a fishing
license or a hunting license.
And so those are
Amendments one two and three.
Then amendment number also
number four.
Those are all for the game and
fish thanks and this is making
sure this clear this should be
included on and donor registry
what we do is when when one of
these a license applications has
this line filled out there is a
national registry and and and
and and donors names internet
registry and so the game and
fish department doesn't have to
do anything else after that
initial notification of the
registry.
on page
For
now we're in the
handgun concealed handgun
license when people apply for a
seal hand license.
We have an application form
we're going to this bill would
add to that please.
Shows they want to have their
organs donated it would die and
so on page four.
Line one.
The same.
Recreation.
That same insertion is made to
show that.
It's all in line with what's
already going on in that
department we're trying to make
it as simple for these
departments and agencies as
possible to include this donor
acknowledgment on their.
So us though those are
amendments for.
But
the.
By age six.
This.
Concealed handgun license then
on page.
We're moving the to
To the.
These are the.
These wars.
Course of these abilities of
the.
Well this licensing boards real
estate board all the different
professional licensing boards so
those last three amendments to
our
are for the licensing is the
same thing where is inserting
three in three different places
making clear that they don't
have to do anything we just have
to reach send on the information
that this person was to be
included in the national donor
registry.
And with the
I will do and then and see if
there is anybody who wants to
seconded.
Second.
Motion the second the.
Please call the roll petty.
Two fifty one Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Sir.
Yes.
Yes.
The local.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
You know yes.
Questions on the amended bill
Senator.
Okay what do you want to take.
so we have a questions from the
committee on the amended bill.
Mister chair Mister chair are
there any opponents.
but we have three in support.
Okay I want to know if there's
any opponents but I think get
out we do have a need and I
thank the sponsor for bring this
forward.
Of.
We have any members wishing to
speak.
Regarding the amendment.
Senator do you up because you've
already are you wish to make a
further explanation of this bill
ordered okay we move on to.
The public.
With with that we'll we'll we'll
wait for the committee senator
thank you okay thank you senator
Trevor I that we don't have any
person wishing to speak against
Senate bill two fifty one.
Okay hearing.
Who are.
Rivera who wishes to speak in
favor of this bill thank you.
that's what I was I was just.
Okay.
of Casio Walters is.
I'm gonna use canceling the next
so.
I'm hoping to avoid a little
bit.
So we have.
Three bills.
You're not on you.
Workers to speak.
Kathy Walker is available to
speak she's from the donor
services of New Mexico.
Okay hearing nothing we have
the.
Michael Doyle wishing to speak
on behalf of this bill is he
available.
Well I've given him ten seconds
so hearing nothing.
We are now.
Turn to the to committee members
and committee members wishing to
speak at all seen hands up.
I have and.
Problems that Senator the CEO
Lopez go ahead
thank you Mr chair I was I was
trying to follow the amendments
and I I just take it that the
amendments to address the
concern on the on the FY are.
Or is this the case
the board of professional
engineers and surveyors
indicated the confusion the
purpose is to show the applicant
licensee has a desire what the
that the applicant is a donor
has provided in the.
In the Jonathan Spradling
revised uniform anatomical gift
act.
I did it I guess did your
amendments I guess the question
is did your amendments take care
of that confusion listed on page
five of the FIR.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Senator locust
I believe they did that I would
like Mr to respond to that
exactly how that works.
How the organization process
works no.
Eight years injection your your
concern.
The professional engine the
professional engineers and
surveyors.
said that the purpose is to show
the applicant licensee has a
desire to be an anatomical donor
and they say basically said
where is section thirty through
request a copy of each document
indicating whether the
applicants as a donor so the
question what that I think
they're confusion is is the
applicant's saying that they
desire to donate or is the
desire enough to to
to satisfy them I guess the way
I was reading it is if you
desire to be a donor and if you
sign it.
You are a donor and then the
then the form goes that's that's
how I was reading it but I was
just wondering if you felt that
the that the amendments I was
trying to follow them and I
wasn't sure that you you address
that confusion or if you read it
like I do which is a desire
sliding it is sufficient to make
your donor.
It is sufficient that's all it's
necessary civil war work similar
to the Department motor vehicle
driver's license.
Thank you Mr chairman and here
we have the great privilege of
side of a voting on another bill
that literally saves people's
lives so when you're ready for a
motion I'm happy to I'm
available to make it.
Okay we have a.
We have a need to pass motion
one wishing to make a second.
I can't.
That we have a motion and a
second.
Please call the roll penny.
I'm bill to I will guide goes.
You can.
Thank you cannot.
Yes thank you so.
Yes.
Okay yes.
Thanks yes there are common yes.
Or to the panel yes.
And because I don't think you're
there are you.
So I have to excuse in six test
is.
thank you thank the.
Senator you have a do pass thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee.
And now Senator Ingle.
Yep.
He's one of the co sponsors for
the next bill to okay will we
were just in time for your bill
Senator Ingle.
This is.
I don't see.
To what
nine to thirty nine all that so.
Senator comics Bill I signed it
but the our wings mill that's a
good bill I move a do pass.
Thank you thanks for sharing
this whole selling process and
sent.
You'll notice Senate bill two
thirty nine and I will say that
I have.
What I was saying to support
this bill.
I'm not sure I have anybody
signed up to speak against your
we have one one person's ears
signed up to speak against.
So
bill and there's just thanks
committee presented or or.
Thank you I'm gonna start
and I have my.
Photo on because I'm unstable
with both the sound and the.
Real life person here but good
afternoon committee I am
starting Senate bill two thirty
nine but we have several Sanchez
and I have Senator myself
Senator Kernan Senator Ingle
Senator Baca and Senator Hickey
so I'd like to point out this is
a bipartisan bill this is not
intended for.
One party or another it's
intended for the health care
field so I intend to make some
remarks and then Senator
prepared remarks and then
Senator Kernan and then I
believe Senator Hickey what's
the state a few brief comments
before we get into our testimony
by our expert witnesses our
expert witnesses are Nick Teo
the general counsel for the New
Mexico Medical Society debit
then the council for the New
Mexico hospital association and
Brian Brock is stepping in for
rest till from the office of
superintendent of insurance.
Committee members besides the
bill in the analysis you also
have received a copy of the
study that and the report that
the superintendent of insurance
did on this general topic.
Forty five years ago in nineteen
seventy six.
The medical malpractice Act was
enacted by the legislature
because New Mexico physicians
were unable to purchase
affordable malpractice
insurance.
The statute created a patient
compensation fund which we call
PC up.
For patients who are injured by
acts of malpractice and
affordable now and still
affordable malpractice insurance
became available for physicians.
The patient compensation fund
assures that injured parties to
successfully sue a provider.
Are reasonably compensated for
any injuries and covered for the
past and future medical care.
Here's how it works.
A provider purchases their
malpractice insurance.
Then they pay an annual
assessment the end to the
patient compensation fund.
This amount is based upon
actuarial studies for that
specific type of provider.
For instance a primary care
physician would have a much
smaller dollars spent than a
surgeon.
The last amendment made to this
act was twenty five years ago.
And it raised the cap on the
provider purchased occurrence
malpractice policy increasing
the limit to six hundred
thousand dollars for three
incidents of malpractice.
Simply speaking the provider by
a malpractice policy which pays
up to their limit and then the
patient compensation fund kicks
in.
In nineteen seventy six
hospitals were included in the
original act as covered
providers but not until two
thousand nine was the first
hospital omitted.
And unfortunately it appeared
that the proper actuarial
studies were not conducted and
the assessments may not have
been sufficient.
By two thousand seventeen fifty
six hospitals and outpatient.
Clinic Act outpatient health
care facilities have been
brought under the act.
And then Senator Kernan is
picking up I saw her on here.
Yes thank you thank you very
much Senator the phonics last
year the governor requested the
superintendent of insurance
press zero to review and analyze
the act conduct actuarial
studies of the patient
compensation fund that review
and the actuarial studies
institute with consultation with
numerous health care providers
hospitals and other interested
parties from that almost year
long effort came a detailed
report with numerous
recommendations this bill Senate
bill two thirty nine follows
largely most of those
recommendations the
superintendent however
ultimately said that nothing
should be done in the twenty
twenty one session until
additional actuarial studies
could be completed.
Part of the controversy is
around this bill and another
bill house bill seventy five
which is already passed the
house house bill seventy five
proposes to delete hospitals
from the definition of health
care provider in the act such
removal of the hospitals at this
time without a clear plan for
how to make up for lost revenue
to the patient compensation
could jeopardize not only
ongoing patient care but also
coscon rocketing premiums for
the positions remaining and I.
We are here today to talk about
Senate bill two thirty nine a
bill that proposes a
comprehensive solution to issues
identified by superintendent of
insurance during his stop on a
comprehensive study of the act.
Senate bill two thirty nine
incorporates it is consistent
with most of the recommendations
made by the O. S. R..
It addresses the integrated
health care system that existed
today's New Mexico and provides
a mechanism to assure continued
access to health care for New
Mexico citizens.
In closing I just want to
mention that my husband and I
moved to New Mexico in nineteen
seventy six and I think one of
the reasons that we chose to
return to New Mexico was because
of this opportunity and that the
coverage that he would have as a
practicing physician.
So this time I believe I would
like to turn it over to Dr
Hickey Senator Hickey for Q.
comments before we go to our
expert witnesses thank you very
much Dr Hickey.
Thank you Senator Kernan then
Senator Stefanics and Mr
Chairman just a few comments
that.
This is a wealth on out bill I
have been involved in the health
care in the state for thirty
some odd years in administrative
as well as patient caring
situations I believe that it
updates the malpractice of
medical malpractice act in a
very appropriate way and I think
that the office of the
superintendent has done
outstanding job of reviewing it
and offering potential solutions
to it so thank you very much in
that I look forward to the
experts thank you.
Now Mr chair do you want us to
go to our expert witnesses.
When you have an amendment
Senator do you want to consider
the amendment first I'll leave
it up to here.
It's my and then yes I'm sorry I
do have an amendment
on page.
I lying to.
Yes Sir.
The semi colon answered.
Hospitals outpatient health care
facilities in business entity
shall not be subject to the
three occurrence limit provided
that a business entity shall
have the option of selecting a
policy that is limited to three
occurrences.
And I would move that amendment.
Discussion seconded.
Now could you could you explain
what it means.
Okay so at this point Mr chair
I'm going to turn to our
experts a new RTO and dead man
and would one of you just
explained the amendment not the
entire bill.
dem.
Yes good evening Mr chairman and
committee members with regard to
this ammendment it was really a
minor drafting issue that
occurred under the medical
malpractice act as it currently
stands and stands in as is
proposed healthcare providers
are limited to three occurrences
and we're clarifying in our
proposed legislation and SB two
thirty nine that hospitals and
outpatient health care
facilities and business entities
shall not be limited to three
occurrences they should have
unlimited occurrences but we
wanted to clarify which is what
this amendment does is that a
business entity can still select
a three limit a three occurrence
policy the purpose of that is
there is some small practices
that have at our our organizes
an LLC or a different type of
business entity that do not need
unlimited occurrences in a
premium for those unlimited
occurrences would simply be cost
prohibitive so that is the
purpose of the amended amendment
is to allow a business entity to
choose whether they go with
unlimited occurrences or a three
occurrence limit.
Well let me ask your question on
that Mr OGO.
What happens if the.
Fairly large business.
You know a large practice.
Chooses not to buy the three
limit policy and they have over
three recurrences that year.
This funding
to.
So.
Your chairman committee if if a
business entity uh chose not to
go with a three occurrence
policy and they they they would
be entitled to unlimited
occurrences and it would also be
charged accordingly for their
participation in the peace yes.
We held harmless because you
charge the entity more is and
how it works.
Mr chairman committee at the
fund would be held harmless the
fund would still pay for claims
against that business entity
it's just that they would
If they were you know in
entitled to unlimited
occurrences they would have to
pay higher surcharges because of
course that is more risk coming
into the fund
Is that at I hope that that
clarifies your question Mr
chairman it is so if I
understand is that if if it's
over time the fund would recruit
having to pay out those
additional.
Mr Mr chairman committee is the
fund would need to recruit but
because of a business entity
chose to go with an unlimited
occurrence policy they would be
assessed based on that choice
when they're coming into the
fund or during that policy
period
so so the the surcharges
assessed on that business entity
would would take into account
the fact that they have on
limited occurrences.
Anybody else on the committee
with questions on the members
Senator as of the office.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I I
still need clarification
I thought that the.
I read the article by Dr
of mechanism who barber American
any is a former president of the
American Bar Association about
this and the point she made was
that when the fund was doing
fine until the office of us of
superintendent of insurance in
two thousand nine started
leading hospitals in on the
frontier and that's what caused
it to go down hill so if I
understand the amendment.
Your allowing hospitals not to
be subject to the three business
occurrence limit and isn't that
what caused the problem for the
financial problems of the funds
in the first place.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez because your question
addresses hospitals I will route
referred to debt then another
expertise the attorney for the
hospital association if that's
alright with you Sir.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
the I took a look today at the
public hearing transcript from
the OSI's November two thousand
nineteen hearing on setting
certain rates in their.
There was testimony in there
about what caused some of the
increases after two thousand and
nine when purchasing mentioned
crack came in as the first US
it'll and it was some claims
against some doctors over eighty
claims against some doctors and
so.
I don't believe that it is
accurate is why is accurate that
the fund deficits started
increasing when the hospital
came in that the reason was not
because the hospitals came in
and the practice has been in the
statute has allowed for
unlimited occurrences for
hospitals and outpatient
facilities from the beginning so
that party is not a change the
amendment is to allow because
business entities are being
added to the act it's to allow
business entities.
Would to have unlimited couple
hospitals outpatient facilities
to or to allow them if they're
small to make a choice to have a
three occurrence policy all.
reserve my concern about that
about what you just said to the
bill I I'm gonna vote against
this and amendment.
Of the because I believe that
that that's going to think of
the fund.
And I should mention and I don't
know if this is the present time
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
I I want to be clear in my
disclosure my husband is a
District Court judge and he
handles a lot of this type of
cases however my husband there
is no formal a conflict of
interest under the ethics code
or or anything and we have our
independent judgment about about
these kinds of issues but I I
just wanted to to make clear
that he does have a lot of this
type of case.
Senator anybody else in the
question on the amendment.
Seeing is there a realistic a
roll call vote on the amendment
and it was moved by for yes.
Just to that extent I seconded
and so Senator Ingle your
question.
I thought I was muted.
You have a question no I don't
okay we're gonna vote on this
amendment and senator.
The secretary will call the roll
and will the.
On the amendment is Senate bill
two thirty nine Senator McKenna.
I go.
I'm sorry what.
Senator this.
Yes.
Yes.
Third Lopez so.
Thanks yes.
Sir Tom on hello.
A panel.
Yes.
It amended bill okay so Mister
chair I it Mr audio and this man
have of the brief presentation
of the entire bill.
Thank you Senator Stefanics Mr
chairman committee and not to
belabor the the points made by
Senator Kernan but I do want to
highlight all of the work that
has gone into this bill from OSI
between conducting an
considering actuarial studies to
conducting studies on different
modifications to help the PCF to
conducting countless stakeholder
meetings a lot of work has gone
into the report that was
released by OSI which truly
forms the bedrock and the
framework of Senate bill two
thirty nine as we can discuss
the vast majority of the
proposed legislation before you
comes directly from OSI's report
it's also notable that Senate
bill two thirty nine has the
support of the New Mexico
Medical Society the hospital
association and the nurses which
for those of you who are
familiar with the history of
medical malpractice and our
state that is quite a
monumental.
At the outset I want to note
that I will not be going through
all of the substantive changes
that have been made I am
confident everyone would be
sleeping by the time that I was
done with that but I will
mention a few of the major
substantive changes for your
consideration right and and to
the act and SB two thirty nine
the first of which is the
definition of what constitutes a
health care provider has been
change that's at page two
paragraphs the of the bill.
The definition of health care
private providers very important
when it comes to medical
malpractice because it
determines who can be entitled
to protections of the act those
health care providers still have
to qualify but it says who is
qualifiable for the protections
of the act we have expanded the
definition of health care
provider the the definition of
of health care provider had not
been revisited since nineteen
seventy six obviously health
care delivery systems have
developed drastically since that
so we've updated the definition
of health care provider to
address that you also pursuant
to OSI's recommendation
expanded the number of health
care providers who can be
brought under the act to
decrease the volatility of the
PCS by bringing in additional
providers we are expanding the
pool of risk in their by
decreasing it's volatility when
it faces
claims being brought.
So I won't go through the entire
list you can find that entire
listen SI's report and I'm happy
to discuss it in question but
the entire list can be found on
size a report from page five to
seven some of the major folks
for bringing under include a
certified nurse practitioners
dentists docked world level
psychologists and certified
nurse midwives.
That's the first major change a
second major substantive change
is an increase the cap as was
mentioning as mentioned in the
opening remarks.
A significant increase hasn't
occurred since nineteen ninety
five all stakeholders agree that
it is time for an increase to
the cap the question came down
to amount OSI has recommended a
an increase from six hundred
thousand to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar overall cap
which is a twenty five percent
increase of course there are
questions as to why the increase
is not more what why did not why
didn't we go up to million
dollars in the answer is
unfortunately quite simple and
it is that it would make a
participation in the PCS are
just cost prohibitive in the
last five years according to a
website which is consistent with
our data in the last five years
positions of seeing a forty
percent increase in PCS
surcharges OSI has concluded
that half were moved to a
million dollars that would
result in a national sixty
percent cost to to participation
in the PC which would total a
hundred percent increase over.
Our.
That is largely why we why OSI
has recommended and we have
adopted a recommendation of a
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollar cap.
The next major change is a
change to the New Mexico medical
review commission for those of
you who are not overly familiar
with this area before a medical
malpractice suit can be filed in
District Court currently under
the act those claims have to be
submitted to the New Mexico
medical review commission which
puts together a panel made up of
three members from the providers
profession and three attorneys
review the claim review the
medical records hear testimony
and really that the claim
based on data that we have from
the doctors company which is a a
large ensure of physicians in
New Mexico out of five thousand
roughly five thousand cases
seventy percent of those cases
did not proceed to litigation
which is a very important point
because that highlights the fact
that the review commission is
either causing cases to settle
before they go to court or
causing Kate brought both are
beneficial not only to the
patient the physician but
they're also beneficial to our
court system so the the the
proposed changes with the
medical review commission those
right page twelve
paragraphs Agency is the medical
review commission that we
propose that it be limited to
only reviewing claims of natural
persons as hospitals have been
brought in and after a two
thousand fourteen Supreme Court
opinion recognizing business
entities under the act of the
the review commission is seen an
influx of cases just naming
entities be it a business entity
or a hospital in the review
commission was really designed
to review actual axe amount
alleged malpractice by providers
and that's what we're doing we
are limiting it to just
reviewing alleged malpractice by
natural persons who are
qualified health care providers
additionally we have proposed
the the cap on its.
Spence's of the commission has
been in place since the early
nineteen nineties the cap of
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars it is simply
insufficient to cover roughly
you know the two hundred
hearings that are conducted
every year in the commission
that we have proposed that the
director of the commission was
appointed by the Chief Justice
be able to submit budget an
annual budget to the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court for
his or her approval next up
we've adopted OSI's
recommendation regarding
punitive damages OSI has
recommended that before a claim
for punitive damages can be
pursued in a court of law the
judge has to make a.
make a finding that there is
evidence of
of reckless and wanton
indifference to the value of
human life additionally OSI has
recommended
that no judgment for punitive
damages should be entered in
unless there is clear and
convincing evidence of that
reckless and wanton indifference
to the value of human life
lastly
in the points in the that I want
to highlight is we recommended
an advisory committee it's
something that the automatic
medical malpractice is needed
for a long time really a venue
where these issues can be
discussed before they rise to
this level or because before
they result in the creation the
advisory committee we have
suggested would have to members
of the medical society to
attorneys in the trial lawyers
and two members of the hospital
associations are representatives
and it would be chaired by the
superintendent of insurance the
advisory committee would develop
what would review the
developments in the law
developments in the in the way
medical care is delivered and
make recommendations on an
annual basis to all three
branches of government on how
I'm really how medical
malpractice act can can develop
and be changed to accommodate
any changes in the law that
would also
it would also review surcharges
proposed surcharges by the the
superintendent which can avoid
situations like miss man
discussed where there is some
debate as to whether proper
surcharges were put in place
I apologize for going quickly I
want to take up too much your
time I believe miss then has a
few points to make thank you Mr
chairman and committee.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair committee I have two
sections to cover the first is
an alternative dispute
resolution process for hospitals
outpatient facilities and
business entities the
superintendent insurance
recommended that if the medical
review commission was kept as Mr
Adio said that it be limited to
claims against individual
providers the alternative
dispute resolution process
allows the hospitals business
entities and outpatient health
care facilities to have a pre
lawsuit mechanism to evaluate
the case and it essentially
involves filing a notice of
intent to sue and then exchange
of medical records and a
mediation or other alternative
dispute resolution agreed upon
by the parties and there's an
opt out provision we look at
other PCS states and modeled
this somewhat on the South
Carolina model but kept the
process consistent with the
exchange of information that the
medical review commission goes
Sir.
That's on page twenty six and
twenty eight of SB two thirty
nine in the last section I'll
talk about is on page twenty
nine and it's the new section on
then you the offices
superintendent insurance
recommended that well practice
cases be filed in the place
where the pier where the care to
the place where the patient
resided at the time of the care
or the principal place of
business of one of the health
care providers who is named in
the lawsuit.
The justification for that is
it's more convenient for
witnesses and providers
according to yes I it is also
allows to providers to be judged
by the standards of the
community in which they provide
care and it if you can find the
lawsuits to the communities in
which the care occurred it might
allow OSI teacher Tweel ratings
when they're doing PCS
surcharges and it might reduce
the amount of surcharges for
providers in small rural
committees.
That's all that I have thank you
Mr chairman committee.
Mr chairman and we do have
Mister Brian brought from the
superintendent of insurance is
office and I don't know if you
just want to stand for questions
or P. as in our prepared
statement.
Mr.
Mr Chairman thank you.
Senator Stefanics thank you I
don't have.
Your comments I would like to
say as an agency of government
we understand very clearly that
the ultimate decision on whether
to amend the medical malpractice
that along with you in the
legislature and of course we the
governor
to that end.
The office of superintendent of
insurance has no position on
passage of this bill or house
bill seventy five we appreciate
your kind comments about the.
Report that we prepared
regarding the medical
malpractice act in the Asians
compensation fund
as was noted we put a lot of
time and effort into that
report.
But the group should also know
that the recommendations are in
no way a consensus
recommendation there are lots of
individuals and entities that
have very strong opinions.
About.
Whether to and how to modify
this very important at.
But we do want to take another
opportunity to sincerely thank
those individuals and
organizations that participated.
Many many times in some cases to
help us.
Summation draft report thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
So.
Mr chair we did find a copy of
the OSI report to everyone in a
separate email it's dated
December thirty first twenty
twenty so
If you have further deep
questions later we have lots of
experts to talk about it and now
we could go to our public if you
want.
Yes there was those who are
opposed to this and I and I have
a few names I am surprised that
have mornings because honestly I
don't think I've ever received
so many.
Originally written.
As opposed to these mammoth more
you know grow.
Whatever the hell bless email
blast through a sense the same
message just repeated endlessly
in this instance I received
literally.
A hundred or more individually
right.
Letters from attorneys in the
state pointing out the
weaknesses in this bill and I
thought we would be hearing from
some of them tonight the
possibly the they have a
different strategy of work here.
So I'm gonna go to the opponents
first is the Israelis rail and
phoned.
Yes senator Mr chair thank you
start with you.
Thank you so much thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is to restore element
attorney in Albuquerque New
Mexico and I've dedicated much
of my career to advocating for
the rights and an interest of
elderly and disabled adults I'm
accused to Senate bill two
thirty nine because I think that
this bill very much limits the
remedies available to
malpractice victims both elderly
and disabled adults
disproportionately consumer
medical services and showed
study show and confirm that they
also disproportionately suffer
the malpractice
just cause by virtue of being
the biggest YouTubers.
In my review of this bill I had
several very very significant
concerns of course the first is
the the definition which vastly
expands the number of healthcare
providers that are eligible to
participate in the compensation
fund that that would
dramatically limit the rights of
victims in malpractice cases
the other thing that I found
very concerning at that agency
then testified about was the
patient pays provision of the
alternative dispute resolution
portion on page twenty six that
was alarming to me because it
program requires the the patient
is down to pay the health care
providers fees and costs
involved in their participation
in alternative dispute
resolution that was that was
really startling to me and very
much concerns me because that
could be a very significant
barrier to fair compensation.
The other thing that a really
caught my attention was the
provisions on page twenty eight
pages twenty four to twenty five
that also very much limit the
court's ability to admit
evidence regarding community of
damages and also limits the
definition of what qualifies is
punitive damages I've not seen
that occur in any other area of
the law where a particular
profession is singled out for
preferential treatment and a
much narrower definition of
punitive damage damages along
with that the limitation on and
that evidence and then the
fourth thing that I'm I'm gonna
try to limit my time I have more
but what the fourth thing to
also concerned me was the
provision on page ten regarding
medical savings trust accounts
and the mandatory requirement
that any that future prosperous
damages representing future care
be placed in those kinds of
accounts in my experience on
those kinds of trust accounts
can create problems both in
terms of the administration and
what's covered under the terms
as and the other problem is is
depending on how much it is it
the cost of administrating
there's accounts could be really
prohibitive and really
eventually a road to purpose of
the money that's meant to
represent future care so thank
you so much Mr chair for
allowing me this room.
Thank you Mr L..
Then I have is a criminal
Micaela Schaefer or years
colonel magician for this thank
you.
You oppose the measure.
Please thank you Mr chairman and
committee thank you for allowing
me to share my views with you
today I would just note that
until the last speaker that
throughout the entire discussion
not one word was mentioned about
those that were harmed it was
totally about money and risk so
let me see if I can show you the
other side here my name is
Micaela Schaefer and you may
remember my daughter her name
was Sherrin Eriksen she was a
morning news reporter and
weekend anchor it Caleb we TV
and she died at the age of
thirty due to malpractice in
Albuquerque she was a vibrant
funny and extremely talented
dancer and singer and the
weekend before her death we were
water skiing with our entire
family at the lake my daughter
died needlessly during what was
supposed to be a relatively easy
outpatient procedure in the
cardiac cach lam the last time I
saw my daughter alive she was
giving me our signature thumbs
up as a Wilder into the lab we
learned afterwards that the
cardiologists did not have the
requisite experience to do the
procedure he was doing and did
not have the proper equipment at
the hospital affects someone
frantically ran out of the
hospital to retrieve needed
equipment from another hospital
in Albuquerque during the
procedure there was supposed to
be a cardiothoracic surgeon
ready in case something went
wrong but he had started another
case which delayed her getting
to the operating room during
that time she was bleeding out
from a terror that they had
caused in part well
institutional issues then
delayed the release of emergency
blood so my daughter literally
bled to death waiting on
equipment and operating room and
blood products by the time she
reached the O. R. she had low
blood pressure in her brain was
totally deprived of oxygen she
laid the ice you live close for
four days connected to eighteen
I'd be hard problem and a bit
later but we chose before we
chose to honor her wishes to
donate all her organs the most
crushing experience of my life.
It is interim CEO just called me
crying and told me that
everything went horribly wrong
in there I had never heard of
position in my life call
patients family and tell them
something like that this was
later confirmed by the patient
safety officer who confirmed
that a series of events occurred
which led to her death and the
following words will haunt me
forever there were at.
Our where we could have saved
your daughter had we don't have
the are the surgeon and the
blood necessary.
It's important for you to know
that I am a registered nurse I
have a masters in critical care
and trauma and I have a PhD in
ethics and biomedical research
and then more recently retired
colonel after thirty years in
the United States airforce I was
the commander of a level one
trauma center at director of
nursing at director of surgical
services right over stop both
patient safety and risk
management committees so I'm
very familiar with these kinds
of cases since your instep I
have dug deeply into the
research on patient safety
errors and was shocked to learn
that the committee it
constitutes the third leading
cause of death in this country
behind only heart disease and
cancer now that's a little
different this year with the
pandemic but admission to a
hospital put one at high risk
for death due to errors in fact
in New Mexico thirty six percent
of people surveyed said that
they had experienced malpractice
in their own family.
Hospitals contribute to this
problem is multi billion dollar
corporations choose profits over
safety and caps on damages only
go to reinforce that mentality I
now spend my life educating
nurses and physicians on patient
safety across the country and
the need for them to speak up
when proper process is lead to
errors often cause a person to
controlled by the hospital
nurses do not feel empowered to
speak up in in the case of my
daughter they certainly should
have to ensure that the
appropriate equipment and
procedures were followed I did
that every day of my career and
it was a long line because my
priority was the patient not
aware that the hospital was
pulling me into participating
when a patient would be placed
at risk.
Artificial caps on damages
lowcost profits over safety will
never amber create change nurses
and doctors need to take
responsibility for their role in
enabling hospitals to continue
to hard pages patients prepare I
I'm very disappointed extremely
disappointed that nurses would
be in favor of a bill that they
think will protect them over
their patients I believe that is
unethical and the work needs to
be done to make sure everyone
has a voice to fix the problem
not hide behind caps on damages.
Multi billion dollar hospitals
are leaving New Mexicans dead
and maimed and taking all of
their profits out of state and
feel no obligation to those they
have harmed artificial caps as
is the case with the patient
compensation fund never has nor
will it ever protect patients it
is to protect hospitals it is
primarily there to get rich
hospital systems and patient
safety errors will continue to
be the third leading cause of
death and less hospitals are
held accountable for their
negligence honestly it feels
like they play Russian roulette
with our families members lives
by not adhering to standards and
then being able to escape paying
appropriate reparations which
only reinforces their decisions
to make money over patient
safety my husband and I lost our
beautiful daughter her brother
and sister lost her big sister
and my daughter is now a
psychologist not by chance but
because of the loss of share all
of us have learned new ways to
deal with brief but I can tell
you it never goes away so I
would ask you to consider if
enabling the fund further would
actually save your family your
family member or any other New
Mexico I don't believe that's
the case moreover I'm asking
that by your actions you ensure
that patients get the best
possible care and are
compensated for injuries caused
by malpractice and prevent this
devastation from happening to
any other family family I thank
you for your time and attention
and would ask you to please
oppose Senate bill two thirty
nine.
Senator.
My beautiful Bonner.
We have Julian include.
Is Julian
with this.
Is there anybody else that.
Cappy lab is on to speak Mr
chair.
The low.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Cathy love I'm a lawyer and a
member of the New Mexico trial
lawyers association and I oppose
Senate bill two thirty nine but
before I tell you why
especially in the context of
this discussion I feel it would
be remiss of me not to
acknowledge the health care
workers who have been on the
front lines of the COVID
nineteen pandemic and we truly
do all of our deep gratitude to
all those who had a role in
caring for community during this
challenging time.
all of you already know that we
have a patient compensation fund
that is already in serious
danger
back when Senator Kernan and her
husband moved back to New Mexico
the fund was intended to be a
lifeboat that would help keep
our doctors of floats but in two
thousand sixteen twenty six
elephants mostly out of state
multi billion dollar corporate
hospitals jumped on that boat
they were across they weren't
charged proper surcharges
at it's as if they jump on the
boat without even bringing their
own orders to help paddle and
now the boat is sinking this
bill proposes to add even more
to that boat and it is surely
going to sink and when that boat
sinks the patients and doctors
are going to go overboard.
This bill takes the job of
holding companies accountable
for wrongdoing out of the hands
of New Mexico citizens are
jurors and allows these
companies to treat
catastrophically injured
patients as if they are a cost
of doing business
anyone everybody I think colonel
Shaver did a very good job of
this but I I really want
everybody to remember that what
we're talking about is we're
trying to real people and real
patients
Eleven years ago tomorrow us
mother and a father watched in
horror as their three year old
daughter bled out after chest
tube was stabbed through her
liver and hospital staff didn't
know where to find the code
requirements safer
little Katie Martinez is family
came to my office and just like
all the other families to come
to meet me at the worst point of
their lives they said we just
don't want this to happen to
anyone else and hospital
accountability is the only way
to honor the wishes of families
like Katie's and like colonel
Schaefer and keep New Mexico
patients safe.
This bill ultimately only helps
insurance companies and multi
billion dollar corporations by
making even sweeter the
sweetheart deal that the
hospitals got when they first
were let into the patient
compensation fund without
appropriate search surcharges
and this new bill include
includes secrecy from the public
about the basis upon which the
surcharges will be set and how
much they will have to charge
and contribute to this fund
it makes it even more difficult
for patients to pursue their
claims and and I can tell you
that the the people who come to
me.
Who want change and who want
things to be better so that this
doesn't happen to somebody else
in the in the future they
already have a million hoops to
jump through it is hard for
people like colonel Schaefer and
her family and others to get
themselves out of bed much less
to bring a lawsuit and this bill
adds more hoops that they have
to jump through
requiring potentially
alternative dispute resolution
is another hoop and and also
often results in inadequate
compensation for horrible
losses.
this bill and does decades of
case law about the damages that
patients can recover it provides
a poultry increasing the cap
that doesn't even come close to
keeping up with what we've dealt
with of inflation over the last
forty years there are many
problems with this bill and most
importantly most importantly is
that we hold people accountable
for the mistakes that they make.
So that in the future this
doesn't happen to people like
colonel Schaefer and heating
Ortiz's Martinez's family and
the many people who come to me
and say.
Just please do something so that
no other family has to suffer
like this in the future.
So I ask that you trust New
Mexico jurors and leave it in
their hands and vote against
Senate bill two thirty nine.
Thank you.
In a position to this bill.
What is public and wants to
speak in support of it and we
have so many that that I would
ask you to keep your your
comments as brief as possible.
We'll start with the dentists
are from local systems.
Ashley Wagner the chamber of
commerce.
William Ritchie from the New
Mexico Medical Society.
Karen Carson of the New Mexico
Medical Society.
Yes hello can you hear me yes
yes.
Thank you good evening Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am an independent
pediatricians serving in rural
New Mexico in Roswell I don't
have any hospital affiliations I
support Senate bill two thirty
nine this bill is going to help
stabilize the patient
compensation fund.
We will be left holding the bag
as independent physicians and
hospitals leave the medical
malpractice act at this time so
it's going to help independent
doctors in New Mexico like we
and it will protect the
affordability of my professional
liability insurance this is
going to keep me in practice so
that I can continue to care for
the children of rural New Mexico
so we are talking about New
Mexico patients here I want to
continue serving these patients
and I am in support of this bill
so I can continue to do so thank
you.
Thank you.
No Ricky is here would you.
school story
thank you Mr chairman and
committee.
my name is where she on drugs
you worth the surgeon at New
Mexico orthopedics now we're
kirke growth prospects in New
Mexico Medical Society informer
Air Force surgeon at Kirkland.
Mr audio laid it out very well
this is about
access to care it is about the
the difficulty finding private
practice in particularly primary
care physicians in the state
that I experienced when I try to
get patients and I am sure you
hear from your constituents if
we double the malpractice
overhead for the positions in
the state they will not be able
to maintain a practice they will
not be able to stay in in
practice continue to to employee
person in their community
continue to take care of your
constituents.
And many of them what we
practice they will retire we
have the the highest average age
of physician in the country out
of fifty states.
And so attracting new physicians
is very difficult to the state
if they come in knowing that
their malpractice will be
several times higher than
surrounding states it will not
come here.
also are there is nothing then
that his that has ever been
shown to improve quality.
Creasing caps shaper with her
training I'm sure as well all
aware of this in in her ethics
studies that when you talk about
ethics in talk about taking care
of the quality of care in our
patients.
Medical malpractice caps are
never in the conversation.
We do want quality here we want
to attract quality positions to
the state if they cannot afford
to practice here then they will
not come here.
And we will not have a good
medical system it's about the
system not individual patients
we want a system here it will
take care of your constituents
and I'm very afraid that if we
no longer have very many primary
care here can afford to be here.
The patients will not be taken
care.
Thank you.
Thank you David I see Ashley
Wagner from the chamber of
commerce is here.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
Ashley Wagner director public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
support this bill we believe
that changes to the act must not
hinder the recruitment and
retention of quality positions
to the state and to provide you
Mexicans access to high quality
health care New Mexico already
has a shortage of health care
workers I challenge made more
evident during the pandemic this
session I've seen a good number
of bills aimed at addressing
that workforce issue by
incentivizing Health.
Health care workers to come in
or stay in New Mexico we should
not stifle that progress is
being made it should also be
noted that healthcare is the
leading economic driver and
employers in many New Mexico
communities on average each New
Mexico physicians supports over
eight jobs and generates one
point nine million in economic
activity we need policies in
place that continue to foster
economic growth and give patient
ample access to care thank you.
We have a JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
JD Bullington speaking on behalf
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce the chamber
believes this legislation makes
reasonable important changes to
the medical malpractice act
without jeopardizing our state's
ability to recruit and retain.
Health care practitioners.
New Mexico cannot become and
hospitable place to practice
medicine our health care quality
will suffer costs are going to
rise.
It's going to make it harder
than it already is to recruit as
and working professionals.
Ross all sectors throughout the
state we considering this
legislation we urged committee
members to keep at the forefront
of his or her mind our existing
health care provider.
And refrain from taking actions
that will make that problem
worse for New Mexico families.
This legislation strikes the
right balance in patient
compensation and patient care.
For the sake of our health care
future and our economic future
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce urges all of you to
please support Senate bill two
thirty nine you.
Thank you JD are next will go to
Nancy right to the New Mexico
Medical Society.
I think chairman and members of
the committee I'm Nancy right I
practiced pediatrics in Las
Vegas and I'm a past president
of the New Mexico Medical
Society I appreciate this
committee's consideration of
Senate bill two three nine and I
hope this bill passes medical
malpractice is an incredibly
complex issue in this bill is a
comprehensive solution doctors
don't want the patient
compensation fund to go bankrupt
we want funds to be available
for people who are harmed by
malpractice and we worry about
the stability of the PCS.
I love New Mexico I've been here
for nineteen years but there's
so many reasons not to be a
doctor in New Mexico such as
poverty in the rural nature of
this state having a stable
medical malpractice environment
makes New Mexico a better place
to live and to practice medicine
and will help to attract and
retain and retain positions
thank you.
Thank you Dr right next we go to
Kerry under from the New Mexico
Medical Society.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee I come to you tonight
as the registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico Medical Society
really speaking on behalf of any
young our executive director.
Mexico Medical Society was
established in eighteen eighty
six and has worked for a hundred
and thirty five years to ensure
that we have a vibrant medical
community that serves New
Mexicans the New Mexico Medical
Society officially speaks on
behalf of more than three
thousand members these numbers
represent a broad mix of
physicians those who are
independent and small and large
practices and yes those that are
employed by hospitals we as the
New Mexico Medical Society
strongly support Senate bill two
thirty nine when we started down
the path of discussing medical
malpractice and revisions that
need to me made to the act we
had one priority and that
priority is patient.
We feel very strongly that the
number one way you can protect
patients throughout the state of
New Mexico is by ensuring that
these patients have access to
good quality care we know that
in order to provide the best
managed care possible we have to
be able to recruit and retain
top notch clinicians not just
physicians but nurses tax and
all of the individuals who work
within the health care system we
know that we have to protect the
patient compensation fund the
medical malpractice path act
passed in nineteen seventy six
there was a clear understanding
that we needed to provide an
Avenue for medical providers to
be able to pool their risks
together in a patient
compensation fund so that that
patient compensation fund could
act as the seeking that for the
very small number of patients
that do have an unfortunate
outcome in our medical system
that compensation fund pays out
the lifetime medical expenses
for every single patient who may
be damaged and we need to make
sure that those lifetime medical
expenses are paid out to those
patients for their utmost
protection we believe that
Senate bill two thirty nine is
comprehensive medical
malpractice before it strikes a
balance that is necessary in
order to protect our patients
and allow our physicians to
continue to practice medicine we
stand with our partners in the
house of medicine under stating
that we are one part of an
integrated health care system a
system that rights when each
component understands the
importance of coming together
and compromising on a path
forward medical malpractice is a
very complex issue with with
very complex challenges and we
believe that Senate bill two
thirty nine is an elegant policy
solution to those challenges we
like to think the superintendent
insurance for its work over the
interim and we'd like to thank
our partners in Senate bill two
thirty nine The New Mexico
council nurse practitioners the
nurses association of certified
nurse midwives.
In the New Mexico hospital
association we for the first
time are standing around on the
same page about changes that
should be happening in medical
malpractice act we are also
deeply grateful to our
bipartisan sponsors of Senate
bill two thirty nine Senator
Stefanics Senator Kernan Senator
Ingle in Senator Hickey we hope
that you will need to Senate
bill two thirty nine Ford this
evening so we continue these
conversations and on and only
sixty and implementing a real
medical malpractice reform for
the state of New Mexico thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
To say.
We really do need their comments
brief because we still have a
dozen people and signed up and
if everybody takes ten minutes
we'll be here until midnight so
please keep your comments brief
we are Linda Segal of the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council will lower in dory of
the New Mexico nurse
practitioner council.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I was going to
give you all the reasons why I
think nurse practitioners nurse
midwives are and clinical nurse
specialist should be included in
the act but I think I need to
talk about something else this
has become an incredibly
political issue hitting the
trial lawyers against the entire
health care community the
hospitals the doctors the nurses
and you know it's gotten pretty
nasty in there been a lot of
myths truths perhaps on both
sides.
What we need to do is to figure
out how to solve this problem
yes Representative in the
hospitals out of the fund is not
going to solve problems it's
going to create more it's going
to put on the backs of the
independent doctors which is
around two thousand state there
are going to be making up
losses and the hospitals white
doctors and nurses there are
going to be more vulnerable we
need to all sit down and figure
this out and we can't do it in
this environment unfortunately I
wish we could have gotten
together before the session
started okay but we couldn't
because people didn't want to
talk we've been told by the
governor we need to work
together we do need to work
together we would like to see
this bill passed to the next
committee where house bill
seventy five which you've heard
about which will remove the
hospitals that will be another
committee and they'll all end up
in Judiciary and then maybe we
can figure this out so we don't
estimate the fund by ripping out
the hospitals leave a doctor.
Thank.
Next is Gloria Doherty followed
by Jason Weaks.
Hi there good evening Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Gloria
Doherty I am president of the
New Mexico nurses association
and I'm vice president for the
New Mexico nurse practice.
Missionary council I am
fortunate that my practice as a
night shift intensive ist and
hospitalist covers me under the
state court courts the state
point claims act that in in the
hospital that I practice the
most of my colleagues do not
have that good fortune.
The nurse practitioner Sharon
teams they have their own
practices there in specialties
they can have their independent
primary care clinics urgent care
practices there are no even
though other providers are
covered in this role they are
not covered and this is about
the patient's nurse
practitioners give a lot of
primary care for our state and
improve the accident access for
your constituents and that we
did required to have the same
protections.
Midwives deliver one third of
the babies in the state and
they're not covered under this
entity either.
We are vital to the care of the
patients in our state and to the
populations that you all Sir the
pandemic stretched out.
We worked extra sometimes and
alternatives that settings that
remained within our scope to
ensure that our population had
the access to necessary Karen
treatment.
And we work with and apart from
our colleagues I'm alone in the
hospital at night there's an ER
physician but for the critical
care areas and the rest of the
hospital it's just me I can call
a friend if I need not a friend
but you know call like an
outreach to help somebody if
it's something that I'm not
quite sure about we all work
legally but at the end of the
day it's my name on that medical
record and we required to have
the same rights and protections
that the physicians do.
Additionally as you've already
heard in other people's
testimonies that the additional
cost of malpractice or the
attorney fees that we have to
use to deter the ability to
retain and recruit quality
providers will continue to
occur.
Right now nurse practitioners
and if you look at the
literature any advanced practice
nurse is rarely ever brought up
in a malpractice suit but with
knowledge coming out and people
becoming more aware of what is
open to them nurses will be the
target nurse practitioners will
be the target and so I implore
you as representation from the
professional nursing
organizations and for my own
personal colleagues that you
support Senate bill two thirty
nine and add advanced practice
registered nurses to be named in
the medical malpractice act I
thank you for your time I know
it's late and I'm happy to
discuss anything related to that
to advanced practice nurses
thank you thank you thank you.
Jason Weaks followed by a
principles on a.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee Jason
Weaks from registered lobbyists
for optim Medical Group optimise
the largest independent
physician management group in
the state receives tens of
thousands of patients mostly
primary care but we have other
areas of our practices well in
New Mexico each year in medical
mal practice is really profound
the complicated issue I don't
think any individual physician
in Devers to treat a patient and
and wants to harm them or wants
to commit an act not practice
but malpractice does happen and
that's why we do need a medical
malpractice act it is responsive
to the needs of the patients but
also create some structural
protections so that malpractice
happens in an orderly manner we
try to attractions additions
each year to the state and we
have often end up having to
offer salaries that are higher
than the sellers that they're
being offered and stranding
States to get them here we want
to be able to retain them we
need a comprehensive medical
malpractice second we need
comprehensive changes that
create those structural
protection so that we can
actually improve the quality of
the care that we're dispensing I
want to belabor the point made
by others but there are a lot of
very good points made and quite
frankly this bill is the way to
to start addressing some of
those structural issues we have
with our medical malpractice act
and get on the road to improving
the quality of care that we are
in the state thank you thank
you.
Transposon followed by county
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee on Chris Bazan and
the register lobbyist for the
New Mexico association of North
on a set that this we are the C.
R. N. A.'s and on behalf this
year nace with we support this
piece of legislation we believe
that this is a comprehensive
peace
of Law and all that good
comments we already shared Mr
chairman I'll gonna kick this
time shortages say that we may
strongly agree with what the
exploratory T. shared and the
the stable so we support this
bill in order to committee to
pass thank you very much thanks
Chris conte Trujillo followed by
Sean read.
Good evening Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Connie Trujillo I'm a nurse
midwife.
And New Mexico is a very
progressive state when it comes
to health care it's rural
landscape has encouraged health
care providers to get creative
in how we provide care to
Mexicans throughout the great
state what we can do better by
allowing non physician providers
access to the protections
afforded by HB medical
malpractice act as a nurse but
why.
Who owned a midwife only
practice in a rural community I
know too well the impact this
has on non physician providers
every year during the ten years
of number women's health was
caring for women in Las Vegas
New Mexico I researched
malpractice insurance options
for a group of three midwives.
There was only one insurance
company willing to cover us in
this provider only provided the
claims made policies which
required us to pay for tail
coverage once the policy was
canceled.
I would call other PML practice
insurance providers for quotes
for occurrence policies which
still required skills and was
always told that we would not
that they would not cover midway
unless we worked with
physicians.
When I asked why I was told it
was because we were not included
in the state's medical
malpractice act.
These limited options for
malpractice.
Insurance coverage created a
monopoly for this company.
It also made it difficult to
recruit new providers who wants
to risk having to pay a
considerable amount of short
tail if the job doesn't work
out.
When I was forced to close the
practice in twenty seventeen
after the local hospital close
the OB unit two thousand sixteen
we had to pay over seventy
thousand dollars in tales
because we were we only were
able to acquire claims made
policies.
We had no other options imagine
being forced to close your
business leading thousands of
women without care and then
having to pay additional.
An additional seventy thousand
dollars to ensure any
malpractice claims made toward
your employees business or you
are covered.
I humbly ask as the non
physician provider and former
health care practice owner thank
you both to improve access for
New Mexicans and vote yes.
Senate bill two thirty nine.
Thank you.
Question for you but you still
will have to buy the.
The medical malpractice
insurance luncheon yes yes but
we we weren't ever able to get
the current policies we could
only get claims made policies.
Because we weren't included in
the medical malpractice act.
Increase the this bill would
make it possible for you to have
a wider choice of insurers
exactly yeah okay thank you
Shawna Reding stolen by leading
Hewlett Masser.
Evening Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Shawna
Reid and I am a nurse
practitioner I am board
certified in family practice and
also acute care I live down in
hops in my practice is that
specifically for nefer ology
patients I work in a dialysis
center and I cover three
dialysis centers both in Eddy
county and Lee County the way
that our current practice
setting works is because we are
still rule the Neftchala just
actually live in reside in
Lubbock Texas in travel in
usually once a month twice a
month to see these dialysis
patients and so I contract to
them to help provide services to
these rural New Mexican patients
with that being said nurse
practitioners are currently
excluded from the medical
malpractice act so my physician
nefer ology counterparts are
able to be included in the
medical malpractice act and with
that are provided the
protections for themselves as
well as for the patients
specifically the review
committee of any type of alleged
malpractice action where nurses
nurse practitioners on the other
hand are not eligible to be
included in the medical
malpractice act so for me this
is a matter of equity I'm
providing much of the same
service as my position
counterparts and would enjoy the
benefits of being included and
as well as protecting my
patients with a medical
malpractice act thank you so
much for your consideration
thank you Mr.
Salim he'll and master followed
by Troy Clark.
Troy Clark followed by John
Harris.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members
and are participating in present
bill co sponsors my name is Troy
Clark I am the president and CEO
of the New Mexico hospital
association and I'm gonna follow
the lead actually of Linda Segal
and apart from my prepared
remarks first of all I want to
recognize that for those
patients who do receive harm it
is a horrible event to have to
go through and we recognize that
and I appreciated her Micaela
Schaefer and raising the
awareness that the work that she
mentioned that she does in
trying to help promote quality
within our health care
community.
I have over almost twenty five
years of experience running
hospitals and physician groups
and I can tell you and testified
that the amount of effort that
is put in on a daily basis in
our hospitals here in New Mexico
to work and improve on quality
is here regardless of.
The levels of caps that may be
placed on malpractice it's
because the desire to do no harm
our patients and providers are
are I'm sorry our providers care
for their patients and try to
improve every day to eliminate
and minimize the harm is
created.
Senate bill two thirty nine
supports physicians and nurses
and providers to make those
efforts every day within the
walls of the hospitals those
hospitals have been referred to
as multi billion dollar
corporations there cannot be
anything more from the truth
when it comes to the care that
is given those hospitals are
made up of New Mexicans you've
heard from many of them today
doctors nurses tax registrars
maintenance person who care for
the citizens of our state in our
communities.
You have heard from a number of
health care heroes today.
That we have all experienced or
heard from the news over the
last nine months during this
pandemic those who have gone
above and beyond to make sure
that we have the care that we
need.
Mr chairman committee I commend
and recommend that everyone of
you follow and listen to the
voice of these health care
heroes will been there to
protect us as they realize the
impact on the access to care the
failure to pass on Senate bill
two thirty nine would create.
Senate bill two thirty nine is
here to provide the necessary
reforms to the medical
malpractice act to make it
current.
Recognizes the efforts of those
heroes will provide that care to
us and it is our to do so on an
ongoing basis and not limit the
amount of care that we have
accessible to not only the rural
parts of our state to all parts
of our state we appreciate the
sponsors and co sponsors not
only for the work they've done
but for their attendance tonight
we stand with them in New Mexico
clinician coalition and all the
health care heroes on the
frontline who are not
represented tonight because
they're out caring for patients
Representative by the view of
spoke to you and urge you to
support Senate bill two thirty
nine thank you.
Thank you Mr Clark.
Next we have John Harris
followed by Larry heard and.
Thank you Mr chairman
make just a few remarks tonight
I come to you tonight now is the
chairman of the board of all the
hospitals in the state of New
Mexico.
But also as the CEO of the
largest hospital in southern New
Mexico.
And I operate hospital by the
way that some referred to early
that oppose Senate bill two
thirty nine that is owned and
operated by a corporation.
Outside of the state of New
Mexico.
But I will tell you that they
don't pay me to say this but I
will tell you never let us that
everything we stand for is about
quality of tier every decision
that I make is about quality of
care for our patients that we
have the privilege of serving.
We have earned many accolades
throughout this country at
Memorial Medical Center for the
outstanding quality and safety
that we have but here's the
problem when you get past the
politics you get past all the
rhetoric what is at stake here
is a healthy health health care
system in the state of New
Mexico.
There is a reason why Senate
bill two thirty nine is
supported by doctors and nurses
the people that we appraise
nationally as well as in the
state of New Mexico is being
health care heroes.
The same professional support
this because they know the
circumstance that we live in.
We are battered by frivolous
lawsuits daily or cost benefit
analysis or done and in cases
are settled even when the
hospital the nurses the doctors
have done nothing wrong I've
seen this I've been CEO for
almost forty five years it's the
only industry I now you have a
decision to make ladies and
gentlemen that is crucial to
your constituency.
And in some cases that is
whether or not they have a
hospital in their community.
My hospitals healthy and doing
fine but I have been surrounded
by three out of four hospitals
that are in various states of
near bankruptcy.
Exacerbating this litigious
situation serves no one
certainly not the patients and
we talk about the safety of
patients think about economic
development think about the
safety of the patient whether
it's a hard hard to tackle Ravel
stake by.
In a community where know what
hospital exists to save them.
That's what we're dealing with
here so I tell you tonight
please vote for Senate bill two
thirty nine not because I'm a
politician not because of any
other reason than I and my
colleagues my doctors my nurses
truly care about the quality of
care and the provision of care
in this state.
It is extremely difficult to
recruit doctors and nurses into
this state I am in the southern
section of the state I can't get
doctors to cross the border from
taxes in specials lease that we
badly need to practice here.
So I'm not going to exaggerate
the situation I'm gonna tell you
the practical boots on the
ground approach to this this is
the right bill to pass your
doctors or nurses or hospitals
all are telling you that.
It is the right thing to do.
Thanks for taking the time.
Thank you Mr Harris David
Letterman followed by a key
lever Faulconer.
I thank you Mr chairman I
actually don't need to speak on
this I would defer to drive
Gallup when his turn comes up
okay thank you Dr Michael room
followed by Dr Dallas.
This is.
Okay then we'll go to.
But doctor gallon followed by
Charlie money just thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for giving me the opportunity I
am the president this year of
the New Mexico Medical Society
and it's a real pleasure to be
here with you this evening I
want to talk a little bit about
the opportunity that you all
have this is a momentous
occasion to update this very
important medical malpractice
act the last act written in
nineteen seventy six largely
stayed intact for forty four
years.
if you get this right hopefully
your act will stand for forty
four years and protect both
patients and access to care many
stories you guys will hear from
patients have to do with not
being able to get a surgeon not
being able to get the right
person or equipment to the
patient at the right time and
what we're so concerned about
all of us is that if we don't
have a good medical malpractice
act we will continue to have
that access so that's what we're
asking so much from you is to
read the report of the
superintendent of insurance it's
interesting he wrote a very
clear report but they they defer
to use self I'm deferring to you
as well this is your opportunity
read his report make up your own
mind think about both sides
think about what we're all
asking for their so many
similarities here we're asking
for protection for patients
we're asking for protection for
a state that needs access to
providers and so the I I am
thinking this is a great
opportunity I hope you will
carry this act not only support
it would explain it to your
other colleagues who may not
have the opportunity of this in
depth discussion of having read
the superintendent's report like
you all do for them to
understand what's behind all of
these arguments back and forth
I'm I'm not a person who likes
are going I don't like arguing
with other physicians I don't
like arguing with the trial
attorneys I really want us to
find the common ground that
takes care of patients and that
keeps doctors in New Mexico I
have practice here as a primary
care doctor for nineteen years
I'm a graduate of the university
of New Mexico I see you're
headed behind you chairman I am
also a grad and I support our
Lobos and I want to keep our
levels here in New Mexico so
thank you very much for your
time and there's a lot on your
guises shoulder.
Please help us maintain access
and and safety and a patient
compensation fund for the
patients good evening.
Charlie Mike yes you get to wrap
things.
Thank you I will try to keep it
short Mr chairman members of the
committee
and.
I I would just wanted to come on
here and quite honestly I was
conflicted as to what position
to take.
Because the issue that we have
is you know we support this we
believe that that this is a
medical malpractice act has a
practical purpose and in a right
place in law.
It provides for protections and
also provides for the ability to
care for individuals so that
money is not shifted purely to
to matters of religious legal.
the importation part is the the
organization I represent is New
Mexico health care association
which are the nursing homes and
unfortunately we have never
found an opportunity to find a
venue to discuss the issue of
our inclusion.
And the issue is that our people
once they've you the
organizational they see us as
the.
Hi changes of nursing homes and
only because I I believe because
we we see all these
advertisements on television to
talk about.
The opportunities to start
sooner should all of them will
we also provide is all these
long practitioners some people
out to New Mexico purely to come
after of highly attractive
cases in nursing homes.
And along without grounds
what we find is we find
ourselves in a position that the
doctors found themselves and in
nineteen seventy six we are now
in a place where we have but one
option for.
Rich in many cases in most cases
and now we have found over the
last three years that the
premiums for these policies have
jumped.
As much as percent as low as
thirty eight percent to as much
as sixteen hundred percent.
Those job only the smaller
percentage percentages are
accompanied by a
small deductible there's often a
thousand times what it used to
be.
And so that's the environment
that we send them and we're
again highly criticized because
of the care is provided well
just because we we shall we we
spend all our money on on
lawsuits they're often settled
because they don't even taken to
court a lot of the insurers what
frankly or free to go to court
because of the judgments that
they may receive so what they do
is they settle out of court for
well up on the cap that is
established in the medical
malpractice act so we come to
you with simply wait to look for
love thank you.
Have this discussion with others
and bring the data for work that
actually shows what what the
basis grew out and it's not as.
I'm gonna say the judgments are
alright this highest people
perceive them to be and the yeah
again if anybody has a right to
be considered it would be this
industry again with the same
qualifications that are required
to get into a and a willingness
to pay our fair share.
And as stated with the office of
the superintendent the more
participants there are insurance
plan which this is.
The better off the plan is.
And so we're not Mr chair I will
conclude my remarks I appreciate
the opportunity to address the
committee
and I will say that we do
support the PCS and the medical
mail practice at.
But we would like that
opportunity and a venue to
discuss thank you very much.
Thank you.
Members of the committee is.
Well let's see let's let's give
the Sanchez insurance to make
some final comments before we
turn to the committee for
questions or comments Senator
Stefanics thank you Mr chairman
and committee members
we will of course be open to
questions primarily to our
expert witnesses but
as of one of one or more of the
commentators said.
We would need to do this this
year if the trial lawyers had
not come forward to hurt.
Asian compensation fund and to
delete the hospitals they should
have been negotiated over the
next year her recommendation of
the superintendent of insurance
but we need to protect the
health care clinicians thank
you.
Thank you for the comment
Senator because I think that
that is the one thing I took
away from reading the report
that he didn't say this approach
with this approach is one we
favor he said basically they
should get together and hammer
it out over the next year and
yet we have house bill seventy
five.
Yes the House incidently is now
over here maybe not in this
committee.
Thanks committee right the
figure.
Yes dilemmas Committee faces
we've got two different
completely different approaches
it's clear that we should be
done is is.
A year of negotiating and and
coming up with something that
meets everybody's needs but
instead we have this bill which
I have to say has some problems
with the and then we have house
bill seventy five which you
point out has some problems with
it and
We will have a chance in this
committee incidently to put the
two together.
Bill is coming here that would
have been my preferences.
You will see
I wanted to give the other
spas has seen the final closing
remarks on this if they wanted
to Senator Kernan Senator Ingle
Senator Hickey do need any of
you want to add anything to this
short debate on the on the
topic.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan here and I do agree with
you I feel that that this it
this needs additional study an
opportunity for the actuarial
data to be collected I do think
the testimony on both sides it's
been it's been eight eight very
good thing we need to continue
this discussion I hope this bill
passes on to the next committee
and I will be hearing the other
bill in my committee so this is
been a great opportunity for me
to hear this bill and to compare
the other bill that ultimately.
I think both bills need to go
and and be up discussed in full
in comparison that ultimately I
really wish we would have one
more year for everyone to get
together and try to resolve is
so what that's why I urge you to
pass this bill at this committee
so that conversation can
continue and that's what really
needs to happen today thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan Senator
Hickey did you have anything you
want to add.
Thank you Mr chairman I agree
with Senator Kernan and centers
departments thank you thank you
senator Senator Ingle did you
have anything you want to say.
Okay well we'll go to the
committee then and we'll start
with the senator I think engine
and Sedillo Senator name at our
end of the first Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
And I apologize I'm I'm eating
dinner so I apologize for that
You Mr chair and and Senator
stuff of Senator Stefanics you
actually answered the biggest
question I had because I got the
OSI reported three o'clock today
and so I've been also reading it
and skimming it it is a lot it
is a lot to digest but the very
first recommendation that OSI
made was not to do anything this
year.
They concluded.
They concluded their reports
with with exactly what senator
Karen and said which was
Pursuit proceeding with reform
legislation without an actuarial
assessment of the changes that
are recommended here and will
result in an uninformed product
given the precarious financial
condition of the P. C. have the
appropriate step to take is to
is to secure a complete
actuarial assessment of the
recommendations seek input from
the stakeholder groups and then
consider legislative product.
For these reasons COS I
recommend against considering
MMI amendments in the upcoming
legislative session.
so I am really troubles that we
have to deal with this bill I do
have several of problems with it
the the major one is narrowing
the definition of punitive
damages and the standard being
raised to clear and convincing
evidence of I know that there
have been physicians and and I I
also want to say before I even
talk about this how much respect
I have for all of the all
physicians as many people know
I'm a huge advocate for
universal health care and this
is one of the reasons I think
having insurance for profit
insurance companies and for
profit hospitals really affect
the quality of our health care
and waste a lot of money that we
that could otherwise go for
patient care but that's that I
understand that's a separate
issue but I do believe that that
That all of our health care
providers every single one of
them are absolute heroes.
None the less.
Narrowing the definition of
punitive damages and also that
is inconsistent with any
definition I've ever seen in the
law and then having a high
standard of care I mean the
standard of proof clear
convincing evidence
I have been aware of cases in
which physicians have operated
under the influence.
And.
I don't believe that that would
meet the standard in this act
and I find that very very
troubling.
I believe that the six that
increasing a six hundred
thousand dollar cap.
Two seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars after forty years of not
raising that cap is ludicrous.
it's a traveling traveling raise
and I don't understand how it
was explained that that raise a
loan would double the premiums I
think that that again is an
example of OSI's report saying
we need to we need to study this
further because just the logic
of raising by two hundred fifty
and having that double premiums
just doesn't make sense to me I
need to see that explained.
I feel like I said I don't
understand how such a modest
increase in the cap because it's
such a large increase in the
premiums of their other kind of
little Luke Littler problems I
have with it
I really appreciated the speaker
who said that it's time that all
of the parties get together and
that was gonna be my question to
the senators to phonics why are
we doing this if the OSI says
not to but at the Senator
Stefanics if you answer that
again I guess is being
repetitive but just to be
absolutely clear thank you Mr
chair and senator
We this is a defense of bill
house bill seventy five is
moving had and we would have
willingly negotiated but it is
moving ahead and it's moving
ahead with full speed you want
to the house floor it and it
wasn't with the mandate it only
passed by one vote.
So people in the house were very
divided about house bill seventy
five but is now here finishing
up on our side.
And the Senate now has the
responsibility of either sending
both together to merge at
Judiciary are letting house bill
seventy I move on to Judiciary
and perhaps to the floor.
And then we take the chance.
Of house bill seventy five
passing.
And then we have an entire cadre
of health care professionals
around the entire state and the
patient compensation fund being
affected.
This is a preemptive move
because of house bill seventy
five.
While.
I that is amazing because I do
have so many problems with this
bill is a little and I I gave
you the largest ones I have but
I also have a smaller ones the
arbitration for example the
arbitration I'm not sure that
you know the arbitration
traditionally has been a
procedural matter and handled by
the courts under separation of
power so there's there's just a
lot a lot in this bill it's it's
very very complex and and I'm
troubled by it I appreciate the
explanation.
And I was going to ask you you
know why this is why the amount
why seven hundred fifty and how
does that how does that double
the cap and I was gonna go
through all of those questions
but the time is late and I just
think that your absolute correct
and I'm not sure how to get this
in the same committee
but I wish we could and it's
unfortunate that seventy five is
in in in here and and we
couldn't all work it out I
thought that the speaker who
said that was was very important
was a very important point
so with that I'll just yield.
The Mr chair and senator thank
you senator goes into Senator
should be issues and then
Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Can you please tell me.
What what is it about our state.
We're a medical malpractice
insurer looks at us and says all
I can assure you unless we have
this funder I can't insurers
practitioner or what what's
what's the problem there.
Mr chair and senator great
question I'm gonna pass it over
to Mr Adio mis and then.
Mr audio you're you're on mute.
Sorry about that Mr chair
Senator Schmedes I think there
are a number of factors that
lead to that conclusion from
insurance companies I think a
large part of it is then looking
at Los histories in New Mexico
and and sizable jury verdicts
venue shopping is also a problem
in our state which is an issue
for insurance carriers when they
look at bringing up policies to
New Mexico that's something that
is dealt with in our bill
but I think those are likely to
have that the the primary
concerns I'll defer to that then
if if there are other issues she
spotted.
Thank you Mr chair us on
question I have.
The Senators committee Senator
McKenna followed by Senator
Tallman.
I'm a chairman I believe
Senator comments had was up
before money I'll go up after
him.
Go ahead go ahead Brandon.
Thank you chairman and thank
you.
Senator Kernan and us to finance
I'm.
Liz listening very carefully
what I've heard this afternoon
and evening from the providers.
And I'm really honored.
I are you for all that you do
every single day
reasons that have been
expressed earlier by others.
I I do have to echo what I've
heard from senators to deal
Lopez.
And and that is why at that is I
don't understand why juries are
getting carved out.
To me that's a that's a chilling
effect or for patients and their
families.
And I was just thinking about
that seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar cap.
you know medical errors can be
devastating and I'm just
thinking to myself for someone
who needs care twenty four
seven.
How long would that amount of of
the award.
Last last for the rest of his
life.
Finally you know doctor Machen
any who why now
She wrote an op ed this month
and.
Why the MMA.
Is the the situation that it's
in and that is it took on risk
in two thousand nine it was
never designed to do and that
was giving Christus St Vincent
hospital.
Limited number of malpractice
occurrences when before it was
limited to three.
I'm so.
A lot of consternation with this
bill and.
Again like Senator Sedillo Lopez
said we.
We don't have a health care
system.
We we don't.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators.
Thank.
Senator Tallman will will will
turn to you next thank you Mr
chair and then.
Senator a synthetic for bringing
this bill forward I certainly
agree with the Senator Sedillo
Lopez that would.
Our health care system is a
disaster in need as a big
supporter of single payer we
would have this in this massive
we had a different system I
pride myself in being very open
minded I can appreciate Mr both
sides of the issue.
Therefore I will move a do pass
with a no recommendation and
strongly urge both sides to come
together to go she eight been
suggested by the governor and
lend us Linda Siegel thank you
Mr chair.
There's.
Seconded by Senator Stefanics is
a no right.
Senator.
Make sure you have your hand did
you just forget to take it down
or do.
Mr chair
down pardon me I'll take it down
right now okay no problem
Senator Stefanics Mr chair I
just want to reiterate there is
a medical trust also available
in that would take care of the
medical needs of an individual
going forward.
Now let's.
Separate the two issues.
We testimony from a.
One of the people is
localization
well that that they she thought
that was inadequate approach to
that I guess you're right there
is a way in the in in the
current practice to take care of
medical care for the rest of.
One slide is a lump sum payment
and it could cause some
problems.
anyhow I I I did want to say a
couple things about this first
the Supreme Court has created a.
Commission.
To study this issue.
Court and and their efforts this
is clearly an issue that the
demands of the input from lots
of different players lots of
different considerations to be
made and I think we would be
wise to see if if there.
commission comes up with some
solid recommendations some
agreement there's lots of solid
recommendations everybody's
recommendation is solid the
problem is the other half of the
of the players at the table
don't necessarily.
This is really willing to go
with it I am very disturbed by
the
By the.
Information I got from the
office of the superintendent
then removing the hospitals from
the fund.
Improve the.
Solvency of the fund even though
when they were put in they
immediately.
Created a huge impact I mean he
is charges is as clear as soon
as the house rules relating the
deficit grew now the fund itself
grew enormously and percentage
wise the argument is well.
We're closer to solvency than we
were before even though the
dollar amount is much larger
percentage wise we're closer.
That's a factor of of the OSI
the previous so so I I just
know.
Charging enough.
To keep the funds so that I
think but what he said was was
state said it was going to check
Mr brought the I don't want to
prolong this wasn't even the
hospitals out there remained a
three year tail.
Time during which any.
Malpractice suits his hospitals
that used to be in the fund
would still be paid out of the
fund.
How that happens.
To create such a system I I
think I'll never understand that
that's what happens when you
make health care business I
guess but it is it does it does.
You're just replace me that
would be the case so we know the
situation was the hospitals are
in there there.
Exposure is making the fund less
solvent than it was before.
In terms of raw dollars.
We
we do then they don't even pay
in for three years we're paying
out the claims against them.
This is this is this is a
message we should do I have it
anywhere close to right it is
Senator Hughes is that the case.
Yes Mr chairman you you have
that correct in in insurance
there is a situation the Concord
but not reported
anyone who had harm
this year but didn't is is
waiting for whatever reason they
can bring suit in three years
and in order for there to be a
fun they can actually pay out
that suit were approved valid
the hospitals will need to
remain at so
you get that and thank you for
making that explanation.
It's a little like to guess who
came to dinner and then just you
can get amount is more than one
more one of the bigger desert.
The two scoops of ice cream Mr
chair.
What are the cherry on top yeah
well.
Okay.
There was one of the things you
say yeah let me just ask about
this on page thirteen.
No malpractice action.
Maybe filed in any court.
Agence qualifying health
provider.
Unless all parties stipulate to
opt out of the New Mexico
medical review commission review
process.
Which hospital is going to opt
out of that.
Please say yes or which doctor
doctors Gordon sumi instead.
Thank you seems like a really
unless I'm missing something
crucial here.
That's a really weird.
Thank you included building
basically says you can suicide
we agree to let you suicide
otherwise you have to go to this
medical review commission.
I want to respond to that
please thank you.
Then or or missile defense
agency then please.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members the current act requires
that every doctor hospital
anybody who is a qualified
health care provider nobody can
sue until they've been for the
New Mexico medical review
commission this amendment
actually relaxes that a bit
because it allows an opt out if
everybody wants to opt out.
Mr I have more to say on that
but
the current waters that
everybody goes through the
process and a lawsuit can be
filed until it happens Mr
chairman and and the committee
to to answer your question
regarding what position would
want to opt out of it there is a
situation that commonly comes up
in that the commission where a
plaintiff an injured patient
just wants to get to court so
they will stipulate to no
negligence with the doctor and
then they can just go to court
how it is currently written
that's prevented so so we're
we're providing an Avenue for
four eighty eight patient if
they will stipulate to known no
negligence act the commission
phase then it can just go to
court.
So it's it's bringing down a
barrier that otherwise existed
to access in the courts okay
Senator eighty.
Yes and further if in in the
current situation if someone
goes to the review boards and
the review board which is made
up equally of the medical
providers and attorneys and then
they choose of one other
individual if they if that
review says there is not a
more at the plant the of the
individual can become a
plaintiff and take it to the
court so that is still a free
and easy activity that someone
who feels that they have been
our can you but everything under
the current law since seventy
six has this commission review
but certainly anyone consider no
matter what the termination so
you.
Says no we don't see there's any
evidence you the plane can still
go to court.
We're.
Yes that is correct.
Mr chair.
So much so you know the other
issue really is a small
hospitals need this the house
will still need to fund I mean
the reality is Presbyterian does
not need to be in this fund
right.
The chain still need to be in
this fun they've got plenty of
resources to deal with these
issues they can buy a all
malpractice insurance they want
is the little hospitals the
Santo roses the.
Only crosses or whatever.
The ones they're they're hard
pressed to find a way to pay
for.
Kind of coverage they might
need.
But the US does mean one
solution ultimately might be if
we had some kind of a and I
guess that was originally in the
in the bill the OSI has the
right to say no you're you know
you we you don't need it you can
come in earlier than once every
ten.
Let me one second ice cream and
desserts and.
Okay let's see if we have a
motion for a no Representative.
Any other debate.
If you stop.
Senator so I mean the secretary
will call or did you have a
question Senator Sedillo
officers interest here and.
I am I was just wondering if
somebody had the answer to a
question about the queue I was
thinking about what you just
said about the big hospitals
Do the little hospitals I've
been working very hard of trying
to get a hospital into County I
think I've probably told this
story many times of my
grandmother dying in the
ambulance on the way up and so.
You know I met for Medicare for
all but I'm also for access
rural axis is fine if if have
people have free health health
care but the question that you
raised in my mind's Senator R.
Mr chair was
are the little hospitals covered
by this fund.
Well I I don't think they are
because I've been working on
this.
two I guess didn't miss madam or
or to Mr brought to be still
with us.
Yes Mr chair Senator fifty six
hospitals and outpatient health
care facilities are under this
act so this man are the small
hospitals under this act.
They are all eligible to be
covered under the act some of
them are already in the fund
some of them have not been able
to get the kind of the current
form of of insurance it would
allow them to be in the fund.
Thank
a real it's a real dilemma it's
a real problem.
The secretary will call the
roll.
No REC but you know
recommendations.
Bill Senator.
And amended yes.
I'm Senate bill two thirty nine
as amended center just got out
it was a no Representative
recommend of.
Survivor ghost.
Those.
Yes.
So.
No.
So.
Yes.
Search local.
No.
Thanks yes.
So I'm yes.
If you know.
What is.
For yes or no.
For
you know rex Senator also.
Where you're Judiciary nurses
Rio we all end up in Judiciary
house bill seventy five and us
so thank you very much committee
members and Mister chair.
We have a vote from Senator
Gallegos I I mean I never heard
him.
No.
Yes ma'am I keep answering yes I
I I.
Senator Gallegos voted yes he
said he
yes will you think so we didn't
hear you.
We heard you so that makes it
five to three.
I know right.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and.
I guess I I it must be tired
it's going to Judiciary and so
is seventy five no seventy five
is going to taxpayers Senator
gets under taxed it'll go
Judiciary next.
Okay all right.
The ultimate scheme is in
Judiciary where we're all all
these issues here.
Then us get worked out of all
these issues.
Or put in sometimes
This will be the resolution will
take place
Thank you Mr chair this is a
very very complex topic.
You know the one thing that
nobody debated and and I don't
debate it I don't think anybody
in here anything about was
emitting the nurses and the
nurse practitioners to the bill
that makes sense to the fund to
the program.
That is all but some of the
other aspects that are a little
more troublesome.
At any rate I think.
we still have several items we
have a roll over for the for the
those are your Senator on the
webcast really bills we rolled
over senator Baucus bill.
Congratulations Senators
incidently thank you for really
educational debate rail thanks.
So we rolled over senator Baucus
bill looting.
Senator pull incidently I meant
to mention this ad asked already
that we move his audit reporting
bill to when C. S. two sixty
eight because you want the CPA's
to be here till the wee hours of
the night.
We
need to yes this is Wednesday to
Friday.
If he's here maybe we can try to
do is military family relief
school enrollment bill and and
call in I actually think.
Are you here Senator pro.
I know he's.
Okay.
Then I would I would.
Do you think it is is there any
reason to just insurance this
point roll everything else over
to Friday.
Need to do.
this is the Senate Mr chair will
the the bill that we got off the
table what can I.
We.
