Have chief executive officer of
the new mexico finance authority
marquita russell with me else I
have john brooks the chief of
programs at the new mexico
finance authority here I am
again to do on our level best to
reform and in in the ad too and
and really hit these programs
that are making a lot of
difference for us but
essentially send a bill to ten
makes a one time appropriation
to three of the new mexico
finance authority funds
for and in this makes low cost
loans available for primary care
behavior health and child care
providers the three
appropriations would be twenty
five millions i'm sorry twenty
five million to the primary care
capital fund twenty five million
to the behavioral health capital
fund and ten million to the
child care revolving loan fund
in two thousand twenty three
chairman members of the
committee you might remember
senate bill for twenty three
basically expanded how these
funds could be used because
these with the critical items
that these particular operations
really need which is facility
renovation expansion and
equipment so that gets them on
the path to what they're trying
to get done there it's matter
fact they've already received
another application just
yesterday because this program
is going so well together these
programs are finished twenty
nine projects
three hundred and fifty thousand
patients have been positively
impacted by it with one point
four million visits mister
chairman and eighty percent of
these services have been
rendered in rural and frontier
communities and I think that
that just speaks volumes to the
fact they were trying to reach
the entire state with this kind
of stuff I would like to bought
the appropriations to go back
approximately twenty years a
lack of funding today just
creates problems for these
particular programs so that's
what we're here for I describe
she said mister chairman to
finance would you like my two
experts to say are you
comfortable with the
introduction no listed each
other they've made all the track
of so
miss russell do you want to
speak first or mister
mr chairman i'll go first thank
you for hearing us today this is
the first time we've asked for
more money into these funds as
the senator mentioned it's been
more than twenty years.
Since any of these programs have
received funding and we have
made a tremendous use of the
little dollars that we've had so
I just would mention that the
primary care capital fund which
is the oldest at these three
funds initially received a five
million dollar appropriation and
over time as we've made those
loans and they've been repaired
proceeds from those repayments
have been periodically scraped
in order to go back for solvency
so we've actually had a net
negative nine hundred thousand
dollars a general fund
appropriation to that fund yet
we've made twenty loans totally
in thirteen point three million
dollars so there's a lot of
impact to these revolving funds
you know if you are able to make
anywhere close to these kinds of
appropriations we don't expect
that you'll see from or hear
from us again relative to these
three programs because they are
this would put us in a very good
place to serve a lot of new
mexico clinics so thank you
great and and mister books to
chair I architect
spoke well about the program and
I don't have anything to add
very good let's go to the
audience of just for the show of
hands whose in support of this
measure.
Okay you want to say anything
about it quickly come up and use
the mike though the.
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is ever I mean
is amanda I represent the new
mexico primary care association
we are the people who have been
the large recipients of this
fund I will say in the two
decades it has helped us build
the infrastructure of the rural
infrastructure for vulnerable
uninsured high needs folks we
appreciate the senator for
carrying this bill i'll just
name a few less connectors done
north day and eldie though I
claim to go there for melia
women's clinic and less crucials
you'd all go medical services
silver city mosconic it's damn
delivery but they really both
medical and dental expansion
first choice broadway hell
center
this is an exciting bill for us
we really appreciate your
support we will continue to loan
money and pay it back and keep
building for new mexicans thank
you thank you is anyone here in
opposition to this bill
is there anyone online who is to
speak
members of the committee.
I have a quick question for you
you mentioned the primary
careful how about the behavioral
health phone as that had similar
has a multiplied like loves and
fishes similarly.
Mr chairman it has a ten year
history of ten years less of a
history and so it's had less
turnover but we have managed to
multiply that two point five
million dollars to more than six
million dollars of projects so
yes we've we've had some
significant impact that's great
it was just originally two point
five million correct and we've
had the the chalk your program
we were only ever to able to
make one loan it was a fifty
thousand dollars basically micro
loan for chat care provider and
lost crucials and money got
taken very shortly there and
just to be clear that these are
all for physical facilities
right or is it for program mr
chairman it is for physical
facilities and then expansion of
services so they can use this to
higher staff as they expand
their services.
Last year we gave the.
Behavioral health.
Division twenty million dollars
to expand services in behavioral
health may understanding is that
none of that has been spent.
Should we just switch that over
to you maybe you would get more
done that they've been able to
get done with it should we get
to finance i'll take that up
there yeah bring that up
cause somebody's got to spend
that money this is this is
that's it it just sits serving
we have such big need
we also had a proposal wednesday
night.
For a hundred and sixty.
Hundred and.
The.
Hundred and sixty six million
eight hundred thousand.
Four of strange number but it
was a hundred and sixty six
million eight hundred thousand
for behavioral health facilities
around the state we we passed
out to here.
Maybe we should.
Give that to you as well that's
something else to keep in mind
that senator tomorrow's bill
that your bill maybe we should
give it to them instead of we
were giving that to behavioral
who got the money from your
bill.
The health department
services are.
No I think it was I don't know
do you remember a barrick who
didn't senator tomorrow they'll
really night with that service
construction money go to.
Yeah we're to go to behavioral
health or two.
Okay anyhow we shouldn't have
like five different places all
trying to do similar very
similar things it would be
greatly consolidate them in
yours where you have a track
record of actually getting the
money spent
anybody have any other questions
or come at senators or the
olympics thank you mister chair
I appreciate this building I
support it although I do wish
there was better coordination
because I was gonna answer
questions and we just get it
like what was that
and now I understand it from
that but then but my question is
um how how is the word does the
word get out about the
availability of these funds
mr chairman.
Senator the word doesn't really
get out very often because we
don't have available funding we
have no money in the primary car
capital fund there's no money in
the chocolate revolving fund we
have to be very judicious about
setting up expectations to be
able to fund a project if we
don't have any dollars in it so
very early in their
capitalization we work through
the behavior health with our
partners over it either the now
the health care authority or
department of health are now
ecd to find good clinics we work
with our partners but it has
been so many years since we've
had enough funding that we
really haven't had what I call
the marketing push or an outrage
push to allow folks the
opportunity to plan around these
dollars and mister chairman
tended to that was an excellent
response from this russell but
also us I mean we are on the
ground in our communities and we
know where there's
vast need and and we need to
build this that in the other we
need that service in our
community so you know I would
also put that on our shoulders
as well to communicate in the
community and we hear those
needs
thank you mister chair will how
did for example you said one day
care was was funded right before
how how did that do care find
out.
Mr chairman that came in through
our partners then at the child
youth and family services
department that's where their
child care program was initially
where we were partner initially
would now be partnered with
ececd with whom we've been
working on a couple of other
programs to deliver some of
their federal dollars great
mister chair so I assume that if
this passes the work you will we
will market it mr chairman we
will have the ability to
you know serve needs into the
future yes
thank you thank you mister
chair.
Yeah.
Senator hickey yes senator he
give out yes center my stuff yes
those votes yes senator mccurtin
senator my catch involves yes
senator mechanic yes center
mechanic votes yes send a
neighbor senator library boats
yes sinish mirrors center city a
lot is yes senator city a lot as
well yes senator tomman yes
senator man votes yes center
disappeal i'm going to vote in a
second but I just wanted to
share the information we just
got about senator tomorrow's
bill that we passed out
wednesday night it's for a
hundred and sixty.
Million eight hundred thousand.
And it goes to the health care
authority the behavioral house
services division so we really
do need to have a little closer.
Coordination collaboration
whatever we need to start using
our resources in the most
coordinated way possible and I
would vote yes.
Senator or these if you know
what's yes
they vote of add in the
affirmative zero in the negative
you have a dupass and move on to
finance were
you
have another debate thank you
mister chairman and I will
I don't see the primary
sponsored we've just sent work
to him i'm going to just wait
for a moment yeah we'll wait for
just a second on the next one
senator munios is in finance
we're trying to see if he wants
to roll it or hear it n.
Okay let's do domestic violent
services and that is senator
rodriguez but she's not area.
Yeah yeah
okay we're going to roll senator
monos bill.
And we'll go then first
we'll go then to senator
sophonics in the health care
authority.
Oh.
Her bill will take an exciting
two hours so this do you mind
center the.
No no we'll we'll do a senator
hambling's bill and
representative but a honest bill
welcome representative good to
see you will do this very
quickly I believe unless i've
been missed led by their
lobbyist
not mr chair
you're right.
I said so this is the senate
still
two thirty thirty six metro
redevelopment project
grt increments thank you mister
chair and thank you committee or
hearing this this is many of you
may remember last year on the
floor the metropolitan
redevelopment act bill that
passed unanimously on the floor
it was a bipartisan bill we had
senator brant senator carnine
also as the co sponsors on this
after those people are new to
the senate this what this does
this the original bill allows
for communities to designate
areas that are in experiencing
blight and pull seventy five
percent of the taxes incurred
there to go right back into that
area it's local control it
doesn't increase taxes but what
it does is it redirects where
the taxes can go to improve
those areas so especially small
rural areas that are able to
designate metropolitan
redevelopment districts this is
really an economic boon for them
so what this bill does is to fix
the taxes from that tax and
revenue attempted to implement
them more a from last year but
they brought to our attention
that we needed to make some
technical changes in this bill
or fix those changes and allow
tax and revenue to implement the
requirements from the original
bill from two thousand three
i'll go through the four things
that this bill will help address
it clarifies the cities that are
working on mra's to identify
boundaries and then notify texts
and revenue and you have my
expert larry haran who is more
than welcome to chimen
representative I had owned his
new to this particular bill but
is very excited about it as well
the second point allows texts
and revenue to set up a
supporting code and collects
data for twelve months to
determine your tea payments in
the area and that was really the
crucks of why we're doing this
bill because they need that year
to gather that data in order to
assess the great for those
particular zones which then in
turn shows how much money can go
back into that area.
Then tax and revenue can
determine the baseline grt start
collecting that and then
distribute at and that it also
clarifies how tax and revenue is
supposed to distribute the money
to local government so provides
a little bit more clarity for
them on the also holds them
accountable for the things that
we need to have done and then it
can allow those to to to go into
place and we are having the
start date of january one for
them to collect that data
which makes sense because it's a
tax year but also we can start
moving on the mrs now which one
very happy when we have the
conversation with tax and
revenue that local jurisdictions
can start pulling already their
local taxes to start those mra's
moving so we're not holding
those up.
Because in los cruces we have
two mra's that are ready to go
and so i'm very grateful with
the conversation with secretary
sharon clark who was happy with
these this modification and if
we have any other questions were
more than happy to ask larry
haran who is lobbyist for the
city of us crucials i'm also his
work closely with albert kirkin
other communities that really
see the benefit of mrace at that
point I don't know if there if
you want to make a statement or
if you wanted to stand so
questions but we're we're open
for that is there anyone here
from texas.
The.
Okay let's open it up to the
floor then
anybody here in support of this
bill.
Anybody here anybody online
either way anybody here in
opposition to the bill
members of the committee.
The.
Senator neighborhood.
Thank you mister chair.
A statement you made
I don't quite understand how
this works you you said a rural
town could create a method.
Redevelopment plan and okay I
don't understand how that would
would work in truly rural towns
in our.
State sure thing mr chair I
appreciate that question center
i'm gonna let learn answer that
question mr chairman that synder
neighbor any municipality can an
act in m r a the statue
designates how and why you
doesn't it blighted error and
you designate the boundaries for
it so if you had an area.
That needed development or you
have hovery or any issues that
qualify under the more active
designated by zone by the city
council action and then now
because of the changes we had
you can dedicate a portion of
the increment in criminal growth
of the grt within that area to
go back into the area to to
bring it up the increment
financing much like we would do
in a ****
so.
Mr chair and.
The senator mr ran.
The.
The ability
of a town
to do this means that it's going
to have to be a fairly so never
get size to create them I can
see where ross will might do it
but a town light.
The towers.
Twelve thousand people probably
cannot and certainly a town
light texaco.
Uh would not be able to do that
because I mean they're they're
not big enough to have these
different districts and the one
that I saw a recall seeing was
one in albuquerque.
Uh where south are you an m they
want to create a special
district so I understand how
that works but the
said rural towns I was thrown
off a bit so
I I think I understand it but
but I wouldn't classify one of
those rules so.
Am I am I off as here.
Mister chairman center niver
actually and I have the list
last year when when we are
actually making the changes I
don't have a this year but.
Several communities including
small communities like silver
city have metropolitan
redevelopment areas and the city
council has the authority to
establish the boundaries so I
don't think anything would
preclude it that if you had a
small a small enough town that
was going through blight you
could design the town is
an apply for that grocery
season's increments that's
vested in the authority of the
local governing party so they
have the ability to do that is
so it's pretty flexible
mr chair and her mister ram even
a town like silver city the only
tax that's impacted by it is a
tax generated from within that
district and so
small communities I mean so you
designate that from this small
area it may may be hundreds or
maybe in the low thousands of
dollars a year in grocery seats
tax that's really not won't want
me to do III see how I can do it
but I just the practicality of
that is is somewhat limited so
we're really talking about.
Larger larger towns probably
silver cities probably the
smallest down that you'd want to
do this
so you're really talking about
the handful of towns that have
what i'd consider at least
substantial population so thank
you for claim clarifying that
thank you mister thank you
senator mccutchen followed by
senator
mister chair and center
i'm going to show my ignorance
on tax code here but could you
walk me through how this is is
is really going to work with the
relationship in the cities in
the counties because if they
designate an area that's in the
city more but the great is
collected mainly that excuse me
not to guarantee the property
taxes are collected heavier in
the county side but then those
who be reverted back to the city
more heavily or
mr chairman center mccushin know
the way it would work is you
designated that area by by zones
and when she designate that went
in with this bill tax and
revenue give a reporting close
for gross receipt zone so then
you know how much money is
generated in that zone and once
you've established that baseline
which would be your zero on your
gralf any growth beyond that in
the district that revenue can be
dedicated back within the
district the county has the
ability to authorize money to go
back in the district if they
choose not to then none of their
revenue is not impacted the city
can do the same thing as can the
state for the state portion with
the provision that to get the
state portion we have to come
back to the legislature to get
approval of that dedication so
it's only within they can't do
property tax in the zones that's
been in place since nineteen
seventy six they've never used
the property technically because
it doesn't work which is why we
came back for the the grocery
seats tax increment okay
mischange their thank you for
the clarification of.
The.
Oh thank you mister chair and
thank you for bringing this
fourth
question if i'm right was the
emphasis though for this bill
due to a union's request to use
users for some of their
property actually thank you
mister chair and senator for
that question actually the the
reason why I became aware of it
was because in less crucials we
have three main streets that are
designated to be experiencing
blight we have solana we have
picacho and we have el poseo
these are streets where they're
stop in their shop and go not
shop and stop and so it was
through the city economic
development department that this
was brought to my attention but
also recognizing that it
benefits a number of communities
and mister cherson are told that
was the union tid was a separate
bill last year that passed
several it was different and
metropolitan the man acquising
two fifty one
last year it did carry that time
for you as as well tidy or
a i'm sorry can you repeat the
questions center
was the bill last year that was
fronted by you and m
was that a mra or a tip that was
the tid and I actually carried
that bill as well in the senate
that's why it's it's confusing
because both of those are kind
of related so what's the
difference between the two so
what is the difference between
the two mister chairman center
thomas the methods from the
development act is expensively
authority held item in a
cipality a tide can be brought
by a private property owner
private developer in cooperation
with some match potential
development act is just with the
government
oh thank you for that
explanation it's all it has
mister chair
anybody else
seeing seeing no other
discussion what's the bill of
the committee senator
second we have emotion from for
a due pass second because
we already had.
We already had in the other
order
either way secretary will call
the room senator hickey senator
he give out yes center my
establishes center my yes center
in my cutchen center in my catch
involved yes center mechanic yes
center mechanic votes yes center
neighbor
center and yes and is senator
yes center city in office yes
centers that you look at yes
senator thomas yes
yes senators if you know.
Yes then I was if you know about
yes.
Senator by a nine zero vote you
have a dupass thank you very
much committee appreciate your
your comments your money us will
deal with your felony entering
retail establishments
and senator by the.
Mr chairman will one nine five
thank you obvious quick as we
can will just give it rob you
and get out of here okay that's
curly what happens in retail
storage right render the door
grab stuff leave leave as quick
as they can with them much stuff
so we're trying to court tail
that
mister president in a bill and
mr chairman said a bill were
ninety five seeks to revise
crime brightly statue
specifically targeting retail
establishments it proposes that
entering the retail sustains
after being explicitly
prohibited from doing so
so after you're told not to come
back.
Right with the intention of
theft fell that committed theft
or any felony beating up a clerk
pushing them down threatening
them with a gun so constitute a
fourth degree.
And that I have to expert
witness there for their looks so
will take questions what he said
but this is a
not me
I don't know what's going on
there is the just into this
massive problem for retailers to
the point of you know folks not
wanting to work with these
retail location locations
because of this kind of crime
that's going on and just
persists so that's why we're
here today okay and did you want
to say something
from the sentencing commission.
From the organized crime
commission right
mr chair well i'm my name is
heart of the director of the
organized crime commission I
also
I also practiced as a prosecutor
at the second judicial district
attorney's office for some time
and I will say we see these
cases over and over again where
people are trust pass they keep
coming back to keep playing the
businesses and there are certain
sets of facts which is exactly
what this is trying to get out
that we currently aren't able to
criminalize that type of conduct
and so we think this bill helps
move the need on the right
direction.
Anybody in the audience here in
support please raise your hand.
Okay anybody here in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay we'll take a couple of
comments from the supporters.
And we have somebody online from
the chamber of congress that w.
Yeah comment of the use of my.
Mr
members of the committee might
be mischelsea canada and i'm the
director of public policy at the
mexico chamber of commerce
we appreciate the leadership on
this bell we just release the
the state chamber just release
an annual voter pulse survey I
had of the legislative session
where addressing public safety
and crime was the number one
issue from new mexico voters
across the state I remembers
believe this is an important
issue where as you heard repeat
offenders repeatedly trust past
the commit further crimes we
believe this will improve safety
for employees and per customers
were really excited about all of
the organized retail or the
organized retail crime bill that
was passed last session and the
quick implementation and we just
believe this will continue to
build on that important work
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for your
time today my name is victoria
blank and I am a deputy district
attorney at the bernalio county
district attorney's office.
Are office seas issues and
crimes at this bill is
attempting to address each and
every day and it has the full
support of our office and of the
district attorney thank you
thank you and did you want to
speak officer or chief.
Good afternoon my name is dale
wagner and the deputy cheaper
than mexico state please I just
the new mexico state police
strongly supports this bill not
only for the abuctor geria but
for the tidy communities in this
area that only have one retailer
and that are having this exact
same problem so thank you
okay is there anyone up we will
want to hear from sarah
fitzgerald of the albuquerque
chamber of conversations online.
The.
We
we we see her words but we don't
we don't hear them.
Yeah I know there's words of.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Okay well thank you miss
visteral.
Her.
Your comments have been
recorded.
Now anybody in opposition yes
miss question.
Good afternoon diane mccash I do
appreciate the understandable
goals of this bill but I don't
think it has the power to from
you I care okay I don't think it
has the power to achieve those
understandable goals but I think
it does have the power to create
sellings of shoplifters such as
the mother who lives formula for
a baby or hungry person barely
making it on our streets my son
was caught shop lifting and
walmart some time ago I believe
he has been banned forever on
he's living in a small community
now and I don't know that there
are many options other than
walmart he walks into that store
how would you know about intent
because he's a black band
because he wears his pants to o
if a person has merchandise
under their code I understand it
seems pretty clear it's but it's
impossible thing to show and
tent I think other than that and
the fourth degree fell on the
called for would I believe have
the potential to cause all kinds
of harm well not offering any
benefit that I can imagine we
don't need more people dealing
with the married of collateral
consequences of a felony
conviction thank you.
Thank you mister chair senators.
Let's look at the paragraph d on
page two and.
If I read this correctly.
The mere fact of entering the
establishment is not a crime
it's a.
Sir
mr chair senator neighbor that's
correct
but entering within tenth two
committee fellow me
or theft is a crime.
Mr chair mr senator neighbor
that's correct as well so the
state would have the burden to
so you previously receive notice
but you still have to have that
burglary intend to commit a
theft there in so the state
would have the burden to show
that men's rare that intent to
commit the crime.
So
why is the.
Notice portion.
Required.
Mr chairman senators.
The.
So the intent would be so the
person that
that habitionally robs right and
this is not a person that says
all I forgot I put a drill
better my pocket they forgot to
scan it myself and everything.
This is intentional robbery
rate.
And and they've done it multiple
times notice could be anything
in correct move i'm wrong those
can be arrested.
Side it right.
And on the notice given by the
store or notifying them imagine
they will receive it verbally
sometimes if they're almost
revered if they had the police
report they would mail it to
that address seem.
That you are not allowed the
store anymore.
And mr chairman senator
with respect to shop lived in
rosa walmart you're caught shop
with you are told you're doctor
inner the story
ice presume that's noticed that
you're talking about you're told
by the owner that you are no
longer allowed on their
premises.
So I understand the notice.
But.
It seems it just walking in.
After the notice
you're at least fresh passing at
that point.
Proving the second part is
pointed out is going to be I
don't know how you do that
unless
they actually have
a product on there.
Or have the salt in somebody in
the store.
That crime probably will have
already occurred when it not how
else would you prove they're in
terms at the time they went into
the store without something else
I guess is my question mister
chairman and senators.
Mr chair senator neighbor so
there could be a lot of
different factual situations
with this comes up they could be
in their destroying property and
to the extent of criminal damage
over a thousand night you've
committed to selling there a lot
of different ways these facts
play out and the point of this
is to give prosecutors more
tools because we've seen in
other cases that there are
there's certain type of conduct
in these people who are
repeatedly offending that it
falls between the cracks and
suddenly we're just hitting them
with two petty misdemeanors so
it is it is pretty fact specific
but that's a good thing right we
don't want to make something
overly broad we want to do
something that helps go after
the specific individuals that
are repeatedly disregarding
notice and coming back and i'll
also note that there's a case
state the arch letter that talks
about the specific set of facts
and we're not actually allowed
to charge commercial burglary if
someone has been given notice
and repeatedly comes back and
with the intent to commit the
after a felony so this helps a
mend with the supreme court is
already said this essentially
cotifies commercial.
Mister charon senators.
I know maybe why it was written
away it was because it kind of
follows the prior
a subsection but
yeah if I were writing it I
would certainly write it a lot
different because it seems like.
It's clear if you say any person
having previously received
notice that the person is not
authorized to enter the reached
telestablishment and who
thereafter inners retail
establishment with the attempt
to comment the fell fell in a
year they asked his guilty of
what we
follow.
But you guys write it how you
want that it's just clear and I
would rewrite that as well that
uh followed the succession of
the event said you're trying to
deal with that's up to you
again.
It's.
It's not the.
Entry after receiving notice
that is a crime it's the entry
after receiving notice with.
And in tent which means you're
probably have already committed
another crime before you're
going to get prosecuted for this
and what that I would suspect so
so chairman and senator
neighborhood but you recommend
maybe ending d at the word
establishment.
Because the problem comes in how
do you establish the.
The second part of that.
I didn't
chair and and center nightmare
as we would you recommend that
maybe we end that paragraph that
the word establishment because
therefore you've
you've been a previously
notified don't come in here
anymore because you've done
things if you're not supposed to
be doing and then there's no
intent that needs to be
established simply have been
notified that's it you're not
allowed in there.
Well I I certainly I mean i'm
not a criminal lawyer but to me
if you've been that you're no
longer authorized to enter that
establishment.
They'll need to establish them
that seems to me to be something
that ought to be.
Capable of the prosecutor and
right now it would just be
simply civil fresh pass if I
understand it correctly.
Mr chair centered a neighbor the
intent of this bill is not to
make enhancing trespassing just
trust passing alone we again we
don't want to be overly brought
with this bill and start having
people who are just coming in or
just you know someone who's not
supposed to be there but just
came in again that alone we do
not want to turn that into a
four three felony that's not
what this does this is for
someone who's actually then put
on notice shouldn't be coming
back and is there to commit a
felony or theft again now it's
shop lifting they have to
actually leave the property
right in order to start charging
that so this is again a
different set of facts is the
satifacts where maybe they are
we catch them stealing they
haven't left the store yet and
you know they get stopped at
this point but I don't I think
it's going to be too broad
sweeping and not really even
burglary anymore if we start
just criminalizing repeated
trust passing.
Yeah mr chairman and senators it
seems like in order to prove
that in ten it's not going to be
you just catching going up the
aisle.
I mean that's going to be hard
to decide whether they happen
tempt to do anything at that
point.
You catch i'm going up the isle
and see that they put
an item in their pocket then you
can probably establish the
intent because they are once
again.
Concealing goods owned by
another on their person.
And I think you'd be easier to
establish the internet that they
were going to walk out the door
even though they haven't walked
out the door yet but once a walk
out the door then you have them
for
crime at theft or largely at
that point
until that point you can maybe
get him under this but you
couldn't get him for largening
or theft of delay actually.
Your pass a cast r.
Mister chair senator nibert
that's yeah I agree but I think
that's the point right we mean
you can look at different
circumstances did they come in
without any money in their
pocket other people clearly
waiting for them outside I mean
that's a prosperous job that's
exactly what we want a
prosecutor to do but we don't
want to turn this into something
that isn't burglary yeah
i'm i'm going to support your
bill I I just uh
it just looks like it's it's
going to be one other charge on
top of the actual crime of of
large near the also
you know senator wool as we move
forward into the shirt will pry
roman them prior to going into
your share if we go that far.
Thank you very much thank you
mister.
The.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you senators but the and thank
you to the crime task force and
all the folks working on all the
bill.
The the crime package kind of
addresses.
Certain aspects of our.
Public safety in our community
so one of the big aspects is is
this commercial low is
businesses you know I mean you
you have to be able to do
business and the government is
to provide a an environment
where not only markets are open
but also free of theft damage by
lins.
In on all that stuff.
Fear what the problem is in my
opinion mister
is how.
My hometown deals with the crime
of trespass
it was a good idea at the time
and saw the city entered into
agreement.
With the mclending lawyers to
not arrest unmissed a meaners
mister meaners are minor crimes
however trespassing.
And i've urged the honourable
mayor police cheaper than
they're doing awesome after
doing the rest every single they
they the city of our cricket
needs to make a wrestling on the
criminal transparency just has
to cause not only as the person
not arrested but it sends a
horrible message to the
community.
Cause the officer tells the
store owner why I can arrest.
As if i'm legally incapable of
arresting or or and then that's
simply not true it is a policy
not the law.
Police officers can make a rest
on misdemeanors if they view the
misdemeanor as we all know.
Or in the case of shop lifting
you know they cannot.
Shoplifting data barred in my
son as they can make up mister
me arrest even though they
didn't actually see the crime.
So I think i'm another aspect to
this bill which is.
Which intends to do the right
thing is the fact that mister
meaners are quicker justice
although mister minner send a
message to a cops days judges
that it's a lesser crime it's
actually quicker justice and and
so mister chairman center
senators if someone gets a
rested on a felony
they get let out chances are
they get let out the next day
that the metro case gets
dismissed.
Three four months down the road
there may be up grandeur hearing
or preliminary hearing three
four months after that they may
it may be separate trial.
On a misdemeanor of that case is
a live and well alive and well
and they can go before a judge
and face the consequences within
like two three months and there
is up to a year of
incorporation.
So I think up.
Even though and folks mine it's
a minor crime the the the teeth
is there in the law to deal with
the situation.
Um so I don't know how to bought
on the spill either here on the
floor but.
I think I think I would just
urge the city leaders to.
To do this whether this passes
are not and and make but on the
flipside mister i'll end with
this is on the flip side some of
the officers tell me where more
they're going to get out the
next day why should I arrest
them I think the second.
So we don't want to arrest him
because they would languish in
jail for three four months.
We changed the laws so that you
know folks get out the next day.
And we don't want to rest them
cause we big out the next day so
anyway it's it's it's a problem
that must be solved and I
appreciate the the sponsors
bringing this forward to to move
this conversation forward thank
you mister chairman.
Thank you senator mast us then
we have senator mckenna.
Is this okay.
I'm fearing this m.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators minos and the
I am.
The.
I am really concerned to about
the increasing shop lifting I
mean i've seen it at home depot
myself where I was walking in to
return something and two people
were so bold to carry out a big
box it was a big piece of
equipment right out the door
and that happens a lot because
we've probably noticed there's a
lot of protective patrols cars
in a lot of the big box stores
and the like
what concerns me about the bill
however is.
Those who have
mental instability mental
illness
and how are they registering the
warning
and a felony on someone's record
is a big deal.
It can prevent sign from getting
the job keeping a job and I can
just see how the spiral down.
For that person's family could
be so bad so at this point
chairman in senators I cannot
sort of port the bill.
Is there any of the discussion I
have a few questions.
One of the comments in the fire
was I think crucial to me
and it says
what deters crime is not the
severity of the punishment but
the likelihood that you're going
to be cut and punished.
And I don't see how this in any
way changes the likelihood that
you're going to get.
The I mean
what happens now is the guy
walks out with an armed full of
sweaters.
And adding this punishment to it
doesn't in any way enhance the
chances it is going to get cut
so it's great that we're giving
the prosecutors another tool.
I suppose it's great but this
isn't going to be going to
increase the likelihood of
getting cut.
Mr chair respectfully disagree
one of the things that I keep
hearing out and I understand the
argument however as as we just
heard from senator maesters the
officers say well this isn't
going to crime I can't even
arrest him for it so law
enforcement doesn't take these
things as seriously because the
conduct isn't culpable it's
we're going to just keep going
in the circle if we keep saying
they're not going to get cut but
it's not a crimes of course
nobody's going to arrest them as
we introduce laws like this
there's more.
Teeth behind the actual law and
I think we are also encouraging
enforcement now he looked this
is actually fourth degree felony
this isn't just a mister meaner
a pediments demeanor.
And and I think it incentivises
everybody to actually do
something and it's also going to
push even retail to say hey we
need to do something about this
there's actually something that
can be done about this so it
does it does increase the
likelihood of them being
last year we increase the the
the penalty which it we we
allowed them to accumulate
didn't that what effect is that
her and wouldn't isn't that.
Every bit is as big a deterrent
or better determined than this.
Mrperiod chair it's some it has
been helpful in fact are we've
been prosecuting a lot more
shoplifting we've been a lot
more effective we've been able
to bring a lot more fell in your
charges so it has been helpful I
don't think just because one
good to all means we don't we
don't need more so in fact I
would say that the fact that
we've updated our shop lifting
laws just proves the point that
the more tools we have the more
effective we can be.
I i'm III heard senator
neighborhoods point loud and
clear and i'm surprised he is
still intense to vote for the
bill because
the person would still have to
actually do some.
In order for for.
For this to have any effect you
can't say well he walked into
the store so he must have
intended to sharply he's going
to do something stick something
under his code or into his
pocket under the babies.
Walker
something has to happen in order
for that intent to be
established otherwise they just
touch it right out of court
there was no intent so i'm not
sure what you gain with this
that you don't already have as
soon as he sticks that thing
under his coat.
You already have a a way to
arrest him now the policeman
isn't going to be in every
single store in alva.
So I it this just seems like a
uh
what's the word a symbolic act
that were symbolically looking
like we're getting really to
phone crime but in fact what we
run the risk of doing a senator
mckenna pointed out is having a
lot of people these charges for
felonies that might not
otherwise have had to do so and
it really isn't going to help
the real the the real effort to
stop genuine crime.
I think you're painting this
with the wrong brush because
then notice has to be given to
them right so you'd give them
the notice that they've already
cut you once in one form or
another.
Trespassing stealing right.
The notice is what tells them.
We don't want you back right.
But have you come back.
And you still from us you're
going to get a felony.
Because the notice is what sets
the tongue.
For the first five guys and get
a restaurant that go to jail
while the other five guys are
still sitting there and now say.
I'm charged with the felony not
a mister meaner that not just
writing me a ticket and let me
go right.
It's seen a felony it seem
you don't want to go to the wall
greens anymore and have to have
opened the box to get raisers
right then retail cost of retail
theft.
Is driving up our costs.
You're not going to catch
everybody because there has to
be incident but don't forget we
have camera video we have
witnesses right.
I'm sure multiple stores have
been hit multiple times in a
single day.
And so
what intent means.
It means.
You're not to be air right in in
the wall more greeter center sir
want to.
It does not recognize the money
that he wasn't on the job for
that got notice not to be that
right.
But I imagine walmart has
enough.
Detection in their system right
to put their pictures in there
in in detect them and and then
notify their security right and
try to get a matter store before
something happens but the
intent.
And the notice is what I think
changes the policy because if if
i'm going to keep going to
robbing it i'm only getting the
mister meter in the good center
for melocrate thinks well that's
a quarter quicker process when I
go in the front of the judge for
a mister metering seeing a cell
can mister terminal guilty we
caught here's a video evidence
you're fine to five hours a
community service you got a
right but this would repeat
infender that has noticed.
Well you don't set that tone
across on criminal prosecution
and we quit being we can give
you a mister meaner and here's
your canny go home work while
you do rake somebody's yards or
leaves you don't get in your
mind.
Well you have to change the tone
but I think misses mccash made a
couple of really good points
first there's nothing in this
build to say how much
what level the candy bar the
story that says look you you
took to candy bars last week so
we're giving you notice the next
time you enter the store you're
going to be guilty of a fourth
degree fell any just because you
were the store there's no under
you know
there's no threshold that you
have to increase we had that in
the other bill the other bill
says once it accumulates to a
level that really deserves
felony.
It does this doesn't have that
it could be a six pack of beer
and you get to chose the fellow.
Mister shared that there isn't a
an amount that's correct there
is not a threshold on that it's
just threat that theft therein
but again there's we have the
situation where if it's you know
four hundred and fifty dollars
every ninety one days but
they're still continuing to
harass these businesses this
would apply whereas the shop
lifting felony would not we also
are dealing with situations
where it's not just that it's
people coming in and damaging
their damaging the actual retail
stores and that's been a huge
issue and that criminal damage
once it reaches a thousand
dollars is a felony so this
would be applicable in the
situations and and the but you
keep describing the upper limits
which I agree should be stopped.
But there's the other thing that
she brought up is there's no way
of ever getting out from under
this when you were nineteen you
still the candy bar or six back
of your now you're twenty eight
and you forget that nine years
before you were in supposed to
go into where you figure they
couldn't possibly remember nine
years later you walk in the
store and bingo you're guilty of
a fourth degree felony
there's no there's no expert no
chance to prove you're not
you've overcome your shop
lifting your club domain has
been treated and you're ready to
come back in there's no way of
ever escaping it.
I understand
the state would still have to
prove that nine years ago they
were given notice so
the state still is always going
to have to have the burden of
saying yes there was notice you
were given before you came in
nine years later so I understand
the point I do I think it's
unlikely as a prosecutor that
you have noticed from ten years
ago and there were that young
but I I certainly understand the
comment.
Mister chair he was we have a
few other people so for the
still for the first time senator
hickey for the first time
senator cutting in for the
second time
okay good
good yeah because I used your
name and
go ahead and senator hickey
thank you mister chair and thank
you senators for bringing this
bill.
I appointed clarification that
i'm still a little fusian
because i've I think i've heard
address both west so if someone
still is a candy bar gets caught
there are notice.
If they just come back into that
store is that itself a felony
or desert have to be some
detrimental or negative
behaviour.
That that either stills or
whatever or less active going to
steal
have to be have to occur mr
chair sender hickey correct the
conduct you just described would
not be a fellow because it would
just the fact that they came
back into the establishment
isn't enough they would have to
have that week the state would
have to show that they had an
intent to commit theft or some
other following us and how did
exist use me mister chair and
expert how how do you define
intent.
So often within tent
you know unless you get some our
right admission plus other
evidence it's going to be
circumstantial evidence you're
going to have to show he we saw
how he did this we saw that he
moved this project around here
you put this in his pocket or he
had a whole crew that he's been
a identified with stealing from
before and it would be it would
largely be circumstantial
evidence for men's rare because
rarely does a defendant come
right out and say up I was going
to do it so that's that's what
the prosecutor has to show and
there's that can be a merry out
of things just as the facts of
the case playout.
Okay
mister chair and expert
they are.
The mariad makes me a little bit
uncomfortable however.
Um.
The.
There's a lot of fear of crime
in certainly in my.
District.
In and you wouldn't think they
would but there is an what
drives it as i'm told.
Is this gang.
Shop lift and that I mean that
that really raises questions and
people.
And I don't know that all the
current is any better earning
worse than any other town but
when it happens it really sticks
out I I know people considering
come up to me and said gosh I
had a friend who was going to
move here but they heard about
this and that and they
it's like I understand it's it's
kind of symbolic but on the
other hand I really do thank you
and you know we can talk about
what creates deterrence in what
doesn't create deterrence
but I think once this happens a
few times and some people are
have committed to felony in some
people are in jail yeah the word
is going to spread among that
community of walfo
they're serious now where is
before it's like yeah okay you
know again i'll get a missed me
and weather.
So.
You know I I don't know that
serving three more years of a
twenty year cents does anything
but knowing that you're going to
be behind bars with this.
Um.
I think does create that initial
deterrent that would hopefully
i've earned out hopefully likely
would deter this type of
activity so
I
the myriad worries me a little
bit and maybe that can get to
find I don't know that you just
you're going to love that work
and I think probably get fixed
there but I think the intent of
the bill is corrected and I will
support it thank you.
Mrperiod chairman center thank
you very much for this I I think
that
if we were to look at the
statute here and go ahead and
put any person who without
authorization there's a vehicle
watercraft aircraft or other
structure removal or not you
know somebody's home and make
that a mister meaner.
I think that probably has a
little different connotation and
saying hey these people are come
into my home we don't want to
picture you know this as as
applying to just big box stores
and and and say all they got to
underway they can they can
figure it out nate they they
roll theft into there every day.
You know enter their everyday
analysis but there's a lot of
smaller stores who are who are
also harassed and they have
people that are not just
stealing but as you said come
and integrate
to create.
Criminal acts and so it helps
protect them as well and so if
we look at these stores as
people's homes then they they
have a little bit more impact
and i'm going to take a little
bit different.
View on this in that this bill
really only affects two people.
The lowest of the dirt bags who
are repeat offenders and just
keep doing it over and over and
over and also it affects.
Kids who are on a dare or
whatever it is and they have
that conversation with their
little buddies and they say this
goes less go still pack
cigarettes from the stop and go
down there whatever it is well
if they know that a felony is
tied to that act during your
site no mandol don't do that so
we do two things we give the
stores
a tool to stop that from
happening and we also train a
generation to say hey do not do
not do this as a serious crime
don't do that and so the peer
pressure goes the other way
because we've all heard that out
to petty mister meaner we all
say that we get pulled over
speaking ticketer you know you
have a organized when you walk
in the capital
but it will take it take that
out out of betty miss whatever
it is so
but i'm i'm in full support and
and I think we owe it to the
younger generation to train them
and so hey look this is this a
serious stuff don't do this and
so with it mister center second
side
mr chair just address your
question the difference as I see
it is where that person.
Not apprehended but could be
taken away and and shuttle back
by security if it's
simply felt they really don't
get past the cash registered
approved the the elements.
Under this bill as I see it if
the camera detects that they put
stuff in their pocket or under
the the baby carriage as you
said or that in there in the
back of the store I think
security can then prove the
intent that they intended to
steal like that artimal and
prosecutor under this act where
you're looking at regular theft
you're going to have to wait
till they have beyond cause they
could say oh I intended to pay
for it I just put it there
because that was conditioned so
that's the difference and that's
why thank you.
I still don't understand
something really crucial.
Paragraph c
says if you come in to any.
Building motor vehicle whatever
it is of watercraft aircraft any
structure movable or immovable
with the intent to commit a
felony or theft you just come in
you're guilty of a fourth degree
fell in.
Article d says if we warned you
once and you come in with the
intent to commit if the your
degree is guilty of before what
have you added with this nothing
I I don't understand why adding
this as anything to the to what
we already had in.
It's the notice sorry mister
charitz the notice aspect in its
specifically the court of
appeals case stavier chileta.
That made it very clear that we
can't say you've been put on
notice you can't return you've
done things here before
that
so essentially that you're
asking why this isn't already
commercial
and there are situations where
it is there are situations where
we can charge a fourth degree in
it and you know the prosecutors
call it commercial burglary
however this is to go after the
repeat persons who are coming in
and playing in these places over
and over and over again have
been told not to come back and
continue to do so but.
Um
could this essentially
subsequency is commercial
burglary but it has nothing to
do with notice it doesn't
address these repeat offenders
it doesn't repeat address the
the gangs in the organization
the organizations that are
hitting these spots and so this
is again just another another
tool there are fact patterns
that play out we're see doesn't
work and stavier chileta makes
that very clear but subsection
deal what we're proposing would
allow us to do that the d
doesn't kick in I think senator
that was my point what senator
neighbored it said first time
room
that
just coming in does not the
chrome.
The crane is coming in with the
intent to commit a fellow to
commit a burglary.
And that is already covered and
see if you come in to the store
with the intent to commit a
felony you've already violated
let me clarify so paragraph sees
what says without authorization
stavier challenge makes clear
that saying that I put him on
notice not to come back does not
count as without authorization
so no it doesn't work because
they say well it's still in
public store you still have
authorization so that's what
stayed for your chile addresses
they said that the we can't say
we put your notice that means
you don't have authorities
authorization to be here no.
Subsection sea does not apply
currently it does not work so
how do we prove that if if we've
already given him notice and
we've already criminally trust
passed them the courts have said
that doesn't that's they still
have authorization to come back.
So this cotifies
steve arch letter.
Two two other issues though that
the the the the
I just don't understand you know
how you would get around.
Does the store have to maintain
a record of some kind.
Of the people that they've given
this notice to or want to
defense attorney just say it's
never been in there before I
don't know why they're
considering him to have been
given a notice.
Mr chair yeah of course of
course they have to we we have
to prove that they were put on
notice that's already being done
though that's not really much of
an issue yeah I mean the
businesses are keeping track
this guy was in here we know he
was here we also have you know
if there was a police report
written from criminal chest pass
so but absolutely because that's
going to be an element that has
to be proven that they were put
on notice.
How do they know whose was who
I mean a law enforcement officer
does but that is the store now.
To secure they they take photos
they have cameras they keep they
keep almost identical what looks
like police records like law
enforcement does I mean this is
their business this is their
livelihood they keep very good
track of often sometimes better
than I think law enforcement
does the very sophisticated and
even the smaller establishments
this isn't just big retail this
is these are the persons that
are hurting their business they
keep track they take photos but
again the state will still have
to overcome identity we can't
just have a slip of paper like
the state still has that burden
to meet but the businesses keep
pretty good track to keep photos
they keep and they share
information amongst themselves
as well have you seen this guy
yes we did I did we can ideally
do you know him yes we do
but if he goes into another
store.
And hasn't received notice in
the release so what this just
mean.
You work your way through the
whole mall before you you you
run out of of target.
Yeah
mr chair sure but that's again
let's if they're going to do
every place once and then leave
great that's still better than
what we're dealing with right
now
any other discussion with civil
in the committee
so I can
move in senator mccutchen
seconds do fast.
Secretary will call the rule.
Senator hickey yes senator he
give out yes center mayor
masters votes no so when my
content yes same cut involves
yes sinner mckenna no center
mechanic votes now senator
neighbor
senator neighbor votes yes
center smith is yes explain I
will senate his votes yes center
city a lot best senator tommy no
explain my vote sent until man
works now senators appeal no
center to zip in a vote
to explain we have a four to
four tight two explain his vote
senator sh meetings and then
senator tomorrow maybe I can
just get one mister will see if
you're really persuasive you
might
new mexico has the highest
birdly burglary rate in the
united states and a well
respected prosecutor comes and
just says we need some tools
because we've had a kind of a
court technicality and you just
need help doing your job in the
state that's number one in the
country absolutely going to vote
yes and support you I will
support our law enforcement i'll
support community activists
whoever it is to it it's it's
one piece of the policy this is
just one you're not saying it's
going to fix everything I
support you thank you anyone
else who wants to come with
other solutions we're creating
food deserts where people can't
even have a grocery store in
their neighborhood
so I I absolutely support it
thank you i'm not sure you're
for sweet anybody with that
there is a good trade center
you're talking
I may not be anymore persuasive
you are just disposal very
difficult to determine intent
very difficult to enforce
soldiers
go to another store and steal
so I agree with what it says in
the.
Any fire says research shows a
certainly of being caught as a
more powerful determined to
crime.
Then the severity of punishment.
As a result increasing penalties
for crime is unlikely to produce
a significant impact in new
mexico.
Punishment is grown less certain
is crime has increased with
fewer violent crimes sound.
Alternative attention said that
we increase the penalty they'll
deter people but unfortunately
people don't think that way
they'll kids going to the store
they don't think they have no
idea what the pound of the years
even if they did they're that
that's not what they're thinking
in a lot of these laws that
we're trying to pass this year
just make in the public believer
doing something really all we
are just twitter
of this making ourselves feel
good.
You know if this is the best we
can come up with.
Um where were were indeed
trouble crime as a sole ramp at
the tweaking these laws is that
have much of an impact thank you
mister chair this is motion
motion for do pass without
recommendation
motion for defense with no wreck
is there a second six second
okay secondary
senator hicky yes salary who
give us yes senator may asked us
no
ms that works now that in my
curtain yes so my car generally
yes center mechanic no similar
can avoid no senator neighbor
sending a neighbor rewards yes.
Sellers meet his votes yes
center city a lot of senator
tommen.
No seller tom hand votes now
senators epino no so I think we
just have a deadline eight
we still have a deadline i'm
sorry didn't we still have a
deadline the vote was for the
four so it sits on the table we
have a member who is presenting
a building another committee
when she comes back we may take
another vote on it or we may
just wait
and keep going voting everybody
thank you I I think something
needs to be said that in the
presentation if you're going to
continue to watch the news every
single day
the winery got broken into
tomorrow who knows how many
businesses and critic have
closed because of her repeated
vandalism repeated theft
repeated that this doesn't deal
with any of those I know it does
everything had noticed of intent
you have not vandalism I I mean
I mean they come in at midnight
and brother they don't go break
into the store at midnight for
just break a window they're
there to get start and that's
that
and this build would not stop
that it would
chair would it would be any
that's a felony it would be they
would be we already have in
those laws we already have
this is if a kid walks back into
a store where the owner said you
can't come back in your store
expect of cook last week that's
a fourth degree felony if he
walks into the store that's not
going to stop people coming at
midnight breaking into steel
save or an atm machine with the
pick up drug that's the kind of
stuff they it will deter you
have to set a bottle I think
we're we're we're
we have a disagreement but when
the other member comes we can
try again if you want
thank you thank you senator
stephanics
and we have a suburban
this is the health care
authority build senate bill
fourteen.
The.
Yeah.
Your care and members of the
committee we have a committee
sub I think it's point two i'm
losing active
subs
and with me today I have missed
john mason who is the drafter of
the bill she's only here for a
technical
expertise to answer questions
because it is a dents bill and
the secretary of the secretary
designate of the human services
department I thought we would
have confirmed it by now but not
yet
so
mr chair doing a brief
discussion of the sub
that would be good okay i'm
sorry you an emotion we don't
have it yeah we just being asked
out.
There is a key to the bill on
the different section and and we
have the key also so if you
don't really want to read the
bill you can read.
I'm sorry
please
when you said there's a key is
at the key between the senate
bill and the committee so yes
the committee sub
dated two one twenty four and
your bottom left hand corner did
anybody so these are the changes
you may between the original
bill
yes mister chair there was a set
of amendments that was put on
the original bill
and then we heard concerns about
the original bill and we deleted
two sections of the bill that
i'm ready to talk about after
you do your magic with that do
not.
You want me just to explain it
first.
Then you senator myself but if
we haven't already done so much
chairman i'll move the committee
support discussion purposes
great thank you center thank you
mr chair so in the first
committee which was senate rules
we had a robust discussion about
two hours there were some
prepared amendments that were
put on that were cleaner and we
also heard discussion about very
site and there were two items in
the original bill that needed to
be deleted and a had to do with
the early childhood education
department which did not belong
in the health care authority and
they had to do with the child
carefacilities so those two
sections of the bills were
deleted and I should let my
doing this this network I think
it works okay so are you think
our expert who
drafted the bill could correct
me if there's anything more.
Welcome to now
miss mason sorry we actually you
can come into we actually ripped
out several sections of the bill
because
the department of help for the
asked for them to be removed so
we removed them
ec asked for two sections to be
removed so there are
now hundred and thirty eight
sections it started out at a
hundred and fifty sections was a
two hundred twenty five page
bill and I think it's standard
two or two maybe
probably.
So that is the changes from the
bill the committee sub and I
prepared to discuss the entire
thing whenever you're ready if
you have questions about the
changes I think I think we're
ready to hear what you change
no lubby disabled the the
committee saw last year's bill
that set up the framework you
come back now with the entered
you're putting it together
that's correct thank you mister
chair for that the health care
authority department act was
passed in twenty twenty three
initiating the creation of the
department by changing the name
of the human services department
and transferring various
divisions and functions from
department of health and general
services department to the
health care authority this is a
statutory clean up bill that now
changes the name throughout
various statutes from human
services department to health
care authority it also
recompiles rear ranges statutes
to create a new chapter twenty
four a health and safety or
sorry health care code which
contains all sections currently
existing and chapter twenty four
health and safety that pertained
at the health care authority any
sections of law being amended
may also contain technical clean
up and outdated language there
are few areas of substantive
change and up yet.
Assigns the director of the
health care authority to now sit
on the state benefits division.
A purchasing group and it
requires iback the purchasing
group not just to go out to rfp
but to purchase together and
that's a big change it because
they weren't really purchasing
together it authorizes the
department of health to share
health information dated it
collects with the health care
authority and the health care
affordability fund program
administration is still
transferred right
transferred from the osi yes yes
and I think at this time i'm
going to turn it to the
secretary of the department of
the health care authority
department so she'll have the
inners and the details of
running it
okay touched the microphone
sorry everyone will kill up
there good afternoon mr terror
members of the committee I would
like to think senators upon its
worth stored and pdf response
rain this important bill
senate bill fourteen spinish is
establishing the framework for
standing up the new mexico
healthcare authority which was
created as a senator stephanics
mentioned during the twenty
twenty three legislative session
essentially transition in the
new mexico human services
department into the new mexico
healthcare authority to be the
single state agency charged with
healthcare policy purchasing and
regulation the human services
department submitted a
transition plan to the
legislature in november with a
final plan submitted in january
at which laid out two key
changes that are contained and
senate bell fourteen which I
want to highlight this afternoon
first the bill redefines the
term consolidated purchasing for
health care benefits among the
agencies that constitute the
enter agency benefits advisory
committee to mean a single
process for both procurement and
contracting at we believe that
there's change well compelled
the necessary collaboration of
the eye back agencies to work
together to advance improvements
and contracting for health
benefits for public employees
and retirees.
Well also respecting their
existing autonomy governance and
funding structures together
these agencies collectively
procure and purchase health care
for more than a hundred and
eighty thousand new mexicans our
gold is simply to negotiate a
better deal by teaming up
together I said that everyone
gets a better deal and to
provide a more transparent view
of the cost performance in value
of new mexico's healthcare
investments.
Second the bill would move the
health care affordability fund
and its staff in appropriations
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
the health care authority this
change will enable health care
authority to better coordinate
health insurance coverage for
new mexicans and to maximise the
states healthcare purchasing
power well also identifying
fixing gaps in the system to
make sure that every new mexican
has access to affordable health
care coverage before I close I
want to reiterate the importance
of this foundation of bill
actions are being taken now by
the health care authority to
initiate the needed fiscal data
and policy analysis that will
inform recommendations and
decision making on a new
purchasing plan that can be
executed by july twenty twenty
five.
Senate bill fourteen is the
enabling statute to advance this
important work to improve the
health care system for new
mexicans thank you mister chair.
Chair members of the committee I
just wanted you to know that one
of my expert witnesses every arm
strong miss armstrong had a
family emergency but she just
texted me to say the emergency
is being worked out good manner
for her daughter and no one
should worry thank you thank you
for letting us them okay is
there anyone here in the list
but it is.
All those in the audience and
support please indicate by
raising.
Wait a second mr more you you're
in support
you could come this is this is
new
I i'm not sure you've ever
i'm not sure this this is the
first I am I am scared of this
might
be on.
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is brent more
i'm a registered lobbyist for
blue crossing shield mexico and
with me to day is a marlow show
to my job is to be her voice
she's actually losing her voice
but double across the shield
stands and support of this
legislation so please do note
that mister chairman members of
the committee that's good thank
you.
Is there anyone here just go
ahead.
I'm sorry good afternoon mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is market
goods all us in our
representative leave a health
care new mexico and we too
standard support of this very
important piece of legislation
we thank the sponsor for
bringing it for and for the
department in terms of figuring
out the way to build a great
future for you make sure the
most duty we stand in full
support necessary committee to
move this bill along thank you
very much mister chairman of
members of the committee thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee if it remained as
amazing of the mexico primary
care association we just wanted
to express our gratitude to both
secretaries for working together
to ex address are concerns with
the bill and of course the
drafters and the senator senator
stravotics for bringing forwards
we support it immensely and we
really appreciate the gracious
assistance that you gave a
you've got to make let me just
ask you then they've taken care
the concern you had over the
rural health care phone is yes
mister chair and the other one
the capital pool which we just
heard before it's it's it'll
stay with department of health
and mfa okay very good thank you
thank you mister martinez
thank you mr chairman and
members of the committee i'm
leary martinez with presbation
medical services as well as a
chairman of the medicaid
advisory committee for the human
services department and we stand
in support of this bill also
with feel it serve marked
improvement over what the first
version was of the bill so thank
you so much thank you
and i'm assuming that all the
cabinet secretaries are here
because they're in support of it
so will save you the the trip
under the mike and and is there
anyone who anybody online either
way anybody here in opposition
anybody here who still has yes
please come up the head of the
retiree healthcare authority mr
give us a chair actually with
return health care authority
just has the concerns that we
just want to bring up or
actually one I should say we
don't oppose you know the goal
of the health care authority we
too want to improve health care
as well the only concern that we
have is regards to the
contracting I know it does state
as a far as a unified single
process we don't know how that's
being defined exactly what that
is obviously we you know are
somewhat unique and some of the
medicare contracting and things
that we do or other concern was
just the speed of this transit
position in that there really
hasn't been any valuation to
look at the impact.
Or the data or exactly the
strategic plan we want to ensure
they success of this too as as
we look at it and I know aboard
just wants to have that
opportunity to understand what
that impact would be they
represent a lot of different
state holders a lot of different
members from from the different
groups of participate under the
retired house to authority so we
just want to ensure that we know
there's one big change as far as
adding a director of the hca
state benefits division which we
now have a voice you know on
this governing board to help you
know in that decision making
process as well as probably
facilitate a lot of conversation
between the two so that is one
of the concerns that we have and
really the reason why we're
speaking up as a regards to that
particular peace at this time
thank you mister chair.
Anybody else
members of the committee
senator hiki
do you have any questions I sure
do
but it mostly have a clarifying
nature I I do want to make clear
to everyone I am
this is one of the bills i'm not
supported about I mean it's it's
and was engaged in research last
year came out with this
essential conclusion they
purchasing the love large
numbers everything else this
makes an immense amount of sense
and we need to do this in the
state and quite honestly without
me going into one of my academic
rumbled ramble rumbled probably
rambling
this is the best hope that we
have in new mexico for
containing health care costs
just long story short and i'll
be happy to explain to people
offline this allows us to
approach what is called three
percent target theory and in
three percent targetary
massachusetts leads the way but
basically the collection of
information data the analysis of
claims per database what's
actually paid cross referencing
it with disease you can you can
take when done right when done
right this hand create
phenomenal transparency around
the particularly and i'm not
picking up anywhere in
particular but system strides
cost I mean health plans take
that and go back and that's
another issue this is really
about what we what we pay into
systems and generating them to
become very efficient in their
care and in massachusetts
for the past few years I think
with a little exception during
hovid
and with the exception of
brigham
mass general they've been able
to keep their systems which take
care of.
By far most of the state twelve
other systems at three percent
or less a year annual cost
increases now that is phenomenal
when you think that we're around
six seven sometimes eight some
eye back agencies fourteen
percent crazy this creates the
information needed
providing we have the educated
and trained staff to be able to
collect analyse and make the
information transparent but this
is our last best hope it costs
containment so I want to be
clear that that I do support
this but I do have a few
questions which I I think that
are going to be not lead to any
long discussion we're talking
about bringing and quote the old
eye back agencies and and that's
a hundred and eighty thousand
well that's a help that better
than thirty thousand but it
never near
five hundred thousand and so
whether by edict or some
mechanism next year and
legislation all institutions
have higher learning should be
included in this poor and and
some of mary are as they tag on
to
some of the the state risk
management but that's going to
that's going to significantly
elevate the numbers and remember
this is about this business one
or one the law of large numbers
The the healthy
basically far out way the sick
that that move every year so
without going into health
insurance dynamics this is
critically important to bring in
the institutions of higher
learning deal that next year
number two i'm hoping that
you're going to bring in all
pharmacy purchasing because
pharmacy and pbm's are in the
same vain as
getting costs and through health
plans or third party
administrators if we don't bring
that together we have no hope of
bringing down our pharmacy costs
so they also you must have a
section in and people who are
qualified and
as I did with the ibm
I b m I back
I just got this one seems long
longer that one was fifty one
pages over sixty page in dapped
analysis of pbs in all the
options of the state and look at
the lower it's healthcare costs
and stopped the highway robbery
it's going on through purchasing
drugs through pbm's and its a
mats it's worth united states
the others make other profit
that's why they bought a pbm's
so we must have that in there as
well and i'll pass the paper on
so do you plan to bring pharmacy
in.
Mr terrorist under hicky great
point so i'll address your first
queen first so III don't
disagree with you in terms of
the other institutions that
include public employees
including all higher education
we hope that my virtue of
negotiating a better deal those
public entities will want to
come into the pool also so
that's another we think that
will be able to negotiate good
deal they could compute it sort
of how their municipal
governments and counties are
negotiating their health care so
hoping that folks will be able
to join our pool
in the second point I think
something i'm really excited
about I don't you know in
medicaid we actually are
guaranteed best pricing and
that's one of the advantages of
putting this purchasing at the
agency we have a lot of drug
purchasing power there today and
we have guaranteed best pricing
and those rebates that were able
to get and so i'm really hoping
we'll be able to leverage and
some of that policy work to you
improve help drugs which is
specifically and mister chair
and and thank you secretary
that's that's critical now
i'm gonna leak out a little bit
of the paper the best hope we
have as reference pricing like
arkansas does what's the best
pricing medicaid now not that
you're going to you instead of
rebate you can do with the
medicine with the medicaid price
the actual price not the rebate
stuff that that gets pauled over
our eyes so putting you made
they may be too set of
negotiations but combined into
one false set another word you
don't finish when to you finish
the other it's essentially the
same people so again there's
there's twenty percent to take
out of drug costs right now and
that's the profit just being
sipened off by the health plans
that own the the p b m's and so
that is is really critical for
car savings and again
affordability
also i'm hoping that as you
start to aggregate.
With these different agencies
and and this would apply only to
reheck a
below age sixty five medicare
but I I really encourage you to
have one set of benefits one hmo
when ppl one savings account
that's it because right now what
people pay in aps is
significantly less than what
people pay in nepsier and
because it's just been allowed
to go on and then they come in
with all these multiple plans in
different pricing and it's
basically
using a lot of confusion as in
the marketplace to take money
out of the hard working people's
pockets and it needs to be
uniform throughout the state
irrespective of geography
it needs to be fair and so i'm
hoping you build that into
anything you go forward with the
one of the things that you've
heard me talk about
this is a hue huge huge amount
of work.
Me you have no idea I I have
been in multi billion dollars
for profit not for profit
companies and when you start
messing with it and and policy
and so forth some people you
think you can do it in the year
hello you can't you'll crash and
burn and then you get everybody
angry you have to bring in a
major project management company
who had we know and how to do
that and brought him in earlier
all this controversy between
rehecter and they work out the
communications so that you don't
don't hitter and I e d and
advertisingly they'd be sure
that every action in any
contention see actions either
before or after our laid out in
office that is complex work and
that takes a company that does
this for a living and it's it's
gonna cost the money but if you
don't do it you just not going
to be able to advance and you
know what I am saying trust me
i'm a doctor now i'm saying
trust me i'm a healthcare
business man and I have lived
through this and I have watched
the entire senior management of
one company yet wiped out
because they made this mistake
thinking they could do something
this complicated in one year and
filed up and they didn't collect
any revenue
i'm sorry I didn't pay any
claims for her almost six months
so it it does I know you're not
paying claims that i'm just
trying to illustrate to you the
potential.
For unintended consequences
expoding in your face and then
everybody in the effort gets
taken away to deal with the hole
in the road instead of working
on continuing to push this for
it so i'm hoping I know this
isn't an appropriations bill but
i'm hoping you have the money
and hospital true to get that
kind of consultation is is that
is it there somewhere wherever
it may be mr chair sender hickey
yes there's there actually
numerous ways in which were on
boarding expert he is that the
agency doesn't have today we are
on boarding project management
right now we got a lot of work
to do partially for the
purchasing plan but also
particularly for setting setting
up a new agency that's ready to
be not stores with the rate
identity on july first as that
is happening we are gonna be
working with the project
management firm for that we're
also on boarding and have a
contract under wave for the
detailed actual ill and just go
analysis they are starting with
the state of new mexico plan
first we're going to really dig
it on the data as that we can
make some recommendations and
then will be stake holdering
with the other I back into so
they can couldn't see what how
that is analysis looks we're
going to be doing a claims
integrity audit so that we can
really assess the performance on
the current system and there is
another item that I wanted to
so we are on boarding all of the
expertise so that we had this
support the self insured expert
so we're also contracting with
someone who's helped other
states do this work I really
knows the terms of procurements
and contracts and brings that
expertise expertise to the table
thank you and mister chairs to
few other questions to be sure
that we are going in the right
direction you you said self
insurance expert you really need
someone who can look at self
insurance and fully insured a
number of large companies are
moving away from taking that
risk because of the volatility
the health care market and it's
also going to explode.
I mean the cost and health care
are just going up and there's
very little raining a man one of
the means we need to do this so
we can make a transparent
but
you should look at fully insured
in one of the things I have
recommended to you and just for
the these are kind of simple
thanks for this we got to know
this stuff were legislators
we're going to be passing out
this but it's it's pretty simple
when you do over revert when you
have a similar product health
planned product and you do
what's called reverse auctioning
and you bring in all the health
plan potential bitters and you
bring a man and say on a fully
insured product because of
itself insured you can wander
all over the place what you want
is give me the pmp that dollar
amount the monthly amount that
some one figure that you and
your actually is figured out and
you tell me in a fully insured
product and this one product or
the two products together him op
and and savings account and and
you go from room to room and
just say roomet just came in
five dollars below you were
going to do so on a hundred say
on the two hundred pm pm you
know that's powerful and then it
got a room sea and it really
works and this is modern
contracting methodology in
health care and so the do not
write do not walk away from
fully insure people around our
moving there again the boltility
and the ability to really do
reverse auctioning which brings
you a better price and you're
probably going to get a self
mister chair senator that's a
really good point I actually
should clarify that we the
fiscal actual analysis includes
a fully detailed comparison of
the self insured options to the
fully insured option so that's
already built in and the reason
that we're bringing on the self
insured expert is just to make
sure that in the event that we
do through how we want to make
sure we have the full set of
options for the state of new
mexico to consider that it's
considered everything's that's
really why we're including that.
Thank you and just a couple of
little points and I said just a
couple more but the once you
want you get to actually
analysis you'll get from three
hundred thousand with it with a
higher edge to cost to five
hundred thousand because the
cities were the actuary and
others and in fact other states
are now letting other large
entities and not for profits
join and with them and a lot of
these not for profits have the
young people which helps pull
down the poor so the openness to
all of those as they look at
what they would get on the wrong
and mean it's like cnn is out
there hanging on their own where
they got the outlot of young so
they look better but this any
aggregate when you get up to
five hundred thousand people
they're going to say hey please
I want to come in
so that there's an opportunity
there I will make this comment
about the database and this is
without doing respect to either
department of health I have a
masters and business and
epidemiology they are too
different areas they both deal
with data and they deal with it
and very specific ways that
really help but epidemiologies
more focused on
the disease that prevalence and
so forth and they'll build the
database in a way that helps
them answer those questions.
It's much easier to build the
database it goes in and looks at
the cost and has the units
broken down by that by the
diagnosis and so forth then the
epidemiologist come along and
use it I I think I read oh well
build it in health and the
epidemiologists of dort and you
can use it you're going to spend
an immense amount of time having
to redo the warehouse and that's
very very expensive and so I
urge you to build that mister
secretary in the context of the
needs for the aca not for the
needs of effort in the arges
it's easier for them to come on
that business base then to have
a business base come off of the
epidemic
and the last point I want to
make is I am thrilled to see
that we still have in house bill
to
the hundred and fifty percent of
medicare for primary care that
is fantastic it is short I have
another paper now quite sixty
pages this time but we compares
us to other states that shows
what conditions in those primary
care making and how we compare
and also predicting our future
dismal future if we keep on the
path run
by the company who did that for
a great deal also has
written and I sent it to the
secretary a pathway so that that
hundred and fifty percent is
getting skimmed that hundred and
twenty percent today is getting
skimmed a an individual and
primary care notified someone
recently in that I was told
about it and the individual
called the say i'm a.
I'm a doctor this particular
institution and I just got a ten
percent pay cut and primary care
it a biggest institution.
And I thought we put more money
in to help take up to well it's
going on having run large
institutions in the state in
other places there are lots of
ways to peel it off make
arguments this money is
intention to attract and retain
doctors and advance practice
providers to new mexico and keep
him here and say you've got a
future you really have a future
so this were we're gonna have to
go higher than one fifty but I
think when fifty scrape but is
it getting into their pocket
it's not and there are
methodologies and and i've given
them to the secretary where they
can put in a past way that trats
the money from hsd to the mcos
to the systems that hire the
doctors and maybe the larger
groups and contracted into the
paycheck
of the condition.
And without that it's just going
to get skimmed and we are
spending the taxpayer's money
for no benefit other than in
some cases improving the profits
of the support profit
institutions and actually some
of the profits so we have to do
this is critical as i'm coming
back next year provided i'm here
and asking for a more and i'm
turning back with the bill that
requires a minimum payment on
primary care next year for
commercial but all of a scan and
no
it's getting there in today it's
not as well as suggesting some
of the codes and sick and so on
so forth that we talked about mr
chair I appreciate this but I
this this is and maybe our trade
off from LHS and shut up there
but this is a learning
opportunity for me to try and
help educate our colleagues why
this is such a valuable bill and
the little things that need
though actual victims it need to
be done to make it successful
and put us in the lead with
massachusetts washington road
island connecticut california
and two more years in all of
these aspects of containing
class in health care and then
also being served over rewarding
our providers in the last little
tangent on that were competing
form nationally and average
doesn't cut it in average
doesn't cut it particularly in
primary care we have to become
the state that's known for
paying primary cares as well as
we do specialist and we can do
that thank you mister chair
senator smith you're next.
Thank you mister and sender can
you discuss
this build treat
commercial in medicaid
differently and how is the
relationship going to change
from the state perspective thank
you mister chair and center for
that question i'm going to have
the secretary design and get
into that.
Mr chair senators needs a yes
they will be treated differently
as different lines of business
so there's not going to be a
combining as product because
medicare separate it we
obviously leverage a lot of
federal funding for that two
different very different funding
sources here
and different provider rate
payment structures for example
but what we are hoping to do is
to be able to leverage the
volume of medicaid and new
mexico is in a very unique
position because we had the
highest percentage of our
population covered by medicaid
so for us for example eighty
thousand it it would be easier
for us to negotiate a good deal
I think on that population
because we have that immense
purchasing power of medicaid so
this is really not intended to
combine product lines with
medicaid so much as it is whole
leverage the power of large
numbers of senator was talking
about to negotiate a better
pricing deal offer across the
different lines of business.
Thank you.
Mr chair and and sender is does
any of this bill require the
disclosure.
Of negotiated rates between
insurers and say hospitals.
Mister here now it doesn't and I
think a we actually clock that
information more in an aggregate
level because of uh federal
rules around what we what can be
disclosed to the agency in terms
of discrete provider contracting
greens arrangements so this
doesn't change that okay
thank you mister mister chair
and and senator yeah my
understanding I don't.
I'm not quite sure if if we
could do that as a state if that
would create a federal issue but
I I think
my understands it probably has
been done the federal level but
I I think that's a major
problem.
And we have heard some
discussion about.
The complexity of just trying to
track where the money goes and
we have to.
Always go back to the person
that is sick and the person
that's.
They're seeking health care
discussion and where we got a
track the money that goes all
around through this complex
system.
And I think if we required
insurers to disclose their
negotiated rates
it's called showing the the
people the prices and I think
that would be a a way of of
transparency a lot of these
lot of hospitals in a lot of
other people that are in the
chain you know they profit
because of the opacity
and I think if people
could see a lot of these prices.
They would start date that the
power
would start to shift toward the
sick person.
And could I respond just very
briefly we are happy mister
chair to put that into the
future basket because this bill
is that clean up bill but I
think your comments about
transparency are well taken in
terms of competitiveness in the
market and so we will we're
happy to answer any questions
and take any ideas but this
really is just the clean up bill
but we will put that in the
future basket for the new
department thank you and mister
chair center again and the
reason I was asking is we've
talked about.
Consolidated purchasing power
and so you know once once again
i'm and and we're going to be at
a philosophical disagreement
on on this but.
You know I with with health care
I feel like we have really
disand franchised the the sick
person I say this all the time
what we're doing with this
entire system and I think more
of it with this bill is we're
taking other people's money.
We are giving it to the
government to spend on on other
people and that the most
efficient way of spending money
is spending your own money on
yourself making making decisions
for your family.
And putting the sick person in
the driver see
you know as as a position I
mean we we we have it we have a
lot of issues with the doctor
patient relationship but.
You you you work for who's
paying you
and
you
if the patience were paying for
their services and so I know not
time out medicaid okay that's
why I was asking if it's
separate and how that works
but on a commercial level
if.
If the sick person got to keep
more of their money they're not
paying these high premiums and
they saw what the prices were
they'd be put more in the driver
see and that that's that's
really what I I mean I just I I
don't once again a philosophical
disagreement I don't.
The.
I I can and and I think we have
to be practical with policy
development and big decisions
like this I i'm I know i'm not
going to get get my way with
this that's not what i'm trying
to say i'm just
i'm trying to see if there is
coming from a different
perspective because senders
defendings and I we we see
things differently you know but
but sometimes we can use that as
our as our strength and she can
see things that I wouldn't see
first and vice versa and so I I
just you know i'm i'm trying to
look in here and say hey where's
how are we prioritizing
transparency because if I was
going to do a revamp of an
agency I I would not do it
without major major steps of
transparency I would not.
In my view.
Consolidate things in power a
government agency and not that
big big big transparency in
there once again focused on the
patient i'm not talking about
transparency for audits and
I've had opportunities to share
kind of my you know generally as
a conservative free market guy
obviously but
the the last thing I think is
why I know sorry to two more
more principles
one is the what I consider to be
a a myth of the.
The the the power of the the
purchasing power in aggregate I
think that's a good principle
for a free market right you know
if you have a lot of a lot of
supply of something that price
goes down you buy and bolk
right.
So that that's that's a free
market principle but it it
doesn't apply to our health care
system because of the lack of of
transparency you know
and the lack of the ability to
figure out the quality of the
product.
Right so you know if if we were
to buy a car
and you you pick out a car and
they say well.
We're gonna we're gonna ability
later you don't know how much it
cost
and you don't really know the
quality of the car because it's
so complex we don't know if
you're actually going to get
reimbursed for the certain
things we actually don't pay for
the brake part you have to pay
for that we don't pay for the
power steering part you get the
body but you don't get this
in that they just would not
would not work and inside once
again the sick person is very
very unable to assess the
quality of what they're actually
going to get.
Paid to do or or what what
they're gonna get you know
approved even.
List a formula is etc.
And so I I just I just think the
entire.
System needs to change and enter
consolidated without a reform a
little bit toward what i'm
warning you know like I said the
transparency in that piece I I
just I won't be able to support
it but i.
I I am definitely really
appreciative of of the heart of
this I know your heart is to to
gain.
You know better better quality
health care but I i've been
saying this for years
costs just continue to go up and
in my opinion it's because we're
not once again we're not
shifting that power to the to
the sick person.
And then.
Sort of so so once again I just
III don't I don't buy the
argument that we're going to buy
and bulk in fact I think quite
the opposite I don't think.
A government agency.
Can bear to those prices down
and the reason is is I look at
the n h s.
And the only.
Price containment strategy when
you actually come down to it and
california you'd go meet with
someone that's on the health
committee in the assembly in
california I I think they tell
you something fairly similar
that what i'm gonna tell you and
matters.
The only way to control cast
from from an hca.
Perspective is rationing of
care.
And and we can disagree that but
that's what they do in h s it's
every year every other year and
they do a calculation of the
your quality of life you're
expected
outcome of the treatment and if
it's over a certain amount of
money
you you are not eligible for
that it's called in the acronym
for that committee that meets is
called nice
doesn't sound fairly nice to me
and I see
just one clarification when you
say n h s you mean the british
is yes the other british system
so they assist them of of where
the government is is buying and
bulk right buying and both once
again making these decisions but
the cost containment
that that's ultimately where you
go california has seen this.
And so I I think it's a
philosophical disagreement
but I I wanted to try to
just insert anything that I I
could that is it is helpful
because I I want to be I want to
add something and I I met with
you beforehand to try to you
know go over a few things and
and and the sponsor had actually
already she so quick on our feet
she had already addressed some
of the other stuff it was
already fixed you know and
that's what I respect about you
so much
but I I just think we need to
just just soft warning to folks
to watch out for
it is that where we want to go
the the brits tolerate it well
and everyone's okay with that
over there it seems I don't know
from what I read
but I I don't know if I don't
know if if we're if we're ready
for that and I and I think the
only way to to reduce the cost
is just to you know get the
transparency of course the
insurance companies are not and
you're gonna get a lot of push
back when I talk about
disclosing rates and things
right
but III think that that's the
direction that that hopefully we
we need to go
show it to the to the people
so anyway that just just few
comments there
and you know I I certainly can
see what you're doing
very much appreciate it so.
Thank you senator.
Very quickly considered it
messes still is next in line.
Senator masters you're next to
them
thank you mister chairman thank
you center funds but i'm sector
the um
just all the work that went in.
To drafting and working on this
over the interim and getting it
ready I have
tried to read the first hundred
twenty five pages on assuming
one twenty five to
two hundred and three is like on
point
but in terms of the first half
so how for the bill mister is
essentially changing deep
department to authority correct.
Mr chair senator yes it's a
largely a clean up bill just
reflecting what was passed last
year changing the name of the
human services department to the
new.
So this doesn't involve the
health department it's it's hs
what we call hsd the human
services department will become
the health care authority mister
chair senator my assistance
correct and it will be a
department level.
State agency and in state
government with up cabinet
secretary yes mister terror
center masses yes same same deal
as today just a different
sove and if I can.
Turn our attention to people
sixty four I think that's the
first page of new material.
And we create the rural health
care delivery fund.
Even though it has it on its pre
determined its own section while
that's new that's new language
correct or no that's existing
law
mr chair senator may assist that
fund is actually created last
year during the twenty twenty
eighty million dollar phone that
we we created last year okay
thank you and and maybe miss of
mason can answer this christian
for me they should unpaid sixty
four line nineteen words as new
material.
Why is it why does it say that.
On page sixty four nine nineteen
little session el mason to
respond to that
this section is and was
incorrectly compiled that's my
opinion incorrectly compiled in
a short title of act that had
been in this bill we took that
short titled at our so we
actually repealed this section
in the back of the bill when it
was interpreted twenty four now
we're moving it into twenty four
a so that's why it shows up as
new material but it isn't
actually okay thank you for that
that's great.
So it's not what it's not
anything that was not a new fund
it exists today I understand and
then on
and then if we go to.
To the to page two oh one
essentially
on july thirtieth twenty twenty
four HSD.
And all of its if you can column
that assets you know
furniture paper clips whatever
the next day becomes the health
care authority.
And that for that page
essentially talks about the
transfers.
This is chairman correct and
then the next page is is like
what it is explaining all of the
clean up i'm referring to page
two o two.
I just recompiling all of these
sections a law so that if we
were when we read the assuming
this becomes low when we read
the
the statutes not you know in the
summertime it'll just be a
cleaner easier to read better
state mister chairman these are
sections it did not need to be
amended they didn't need to have
their name changed and so yes so
thereback here they
hopefully it awfuls
and it does mister chairman I
can
ensist in balba and
appropriation or does it have a
pending appropriation in
hospital to mister chairman
centers to put.
I'm going to let the secretary
answer
mister chair send romances it's
transfers our budget so are our
executives and legislative
budget at that house built you
that budget request to submit it
as a new mexico healthcare
authority so no special
appropriations attached to this
bill aside from and then I think
the appropriation associated
with you know the phone that
comes over there for ability
find that also would shift over
a but no new appropriations
understood thank you so thank
the governor and the secretary
senator everybody for the work
on this built thank you mister
thank you senator most as
senator key did you want to make
she said she would like to go
after you.
Okay thank you and thank you for
all of this work we've been
hearing about it in legislative
health and human services and
i've been trying to follow it
and it is an extraordinary
extraordinary thing that is
happening just have a couple of
questions when is the
hypothetical
if the alcohol taxes increased.
Shame with plug
and
when when the alcohol taxes
increased and at alcohol harms
really remediation fund is
created that would go for
recovery treatment prevention
and also to alleviate the harms
of alcohol.
With with this authority be the
place that would be the overall
ugh.
The best place I guess to be the
overall coordinator of this
funds which could be anywhere
from
you know a hundred while
depending on how much the taxes
increase could be up to two
hundred and fifty million
dollars.
Mr terror senator said your
locus thank you for that
question
so
possibly I I don't know I would
need to go back and take a look
at the the building your bill
to make a more solid
recommendation to be happy to
connect with you after this
hearing after I do that
obviously.
The health care authority will
continue to be the behavioral
health authority for the state
of new mexico so that that does
make sense but or so it would
like to you know court need that
customer secretary all in the
department of health which is
the public health agencies so
that we can really give you a
clear answer if that's okay
though the reason I asked that
is because the bill has it is
now has
funding for a court an overall
coordinator because
we were unable and I I believe
still unable to identify how
much of the general funds are
going to deal with alcohol
treatment because it's just
spread out of over
and
it just seems like just a good
domestic balance you have to
have a coordinated approach I
think a coordinated community
approach and it would be great
if what I see here could also
have could fall that in and
ended a source of resources for
behavioral health with addiction
works that's going to be stable
and there is going to be
coordinated and that is going to
move the needle so I throw that
out there has something that
when the bill passes please keep
an eye out for that and and I
assume you will I know i've
talked with secretary allen as
well but I started thinking
about what is this mean for the
the fund that's going to happen
then the second question is does
this sell us up.
For the eventuality of um single
pair.
The.
We're going to get the alcohol
and probably not in my lifetime
but we will get single pay.
The phone mister chair that's a
political question solved answer
that
I think that this bill is an
attempt by our executive to
bring better health care to the
people of the state of new
mexico.
With better purchasing with
better coordination we as new
opportunities for people who are
not covered and so
whether or not the nest next
executive would move it in that
direction of single payer
that's for them to enter but
this is like a first step that
is doctor hickey said there's
several hickey said it's going
to take some time to get this
accomplished.
The the and I think that that's
really important that it is
going to take time to get this
account with just like it is for
single pair and my question I
understand stither would
possibly I mean you maybe think
about state single bear but if
the federal government
eventually does what I think it
should
then that money is you know how
it's going to be distributed i'm
just wondering if this because
we'll have a more organized
approach it'll be more
coordinated that that might be
useful when we're dealing with a
federal single payer's system
and certainly this this approach
I think needs to be at the table
for figuring out what a single
payer system would look like
when you have plans like when
you have.
Reform in the way that this is
creating I again it didn't mean
it necessarily do be political
lights it's something i'm i'm it
feels strongly about um in
and you know of course I support
this bill.
Um and just hoping that we can
even do better
than thank you mister chair
thank you senator senator
hickey.
Thank you mister chair just a
from my point of view a couple
of clarifications comments from
when I fell senator doctor
smith.
The whole essence of this bill
is transparency the whole
essence is a matter of fact
doctor
or senator excuse me.
Will be able to look at you in
your procedures in different
hospitals because there's a
billing code.
And will be able to see you and
your procedures in hospital a
hospital be hospital see and if
see is less that is something we
will definitely show to the
world and make that perfectly
transparent in the competitive
way that's that's what this bill
is going to create this is what
is done and massachusetts pretty
soon an oregon eventually
california that's the drill down
capability and it's all open
does it open up what
has been was charged too
or have an a fee schedule no
case that would get into
ftc issues and we're have you
but the pressure on the
hospital.
Two I didn't bring it up here
but to do pricing based on
medicare reference and no longer
the scam that's been going on
all over this country and charge
masters and hospitals that are
able they can have there is one
hospital doing our patient
facility charges at eight
hundred percent of medicare that
they charge it as a offer the
charge master and the ran study
last year broke all that out
some transparency that's the
kind of
unbelievable
anti I guess that it the
that's almost a cry in this and
back out exposed through the
transparency that this bill will
put in the place.
I also fell to and usually I
bring it in the end but why did
I get interested in this white
but I mean.
You know hopefully my
consistency make you all have to
put up with me for another four
years and it's around this bill
and what it does that I really
want to be here for because the
other part that I forgot to
emphasize we do have a.
Ah.
Data warehouse that collects all
digital clinical information
it's a phenomenal called
synchronous today if it had some
other names in the past
marrying that.
With this.
You can get to real value based
negotiating as it's the outcome
that you begin to pay for and
that warehouse with the data you
can see how the him a global
name
how much is the cost for one
institution to move over him a
global name and see from eight
down to five we'll be able to
measure that.
That's for nothing.
And then we'll go to the ones
who were date and say your
competitors are at five and this
is what I used to do when I was
your at loveless we used to
share that information
a rate with the physicians in
the clinic by name all out
and amazingly when we did that.
They all got down to five her
honest and so transparency and
the pressure of the public.
Is what this bill is providing
for and then thank heavens and
and this is going to take a
little while that's very to be
able to take that health
information exchange data
information in the greater into
this whatever we're going to
call the health care authority
information and from addicts
starting with a a pair claims
database that's financially
based and put that in and be
able to drill down and so that
we in this dies you are no
longer going to be well I wonder
you know they're saying this and
they're saying that you know
what we're gonna have the
capacity to go over to wherever
it is alas you say hey what's
the cost of this how much
benefit will be getting out of
it this is the foundation for
them
and okay and and this is not the
national health service from my
point of view god help us I mean
god thank you
senator tomorrow you had a one
sentence question
of two two cents okay already
double this time
so
the from what I am hearing it
seems like the major thrust of
the objective of this is to save
calls so what's the second most
important objective of goal is a
transparency is a providing
better transparency.
And costs go to hand and handle
what's the second most important
objective of this
reorganization.
Mr hair senators home and it was
that question so there we
actually a number of job
objectives and they do include
include really measuring the
performance of the health care
system but but actually
foundationally creating a health
care system we do not believe
that there is health care system
today we know that patients are
very confused they rely on a lot
of uh help with navigation it's
not easy the players do not work
together well I said we are
really trying to be that
convenient to create a seamless
correct needed health care
system for a new mexico
thank you for that answer that's
all I have as to sure thank you
I had a couple of questions
before we go to a vote so I
couldn't find the claims
database on this and i'm
assuming that means it remains
at the health department but
they'll share the data is that
what's going to happen
mister chair that's correct and
then actually most of that data
tape is fed with medicaid data
so you know it's a it's mostly
artita today we've invested
heavily in the apcd and working
together with them on the design
and implementation but we are
going to get the commercial
rates to rate mr chair that's
cracked medicare data as being
built in and then all of the
other pieces of it are being
built in and so we envision
ourselves being heavy utilizer
well I had hoped before I
retowed to see that that I I
look forward to hearing how it
happens in the future sometimes
for twenty years i've been here
talking about the old favorite
claims database but it's still
on the horizon and we're we're
looking forward to it last
question.
The new met could you talk a
little bit about how the new
medicaid contract
might be positively impacted by
this.
Mr chair shore so I think is all
you know we have new medicate
contracts that are going into a
fact in july
one of the persians of the new
contracts actually includes a
setting the medicaid fee
schedule as the floor for you
know what medical professors are
getting paid so creating a lot
more transparency there are so
maybe we don't know the ceiling
but we at least know how much
the base floor is there are
number of quality improvements
in there we are really aiming
for a more transparent system
really with the customer or the
patient at the heart of it we'd
like to make sure that our
patience are medicaid patients
really understand how their
health plans are performing and
I sort of intention is to really
get to a place where we're a
signing membership based on the
highest performing plans as
that's really going to be and
we're going to create a lot more
transparency in score cards
around the performance of our
plans in their quality outcomes
so those are just a few things a
happy to share a list of all of
the contract improvements a lot
more expectations around care
coordination particularly for
high cost high need members and
I think we really will be in a
position to leverage of
expertise of the medicaid
program into including all that
expertise around quality until
leverage those are for the for
the private sector as well so
that's really our vision
well thank you members of the
committee what's the will of the
committee
senator hicky mover do pass
senator my stuff
that motion remember that do not
have I thought we
got it
by yeah it wasn't so thank you
i'm gonna have mover do not pass
and it will fourteen and a two
pass and sit and help them
public firstly substitute for
senate bill for
exactly they can advise any
other discussion.
Secretary will call the rule
senator hickey yes
then are my established yes
does votes yes that are
mercurgent
service involves no senator
mechanic yes said a mechanic
votes yes senator neighbor.
Senator neighbors yes so then I
was meetings senators media's
well to know center city or love
is
yes center city a lot best votes
yes center comment yes sometime
I wrote yes senators appear now
yes and to explain his vote
senator neighbor thank you
mister
i'm for efficiency and I hope
that this would really the bill
is about.
But the comments that were made
about going toward the
one payer system concerned me
and so i'll be listening to that
specifically and looking at that
further before I so i'd like to
do as it does.
Still buy a vote of seven in the
affirmative two in the negative
you have to do pass thank you
very much thank you mister chair
members of the committee
thank you
and then we'll get to you sensor
I thought though you have
you have a solution to our
uh
i'm sorry we we still have
several more bills so
you could please make your way
out before you start talking we
still have work
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee.
III I come very solution or if
you read the analysis and
elegance
pretty much
said
I also this bill is a
is a record for me
this is I think the shortest
bill i've ever written
by twelve years of being in the
last century
so this built is a bill that has
to do
this members of the competitors
bell is a bill that has to with
what to do about people who
continually seem to
get up themselves but they go
out think a bit more felonies
and and so the bill
is deceptively simple the bills
actually what used to happen
automatically and for some
reason isn't happened right now
and and so I just can put this
back to what should be
happening.
And have a chart and i'd like to
walk into the truck first i'll
buck you through the bill
because the bill so short
and that is that when the chief
clark received notice.
That a person on pretrial
release for a phony
is subsequently arrested for a
subscript.
The chief quarter for the court
shelt issuer and order for the
person to remain incustory with
our bunt.
The.
The person share many custody
until each judge assigned to any
previous following case holds a
hearing to consider
modifications revocation the
purchase condition of release
what is now how do we get away
with constitutional issues that
everything else it don't affect
the cost of
answer if you look at the start
when I get arrested for my first
feeling which a lot of people
think is over
then what happened says that the
judge has to apply the
constitutional analysis am I in
a meter threat myself for others
or flight.
The judge then puts me on
conditions of release and
relisted
conditions really see what.
I then get picked up for my
second felony
the pardon bold is the part
that's affected by the spirit
when I get picked up by the
second felony
a judge only on motion of the
prosecutor on the second felony
considers whether I should be
held on the second felony.
This bill has no impact on that.
What this bill would do is it
says having been arrested on the
second felony I don't get out
until the judge from the first
felony
olds are hearing.
Because part of my conditions
the release was done a bit more
crimes.
And I have to have a
conversation with that judge
about why it is I got a rest of
from the phone
now if I come in a third felony.
The judge on the third felony
can only consider.
Whether I get out of jail or not
on most of the prosecutor and on
most of the proscure is
restricted only to the questions
of am I inemitted threats myself
for others or a flight risk.
But this bill doesn't affect
that at all
but this bill does is it puts an
oban hole until the judge from
the second felony and the first
felony both holder hearing.
To say what way the same we told
you each of us individually told
you don't comment more primes
why did you commit contempts of
our order to you not to commit
more crimes.
And I have to have a
conversation with those judges.
An odd order on so that's what
this bill does it doesn't change
it.
It's not crime specific other
than the fact that it does the
phone
if I get arrested for mister
winner this doesn't get impacted
so this doesn't deal with
harassment charges.
That people tend to have when
they're down on the lock.
But it does happen with family
cases.
Over that mister we have to
stand.
Is there anyone in the audience
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
Yes cheap please.
Yeah.
Great thank you thank you
anybody else is there anyone
online about this anybody in our
position to this
members of the committee.
Senator said
thank you
mr chair I haven't I haven't
studied it like I did the other
pretelled attention I know this
is not a t.
But the the fire does say.
That
if there are possible
constitutional concerns.
And
this is from the air.
Announced with me and see the
public and I don't anyway so I
would feel more comfortable if
you kind of.
What you said was because it's
not the first.
And and the constitution applies
to the first.
But.
Okay excuse me it's not the
current one rate it's it's not
the current when it's not the
one that they actually got their
constitutional um detention
so they got their constitutional
detention
and my question is.
Why is that because you said
it's not their first could you
explain why their second
detention.
Is is not required to be a
constitutional detention.
Right so so again this is
doesn't worth the charter
support
i'm sorry I didn't quite get the
chance I got it but I didn't
understand so so only so this
bell only affects what's in our
so what I get picked up for my
second felony the judge and the
second felony
can only hold me that judge is
subject to the costus.
The.
Okay
that judge can only hold me if
i'm an immediate wrap to myself
for others for the second for
the second for the second phone
right so that's why where it
says constitution it's it's not
in bold because this this bill
doesn't affect that it doesn't
touch a dozen in touch the judge
for the second felony
okay.
But the person is still held is
i'm trying to get is that like
having a warrant out you know I
am held until the judge from the
first felony has a conversation
with me with why I violated
their conditions of relief.
So so that
so that the judge on the first
felony when I was initially
arrested.
The costs of provisions applied.
The.
But when I violate that judges
conditions of release the
construction provisions no
longer.
That's true because because
you've already got your
constitutional
right.
The first time and then the
second time it's just cause
that's how it works when you
violate the conditions if you
really that's right so all of
the other here's the thing
everybody else was come in with
a bill.
Want to mess with
the second judge odds the person
because they had a first one
where the second just can't
consider that.
Because that would be little
costume.
So what I say is that I don't
want to mess with the second.
But I want the judge for the
first case to have a
conversation to say I told you
not to buy late loss why are you
violating loss.
The.
So they just hold them until the
just from the first case as the
conversation with the person but
i'm not messing with the judge
from the second case when they
get picked up for the second
case when they get arrested for
the fourth case.
That judge on the fourth case
that judges limited to the
constitution
but the judge from the third
case told them to violate lost
the judge for the second case
for them to violate loss the
judge in the first case told
them to violate loss I want them
to have a conversation with each
of those judges to explain why
they're out violin loss.
This bill there's nothing in
this bother told the judges what
to do.
There's nothing in this blood
that says what the outcome will
be
all this bill says is hold them
until they have a conversation
with the judge from the previous
case
as to why they're alcoming
crimes and so mister chair so
has I read the bill the clork
it's not clear whether the clerk
issues this on a judge is order
or if the clerk is does it yeah
and so mister and center city
all of us the so.
So the reason that this is based
on only when someone is arrested
for
not once it was charged for the
fellow and if they're not arrest
is because issuing out and and
rest work is a judicial process.
Right law enforcement or
judicial and the chief court
shouldn't do that
so this is simply the chief
clerk notifies.
The the the the jail.
You have to hold this person
until each of these judges are
here.
The.
Is that an order that you have
it saying or order I think it
should say notice
because the clip doesn't have
power to order.
Okay it says the chief clerked
that's why I was confused about
that we could consist of work
notice order to notice because
the court doesn't have the clerk
doesn't have power to issue an
order made me think well there
must be a judge above somewhere
because it's an order that's
and mister and center city opens
and right I think that's an
important word distinction I am
and and I think that's probably
okay then a so it would be a
page one line twenty four strike
order in certain notice
twenty four h one nine twenty
four strike order insert notice
and you have to change the
article and clear issue notice
yet I would take out an order or
yes you notice a notice.
To whom
I notice to the detention
center.
Right for the press remaining
custody.
Until yeah so I noticed to the
detection center.
Mister chair to hold the person
because then then for the
person.
Then for the person sounds weird
shall issue notice to the
detention center.
Asking because they can ask no
they're not asking they're
directed.
He directing.
The.
That the person.
The.
Actually just strike the word
for direct in the person to
remain custody.
That wouldn't that that would
alleviate my concern about this
clerk trying to issue orders I
mean and mister and center city
or office that would be a
friendly moment and just repeat
it for everybody could be on
page twenty four
strike the words and order for.
An answer and look around a
notice to the detention center
directing.
Strike the words and order for
answered the words a notice to
the defensive center directing.
Okay go frank
okay did you want to make that
motion I make that motion that's
good.
A up any discussion of the
motion senator must us thank you
mister chairman center I
resolved the center civil as
the.
No good catch good catch up I I
believe if this would have gone
to law I think the
the judges would tweep their
internal rules I I believe the
order would come from the chief
judge or the court I think the
clerk is just tasked with.
Sending the order over.
So an alternative to motion may
be
on page twenty three i'm sorry
page one line twenty three to
delete.
Um the chief clerk of but you
know it's six one dozen of the
other just wondering that point
it's not the clerk.
The clerks not ordering the jail
the.
The clerks just.
Issuing the order that the
judges impose on the job but it
is an order that jail is ordered
not to let us do that
and and and mister and and as
there mas
an important what I specifically
chose to make it chief clear.
So that i'm not.
Telling any judge what to do.
Any other discussion on the
amendment is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
built of the amended and will go
then to send it or you're you
still have the floor
senator city look
will in the stick above.
Set the security call the rule
on the amendment senator hickey
center may is this amazed as
well now center in my cutting so
my car generally has sent her
mechanic yes center mechanic
votes yes in our neighbor
senator neighborhoods yes center
smith is
medicine yes center city a lot
yes center city of office votes
yes senator thomas
senator telman wrotes yes
senators appeal yes center it is
if you know about yes
yes.
Still buy a vote of the eight in
the affirmative one of the
negative the amendment is passed
the bill is amended that you
still have the floor centers or
so the locus
I think that
I will uh deal with to my
colleague not well actually the
issue here is my colleague
senator mckinner made a good
point about the timing of this
and so I will you'll to her to
raise the the issue of timing.
Like you know this person being
definitely held go ahead but I
guess
your mechanic
thank you chairman thank you
senator
is there anywhere in the bill
chairman senator that directs
how fast the judge has to do
meat with
the person who's being held so
far I haven't seen it mister
answer make it up we we don't
have better in the build there's
actually or process that says
how quickly they have to hold
the.
And and and there's there's also
procedures I think through four
or three
that that indicates
the time frame for that it also
it also printed the the defense
could follow motion.
To experience that if they need
to
and so I don't again I don't
want to get into micromanaging
too much court process on this.
They will they will take care of
that process and believe me when
someone's being held that their
attorneys are very on it
interest make sure they get a
hearing.
Sure senator so but concerned me
is so i'm not familiar with four
or three
but what concerns me is someone
getting lost in the process.
And they're still being held and
they lose their job.
Etc etc etcetera so that's
that's my concern about the bill
determined the chairman instead
of getting first personal most
these people their job is going
on
that is the.
Right because these are people
who do knock him at a felony.
The.
This only affects someone who
was arrested for a subsequent
felony when a felony is already
pending
that's the does the only people
that have this will ever affect.
Will not affect someone on the
first felony.
Will not affect someone who has
a felony in their past.
Will only affect someone who has
a felony pending
and they get arrested for
another felony
only people that this will
impact
these are not people who have a
regular job.
Chairman thank you certain
things to share center this
question may be moot okay may
not apply but I wanted to make
sure if if we have the first
felony and there are no
conditions of really if if it's
a if they're released on their
own recognition sense
is that does the bill still
apply if they're does this as
the same as no conditions of
release it would that still work
with your bill mr means it does
because no one is released with
no con.
Okay so so mister share and
center so so even an r o r would
still be considered a condition
in your bill okay the chairman
etcetera someone who's released
other regardless that still has
certain conditions that they're
required to be perfect yeah okay
that's all I have thank you
thank you mister chairman
seriously I was thought the
great great idea it's just
amazing how this happened every
single day
and then all senators stopped.
But
and no one had any issues with
it one thing that the new one
the fact that we cannot use cash
bail and then the subscript
constitutional amendment
allowing us to hold folks
without bail the one unintending
consequences of that action is
how to deal with multiple
arrests back to back arrest
if someone gets arrested whether
they're
found guilty or not there's
something happening in their
lives that is not quite right
someone gets multiple or us back
to back to back.
That they're they're they're out
of control that's why some folks
would be in jail mister chairman
on like a hundred dollars and
their family wouldn't bond them
out as the family actually
wanted them and custody
do you know some folks need the
details for eleven days some
books twenty eight days some
folks.
Need to you know maybe two three
months for the clouds to clear
up up there have heavy end in
our cottage but but that's that
we have to figure out a society
how do we deal with those
situations you know.
And it is it is has sat in
heartbreaking but they are no
one's gonna lose their job.
Um.
You know picking up back to back
I mean the vast majority of
people that get arrested the
actual arrest is
do they change behaviour
immediately but there those
folks that are.
Just on a road on a path we have
to deal with um.
So this this would happen on on
mister meaners viewed a mister
minner case pending us to happen
right not right so if you had
this bill if you want mister
case pending and you got
arrested both you had a hold
those game over you sat there
for two three months until both
cases were resolved that was the
criminal desystem we lived under
one and it was incorrect system
we had twenty seven hundred
people in a you know in jail of
a cookie price at about on
sixteen fifty now we have like
twelve hundred
anyway it's just the love
averages and I can give you that
speech later anyway thank you
mister chairman
thank you senator masters
senators at the elopes thank you
and now mr chair this is
following up of which was just
Trails does not apply to
the speedy trial act and the the
constitution requirement
doesn't.
Apply to detentions
like this up the shepherd and
associate it does actually and
that is the fact one of the
considerations if you're being
held you have greater speedy
trial rights that if you're not
being so under burker beat for
ever since we go under under
resort of our state which is the
how the hubby incorporated park
of the window into the state is
under zero
is is that if you are being held
in detention then you have much
greater speedy trial rights and
the obligations on the state to
two to to prosecute as much more
quickly that if you're not being
held this does not guarantee
that anyone's got to be held
really for more than about two
three days
right because because the judge
on case number one could hold a
hearing and say I thought I told
you not to give any more crimes
don't do it again.
And let him go that could
happen.
It could also bear will happen
that the judge of case number
one says you value later my
conditions are released i'm not
going to let you up right but
upon the judge saying that i'm
not gonna let you out.
Upon the judge saying that was
chairman and then there speed a
trial right or impacted
tremendously and the states
burden in that case
a rises tremendous thank you
mister chair because I like what
you said that the judge could
have a an immediate trial let me
immediate hearing.
The but here it says the person
shall remain in custody until
each judge assigned to any
previous felony case also here
into consider modification to
revolution of the person's
conditions of release so.
I understand what you think you
want to make a manager to
judiciary but what is in the
judiciary what is in what are.
Other than speedy trial is there
anything to guarantee that this
is going to happen timely
certainly chairman and center
city but well first of those
have yes
the second of all there's
there's
there's also
some pretending control if if if
if somebody is if a judge is
refused to hold the hearing.
Right then that if I read a
separate tendent control
straight with states for or.
Forcing that you're in to take
place.
And and and africa's precord can
hold a hearing on that with them
for five days.
In order to make it happen or
just simply issue an order to
force that to happen if that is
in fact taking taking place
there are remedies there are
ways to go.
To go above a judge if a judge
is simply saying i'm not going
to go i'm not going to hold here
and and mr chair is somebody who
isn't attention
eligible for legal services at
the chairman and associated with
by definition you you qualify
for public federal services if
you're unset.
If you don't have the income the
chairman and seriously office if
you're in potential you are
presumed matter of income
because you're not you're not
working with your intent
so therefore by definition no
matter who you are the pd's
office will represent you.
Thank you mister chairman just
one final question did you
discuss this with the public
offenders the chairman and
services of us I I alerted the
public federal's office to the
spell and nature that they were
aware now that this will exist
but it was having hearing today
i'm fact I spoke to mr bower
about it this afternoon halway
he appreciated the owner.
And did not come out that was
addressed a debit thank thank
you mister chair senator
tomorrow
thank you mister thank you for
your fourth so what if they're
judges aren't vacationally
reasonable hospitals is there a
sergeant trick and fill in the
shipment center I told them that
is that is always the case
within the justice system they
always have somebody who covers
for for the other judges.
Thank you thank you senator
neighborhood.
We're a promotion.
Great forward to assessment
to seventy one.
As amended
thank you bye senator mccatch
any other debate any other
discussion
secretary will call the rule
senator who give then a he give
out yes center masters
yes cinema says votes yes
senator my catch in so my catch
involves yes center mechanic no
making a votes now send a
neighbor senator neighbor voice
yes center smith is sellers
medical yes center city a lot of
yes and explain my vote
is that your local smokes yes
senator thomas yes senator man
votes yes center it is a pinner
yes and i'll make your comment
senator city
i'm gonna let i'm gonna vote so
that it'll move forward but I do
I think I would do a little bit
more research i'm not committing
to vote for it on the floor but
I I still have feel like I need
to get into a little bit more
than i've been able to today.
Thank you mister chair thank you
senator and my comment was just
that you focused on the comment
by the by the analyst that it
was in elegant solution the
other comment was are we sure
this is the senate arrived he
sought to a bill it only has two
pages
thank you senator by vote of the
age in the affirmative one in
the negative you have a test
general members of the committee
thank you very much I will know
by the way that's that
yeah but he says we could go to
this latest six
fitted germans
did the party started yet
seven
it's the hundred go but are you
here for a different bill
yeah
which bill you hear
yes the less bill in our genesis
senator rodriguez is still in
finance I think as soon as you
get sir after him.
So senate bill
starting with the
senate bill ninety six increase
the attempted murder penalty
thank you mister chairman
honourable members this is
senate bill ninety six.
Which obviously received earth
executive message from the
governor
and it is long overdue.
As you recall germany up ten
years ago we formed the
criminal justice
criminal just a subcommittee of
courts corrections and justice
in the interrum examining our
criminal code
and try to spot contradictions
within that code
in a perfect you know perfect
world you have first degree
murder all in the wall the way
down to
j walking and everything is
proportionate and everything you
know relates to one another for
example driving on a suspended
license
because you didn't pay a fine
timely was anywhere from three
to three hundred sixty four days
jail and a restaurant we took
that off the books and they did
a penalty assessment.
Um things like a having the
wrong address on your driver's
license you know otherwise you
fail to update your driver
license wasn't a restable of
friends we took that off the
books made it a penalty
assessment j walking just
mentioned was an arrestable
offence we now is that a
penalty assessment essentially a
traffic ticket.
Selling alcohol to a minor
when you didn't know it was a
minor was a felony we realize
that
you know why should these wall
greens workers be tagged with a
felony of you know some special
agent walks in with a buried in
the seventeen
buyers liquor from you with an
awesome I think ID we dropped up
from a felony to a mister or one
of the biggest contradictions
uh
if not the biggest is art second
we murder statute.
The worst crime think someone
can commit is is first to
remember the intentional killing
of another a second worse crying
is second view murder or it's
the intentional killing of
another is just not premeditate
it's not planned out
it's it's it's there's the
intent is in the moment you
intended to kill that person and
you killed that person but yet
mister chairman it's not the
second highest penalty in our
common coat
you can get more time in prison
or
for a subsequent drug deal you
can get more time in prison for
a subsequent arm robbery in
which the victim is not even
touched physically harmed
you can get more time in prison.
For those two offences in
particular and so what we want
to do is raise the maximum
penalty from fifteen years to
eighteen years so that it it is
in fact the second has been off
the on the books it is shocking
at two quick points one as it's
very very difficult to prove for
streamer.
Are very difficult
now it's.
I guess somewhat easier with
phones and text messaging and
all that good stuff but it's
very difficult to prove
premeditation and intent
I mean to be flipping but the
star witnesses unavailable
so most first remurder charges
end up clean down to second
remurder
and then the families like in
shock when the oscar the
victimatic it says they're only
facing fifteen years it is a
shock to the conscience it is an
injustice and and what us and
this build remedies that
injustice.
Uh this is this is not a
deterrent.
This is not going to solve any
problem.
Other than the uh.
Other than that that just insane
reaction to.
And the understand that
conscious been shot.
When victims of homicide learned
that that the perpetrators only
facing fifteen.
So this needs to be consistent
with the rest of our criminal
code
and used to go to eighteen last
name is german either even a
bigger contradiction is
attempted murder because you
have the homicide statute over
here and then the rest of the
common code will be here as you
know an attempted crime drops a
degree so an attempted second
recrime drops to third degree
well attempted second agree
murder drops to third degree
over here so you you're only
facing three years on an
attempt at murders of prosperity
never indiated on attempted
secondly murder because it was
just
just and made no sense I just
indict on aggressive better get
a body harm but this remedies
that and so a person would be
facing nine years on an
attempted work with that i'll
stand for questions let's go to
the ideas of first is there
anybody else.
The audiences are anybody here
in support yes please come on
up.
Mr chairman members of the
committee they give for your
time again today my name is
victoria blank and i'm a deputy
district attorney at the
bernilio county district
attorney's office and we want to
think senator my estimates for
bringing this well to everyone's
attention our office is all too
familiar with the concerns
with the concerns that this bill
is trying to address and we
whole heartedly support it thank
you
yes deputy
again deputy mexico state please
and.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill yes
misses
because okay.
The cat oh just second we've got
before you just hang on a second
we have somebody online who
supports it
a sarah fitzgerald the last time
we couldn't hear you but let's
see if it works this time.
Nope we can't but we can read
you so if you speak slowly will
read it.
The.
The.
The.
Very good thank you miss
okay now we'll go to the
opponents please
diameter cash.
I just want to say that to me it
just seems wrong that you raise
this penalty with it no
determined effect no positive on
public safety
instead of lower something else
that is in a severe I mean it
doesn't make sense to equalize
things or whatever it is that's
happening here
and of design crime
but I don't think that it is I
think it's more show than
substance and I think we will
put three years of an actual
person's life
for no demonstrative purpose
if they spend that much time
incarcerated those extra three
years it says likely that
they'll be worse off may come
out then they would have if
they've been released at fifteen
years I don't think that's good
for us
i'm also concerned with the cost
I did some math based on a
fairly conservative thirty six
thousand dollars a year and
carcerated the doc you could
take a family pay their two
thousand dollars a month of
housing for four and a half
years for the cost of that extra
three years so I really stand
imposed and I really appreciate
the senator almost always went
not today thank you.
Thank you mister chair.
And members of the committee
my name is johnny i'm here on
behalf of the american civil
liberties union of new mexico
and I want to echo the previous
speakers
sentiments towards the senator
that we almost always appreciate
his actions in this body's
actions when it comes to
criminal justice reform and but
we respectively we respectfully
oppose this bill we've already
had a robust discussion just
today about deterrence and the
and efficacy of increasing
sentences when it comes to
when it comes to reducing crime
does principles don't only apply
to retail crimes but also to
serious violence as we've
already mentioned this afternoon
there's research showing that
increasing incarceration and
prison sentences does not
decrease crime the difficult
truth is that increasing the
length of prison sentences will
not make a safer on both the
community and the individual
level increased time in prison
actually may increase rates of
violence in the community we
need better more effective
solutions to violence as it the
last thing that I make sure we'd
like to make sure we talk about
in this committee when speaking
of the subject is that there are
families who are the people that
we lock up will be returned to
eventually whatever their prison
sentence is and I think we need
to consider the mental and house
effects that putting very long
prison sentences on different
crimes has so thank you again
and we respectfully oppose
thank you anybody else
members of the committee senator
cution
thank you mister chair and
senator.
I think those arguments are
quite frank ridiculous because
if we.
Have
saying the length of time that
somebody spends in prison has
nothing to do with the outcome
then we might as well say that
somebody who.
Is guilty of the of the crimes
that were talking about spins a
month in jail and gets turned
out or a week you know.
And you know the people that
don't have to worry about this
or the people who don't murder
people i'm in full support thank
you senator neighbor
thank you mister chairman thank
you center for bringing this
you said that.
Victims families are shocked I
think you said shock to the
conscience when they hear that
it's only fifteen years maximum
sentence of remurder and i'll
just tell you it shocked my
conscience to read this less to
begin with um
it looks to me like we don't
value life very much at all
and first agree follow me which
you talked about.
As a eighteen year
maximum service.
Three medicated murder of an
adult
is eighteen years
heartly that's what life is
equal to
I can move you for bringing it
up to eighteen years for second
degree
but i'm wondering why would in
the increase first to cream
heard beyond its current
eighteen years while we were
trying to all we are trying to
fix this because eighteen years
of.
Of
one's life for planning and care
out a murder of another human
being doesn't seem
at least in the victims family's
eyes to be
much of a sacrifice.
If I may thank you mister
chairman thank you sir
these these are the
another non first agreed tears
that first agree murder.
Is is in a different section of
law and it's
thirty years to life so first
agree murder is thirty years to
life
uhm.
So it's called first to be
murder and then of course and
there's the criminal code which
is first second third fourth
degrees
and so screen murders thirty
years to life if you can prove
it and secondly murder just drop
significantly to to zero to
fifteen
the other first agree crimes
you're correct are not zero to
eighteen their eighteen years
mandatory
so there's several crimes that
give you
several crimes that give you
eighteen years mandatory
between the first and second
remote
mr chair and center I appreciate
that but I was just reading on
page three it said first degree
follow me resulting in death of
a child life first degree fellow
me for aggravated criminal
sexual printration life.
And then first degree felony
which I would take for all other
first you referrings which would
include murder but maybe it's
elsewhere eighteen years and
then second degree for me
resulting in death of a human b.
I didn't see the thirty years to
live in if it's somewhere else
in the statutes great but uh
just looking at this list so
mister chairman sir there are
neighbor unpage two
line twenty four
it says as used in this statute
non capital felons.
And then capital feloni is in
another status so it's thirty
years to like.
Well but that's the confusion in
the statute which drops
attempted second week murder all
the way down to third green
murder along with.
Non murder crimes.
There's the murder statute over
here and then the rest of the
mister chairman center if if
we're clean in the serve
since we don't have really any
capital crimes
we did away with those number of
years ago i'm wondering why we
don't clean that up
mr chairman as
they don't we actually kind of
cleaned up your before last week
with the columns in the at you
but but the this is not up
a clean up bill
i'm surprised that that first to
be murder is not in this bill
but that section is amended but
this is a penalty announcement
necessarily cleaning up the
statute but what's neat mister
neighbor is the the sensing
commission that movement that
started ten twelve years ago
creating the criminal justice of
committee
which I was thought that why the
underbeing the chair on the
outside it's led to this
wonderful movement to redo the
criminal cover the sensing
commission is going to be
working all this summer and fall
so that next sixty day we can
deal with all their sort this
doesn't make the finish line
this will certainly be in there
because this is that blatant
contradiction but
but we don't have time to to
that big bill for this thirty
days you know.
Mr chairman center just for my
own education.
When we see the words non
capital felony or the word
capital felony it doesn't mean
apparently now primes that whose
punishment could be
their execution
as I formally understood the
word capital crimes being a
crime that would potentially
lead to ones
death if they were convicted and
service is such a manner so that
those words don't mean that
anymore apparently.
Mr chairman is there never know
good catch we as you recall we
we eliminated the death penalty
in two thousand nine but we
didn't tweet the language and
take away the magic words
capital felony so I mean we
should do that thank you mister
chairman so is it fair to say
capital felonies of those that
have resulted in somebody else's
death
my brain is more so i'm not
going to see that now mister
tremon but essentially about a
felonies are those that can
result in
life without the possibility of
parole as we exchanged the death
penalty with life without
possibility perol and we still
call them capital f.
A senator tomorrow
thank you mister chair thank you
center during this fourth is
there a national commission
that makes recommendations
uncertain thing.
Thank you mister tommin there is
not every state the crime
chrima's state is definitely
left up to the states the
federal government has
incroached on crime tremendously
in the last you know thirty
years because of the war on
drugs but up a federal
government does crimes
essentially that cross
dateline's bank you know bank
robbery
crimes on native american a
native land
air force basis stop like that.
So federal pent penalties are
much much more severe but every
state has their own penalty
scheme.
Ah I don't know if the FIR did
our surrounding states but it's
shocking
what you would receive for
second remurder in other states
compared to all
that was my second question I
was at compare or others
surrounding states does it
also
see that mr chairman tom and I I
don't know I didn't do that
homework for today but it's a.
I mean they're they're twenty
five years thirty years forty
years so them a little much but
eight for fifteen years is like
literally off the chart with
other states it it's it's is
unfailable when you.
Tell peop.
Well i'll be voted for this but
you know we have
united states has the highest
culturation rate.
The modern industrialized
countries in the world we also
have the highest crime rate so
just because we have a.
The.
Hi.
Carceration rate doesn't mean we
have low crime.
Thank you.
That all thank you center
senators.
Thank you I I know that the the
the
cease act where i'm world direct
chrome commission what is it
that the sense and commission
sentencing commission thank you
the sentencing commission is
doing a whole overall overhaul
in one of the things that I
learned when I was working when
I worked on the juvenile
eliminating life of that period
for juveniles when I would
learned is that a lot of these
juveniles were in prison under
the fell any murder
rule
which the felony murder rule was
a capital crime which I think
was really
problematic because now it
turned into a life without perol
situation and there was no
analysis of that and for people
who don't know the felony murder
rule is if your involved in
something that in a burglary or
whatever and there's a death
someone someone is murdered then
you're just his liable the
felony murder opposes murder on
you just as if you had pulled
the trigger and so of when women
was in prison for longer than
the person who actually shut the
the individual because of the
felony murder rule and this is a
juvenile who opened her purse
because she had the person's gun
who used the gun to shoot
somebody.
And he has they got eighteen
years and she got children all
life without peral or or
juvenile thirty years or
something outrageous
you know when she was a sixteen
year old so all of that to say I
am not a fan of peace meant
mailing peace mealing
and especially because the study
that we need to do and in the
end the sentencing commission is
doing is trying to look at the
relationship between it not just
vengeance
you know and and the feeling of
of like justice people often
call ventures just justice and
in my mind vengeances not
justice and of course I I do
really believe in healing and
you know I I have a whole
different idea about what
justice is but I just think
randomly taking you know one
thing that you think is out of
wack there's so much out of
whack with our with our system.
You know it and as was pointed
out this isn't going to deter
and I don't think that it really
necessarily
means justice I think it means
more vengeance
you know when you're talking
about something being out of
whack
it's it's just because there
will be so angry in the
community so I I have a
difficult time with this
building III I can't support it
I i'm looking forward to see
what the.
Sentencing commission does
because
that I mean if I if I had dinner
a piecemail bill it would have
been to get rid of the felony
murder
enhancement.
If I would if I would have done
one of these because I think.
So I I don't have a question
just telling you I I can't
support this bill anybody else
go to judiciary and I have a sec
yes thank you mister thank you
thank you members the committee
the up.
So fell any murderer is a huge
contradiction in law but it's
central result I think if we
taste ourselves with a limiting
felony murder the classic
example is someone doing a
robbery and then the woman two
rows let over has a heart attack
and dies great that that you
know this person gets is charged
as felony reversed to be murder.
Anyway that that's a huge
contradiction that if we were to
do as a state it would I would I
think would would go national
our high incursed rate is
because we incarcerate non
violent offenders.
And so the hope crux of my
criminal justice reform efforts
is to focus scarce resources on
violent offenders.
Murder in particular other than
other violent crimes is is so
horrendous relative to other
crimes you cannot take it back
you cannot heal from that murder
not only as the victim of murder
is not just the deceit and it's
the family and friends of the
december.
Homicide in the family affects
the psychology
generational.
Harm to that family for three
generations.
So so I think that this is just
more than appropriate and
consistent with the rest of our
common account and this is not
for show.
If this were introduced for the
first time maybe you could
suggest there was for show i've
introduced this bill like five
or six times in my career one of
them traded for secondary murder
and eliminated first week
trafficking.
I think we should take first
agree i'm robbery off the books
I think first degree should be
zero eighteen not eighteen and
we have to fix our child abuse
code because of a baby there's
an a tub because because the
parents are whatever that
they're facing eighteen years
mandatory with no interest
anyway there's a lot of
contradictions this is one of
them
um and I think that you were
somebody
all those ills that we talked
about.
I don't care
mr term of the do parcels the
old ninety six we have a motion
for defesting senator nibert is.
The secretary will call the role
senator hickey.
Center may assess.
Yes so my coach and so my catch
involves yes senator mckenna no
center I can not vote no senator
neighbor
senator neighborhoods yes
centers
centers media's votes yes center
city or muppet no sensition as
well senator m.
Senator.
He give us yes senator men.
The.
Yes same time and yes senator
zipino.
No and i'd like to explain my
voters have been about to.
Though six to three you ever do
pass now here's my comment
people in other countries are
astounded at the length of our
sentences nowhere in in the
world do we give do they give
the sentences that we give in
this country and it's because we
always focus on look at the poor
victims family they've lost
somebody for eternity and you're
letting them out after twenty
eight years that's not fair
it'll never be fair.
If we add three years six years
from now they'll be family
saying it's not fair they only
got nineteen years we had three
more it's not fair the it'll
never be fair it should not be
judged how the victims family
feels about it it should be
judged about how do we move from
what happened.
Beyond that we convinced
somebody to prison for more than
three years they become a
culturated to jail.
They can do better in prison and
they do on the outside in all
the criminology reports show
that.
Holding somebody in prison
beyond three years is pretty
much expenditure of public money
at no particular benefit because
whatever they're going to get
out of it they've gotten in the
first three years they've
suffered they decided this is
such they won't want to do this
anymore or they get really used
to it and they get by they learn
how to deal with the prison
economy to learn how to deal
with the prison culture and when
they get out that's what they're
used to we've made lifetime
criminals so I I just I just
think we're we're we're going
the wrong direction when we try
to deal with crime by extending
the the punishment.
After three years is not
punished anymore they just all
it is a guarantee that when they
get out they won't be able to
function any better.
So III know you you have trade
us a number of times I take the
judiciary I hope the judiciary
committee takes a more skeptical
look at it because
I just don't think it'll do any
good but did you do every do
pass and so let's move on to
your next bill
so the repeat fell any offender
no bone to all no that's where
are you create the demolition
fund the created demolition
thank you miss german members
senate bill one hundred thirty
eight this is the all hands on
deck it can send approach to
dealing with a homelessness in
our state
so i've been talking with some
zoning inspectors some some
walks houses and we think that
this will do a world a good
essentially.
Oh when some of when a house
gets dilapidated.
Uhm the city says hey clean it
up and fix this he fix that or
maybe a dispute within the
family as to who owns it after
the death of somebody and then
all ultimately gets bored at all
there's a legal proceeding to to
to to deem it to condemn it and
then there's another legal
proceeding to demolish it.
And then they lat the person who
owns the property.
Is it is legally obligated to
pay for the demolition they
can't sell it because there's a
lean.
Crime increases and so so now
that we have all this wonderful
money at our disposal.
I think this is a great bang for
the book so what this does miss
chairman of the creative
greater demolition fund ten
million dollars into.
Um.
Which would go through the fa
toward grants for city and
county governments.
Uh dfa is gonna is tasked with
promo getting rules and some
other rules can be really co it
really appreciate the analysis
of this committee
you know where.
Where I want to create a
mechanism and statute next year
were a person.
Voluntarily condemns their own
property instead of fighting it
in court and fighting in a court
because they don't want the bill
to come out on whatever they
voluntarily can damage it's it's
condemned in a legal sense.
That would qualify the city or
county for this bond the fun
goes to demolish the structure
and then that piece of land
becomes marketable again to
build new houses for.
For for our communities.
Through anyway that's just one
the radical rule making that
could occur but it's the
maintenance of these of these
elaborated houses the abayment
costs the process between come
down nation demolition
redevelopment.
Is there I mean if we waived a
magic one and and and
demolished.
You know three hundred houses in
my home county it would it would
make a tremendous affect effect
for infill for economic
development for property values
and for the homelessness so with
this bill we can literally.
Wave that magic one thank you
mister chairman.
Thank you
mister chair and senator
right now this is
an issue that the local
government's face weather be the
county or I mean yes politics
that correct.
Right yeah and in that regard.
The.
Local government has to go
through a variety of steps
and frankly a very cumbersome
process to.
Actually get to the point where
the demolition can't occurred as
it.
And very commercial and.
The owner of the property
because they are on the hook so
to speak mister chair and
senator
sometimes these things
never get resolved and the
condemnation never
really occurs because of the
constant
court processes that have to
occur and then the appeals from
those court process.
And in russial
mr chairman senator.
We have an old apartment complex
that if you drive by you would
be shocked that that
that the city has a tournament
down at this point it's a
dilapidated to say that the
least
and yet the order of the
property has resisted.
This process from day wine and
and I imagine most of the
concern is that they're
ultimately going to be
responsible for payment of the
demolition is that an accurate
review of
the situation is to mister
charmer and I that yes I don't
know.
I don't know it.
As well as that but yes so the
city or county condemns it.
They order you essentially to
demolish it you can afford the
demolition you appeal that they
put a lean.
City and county governments
aren't in the real estate but so
and then there's really no way
out because the person can't
sell it because
the market value so low say that
you know to demolish it costs
thirty forty thousand it's it's
it's a big mess that never gets
result.
And so mister chairman center
on the one hand.
I
applied you for doing this on
the other hand i'm very
concerned.
Because in assets if I heard you
correctly mister chairman
senator.
The state would issue these
graphs that would resolve them
demolition process.
And then it makes the property
marketable and the person who
receives the marketable property
is the owner without any leans
is that your intention mister
chair and senator mister
chairman sir now
I would hope that the rule
making or the statute we do next
year would would not create that
that that would be kind of a
perverse since and if I think I
think if we are forced sale.
That would be beneficial and
then proceeds from the cell
could go back into the fund.
Or the landowner could just walk
away scott free and and the new
land owner can purchase it but
yeah we need to this properties
need to change
that on this your chair and
center so be your intent maybe
for the state to have be the
lane holder and could then
market that property as selene
holder get its money back you
return whatever.
Is over and above the amount of
the wind to the owner of the
property and it gets sold to a
third person who can then
develop or do what they wish
with with that property that's
now
clean of the
condemned premises mister
chairman zero that does be a
good ideal situation I think
this.
The f a this may not be best to
go through the family we go
through the new housing.
Agency that the governor wants
to create but yeah that would be
an ideal situation where the
incentives are or aligned.
And the public good money goes
to a public good by tanking
changing that condemn property
to a brand n.
And mister chairman senator.
Have you contemplated the
potential for the demolition
cost.
To exceed the fair market value
of the cleaned property.
And i've just throw this out if
the property contains as best.
If the property contains some
other hazardous substances the.
Demolition and clean up.
Is likely to exceed the value of
that property even clean and so.
You would never get to the point
where.
The state is going to be able to
get back its money it will
always be out in those cases
have you had you ever
contemplated maybe how to deal
with properties that the lean
would be.
Much greater than the fair
market value of the property
mister chairman I would that's
that that contemplation created
the prespose for the bill has
what you describe is happening
now and and if the cost to dim
demolishes greater than the
market value there's no
intention for anyone to buy it
there's no.
Just stays the way it is and so.
If those costs were offset of
the demolition was essentially
free
and it and help liquidate that
it's a property that then that
would be the intent.
Thank you mister.
Oh thank you misses thank you
for bringing this fourth this is
distant wouldn't apply to
properties that.
The city had taken over.
Nine payment atta.
Senator tom and it would have
the if the property probably
needed to be demolished.
The the reference of citi can
apply for a grant to demolish
but what if it's that what if
it's not
sure about the that doesn't need
to be the mileage.
Then mister chairman center
dominate I wouldn't anticipate
this fund.
Going to demolish.
This is this is a fun to pay for
demolish.
So
maybe i'm missing something
right.
Why is it say have to step and
get the city.
Probably money to do this.
The.
Maybe.
But we up and sanity think
outside of the box unlike our
friends that hold.
And and I believe that we can
create a legal str.
Expenditure goes to a public
good.
Thank you assurance is this.
And we have the city of ability
to approach you about this
no but but I did a bill last
year mister chairman sir
tomorrow dealing with the.
Which had two points you could
subdivide a property or adequacy
that build didn't make it to the
gov's desperate the city then
subsequently did as cassie a
bill.
Uh their ordinance was
consistent when my building up
the subdivision didn't make it
in the law but the conceit the
bill did and so they are
interested in this because
there's a lot of condemned
houses that.
They need to be demolished that
they're just not a.
The bland donors don't have the
financial means to condemn or to
demolish them rather.
So I think the cities
and other cities are in or kind
of anticipating the outcome of
this bill so thank you mister
chairman with the but it's not
brought forth by the but to be a
great process mr german said a
dominant word and according to
this bill up.
Page two line seven
the local government division
would promigate
and hopefully get the
incentive's right and in the
cities could apply for the
grants or the city of our crook
it could say apply for you.
You know two million dollars to
demolish.
You know it was fifty homes or
whatever.
Sound first come first serve
basis I would I would have I
would be graves chairman center
told me if if if the ten million
were utilised in that situation
it would be first come person.
The.
But I think that average cost of
demolition is between thirty and
forty thousand.
You do the math that's about
three hundred and.
Okay that's
thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah I I wonder have you talked
like with egual imminent they
did do it a response
I am.
So we buy the house that had
been condemned and.
The reason had been condemned as
it had a basement and it didn't
have this it didn't have good.
Whatever it is below the floor
some floor I don't know the
steel beam underneath and
internet into my husband's
office and he ran at he added
office for me years it's a
beautiful little
railroad queen and house.
Um and so the condemnation.
Was because of one.
Structural thing that was wrong
with it I could be fixed and so
I worry with regard to historic
preservation you know cause I
think this just a
disincentivisers restoration of
older properties that don't mean
cold you know whatever in and
there's no and i'm i'm not sure
I wish I understood all of the
all of the things I don't know
whether there is any incentive
for restoration we did it
because we love the house
but it would always be
i'm sorry I got distracted.
Instead the as I understand that
the cities would apply for it
based on the cities rate of
the I mean that they would get
it I guess rules but one of the
things you that they presume we
will be looking for is whether
the city had a bunch of
properties that it condemned
that were deteriorating because
and then and then they reply for
this grant and they get the
money to d.
Yeah I mean I I am concerned
because I I just don't see.
That has happened a lot in some
areas of my district and it's
not attractive to have like
these.
Not substandard home substantial
home okay home vicama.
You know it it's just it's it's
not I don't think that it
accomplishes what you're trying
to with the bill so I don't know
I i'm torn I I guess i'll see
how I listen to the rest of the
debate but I I think.
I I guess i'd like to see more
support and more housing people
talking about it and seeing
saying that this is a an it
innovative way to be great if
the city were here talking about
how how the city would use it
you know just make me feel
better about this amount of
money going to
to deal with condemned
residential properties.
I should I should as you know
this I guess but when when you
say a property is condemned does
that mean the city has taken it
over now what does it mean
mister chairman certificate all
that it's some.
There's no since an abatement
laws I don't I can defer to.
To service he lopes but when
something is deemed.
Condamned it's it's deemed uh
it's it's just a legal condition
of a h.
You cannot get a certificate of
occupancy and what the senator
said is very.
It's very awesome at the week.
We want we romanticize so much
about the past and we love these
older buildings.
But if they're dilapidated and
uninhabitable for for years on
end we have to let him go so so
under under the system if the
city said this is a condemned
property it's on by
mister.
We would like now to he what he
want he's not willing to
demolish it himself.
He can't afford to or he's not
willing to correct so we will
play to the state for money and
we're going to demolish it for
him correct mister chairman
senator tease penalty and that's
where we got to get the
incentives right there's a
thirty day session this is kind
of a policy conversation
disguised as an appropriations
act but but I think we can come
up with some ideas to use the
financial resources of the state
to facilitate these sales I were
to do the rule making I would
make it so that they can
voluntarily condemn.
The demolition is free under the
condition that I sale is made
and the development occurs the
the they have to sell it to
somebody where does the city buy
it.
Mister chairman or did you know
they would sell it to someone
who's going to build a house i.
I would be my will I mean this
is really a benefit to this land
I mean i'm not sure this is a
guy who let the place
deteriorate and so now we're
gonna.
Scrape the property for him then
he has his nasely scrape blood
that he then sells to someone.
And has backed the cost of
demolition but what if the as he
said the the cost of the
demolition is
more than the sale of the land
brings.
Then we have a a situation where
we've.
The.
There's no incentive for him to
then do it when he fighted in
court and say the city doesn't
have the right to do this if i'm
not willing to.
It's only read I guess that the
thing is it hinges on him being
willing to have this happen.
But if he all is going to happen
to him as he loses the property.
He'll never be willing to have
it.
I've quite possibly mister
chairman sir did you know
because some of these people
just have an emotional
attachment to their parents
house or whatever but this is an
opportunity to someone to
essentially get out from under
this legal and financial
situation you're and and to
benefit the neighbors granted
making lots of not cool in a
neighborhood but can doubt a
condemn dilaperate house is
worse than an empty lot if we
can get some agreements that
that that that he's a property's
gonna be developed into a house
we can improve the housing stuck
as well as improve our economy
with a little bit of state
subsidy.
Okay what's the will of the
committee.
With a motion
of did you have a question
we'll be listless let's get a
second will discuss there are
second for the motion.
Second second if I senator
masters okay senator mckenna
which your question.
The bill does not address or
include a requirement to
redeposit these those proceeds
back into the fund.
So the state would give ten
million dollars.
Pay for the the raising.
Right.
Yeah.
And then the minister party
would sell the lots and then
what happens to those proceeds.
Thank you mister chairman that
the city would not sell the lock
because the city doesn't on the
lot in less of course that
voluntary condemnation allow
that person to get out from
under scott
but that would be determined in
rule or in statute next year
but the key to the room making
or the statutory structure is
just to get the incentives
right.
So that up to these dilapolated
properties are demolished and
new houses are b.
And senator so let's see and my
my heads get a little.
Little using.
So the state essentially word
take that ten million off their
books they don't
are you saying in the rules and
statute later they would address
this is that what you're saying.
Mr chairman of a can I on page
two paragraph b line seven by
december first twenty twenty
four the local government
division shall promote rules
for the administration of the
demolition fund.
Chairman is senator right and
there's no direction about what
those rules consist of.
Mister chairman sir mckinner in
this bill know but I would I
would hope and think that those
rules would get the incentives
right with regards to the goal
of
the increasing surrounding
property values and
and increasing the housing stock
in the.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator.
Good luck.
Godless ameri.
The.
The.
Reserve a little because it is.
I'm finished thank you chairman.
Mister german know however
there's a lot of money in each b
two.
I don't I don't anticipate it
happening this year because we
would need the role making in
the kind of the buy.
But I but I didn't want to hold
year to go by without.
The.
If I could say what you're your
intention is is that this passes
the fund is created they'll
strip the money out in center
finance but it'll be in the
books and then you go for an
appropriation next year to
chairman than ever that would be
one one thing I just want to
explain this to the finance
committee maybe we get the city
up here to talk about it and
move.
My experience with condom can
abandon buildings and most of
them.
Were have been taken over by the
city for unpaid taxes and then
we
accepted applications from
people.
And.
If program was so successful
that uh.
We were in a stateway the
television.
So.
So you're saying there aren't
most of these properties of
walked away from it and not
paying the taxes n.
I couldn't tell you I couldn't
tell you all I know is there's
up.
All I know is there's a lot of
it's just a long
and
procedural process for the city
to condemn a property and then a
whole nother economic reality to
demolish it and then and then a
whole other weird situation to
sell it and and we develop my
message to it but which is up
that I still think the cities
should pay for it I don't know
okay we have emotion i'm done
secretary will call the rule
senator hickey now explain my
vote center he give out now
center mayor stess so many
states works yes center my
cution center mechanic yes then
I can have other senator
neighbor to continue to
discussion
our neighborhoods yes centers
centers center city a lot best
no but I hope the the discussi.
Not here not now
next year and institute a
session
at a time then though send our
mind roads now it's not easy to
be no
so it is a pain was now so
a lot of good ideas in here
i'd like to see something I wish
the city were here so that we
could see kind of where the
funding were going I mean it's
it's a good issue it's a
prominent issue it's just
I would like it to be tighter
and wherever to go if it went
through here finance
they aren't going to hear it i'm
sorry
I
I think that the thing you said
about maybe the housing is this
new housing office of that a
actually gets created
or alternatively mf
they would be a great vehicle
and maybe put together
a bill to come next year with it
spelled out instead of waiting
for the
rule making a little more of the
parameters of the bill and then
thank you so much mister
chairman there was a wonderful
study done by the city of settle
on post
and those owning laws which were
a good idea at the time deprived
the black community and settle
of thirt.
Thank you said by a vote of the
three in the five in the
negative
and senator city olives I
understand you're going to put
on the the last bill and our
agenda senator rodriguez is
domestic violence services bill.
Okay.
Then a bill two three four.
This is an appropriation.
Thank you
this is an appropriation bill it
it appropriates four point five
million from the general friend
of the children youth and
families department for
expenditure in fiscal you're
twenty five to provide for to
provide or contract for the
provision of domestic violence
services and most of these
services are contracted with
domestic violence non profits
and
there's not enough they're
they're they're really aren't
enough services
it is as the bill described it's
a non recurring appropriate
domestic funds to services this
year but we have the opportunity
to prove to lfc that this is a
good expenditure of money and
hopefully will become recurring
in future years.
Um I have
of course they have a very
eligible maybe what's your
listing but yeah garcia merrill
in garcia and I have linda here
a little single is a lobbyist
for the coalition of gets
domestic violence and maryland
is the I think the program
director
the managing director of the
coalition against domestic
and we stand wealth and do you
want to see in.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much.
Senators
daniel garcia this is his first
time witnessing the legislative
process
but it's been great for him to
see what his his mom does in the
work that we do and i'd like to.
Putting forth this bill as you
know domestic answer misses in
the state of new mexico or you
may not know have been
incredibly stagnant for many
years the funding has been
stagnant I make a pull of
spreadsheets and do lots of
things that show and but what
we've seen over the last year is
in twenty twenty one we had
fifteen thousand over fifteen
thousand domestic violence
services and crisis calls
handled by providers which was
the fifty three percent increase
in calls from the prayer year so
we're seeing a fifty three
percent increase in addition to
anywhere between ten and twenty
percent increase in access to
direct services so crisis calls
are increasing services are
increasing and we're asking our
providers to do more with
funding that is decreasing it's
increasing on the federal level
and the funding has been
stagnant we know we've had an
eight percent inflation rate and
really the children eat the
families department where are
domestic violence funding
primarily sits and through the
family balance protection
services act spending and the
state general appropriations
funding in collaboration with
our coalition and our thirty two
members conducted an assessment
and found that realistically we
need about eleven million
dollars in addition to what
we're receiving to
to stabilize where we're at but
we're currently requesting an
additional four point five
million because we have
vacancies and all of our
domestic provider programs and
we had about six programs who
were on and off of zoom today
they were texting me throughout
this they have vacancy rates of
five seven eight nine employees
and when you're talking about
staff that range from twenty ten
at most forty and there have
vacancy rates of nine ten star
five staff that's significant
they're unable to hire because
they're not able to have
salaries that are consider it to
the professional experience th.
They're losing staff to walmarts
and target and other employers
who can pay more and offer
benefits and we have employees
who
are uninsured and don't have
access to health insurance which
was interesting to listen to the
health insurance conversation
today so we're asking for four
point five million to
specifically target increasing
wages so that we can sustain the
staff that we have pair them
commissioner it to the work that
they're doing and support the
funding losses that were
experiencing I know the physical
impact reports spoke about the
funding that's going to be going
to the crime victim separation
commission those funds are for
other victim services and the
domestic vans funding from that
agency will decrease by fifty
nine percent this next year so
are domestic balance providers
starting in october are going to
be facing
catastrophic losses and funding
our we're also looking to
increase our children's capacity
funding so that we can support
our children's capacity funding
and as a result of the.
Our domestic offender treatment
find we'll no longer be in
effect so we're also requesting
to cannot back fill and what we
would be losing to support the.
The.
Just on that less point was this
program funded with some of the
fees that were not not is the
batteries intervention a program
that's the the men the program
for.
For better yeah so so that's app
all part of the four point five
year that's a piece of it they
are they're also going to you
know work on coordinated
community response funding there
there's a
and it is you know I really
believe in better's intervention
programs because the way you
measure them is whether the
victim is safe during the time
the person participates not
whether it ever happens with
the.
The.
Did you want to say.
Well
that we we are trying to work
the finance committee and did
work the house but nothing yeah
let me ask you how much is in
house bill to now
zero zero additional for all
additional but what do you what
is your basic well the basic is
about mister chair members of
the committee see why says it's
about nineteen million but that
all of that money doesn't go to
programs so I think we only have
about fifteen million that
actually goes to program where
is the rest of two things and
see why the vanishes into the
bowls of the
apparently and the secretary has
said to us right now see why fd
has absolutely no expansion
and the secretary has uh just to
me today that if we get some
expansion in
in senate finance that the
general money that she would
certainly allocate direct some
of it to domestic violence
because they do not.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience
wants to show support for this
bill see why if you want to say
anything about the bill.
Come up and use you don't have
to do but if you want to don't
don't feel like you're.
If you're pressure here.
The.
Good afternoon a chair and
members of the committee
tell interior with sy way of
debit call services division
which is where the domestic
violence programming runs out of
it previously was protective
services
and.
As an agency we are neutral on
this but i'm happy to take any
questions or clarity on anything
one piece of clarification
though that I would like to
share is that there is not a
specific curve out in hbe for
domestic violence programming it
is
a budgeting decision essentially
that's made in face t y fd there
is not a specific car about
it's all wrapped into the
behavioral service correct.
Okay this would be targeted
yeah.
Anybody else wanted to say
anything either for or again
this bill.
I'm not sure why mf is here on
the domestic violence program
but it's nice to have you in the
audience
okay.
Members of the community will
the committee senator mechanic
thank you chairman I like to
move a due pass when you're
ready for do pass their second
senator toleman discussion
senders
i'm sorry it's late
so this is
you usually have money mister
cherry.
Senator sadillope has.
So
this four point five million or
whatever is money that is needed
to fill gaps in the contractual
services that see why fd does as
that right yes and that gap is
created because
well one of the one of the
issues are several things going
on here but one of the issues is
federal funding has been cut the
funding they go
so that's one issue that's a
piece of it and then the other
issue is the fees and collection
battery fund.
So convicted of domestic
violence you had to pay fees and
those fees were directly
directly went to the batteries
intervention now there are no
fees so that program received a
cut and that I believe that
that's a
really bad thing because it
keeps victims safe while the
participants are in th.
The point we we commit.
As the body the legislatures
that will cut the fees but will
fix it with geo general fund and
then we forgot conveniently.
Yeah that's my second question
mister chair.
What chances in how i'm sorry I
mean if it's if this is ison how
I mean it which is the
same as fine I mean a senate
finance gonna come up with this
and fulfil our obligation will
say that senator rodriguez who
is actually carrying this bill
okay for her is on finance so I
think it's got
thank you okay that's really
good to hear that there is there
there thank you mister chair I
will certainly stand in support
of this and and as you know my
wife is on the board of sane and
was their medical director and I
do here a lot of these really
awful stories so I wish you the
best thank you senator i've
employed that there are two
people who want to speak I
forgot all about going to the.
The.
So we have two people who want
to speak on this either for
against it please identify
yourself and then give us your
comments
somebody from battered family
services.
The.
Good evening my name is family
allison i'm out of a gall new
mexico
you know we're right in between
the the nab nation and and
published.
And so we encounter a lot of dvd
issues and the missing your
murder condition is phenomenal
it's pretty huge here.
The workforce
paul is also very limited and we
have worked very hard to attract
individuals who can provide
great services for our clients
but we aren't competitive with
the local school districts or
the local hospitals we've lost
agreed social workers from
western from eastern.
Because these other entities are
able to provide retirement
yoke health insurance
yeah vision gentle at a hundred
percent and they're paying wages
twenty thousand to forty
thousand more than we can and so
we're chronically understaffed
the still would definitely make
us more competitive and
addressing the issues in our
region.
So just wanted to to point that
out and and thank you for the
pound taking the time listen to
my comments very good thank you
so much next is somebody named
n.
And thank you mister chair
deal up as carried this horse
senator nancy redriguez and
the advocates and other
representatives
I have unfortunately been not
too long ago a recent recent
victim of domestic violence and
just last night I was in a store
and was out the mother crime
sell this is why i'm not in the
committee today
I will.
Scares me mister chairman
members of the committee and
everyone in the audience since
presenting and also
miss.
That point that was made about
the last revenue from phase is
exactly correct and there are
some funds in house filled two
to support some other victim at
the legends of crime reparation
services but not for domestic
violence and therefore I stand
with support of this bill and
its efforts to help to close
that gap thank you thank you
very much.
Okay we're still in the
committee any of the discussions
what's the will of the
committee.
Do we already have emotion we
already have emergency mckenna
and tomorrow yes my home
are things slipped away
the fug is setting
the secretary will call the rule
senator hickey
senator he keep out yes center
my assessor yes there may ask as
well as yes center my curtain
center mechanic yes they're
mechanic votes yes senator
neighbor senator never never
bought yes center is center city
a lot best centers that he
allowed his votes yes senator
tomman said and how many boats
yes senators appeal yes is if
you november seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
all your hours of waiting
and thank you for everyone
patience
so members that then that then
concludes are a gender for the
day I remind you that we need
right here in this comfortable
room at ten in the morning
we're a very very busy uh
agenda.
Right
now.
