Senator Block
And her boon, Senator Charlie.
And our gallegos and our nava.
And our Pinto.
The nurse Scott
Serio Lopezen Hickey.
Senator Lopez
Present.
We do have a corn present.
And I think uh everybody's
indulgence for wearing a mask.
I'm still immunocompromised for
my health issues and I just
appreciate everybody, um.
Wearing a mask this evening.
Um, Ms. Cracker, you are here
and I invited you and I
appreciate again your
willingness to be here and to
share with us some information
about um the Kevins arbitration
that recently took place.
And I know some of us, I mean,
we all watch the news and such
and.
Um, and get garner some
information, but I think it's
most important to hear from
those of you who are part of the
team, the plaintiffs, uh, to
hear exactly what the outcomes
were of your arbitration, so.
Welcome and, and please the
floor is yours.
Thank you so much, Chair. um,
thank you so much for having me
tonight, I am honored to be
here. I want to serve as a
resource as for all of you and
understanding where we are on
the Kevenness lawsuit. I would
like to begin.
Um
Well, first, let me introduce
myself, I represented children
in foster care as their guardian
ad litem or their youth
attorneys since 2001.
Um, so I've really burned court.
And together with 7 co-council,
we brought the Kevanness lawsuit
against the prior
administration, um, where we had
14, um, foster children as the
named plaintiffs on behalf of
the entire group in a class
action of all children in foster
care, and we brought this.
Case in federal court against
the cabinet secretaries of both
CYFD and.
Then HSD, which I, and that's
important because we allege that
the state.
The state system, so that there
wasn't enough collaboration
between HCA and CYFDE. They were
co-defendants for a reason, and
I think they get kind of HCA
gets a little bit lost.
Um, in the mix when we're really
talking about Kevin us. So the
allegations were that the state
had been depriving.
The foster youth of their state
and federal rights. So we were
really just trying to enforce
current law.
Um, and after multiple lengthy
days of mediation in 2019 and
into early 2020, we co-created,
and this is so key, we
co-created.
The agreement. So with members,
um.
Huge teams of staff from CYFD
and HCA and their council.
We wrote this agreement together
and the agreement is a
multi-year plan that is the
blueprint for reforming New
Mexico, New Mexico's child
welfare system into a trauma
informed system of care.
With cross department
coordination between CYFD and
HCA.
The agreement as well as each of
the documents I will cover with
you today is available on our
website.
Heaven as settlement.com,
including the handout that you
have, and I really encourage
each of you to get on the
website, maybe even during this
presentation, um, and just kind
of play around with it so you
can see all of these documents
are just right here on your
phone in any time you need it in
any committee, when you're
considering any bill that might
impact foster children, you're
able to review these documents.
The agreement itself.
Um, was really meant to be an
acknowledgement that the state
was failing.
Kids in care. And I wanna just
begin with what the agreement
itself says, because as you can
see from the handout on the
arbitration, we arbitrated only
on a corrective action plan. So
it was really a reduced, not the
full settlement agreement, but a
reduced part of the settlement
agreement called the CAP.
Um, but the point of the full
agreement, I'll be very brief,
was to have make sure we have
the foundations.
Foster parents and mental health
professionals to ensure we can't
get anywhere.
In this reform in this state or
any state without enough foster
placements, who can meet the
unique needs of our, um, young
people, including cultural
needs.
Without case workers who are not
overburdened by their caseloads
being too high, that's a key
component of this lawsuit.
And also, um, critically, mental
health professionals. It was
really, um, HCA promised us that
they would recruit additional
behavioral health professional.
We also were promised that
screening for trauma would
happen at the outset of a case,
so that kids that we know are
coming in traumatized or having
their screenings done so that we
can.
Provide the services and seek
the services that they need.
That the least restrictive and
appropriate placements would be
relied on that there would be no
children placed in hotels, in
motels, in offices, or in any
out of state.
Provider like an institution.
Um
What's happened since then, I
just want to pause on this
point.
Since we filed the lawsuit in
2018 and settled in March of
2020.
The rise of children being
forced to spend the night in the
office has exploded.
And in fact, the the.
neutrals who we've chose in the
agreement to supervise the
settlement found in their 2020
in their.
Recent report that.
In late 2023 through the
present.
These numbers of children in
offices has gone.
Um, in spite of these promises
to have no children in the
offices.
The other thing the the full
agreement promised was, of
course, our state version of the
IAA, which was passed to um set
up processes and procedures to
promote traditional
interventions.
As first line interventions and
services developed with the
input of our tribes and.
And again the uh increase in
behavioral health services. I
want to speak quickly about the
cone neutrals we began with 3
and now we have 2. These are
national experts chosen by
CYFDHCA and plaintiffs to
supervise progress under the
agreement because of their
expertise in the issues. They
have turned around systems in
other states, we hear all the
time, what are we gonna do? And
I know this is the the question
heavy on this legislative body
and this committee. What can be
done? Our our foster care system
is clearly in a state of
disarray like is.
it impossible.
These two professionals have
turned systems around whether as
um.
Mr. Ryan was himself. He
inherited a lawsuit in New
Jersey and was a secretary and
then also our neighbors,
Oklahoma had a system reform
lawsuit that he has helped them
exit as their supervisor. So I
want to point out that what
they're doing is leading the
agency through validating data.
One of the findings in the
arbitration is that the data
system is as significant
failures. The con neutrals have
their own data team.
So I really recommend that you
look at their reports, which are
also on our website, these are
100+ page reports timed to be
released in the November.
Prior to your session every
year, so that you have this
resource, you have the most up
to date information, um, along
with us on the implementation
team when they released these
reports in November from
validated data.
So the cap. We avoided
arbitration by negotiating a
corrective action plan with the
to get the agencies focused on
the foundational work needed to
bring a reducing the workforce
case load.
Increasing resource resource
family we need, we need foster
and also fixing the data
collection.
Um, we arbitrated.
It took us 8 days of testimony
in the arbitration using
significant state resources and
focus.
Um, the decision issued on
January 21st of 2025 found in
favor of plaintiffs on all
claims severely understaffed.
And that it had failed to
recruit and retain adequate
foster parents, this is what the
handout um is about is really
summarizing the findings of the
arbitration.
So
There is a longer arbitration
order, but also on our website,
just a brief 6-page order. I
really encourage you all to pull
up, and it's called remedial
order number one under documents
on KevinS settlement.com.
It orders the defendants. It it
directs CYFD to ensure that at
this legislative session, it has
taken all steps necessary to
request adequate fully fund all
caseworker and case aid
positions required to meet the
caseload standards established
under the agreement.
Another thing it does, which I
think is really creative, um,
is.
The arbitrator ordered.
The agency to create a new
category of caseworker to cover
on call emergencies and
overnight. We, um, one thing
that co-neutrals do is they
don't just look at the data,
they go out into around our
state and talk to employees, and
they do this once a year,
sometimes twice, and they heard
from employees throughout the
state that the reorganization
that happened under Secretary
Casados, the man is really
increased stress. There was also
a hiring freeze so that more
case workers weren't coming on
and what the
arbitrator really found is the
agency needs to overhire. So
constantly be hiring don't wait
until you have a vacancy,
constantly over hire, so there's
always a pool of fully trained
workers ready to come on board
when one leaves. Um, so that's
something this body can do is
make sure that the requests in
the budget for the agency on
staffing are fully funded and
our team absolutely supports
that.
The arbitration order also.
Requires CYFD to dedicate
placement staff workers in Haney
counties to focus exclusively on
foster parent recruitment in
those counties. This is how we
get children out of the office.
It's not by creating RTCs or
congregate care or these group
homes that the agencies wanting
to fund more of.
That is a lesser of evils. It's,
it's out of one terrible
placement, which is the office
into another.
Not best interest placement,
which is congregate care. These
young people need.
Dedicated parent or substitute
caregiver, which is the foster
parent.
A family setting.
These children can't learn. You
cannot learn when you are
homeless.
That is just a basic need.
The stress and the overwhelm
that these young people
experience in the office is
exhibited by the number of 911
calls from offices, um.
We have staff who are refusing
to do overtime. So in February
was recommended, do not make
mandatory overtime just get
increased staff.
We have um seen a screenshot of
an email that went out just a
few weeks ago to.
To workers saying there will be
a letter of reprimand if you
ignore mandatory overtime. So,
The recommendations in the
arbitration order are critical,
and they're critical for the
safety of our clients. Um, I can
go through each one, but it, it
goes to caseloads.
Resource Family recruitment,
well child checks, these need to
be happening right when kids and
also um improving the data
system.
I want to make sure.
I cover some ground, but also
have enough time if everyone
wants to ask me questions. I the
the the key points here is.
Anything that legislature can do
to make sure that these goals
are fully funded to increase
transparency and accountability,
maybe if there's some way to
attach accountability to the
funding so that.
This legislative body is able to
see, are you spending the funds
on on um foster parent
recruitment. Are you spending
the funds on reducing caseload?
Are you following the
requirements of Kevin us because
again, this is the blueprint.
We have invested so much, um,
not just my team, but the
different agencies, all of the
time we've spent mediating
arbitrating for this plan.
And if the agency could just.
Focus on executing the
requirements of the plan, we
will see significant turnaround
for our kids.
I'm so grateful for the
bipartisan passion that is
really palpable in this.
And I want to make sure that we
don't distract from the
blueprint.
Because that, this is, this is
what's going to have a long term
effect we all desperately want
to have, and I've dedicated my
career to this question of what
can we do to fix CYFD.
The answer is anything that this
legis legislative body can do to
hold the agency and HCA.
Accountable
To the agreement.
To the funding
Or the goals of the agreement.
Is appropriate is what we're
looking for is the way forward.
I think we just need to to make
sure that we have.
Foster parents.
Families and homes for the kids.
A dramatic reduction in caseload
in ensuring that the money that
is being spent on.
And increasing the world justice
services.
And I was a little bit
scattered, but I wanted to do a
reduced presentation so that I
could stand for.
And again, I appreciate and I
would encourage anybody
watching um and my colleagues
also to go to.
Plenty to read if you have
insomnia.
It's a perfect opportunity to
so.
And I would just like to say I,
I appreciate the secretary
Casados being here with us this
evening.
Thank you and I, I'm.
I just, Secretary Miho, I just
thank you for being here. Um.
We'll go through and part of
what we're.
Oh, and just in case I did not,
we're not hearing the two bills
that were on the agenda for
tonight.
Um, those will be rolled over
for our, our meeting on Sunday
at one o'clock.
And we'll continue to, to work
on committee business.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you for your brief but
very poignant uh presentation.
I, I read through it while
waiting for people to come. It's
shocking.
Um
Uh, to, to.
quick question given the time.
If
This estate continues to not
comply for whatever reason.
Do, does the state stand to lose
a lot of federal funding?
And in some areas, particularly
around behavioral health, the
child use.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Hickey, thank
you for that question. So when,
when we hear the secretary
talking about drawing down
federal funds, there are
similar, there are parallels
between the goals that the
federal government is trying to
hold um states accountable to
and some of
The Cavanness Agreement. It's
not all.
Aligned, um, but yes, when we
don't meet the federal
requirements that which.
stand alone and separate from
this lawsuit, then we have to
yield fun.
Uh, yes, thank you. Um, I
Understand that Ohio had a
similar situation as kind of
and mandated a
complete behavior health
overhaul.
Uh, we're trying to do some of
that in our state now.
Um, but also the it was the loss
of a number of federal help
motivate people. So that's where
I was.
Looking
If, if we had a similar
Situation there. The other
question is,
Um, I mean, so if, if we don't
succeed in doing this, how
How do we get
How do we, how do we get it
done? I mean, we got a
legislature that could be fickle
about money or whatever, but
how, how, how are we going to
get
The compensate, I believe we
don't compensate people nearly
as well as we need to, um, and
in all levels and all, all areas
of the government, particularly
in this area.
Um, do you have any other
leverage compelling.
Uh, authority to uh
Yeah, this, I mean, like, if you
come in and take over a.
Thank you. Thank you, ma'am.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and Senator Hickey.
Thank you for that question. So
what happens next is.
Um, the parties will talk about
moving forward on the remedial
site and if there is still
noncompliance, then our um team
will consider taking the
arbitration order and then a
judge would be assigned and we
will be back in litigation.
We're still not there,
arbitration's kind of a quasi
limit litigation, um, and we
will be asking the court to
enforce, however, the court sees
fit. I know in Texas there were
daily fines for lack of
compliance, um, so that.
Something that we're
And
Lisa
But if you're
Is this the only route.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and Senator
Pinto. That is such a great
point and no, we don't.
Law enforcement should be last
resort. These young people have
their own trauma with law
enforcement.
Um, some of my clients weren't's
court just because they had to
pass through security and it was
triggering to them. So you can
imagine.
Being not only kept in an office
where you don't want to be, but
being subject to a law
enforcement call out it just
escalates things, so no, as a
team, a monitoring team, we
have, um, called on the agency
to end this practice, there are
more kids in the office than
ever.
I've had clients in the office,
it is.
Incredibly stressful, it is, it
causes their mental health to
deteriorate, so one thing we've
been pointing out.
Throughout is where's the
behavioral health support, there
is no therapeutic support, I
mean, there, the problem is you
don't want to build in support
around a placement that
shouldn't be occurring to begin
with, but here we are years in
many, many more kids in the
office, so you've got to do
something different and calling
the I think is outrageous, and
it just goes to show that there
are, um, this is not a
sustainable model. It is bad for
kids, it's bad, it causes
delinquency cases to be open,
then you've got this child on a
qu ency pipeline as well, which
is what we.
Absolutely want to avoid and
Not to mention the staff who
aren't feeling safe. I mean, the
all of the code neutral reports
and letters really document
staff tells them we don't feel
safe. We're not trained to do
this.
So staff being asked to serve
basically as a mental health um
professional, which they don't
have the training to do. Um,
physical interaction between
staff and youth, it's all.
Giant problem and should be
dealt with differently, yes, and
and that would have to happen,
that's comes from leadership
inside the agency.
your
But
I mean, they
Do this. Yeah, we shouldn't be.
it
And we're putting all this
trying to address it.
You heard anything about any
funding trying to establish.
Something different.
Then this particular thing.
other
Way to reach out maybe I don't
know or maybe I haven't heard.
Um, this session.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Pinto, I, I
feel like that was a
multi-layered question. So what
I heard was, is there gonna be
funding for just overall
increased behavioral health
services in general.
But we know we put a bunch of
funding in, but.
When you're you mentioned too
earlier in your this funding.
If this is outlined already and
identified or directed to this
particular members of the
committee, Senator Pinto, I.
I mean, I think really that's a
great question for the
secretaries of both HCA and
CYFD.
I am unaware of anything
specific to ending 911 calls as
the first.
In the offices.
I can tell you that my clients
have benefited from and I have
volunteered with agencies like
New Day Youth and Family
Services, where they absolutely
train um every staff person who
interacts, even the ones that
don't interact with youth and
nurtured heart, um, in ways
communication to de-escalate. So
there are things that can be
done and that have been put
forward to this agency, but that
comes from leadership inside the
agency. I
I, if I had the magic wand, yes,
that would be happening, but I
don't.
Specific to the 911 calls, I
don't think there is anything in
this arbitration order that.
Other than
Immediately recruit more foster
parents.
Um, that would address what
you're asking.
Madam Chair um
You used the word promise.
Earlier, and that's all we stood
on was a prom, that was enough.
legal promise, it's a contract.
So they are in breach of
contract. And that's we built in
the arbitration mechanism, we've
used that if we need to move
forward, as I mentioned, get
back into litigation, bring an
um failed promises under the
arbitration order back to court,
then we, we will be back in
court. Thank you.
Adam Chair denied.
After this arbitration,
whatever.
There was no shock.
Now we're just like we.
I
Didn't expire.
But we just have enough that
with court.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Pinto, there
are deadlines and I encourage
you to look at remedial order
number one. It's a 6 pages of
what needs to happen next. And
so for example, under Resource
Family recruitment and retention
at page 2, paragraph 5. The
order states that by February
17, 2025, CYFD will dedicate one
placement staff worker located
in each of the five high needs
counties identified under the
correct corrective action plan,
which are Berna Leo, Dona Anna,
Santa Fe, San Juan, and the
Chavez.
County.
To focus exclusively on foster
placement, recruitment in those
counties. Those dedicated
individuals will be identified
by name to the co-neutrals in
writing by February 10th, the
designated individuals will
maintain their exclusive focus
on recruitment and the five high
needs counties, so there are
plans under each section. But as
I mentioned, the arbitration was
on boiled down version of it's
like emergency basic
foundational goals. Um, so there
are deadlines associated with
each, and I hope that I.
answered your question.
That's all I have for right now.
Thank you, Senator Seddio Lopez.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for, for this presentation,
um.
Very unusual though.
Um, so,
I, I'm just wondering, is um one
of the things I hear about the
staffing of people. I like the
idea of just keeping, you know,
hiring people.
But does the
Where did you lean about the
issue and I'm talking about
staff.
Not, not fuss, I'll talk about.
Thank you for that question.
Well, I mean, it's not just
during the arbitration hearing,
but in the last 5 years now of.
Investigating information, not
just in my cases, but from
employees, people reaching out
to our team, the neutrals to
discuss this in their reports,
what they hear from staff and
it's the.
Several things. One, it's not
just case loads. It's the
culture inside the agency, the
fear of retaliation, um, so
there's a massive culture
problem, also the community has
lost trouble. I don't think
that's in dispute. So, um, when
people are considering work or.
back to the foster parent issue,
you know, it's, it's hard for me
to encourage anybody to apply to
be a foster parent. So there's
definitely a culture issue that
arbitration order kind of
discusses that, but then I do
like that um again, this was
upfront in the 6 the 6 page
order, the idea that let's get a
whole different classic
classification of worker, the
arbitrator really couldn't
believe there aren't even just
data entry people that the
worker front line workers have
to be responsible for basically
parenting children, setting up
services, coordinating that,
coordinating care.
which again, MCOs should be
coordinating here, so let's get
them online doing that's part of
the effort here, cross
coordination. Um, and then also
entering data, that's why data
doesn't get entered. It's in the
phones, there's a data, there's
a data bill pending because
that's also a critical issue.
Um.
So yes, I think that the
arbitrator really couldn't
believe there aren't just data
entry people, they're to
alleviate alleviate some of
these other duties that aren't
directly PPW the placement and
the hair of like care and
keeping of a child.
Um, that also there needs to be
a plan, though, like.
What are we doing to keep
capacity up and make sure that
that there's enough they're
trained up and ready to go. We
definitely heard a lot about
that. I hope I answered your
question. I think you did.
I mean, perhaps we.
Madam Chair, Theo Lopez, I can't
say enough about the nurtured
heart program, which CYFD has
tried to get off the ground and
has presented to.
Um, staff
But there are models and methods
that have been proven to work
with this demographic, the
hardest air quotes kids who are
from the office, who are
homeless, and they don't have
the volume 911 calls, they're
doing something right. So, you
know, we had a.
They've the agency has
contracted with them to train
foster parents to take some of
the hardest to place kids, they
could do that again. There are,
we, we have solutions.
Um, we really just need the,
um, madam, um, and it was, it
was very successful, but, uh,
but we
had more uniformity and who we
were working with, of course,
New Day has young people from
all over as well, and I have sat
through the the nurtured heart
training and
I'd be interested to hear from
you offline about the cultural
concerns because I think it's
actually excellent.
That meets people where they
are, and it helps young people
understand what it is their
spark is that they want and
like, it really is an
empowering.
Empower the self and put that on
the child to learn how to do
that, but also have boundaries
and energize positivity, I mean,
these are young people who are
feeling shamed and blamed in
every juvenile justice, CYFD the
stigma of being a foster.
nonprofits about making sure
that
When you feel this area, um, but
that, that's last question was
about the child.
Yeah.
And I remember at one of the
meetings this summer.
Whoever the child was with, and
I expressed concerns at that,
um, you have to get out that the
the person that the kidio Lopez,
the Presbyterian Health plan is
the um MCO that's come online to
to provide services for all of
the children in foster care, and
so they have said.
We've observed them to dedicate
are closely monitoring that and
hope power that MCO to do an
excellent job because our kids
just can't wait. I mean, the
services are, for example.
a healthcare provider at um
and then they have to get.
Um, well, I've and Bill.
Um, was that initiated by?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Cio Lopez,
the, I, I believe if you're
referring to the one I heard
this morning, there's two
versions, one in the house and
one in the Senate, and I sat
through.
Um
A version this morning where the
it's sponsored by Speaker
Martinez, and the Attorney
General's office is involved in
that version.
That was not initiated by the
agency, in fact, the agency has
opposed on but lying on behalf
of an ombudsman bill in its
prior version and then.
Make it out of committee. So we
have fought advocates have
fought hard.
For an independent voice where
clients like mine can go and
feel heard.
Um, and not only that.
I think the version of the bill
I just referenced would also
track.
Um
track
Sorry, I just placed on the word
whilst thank you to to see
different.
I really just blanked out.
trends, the trends that are
happening that are negative and
impacting kids throughout the
system, whether in certain
counties or not. So that's
really important, um.
My team wants this legislature
to do what it can to support the
goals of Kevinness. We, we want
to make sure that the, this
legislative body and really
importantly, the agencies don't
get distracted by too many.
Um, different bills and
different piecemeal reforms, I
think the um budsman Act.
If
Enacted outside the agency
independent authority lawsuit.
You, Madam children.
Madam Chair, um, senator, I need
to compare them, um.
I think my clients are desperate
for a voice and independent
voice.
Madam
Thank you, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Madam Char. Thank you
for being here, Miss Grecca. We
really appreciate you uh
bringing this forward. I wanted
to point out where you all know
that the state does not have the
data capacity it needs to
analyze, uh, compliance and to
help improve performance over
time. Um, and then it points out
that the difficulty of obtaining
consistently reliable data was
demonstrated and some of the
evidence. Could you expand on
that?
Yeah
Mildly.
Madam Chair.
of a chair, members of the
committee, Senator Nava. So.
What I can tell you about the
there's data.
Yeah
Aggregate data about.
Being able to collect what's
happening across the state
across counties across.
Um, the number of individual
cases and the FACT or fax system
years ago.
So I think, and again I I've
very large.
Funding, um, there's been a lot
of money spent on revamp we are.
So one problem is that the cone
neutrals are only able to do, we
built in the arbitration
agreement or the sorry, the
settlement agreement.
Because of this data system that
we're stuck with, the conos can
only validate data from the year
prior, it takes them an entire
year to validate last year's
data. That's why when we get a
report this November of 2025, it
will be the 2024 data.
Report
So, um, there was a lot of
testimony about.
How difficult it is to deal with
the data system, the code
neutrals didn't testify, but.
You know, they, they spend an
enormous amount of time with
their data team to validate the
data and, and how can you
understand what problems you
have if you don't have valid
data.
So, um
I don't know if I answered your
question, but it's still
definitely something that needs
to be addressed and something
that the arbitrator is demanding
be addressed in the 6 page
order.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Cracker. And on that
note, are there any current uh
proposals for funding that
you're aware of, um, that
address specifically this issue
with the data of reliance.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I I.
Don't relish the role that I
feel like I'm being asked to
play, which is to answer for the
agency, but, um, I, I have sat
through the agency does have
line item budget requests around
data, I think I would defer
those questions really to
members of the um agency to
answer other they're, they're
planning to comply because
again, remember this order, the
6 page order came out the day
that the gavel was dropped for
this session, their budget was
already in, you know, writing
and.
ized
Whenever that was, so to to to
be able to adjust their really
being asked to adjust on the fly
and make sure that their budget
requests meet. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you, Ms. I'm
not sure if we're able to have
an agency response.
They're here if you'd like to
ask a question.
what I did.
Um, good evening, madam chair,
Senator Nava, um, as Mrs.
Cracker stated, the agency had
their budget request to
receiving that order, but we put
together a spreadsheet based on
the items in the remediation
order and have submitted it in
dollars to meet the items in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much, Secretary, I
appreciate that.
stay here in case there's other
agency questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, Miss
Krea, if you could name 3.
Current pieces of legislation
that could help address some of
the issues that have been
uplifted here. Would you note
them for us?
Thank you, madam chair members
of the committee, since I'm here
in my capacity as plaintiff have
asked plaintiff implementation
team member.
Really, as a team, and we have
staffed this, including
recently. Um, we really just
want to encourage full funding
to support.
Caseload
The urgency of caseload demands.
We also want to make sure
anything that goes to well child
checks within 30 days,
recruiting and retaining foster
parents supporting uplifting
foster parents, making their
lives less stressful. Um, that's
really where we stand now I
personally as an advocate on
behalf of my clients.
will be have testified and will
be providing additional
testimony in favor of the data,
the CYD data bell sponsored by
Representative Meredith Dixon,
as well as the foster care, um.
fund for for getting the title,
but it requires the agency to do
early assessment around whether
a young person qualifies for
Social Security disability
benefits.
Um, I can give you those
numbers.
After I look at my phone.
Um, but again, like that's my
prerogative as a strong advocate
for.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Cracker, thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Miss Grecca for being here.
Um, as a part of the.
The settlement, was there a
monetary.
Um, settlement.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee know that children
were, they waived payment.
But it was really injunctive
relief. The, the point of the
lawsuit, the underlying lawsuit,
was to change the system, to
transform it for other children
coming through. There was not a
payment to any of the plaintiffs
and I'm understanding your
question correctly, Madam Chair.
The
Yes, I, I, I was curious with
the 14 young people received any
restitution as a part of the the
settlement that was brought.
Madam Chair, no, they did not.
Um, did any of the um.
Any of the attorneys who brought
the case, did they receive
monetary settlement
compensation.
Madam chair, it's been well
documented, including before
this legislative body that risk
management did pay attorneys'
fees that were submitted and
reviewed.
Um, for co-counsel, yes,
initially, but that it was just
one time, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
establishing that the attorneys
were paid and that the children.
Um
Miss Grecca, can you explain to
us a little bit more about what
the implementation team.
But they do
But that looks like who's on
there?
Of course, Madam Chair, so the
implementation team is.
One of the best experiences I've
ever had as um an advocate is
with members of this team. So,
combined, we have over 100 years
experience between us and child
welfare advocacy. We have a um
Doctor George Davis, who's an MD
who actually used to and is
still on a contract with CYFT,
he.
He specializes in trauma, early
childhood trauma, and he's a
psychiatrist, he advises us. We
also have Tara Ford who well
He specializes in trauma, early
childhood trauma, and he's a
psychiatrist, he advises us. We
also have Tara Ford who what
really began her career as a
child advocate with advocacy
Inc. and was my mentor in New
Mexico for many years before she
went back to her alma mater
Stanford.
Um, law school to become a
professor there, capacity as a
professor at Stanford in the
beginning of the lawsuit, and
now she's with public counsel,
an attorney as kind of our
leader. She um public counsel
has been amazing. They are the
largest nonprofit, they fight
for all sorts of.
Rights on behalf of kids,
including, um, ensuring that
disabled kids are getting their
needs met.
They're fighting very hard for
immigrant children right now
under this new administration.
So we have
Um, presence from public
counsel, we have disability
rights New Mexico that also has
protection and advocacy
authority, which means they get
to monitor, um, any agency that
is caring for children.
So we have members of their
team, we also have Theresa
Annan, my colleague from Native
American Disability Law Center.
We have Betty Fleischman from
Pegasus Legal Services, um, when
we went into arbitration, we
also picked up counsel from law
firms, including Mike Hart's law
firm. So we really have.
armchair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Miss
Greco, what has the
implementation team
accomplished.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
So
Implementation team is the
reason that this this is like a
body that it is still.
Um
An effort that we are moving
forward because the defendants.
Essentially turn their back on
this, so having um coordinating
with the cone neutrals,
monitoring the.
Reviewing the data ourselves.
Lifting up the voices of because
we don't have an ombudsman
lifting up the voices of our
individual clients to the
co-neutrals. I, I was really so
proud in arbitration of.
Hearing all of the
Issues that we've identified
coming forth, bringing out
testimony, having actually
everyone in the room around that
I got collaboration, but the
most communication, the two, the
parties had had with each other
about this effort, what it is
we're trying to do. So,
What we have done is we have
hold this continue to do that,
especially if we um the
attorneys need to take it back
to court for enforcement.
Heart and soul of this. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'd say the
plaintiffs, the 14 young
children are the soul.
I I I do crack that.
Um
We haven't accomplished much by
way of.
You, OK.
Um
A very impressive list on the
implementation team. What about
tribal representation. I did
hear disability, um, rights, but
I wanna dig a little bit deeper
into how Kevin S intersects with
ICA.
Um, and I think that would be
important for the folks up here
to understand how that works.
But aside from the Native
American Disability Association
named. Are there any other
tribal members of the committee.
No, we just have the Native
American disability Law Center,
um, as our primary.
Liaison between.
Our team and.
The tribes and peoples that they
serve, but we also have Betty
Fleischman who uh is the
primary, she oversees the GALs
and the youth attorneys assigned
in the equal court. We have an
equal court in 2nd judicial
district.
Um, we as a team felt very
strongly about the issue that
you're lifting up. And there so
appendix. We were really pushing
for greater communication and
coordination.
stalled between the agency and
the tribes and pueblos, I wish
that Ms. Yanna was here to speak
to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and just to share
with the members of the
committee that.
Um, foster placements, there,
there's a priority to have
Native American children play
American communities.
And um I, I'm not sure if folks
are aware of the challenge at
the Supreme Court a couple of
years ago where ICWA was
attempted to be overturned.
That was because native children
were placed outside of a native
home.
And that they, the foster
parents did not want to
reunificate re.
Reunify, thank you. Um, those
children with, um, biological
family.
And not only could that have
undid, um, the protections of
the Indian Child Welfare Act,
which is why we further codified
that into state law, the Indian
Family Protection Act.
Um
It, it's a direct attempt to
undermine tribal sovereignty.
The case was actually picked up
by Chevron.
And, um, so I need, I need to
name that in this space.
Um, Miss Greca, can you speak a
little bit about how you're
working through, um, how the
implementation team is working
through and um.
The intersection of ICA and
Keveness.
Thank you so much for that
question, Senator Charlie. We
get, we meet as a team either
weekly or every other week and
as I mentioned, that team, and
she reports back on what she
observes and supervises with her
attorneys in the ICA division of
the Children's Court in Berlio
County. Bernleo County.
Unfortunately or fortunately has
over 50%, um, so that as well as
Ms Yannan is always on the call
and her agency supervises.
The um GAL's assigned, I believe
in the whole nation.
What you're raising is so
important and I, I'm just really
filled with gratitude. Trying to
do here is lessen trauma.
And when we separate children
from their family. That's a
trauma, but when we separate an
Indian child from it's beyond
trauma, it's.
It's historic. It's, it goes
back generations, it's.
Something that we have to be
very diligent in avoiding. And
at this point with the way the
system is, the lack of workers,
the lack of children's court
attorneys coming to court.
It is
kind of state of chaos, which is
to borrow a phrase from the code
neutrals and their observation
and so that's when issues
they're not even doing
foundational for any kids, let
alone.
Unique needs of Native American
children, so I'm really glad
that you brought that up.
We all need to redouble our
effort.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I completely agree. To that end,
I, I just took a look at the
website and didn't.
I saw, um, the Indian Child
Welfare Act was linked there,
but the Indian, um, I think that
is something that the plaintiffs
need to uphold support and
defend.
Um, as a part of, uh.
Um, can you speak a little bit
about, um.
tribal foster parent licenser
Charlie.
Tell me more about your
question. How, how?
Family specific to having native
children in their homes are
recruited by the agency.
No, um
but that is interesting as well.
Um, Madam Chair, what I'm asking
about is um what particular
attention or effort is made.
Either by, um, the
implementation team and thinking
about how this is going to be
developed or by CYFD and
secretary if you wouldn't.
Um, if you want to answer this,
please, please do, but um.
What is the relationship between
the state.
And
The like the.
Licensing.
Foster parents who reside on
tribal land. And what I'm trying
to get at is, what's the
relationship between this system
over here and um.
tribal system think Casados.
Um, Madam Chair, um, Senator
Charlie, um, I think one of the
areas where the department has
really done an incredible job is
our office of tribal affairs,
which is led by Jonathan
Lorenzo, um, has built
relationships over the last
several years with all of the
tribes and pueblos, and one of
the things that we have changed
within the department is
specific to licensure where we
recognize the licensure of the
tribe of Pueblo and what they've
done and we transfer that
license into the.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
actually didn't realize about
that update I had done, um, I'm
the previous director of the
coalition Stop Violence Against
Native Women, and we had, um, an
investigation, um, report that
we provided to CYFD on. Thank
you.
Um
And I just one more point in
this abbreviated presentation,
um.
It's about ICA because it is
such a big part.
Care in that, um, system, and
it's something that this
committee and others need to be
aware of.
Thank
But I always think about the
majority of like there's.
So many complex issues.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee it's, it's nowhere
here.
Just to address both Senator
Charley's and Senator Sadil
Lopez um concerns about what was
presented in the handout around
the arbitration summary.
Again, and I it was it's very
difficult for me.
That
The arbitration was only around
the corrective action plan. The
corrective action plan boiled
down.
Certain areas and it it which
didn't include the any of the um
and maybe that's because we
passed it, but the point is that
these foundations, if they
aren't met, we are already
ignoring culture, we are by
definition ignoring cultural
differences, language
differences. I mean, I am so
passionate about the unique,
having unique placement matching
between my clients.
And not just any old bed that's
open, and that's what we're
doing right now. It's any bed.
And so it may not even be the
right.
sibling group set for a young
person who has been sexually
assaulted and can't be around
older kids or male kids like
we're not doing any of that
right now. It isn't a crisis
state, so.
Everything is being overlooked,
including cultural differences,
including language differences,
Senator Sio Lopez, we know that
there are English only kids
being placed with Spanish only
foster parents because it's a
bed. So you're absolutely right.
These are critical issues. These
are the, these are the issues we
that cause us to file the
lawsuit to begin with. So I
couldn't agree more, and I just
want to say that in terms of our
summary and what we, uh, we just
wanted to summarize the
arbitration order. So by
definition, it does
out all the categories of the.
Any other comments?
I just want to say thank you for
your time and thank you to the
secretaries and such for being
here.
Um, I, I wanted the presentation
at least to bring.
To the attention of those who
are watching, but also some of
our committee members.
Um
The importance of what for us as
legislators, right, and the
legislature.
Uh, I, I think have more of a
focus.
And I think some of these are
questions that need to be asked.
The budget is still not done.
I think this is an opportunity
for us to look um and see.
And ask our own colleagues in
the budget committee exactly
where what we are doing.
As the legislature.
Um, to help support the
departments to monetarily and
such.
But I would encourage anybody to
go to the the actual website.
There's plenty to read, um,
where we are.
And um
I still believe in hope.
That we can still get there?
But also to remember that we
have a changeover in
administration coming again.
And that's for us there that
that new entity coming in.
To keep their feet to, I, I
wanna say thank you.
Um, and the committee members,
uh, that's all for today.
Thank you.
Thank you.
