Representative Ezzell will be
right back she just stepped away
to the right to the ladies.
Representative but it us or
house bill one fifty two is
amended.
I reflected more changes.
In this house Sixtyeight said
nothing.
So Representative about us what
you want to say about.
Are ready to board and how it
needs to be changed.
Thank you you chairman and
members of the committee this
bill has been introduced to
update some outdated provisions
of the New Mexico chiropractic
physician and to provide greater
flexibility for doctors of
chiropractic to travel between
states and care for patients
this is accomplished by allowing
temporary licensure of doctors
of chiropractic who for reasons
beyond their control are
temporarily unable to practice
in their home state and wish to
temporarily provide services in
New Mexico and vice versa it
also allows those out of state
doctors of chiropractic to come
to New Mexico and temporarily
care for the patients of native
chiropractic physician who is
ill or injured and unable to
care for his or her existing
patients this bill also
modernizes some statutory
provisions related to the New
Mexico board of chiropractic
examiners.
Right is there anyone in the
audience who wants to speak
about this bill.
Sign up in advance.
Julia in a cruel and Tara
Hendrickson signed up for you
here and you want to say
anything.
Seeing none will go to the
committee was committees will on
this bill.
On now
do passed us one second.
There's a motion from Senator
Sedillo Lopez a second Senator
Tallman.
Okay hi.
Okay.
Is there any other discussion
any other questions.
Since none.
Instagram.
The secretary will call the roll
okay I'll see you later okay
thanks if I may need your help
that you.
Judging.
Excuse please Representative
Gallegos can you meet yourself
for just a second we'll get
right to the next.
Yes.
I'm I'm yes.
Those.
Yes ma'am.
And.
Seven zero with one excused.
Regulation Representative but it
is thanks for coming to the.
The meeting next is our house
bill twenty three with the
Representative during a English.
Representative do you want to
just to give us a quick summary
of your bill I thank you Mr
chair house bill twenty three.
it sets a standard that will
ensure quality medical training
programs it ensures that you
schools coming to New Mexico are
aware that they will be partners
with hospitals doctors and the
state of New Mexico it gives
hospitals and doctors the
ability to help K. and training
programs and residency programs
that are best suited for New
Mexico house twenty three as
amended does not have a set of
fiscal impact it does not have a
negative impact on rural or U.
N. M. and it does not prohibit
new schools from opening in New
Mexico our effort with that Mr
Chairman I stand for questions.
No the pass the.
It's just the house on a sixty
five to zero most medicine
representative are assessed on
CTE desirable and so she's dead
right now.
We'll go to the audience and we
do have four people in sign of
ahead of time to speak on this
Sharon Berman.
Jerry Brown more.
Really Irvin Vitela more than
eight or any of them here and
you want to say anything.
Mr Chairman this is Dan weeks
for the hospital association
hospitals.
Dan's strongly in support of
this legislation thanks a
sponsor for bring it forward
thank.
Thank you David and that Mr
chairman members the committee
this is Kerry robin Broder The
New Mexico Medical Society
stance in support of the
legislation as well thanks so
much.
Thank you Jerry.
What else.
Members of the committee.
Let me just remind people and
agreed to say one of the things
that any bill and shows up on
this
Red has already been approved by
the ranking members Senator
Schmedes and the vice chairman
going over them and they agree
that these are built we have we
can act on with limited today so
we'll go then Senator guided us.
Mr chairman and
Vice chair Gallegos I wasn't in
that discussion I just had a
question on
On your bill I was trying to
figure out why this was needed
as far as legislation are we not
already
I guess having the applicant's
here for the state you know for
has as they come in for medical
schools is that not correct.
Mr chair and senator day goes
Eight it is happening I think it
is a really solidifies the the
practice that we're wanting to
make sure anybody that would
like to come into the state or
to have residency programs did
they they know that they're
coming in as a partnership.
Okay thank you for that Mr
chairman and Representative
Gaydos I I just I thought it was
already occurring but this just
make sure that they understand
for the coming of state and with
that are you thank you madam
chair thank.
Thank you Senators Senator
Cervantes I would move the new
pass.
We have a motion for a new press
senators to FedEx is our second.
Seconded by Senator Ingle.
Any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Yes ma'am.
Thank all.
Thermacare.
Yes.
Yes I like to explain about.
Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Common.
There are two.
The center console yes COVID
yes.
Banerjee being no yes then
Senator sweetie service lane is
no.
Thank you Mr chair and.
Representative.
I think this is important bill
and I'm glad this is a very
proactive Bill you know I don't
think anything in this bill is
going to be you know needed you
know next year anything but I
think it could be at some point
in the future and I think it's
really important that we we just
look look forward to that I mean
I I've been privy to some of the
issues how these turf battles
for a clinical
you know training facilities in
Houston med center Houston you
have all these people kind of
battling and trying to take up
room in spots and it could
happen in New Mexico you just
never know and and so I I just
I applaud the effort here and I
think it's going to protect our
training programs going to
protect our hospitals are are
clinics and and hopefully lead
to getting some more people to
to stay in New Mexico which is
really what we want so thank you
Mr.
Thank you senator.
So what's the word on that one.
Eight eight zero Senator.
Reservations Representative you
still don't have a negative
vote.
All the way through the house
and always have to send.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee is always here
Representative
we'll go to the.
Representative have you ever
Martinez I don't know if you can
get on that I told him I would
put it on if you couldn't.
Are you here Representative
Martinez.
So be warned well as amended.
Instead of station locally
funded healthcare providers from
discriminating on the basis of
immigrant status.
The bill includes any health
benefits funded by the state for
my local government.
So.
Our programs we face some health
care costs.
It's state and local funded
health benefit programs from
discriminating against everyone
who would otherwise qualify for
that except because of
immigration status.
Dresses New Mexicos county
indigent care programs providing
no ambiguity as to the school
was built discrimination
prohibition.
This and I know some of the
background on this because there
are hospitals in the state of
New Mexico who is affected the
federal government.
Does not permit federal funds to
be used for healthcare
immigrants.
Documented immigrants
with twelve state and local
funds can be used for.
And so with that we'll go to the
audience and I have to tell you
this will have sixty cents to
zero in the house.
And we have a lot of people here
I'm not going to change the time
for everybody but if anybody is
in the we have about twenty
people signed up right comment
on this bill.
Anybody want to please raise
your hand and will try to
recognize you in order Lucille
the compost.
Good afternoon.
The committee my name is Lucy
like compost I'm a policy
associate with gold futures
formally known as young women
United we strongly support H. B.
one twelve.
Demented women semi protected by
the act I have seen my mother
and my grandmother in dollar
prolonged pain because of their
lack of health care benefits I
myself have had my own basic
health care needs and rights
denied.
Simply because of my immigration
status.
It is time that we and the whole
discrimination on the basis of
the nine digit social security
number and we keep on the
Mexicans healthy regardless of
their immigration status we urge
you to vote yes on H. B. one
twelve thank you.
Thank you.
Close to licensed.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Kelly and
my last test and I'm speaking on
behalf of the league of women
voters in New Mexico the league
stands strong support of this.
We believe every New Mexico
residents should have a
comprehensive level of health
care the league favors and
national health insurance plan
but until one is in place the
league supports expansion of
state and federal plans thank
you.
Thank you for your
next will go to the doctor Jesse
Martin.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
on Jessie Barnes I'm a family
medicine physician at the
community health center in
Albuquerque along with a couple
dozen of my colleagues who
signed on in support of house
bill one twelve as we feel it
rectified as a grave injustice
and brings all the state's
counties into equal treatment of
all of our patients this bill is
very important will make a huge
difference in our ability to
take care of New Mexicans so we
need to support it.
Thank you doctor next we'll go
to judgment.
Good good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is directly and I'm representing
Mexico voice for children we
like to thank the sponsor brings
more bill Ford both invoice our
strong support for too long many
New Mexicans have been
discriminated against by the
health care system because of
their immigration status
immigrants are important members
our communities and when they
can't access health care
services it has serious
consequences for the health for
their health and for New Mexico
as a whole would you will
postpone seeking care it results
more serious health
complications and ultimately
affects the state's economy we
urge you to support the support
legislation to help make New
Mexico to help you thank you.
Thank you very finally Lee wrote
a song.
A good afternoon chair chair and
committee my name is Lee are
still I'm from McKinley County
and with a forward together
action I wish to we strongly
support XP one twelve because
every family deserves a right to
have access to health care and
every family should be able to
get medical services without
having to worry about financial
disaster from medical bills
including our immigrants can you
do communities which are being
locked out of.
Locked out and discriminated
against do this pandemic no one
should have to worry about
having to pay for health care
services thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr so.
Hello call Martin from
indigenous women rising.
Yes hello thank you members of
the committee and chair I
just wanted to stay as on a
dinner and quick committee which
is Navajo in the gonna public
person.
Only believe health as well and
some chair New Mexico some
county programs and local
hospitals you for example
exclude mighty migrating
relatives including many the
subfolders from local health
care assistance programs so I
encourage you to vote in favor
of H. B. one twelve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to the committee
down for any discussion on.
H. B. one twelve is amended.
Mr chair.
Yes Senators.
Yep there is no discussion on.
Also chairman.
We have a motion a second
Senator guidance you want to
comment on the bill.
Mr is going to be on the past
with our yield okay we'll give
you a chance.
And
Tell you James did you want to
say something about the bill
before you vote.
James did you want to say
something about the bill before
we go.
Secretary will call the roll.
On house bill one twelve Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Senator.
Yes thank you.
Rep Brian.
Yes.
First.
Yes.
Yes.
Our thanks yes there are Tallman
yes there are two panel.
Yes.
It.
Yes.
Are very.
Thank you.
Next we'll go to representative
Jerod for House Bills twenty two
as amended.
Well your own changers Act
scholarships.
Thank you Mr chairman house bill
twenty to grow your own teachers
at scholarships addresses two
issues that we discovered in the
two years that it's been
implemented and so this bill
authorizes anybody anybody is
authorized to work in New Mexico
you don't have to be a United
States that is firm and it
expands the definition the
original accent educationalist
Estense but some people are
labeled as instructional aides
the amendment cleans up some of
the language pertaining to
educational assistance at as
it also.
K. five for the scholarship
because they make too much money
they can still get the benefit
of taking professionally they're
enrolled in a teacher's program
and I don't know if my co
sponsor Senator I would like to
add anything.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative yes everything
the representative said is is
accurate and this is probably
one of the most successful
teacher preparation scholarships
the state's ever undertaken you
know the expansion yes you know
the qualifications and it places
the other school personnel in
line to participate in this
if they have direct experience
with the classroom and that as
we all know we have severe
teacher shortages all over the
state this is going to be one
way to ensure that the the you
know the folks that have the the
direct hands on already
experience are the best
candidates to get through this
program I am and I think the
money flew out the door so
quickly that we just thought
this is this is something we
should continue to look at thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator.
And then I would go to pass the
house this bill because I have
sixty nine injured zero.
So that your nose at the top of
the.
Is this Mr.
Representative Garrett so.
We now have three people is
signed up in advance to speak on
this is there here Jon duration
remains G..
Earlier in the children in
Mexico First insurance Berman
from the New Mexico first many
of you are here or anybody else
wants to speak on this.
Speak now or forever hold your
peace.
Yes yes Mr chairman I John urged
here with F. G. New Mexico did
want to just six of our strong
support for house bill twenty
two the sponsors of adequately
laid out and really
talk about why the bills
important this is definitely a
program that is utilized within
the first semester we saw this
program producing classroom
teachers and so that was really
gratifying for all of us that
worked on it and it also has
been shown to produce diverse
teachers that look like to
students that they are
instructing and that's also
really critical as we think
about equity so we do urge this
committee support for house bill
twenty two.
Thank you John anybody else on
the public.
Let's go to the committee then
then Senator McKenna has your
hand of.
Thank you chairman and
thank you Representative Garrett
and senator.
yes when I first heard about the
concept of this legislation in
twenty nineteen I just thought
that is wondered what a
wonderful wonderful idea.
And by the the the vote count in
the house
that's fantastic and such cute
who does to you and someone in
the room may not be able to
confirm this but it's my
understanding that this
legislation is being considered
at the federal level.
Correct Mr chairman.
Senator.
Yes so I'm really proud of you
all and I just wait to hear the
years coming you know still the
statistics of how many teachers
are we have because of grow your
own thank you senator.
Thank you senator Senator
Senator Gallegos units.
Mr Chairman representative I was
just gonna ask you this question
I like the bill but on page
three line twenty five a charge
the public school may require
and goes into the next page
school employees make up hours
in exchange for hours Mr and
school day how do you propose to
get that done at I know if
you're talking about the student
teachers and and the other
problem would be staffing while
they're gone have you guys
having discussions on that point
Mr Chairman representative.
Senator that's something that
the people getting work out with
their local administrators it's
like comp time off and EA
sentence fractional aids comment
on Saturdays to do Committee for
school all and so with that you
know who are in the program they
haven't had a problem working
this out.
School that they're at actually.
It Mr chairman and senator guy
goes just jump in person so not
not all of them are are full
time employees schedule full
time employees also so they're
able to to fill in the rest of
the eight hour day or that the
rest of the time that they would
be making up.
Thank you that's well the
question I appreciate it Mr
ideal.
Thank you senator we just
Coleman said.
During the interim I heard some
really staggering numbers and
that is all of the colleges in
the state last year.
Universities and community
colleges together graduated
fewer than one hundred features.
So you know that many certainly
retired died.
decided to the field of the
animal husbandry or something
else because we're we're we're
we're just losing ground badly
and the answer is staffing our
schools adequately so this is a
great bill and thank you
Representative Mr seeing that
one security Sir will in this
manner.
I would like to move it make.
Do past chairman pardon me.
Second.
In seconds many of the
discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
On house bill twenty chair
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Go.
Censuring
the space for that works to
amuse yourself recently.
He's holding down.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
Third.
Lopez.
Yes.
Course the fabrics yes.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Congratulations Representative
you have and senator you haven't
do pass or in the.
I just want to add one final
note in closing is that that
grow your own title actually
came from the guidance of doctor
Karen Trujillo so the special.
Thank.
Thank you.
If you want to go to Senate
bills thank you.
And I listen I need to let their
several representatives who've
come into the room the
anticipating their bills what we
incentive to starting you might
and then your when I said this
was that we were going to start
with the five bills from the
house and we're on our consent
calendar.
Then we're going to go to the
Senate bills and then we'll come
back to the three additional
House Bills and we added today's
calendar so that's
Representative because then the
representatives L.
Representative Ferrary in Rubio
your bill's will will be after
the Senate bill so if you you're
welcome to stay obviously the
majority come back you'd
probably be at least at least an
hour before we get here because
we've got.
Senate bills to before we get
here what we think we will.
So far away if you are you
urgent okay.
So let's
let me before we go to the set
of bills I just want to check
can somebody get a hold Senator
Campos and have enjoyed the
services you already joined
this.
Was on earlier and so he may
still be here are come back we
also again as you know have by
Representative bash with.
We are you and be I I yeah I
just wanted to start winding up
Senator Representative bash with
the dietician nutritionist
licensure.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman several months ago
members of the academy of
nutrition and dietitians came to
me to help them accomplish a
total rewrite of their thirty
two year old practice act their
practice act originally passed
the legislature in nineteen
eighty nine and has not been
substantially updated since the
enactment.
And there have been a lot of
changes in the health care and
so the act definitely needs to
reflect the current practice of.
You when you are muted on this.
Okay.
There's been a lot of of changes
in health care in the past
thirty two years so the act
definitely needed to reflect the
current practice of dietitians
and dieticians nutritionists.
And I think there are a couple
of people lined up to speaker
one anyway well we have no
actually we have formally signed
up at a time I'm not sure
they're all able to join us
Linda Siegel Rebecca Leverone
Stephanie rose and one east
middle signed a better time or
they hear.
Romero's name yes please this is
going to say no I'm not going to
speak and we'll be right I think
Rebecca Rachel are supposed to
be on yeah I saw Rebecca's name
there there's racial when we
share with you racial.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Rachel I'm a
licensed dietitian and and I
represent the New Mexico Academy
of nutrition and dietetics lease
strongly support this bill to
update our licensure.
Thank you.
Leverone.
Good evening or good afternoon
Mister chair and members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
Lambro and I'm a registered
dietitian line in the state
policy representative for New
Mexico Academy nutrition
dietetics which is the largest
organization of food and
nutrition professionals we stand
in strong support of house bill
one forty seven and on behalf of
New Mexico Academy nutrition
dietetics we thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Anybody else want to speak on
this before we go to the
committee.
Members of the committee what is
your.
What are your comments on this
still represents Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
to our sponsors of the bill
What what a great list this is
I'm chairman and those that
worked on it we're are there any
takeaways are all house that's.
Are you that came to you after
or during this right right I'm
just curious.
We had several amendments that
I'd like to ask Rachel if she
has any comment on that thank
you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members so one of the big
changes is really updating when
interesting distance because
it's really outdated definition
of who a nutritionist and so it
strengthens it so that thank you
Titian's can provide medical
nutrition therapy.
Wonderful thank you for that
thank you chairman thank you
Representative bash thank you
this
Your last name.
The young we are thank you misli
on.
Then Senator is your next Mr
chair and and Representative
project this I'm just wondering
why
the whole rewrite one not in
segments and is this just a
codified the administrative
functions as at the overall
region.
Yes and it was so out of date
that it really needed the total
re right and
And it also specifies who can
give nutrition advice in a
medical sense
So that you're not just having
people go into their local
vitamin store and and get advice
that's not medical nutrition
that's.
So.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
Representative David after the
re right are you guys going to
have to update the definitions
and curriculum.
To match these.
As far as a college and
university from your great
programs.
Yes I think this already
jobs with the
With the university's.
Okay that's what I want and seem
like a huge lift all at one time
but I appreciate the insight
thank you Mr are you.
Thank you senator to make a
motion senator Graham's.
Yes sure I'll make motion to
pass.
Chairman seconded by Senator
McKenna any other discussion
from the committee.
Seeing the secretary will call
the roll.
I'm house bill one forty seven
Senator Gallegos.
By accidentally and you really
need you senator I'm sorry.
Yes ma'am thank you Senator
Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Yes Thoman.
Yes.
You know.
Yes.
Congratulations Representative
bash.
Or okay.
Before we go to send it in we
had to get all the Senator
Campos on the way.
I got an answering machine and
left a message.
Another number sharing you try
the so the number.
Is.
Can go getters go get him on his
office is right down the hall.
Okay well she's gone home.
Usually stays on the floor you
know he's he was in his office
because he's he's.
In finance so they're working
okay.
Well she's looking at remember
let's just discuss this process
we just went through that
shield if you locate you because
if this works better and better
access and we have
several other possibilities for
variety you can send challenge I
just wanted to committee Steve
that one whether you felt this
was a good way on those bills in
the ranking member senator
communities.
And the vice chairman Senator
installment agree on we we do a
few of those each meeting at
your if you were if you think
it's worthwhile thank.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I I just
wanted to say I thought it works
really well
Fast and I think that the the
Sanchez felt good about it.
I mean it requires a little
extra work from the to the
ranking member in the vice
chairman Mr
you know as long as they're in
agreement as long as these are
built it clearly had strong
support in the house.
Unanimous is not as strong as
you can get the.
We're.
Mr I'd still like to see my four
oh eight heard this year thank
you Sir this is a member to
getting that done Senator region
you know for wages today we're
getting up to Senate bill three
fifty one.
So those are still house bill's
Mr thank you.
Yeah but if we can get through
them then we have a chance yet
here for way which I know a lot
of those waiting to hear but
it's it's just a.
Such a high number.
This year this is Thomas I get
somebody on the phone is
enquiring about four oh eight
what is the do you have any idea
what's going to schedule one one
of the schedule Senator
Gallegos.
As soon as possible I just have
to have some witnesses call in.
Senator Tallman just tell them
as soon as possible Senator this
is working on it okay ridecell
good.
Mr chair if I if I could if
we're able to get through
today's agenda
for wait actually makes it
towards the tail end of Friday
afternoon you Senator.
So we don't have the London
venue today we can probably get
to you on the side of the rising
of the sun the invention so kind
to move a do pass on receive
bills just.
Thank you.
Senator Campos welcome.
This is geared for Senate bill
three twenty nine ambulance
services thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee and just very quickly
and
we're working on H. B. two right
now and so they're still some
moving parts and I really
appreciate you are fitting me in
this afternoon and essence of
the Senate bill three twenty
nine.
would
provide for the establishment of
an ambulance services it's fun
to make grants to local
ambulance uh ambulance service
providers throughout the state
in this and so about three or
four years ago one of the big
issues that we we're running
into across the state
particularly and communities
was the we're of our air
ambulance service helicopters
basically well we're having to
fly in and of course
certifications then to some of
the larger hospitals.
That created a significant
nancial burden for a many of the
individuals that are we're we're
being transported along with
that several doctors and
individuals who are working or
have worked directly with you
there and emergency medical
service.
Our with our local public cost
bills did have an issue because
they didn't have the resources
to continue to purchase balances
and the other issue of course
with the PRC at the time the
resources that they had
available we're not sufficient
in order to continue
to find and and support the
ambulance services and
equipment.
Because of that
what we've done is basically
created the Senate bill three
twenty nine within that a couple
things I did visit with the
Garcia indicated of course the
problem the indicated that you
know they would work with us
we're not trying to duplicate
however we do need to resources
within either the current fund
that exists and if that's not
possible of course go ahead and
create an independent separate
fund again to do our best to our
to ensure that we're able to
assist with our with safe and
Beyonce's across the state of
New Mexico
there's there's a lot more to
this but the bottom line with it
is are we need resources some to
do my best to try to get some
resources into hospital to in
order for us to continue to our
and ambulance services
throughout the state and then
the other part of course it
doesn't go through what I'd like
to do is to continue to work to
ensure that we do have a grant
program for funding ambulance
services it's so desperately
needed particularly in more
rural parts of New Mexico so in
essence Mister chair members of
the committee that's the.
I believe there might be one or
two individuals at with the also
like to offer.
Off of yes they are a well at
least two of them signed up
ahead let's see if the trial for
the O. H. more Casey Dunn PRC
economists are here with us.
Mr chair here but let's see.
Or is there anyone else who
wants to speak on this bill.
Okay seeing no one Senator we'll
go to the committee.
Mr chair.
Senator.
Mr chair why can this go on
probation great.
It
was one of the primary route was
in that after you know it was
well is one million it is more
than we generally put on a great
it also has a fair bit of
language with it has to create a
new program and that type of
thing the way it's written that
is bigger and more complex in
what we generally put on the
great we are so Mister chair
though it is still finance.
Yes.
I'm.
Motion passes are a second.
Also.
Question discussion yes please
Senator Sedillo Lopez and it's
as Senator Campos and and Mr
chair Senator Campos you are a
you're in appropriations how
does it look for the nine
million dollars here
Representative you're trying to
get.
Mr chair in occurrences Senator
Sedillo Lopez I don't believe
that we're gonna be able to
secure the entire amount but
we're gonna do our best to try
to get at least
Some server resource in there I
would just indicate right now
the way things are looking it is
tight but again we're going to
do our best to try to get some
money in there for the the
ambulance services I can't give
you specific amount right now
again because what we're doing
is we're reviewing it's free to
the amendments and and reports
that process now.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I I
think it's a good idea because
so many times people hospital
plans don't cover the ambulances
and it's just it's a real
problem and also I like the
requests for the.
For local public and ambulance
providers so I I think it's
great bill I'm I'm happy to
second the best motion.
So so
Senator Schmedes you're next
yes.
And I just wanna noted Kyle
fortune is trying to get in so
we're gonna let in the would you
go ahead Senator Schmedes will
we'll go to them thanks just a
brief comment on that same note
if the nine million is high I
mean it the bill says that no
entity can receive more than
seventy five thousand dollars
so you know for for grant for a
fiscal year so I mean even if
you had seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars that's already
ten grants right there or one
point five million that's twenty
requests so it seems the way the
program is designed in seventy
five thousand dollar goals
if you don't get to the nine
million it would still allow it
a decent amount of requests I
think so just wanted to point
that out with with this program.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator chairman.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Campos.
I.
So this is a question because I
simply don't know how it works.
Let's say a New Mexican
patients.
Receives.
The service from one of these
ambulances how does that.
Work if if the patient has an
insurance plan.
Just come in to see I've heard
of situations where certain
insurance plans will pave Papen
one type of ambulance service
but not the other so how does
this legislation clarify that
doesn't is it meant to at all.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course Center McKenna.
This doesn't get directly into
that way if compensation this is
going to going to be for
ambulances and for equipment but
to to try to answer your
question is simple doctor brown
in Santa Rosa and this is one of
the reasons why this this piece
of legislation came forward
We have quite a few people as an
example that have been involved
in accidents along I. forty so
they need the emergency services
they fly amount
sixty thousand dollars for a
trip to Albuquerque versus what
the ambulance
trip would be and so within that
of the problems that.
Places like local county general
and others are running into is
that of course patients in many
cases aren't able to pay and so
what happens within the services
themselves intercourse we'll do
want to make sure that the
services are provided as
expeditiously as possible but
some of these hospitals are read
in the situations where they're
having to to put the bill on
some of it and then with
insurances themselves again with
some of the plans.
They will cover some of the
transportation others they won't
and so what these rural
hospitals are asking for is if
they at least have the ambulance
and they need to cover some of
these costs are that they're
able to help to defray the costs
because we were able to receive
a grant and and happy the local
operated afterwards thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much and
and.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Campos I know this can
be a.
The
challenging
Situation discussed so so thank
you very much thank you.
Thank you senator iterations of.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you as
senator.
Rain is for how many of.
Committees.
How many the agencies would
qualify for this grant.
Thank you very much for the
question on Christmas chairman
Senator Tallman I I don't know
exactly but I would indicate you
would have quite a few of your
rural hospitals and EMT
providers that will I'm sure
these submitting requests for
the ambulance equipment
but this is going to be used why
it's going to cover all corners
really apologize because I don't
have that that information right
for.
That kills my second question.
Correct as.
If you had that.
The twenty and twenty times.
Seven thousand be a million and
a half dollars.
Which.
So thank you Mr chairman of
course senator Clemente again
if if the cap is going to be
seventy five thousand the
initial intent was to try to
help so that would be able to
disperse the resources across
the state.
Various ways so the amount would
be up to that amount but you
could let's say for example
purchase needed equipment and it
would be possibly a lot less
we're trying to stretch the
resources a that realistically
we would be able to secure and
then of course those resources
that with able to to to disperse
but again Mr chair Senator
common the intent is to spread
this out as much as possible
because that's what the great
need is right now.
Securely with and of our smaller
communities throughout the
state.
Thank you Mr thank you senator I
am not trying to I support the
program.
But I'm not trying to give you a
hard time.
So.
It says here's reoccurring.
So whatever state present you
get.
There are four million dollars
would you be asking.
So it would.
The.
Going on this program to go I I
here after years of low sunset.
So Mister chairman Senator
comment a couple of things first
of all to secure a recurring
dollars someone just say with HB
to our general appropriations
act no we indicate that it's
going to be recurring resources
we know that if we don't have
resources available and cannot
be recurring so the indication
would be with the intent that we
would like to secure resources
so this would be an ongoing
program to assist our emergency
US medical teams across the
state regardless of what the
amount would be if resources
aren't available to the general
fund in fact in two thousand and
with session we found that other
quite a few of these type of
programs that were not funded
going back even three years ago
are we also saw the resources
for Senator programs we're not
available so again in this label
this recurring unless we have
the resources we won't be able
to fund it thank you Mr chairman
thank centered on thank you Mr
chairman thank you senators one
last question so I would assume
that an agency who.
Was not currently in the
ambulance service businesses
would be able to.
of purchase make make use of
this program in other words it's
not only help existing agencies
but to open agency you want to
start.
Start up the ambulance service
is that correct.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Senator comment no this would go
to go ahead and take care of our
public entities that do provide
of medical certain medical
transportation services so this
is not to go ahead and have
someone apply receive a grant
and and start up a business but
that's a good idea it's a good
concept to our entertain for
future legislation thank thank
you senator Clemente.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for bringing
this forward that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you senator John and as
senator of compass I do have a
question that was raised in the
FIR will yeah yes they are and
it has to do with why not just
put the money into the EMS Fund.
Mr chairman of course members of
the committee it's a very good
point and part of the reason why
this was developed the way it
was and again I'm not going to
speak against India the
introduce a few years back with
here see there was a concern and
so as we went forward the intent
was to go ahead and develop this
as a separate grant Fund
in order to go ahead and protect
the of the resources within the
fund cannot be done should be
done given the nature of time I
would like to at least see the
concept of move forward so that
we can see if there's a
possibility to include that
within the general
appropriations act how much
again going back to of the
questions raised by Senator
Sedillo Lopez I'm not sure how
much we're going to be able to
do that but it's a it's it's an
important concept in support
initiative going house to take
care of our are needed emergency
services thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Thornton has joined us so I'd
like to hear his views on this
issue you just trying to make
comments messages or.
All good afternoon Mister chair
and senator yeah yes
thank you for recognizing me
but it introduce myself I'm a
current or in the in the mercy
medical systems bureau chief for
of the state of New Mexico
department of health and we
would like to
thank Senator Campos for his
interest and his action to try
to hello
are very badly underfunded
anyone's agencies and the it is
greatly appreciated.
there have been many years of
concern and and struggle for for
that funding
One of the things that we saw
during the pandemic was that in
many cases we just almost did
not have enough Daniel this is
through the patients from where
we needed to to where they
needed to go
and the Senator Thomas's
Legislation would would go a
long ways and and helping with
that
the DMS funds
Would be an option for this
so.
redundancy and having to develop
new rule and.
Rules
simply because of the M. S. one
is also mistreated to ambulance
agencies
there is a form was in place
there's maximums in place
there's different ways to
someone mentioned start up
there's a rule for that.
New service crews are and
benefit from a portion of the
money.
I don't believe Casey Dunn from
the PRC has been able to join
but
She is the economists from the
PRC and I can tell she's here so
don't certainly me told me to
speak for she is but she and I
actually come up work together
on their response the PRC's
response
for the for the FIR and they
would prefer that the money at
this time with some of the
changes that occur with PRC they
would prefer of the money is
placed into the EMS fund as well
simply because they know that it
would go towards the same
goals and without having to
develop new rules and new
procedures so with that of.
I'm stand for questions Mr
chair.
Actually we have emotional
right.
And I think it was it was so
Senator Stefanics made the
motion or was it Senator Tallman
inside
paddock's made motions are Tom
and seconded seconded yes any
other there's discussion from
the committee.
It does so Senator Campos late.
Just because of the time
constraints you're gonna have to
get the house bill two out
before this bill looking at all
right through so you may need to
just put that money into the the
M. S. on this year richer the
master technician and in finance
and anybody can get this done an
overview.
Mr chairman I really appreciate
that and all the points that
have been made are well taken
we'll do our best to ensure that
we're would serving the purpose
and that is to ensure that
resources for ambulances and
emergency a medical equipment so
thank you very much for that Mr
Chairman really appreciate.
We'll call the roll.
On Senate bill three twenty nine
center Gallegos percenter
Campos yes.
Ingle.
Technician Campos yes.
For.
We're tired.
Campos yes.
My friend yes.
Or my neighbors Senator Campos
of course.
So.
It's.
There was seven counties yes.
And tall one.
For what we're president of the
community college yes.
After R. two C. panel.
Yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much so
a resources for ambulances and
the equipment.
But the real good use across the
state of New Mexico thanks to
your efforts to.
And as I hear the release of the
orders Senator I can't get back
thank you all right.
Thank you we'll go.
Yes Mr chair if you told me one
minute I'd like to recognize
that Senator Ingle because
probably thirty years ago when I
was a bureau chief of the M. S.
he gave me a very tough hearing
at all never forget and he's
been a great supporter insists
that was originated I've always
appreciated that Senator Ingle
keeping us on track with the EMS
Fund thank you for that
intelligence.
Thank you very much for bringing
that up and we see have to do is
during these hearings over time
so.
In general this is a new
development.
We're we're thank you senator
goes Senator Schmedes we have
here Senator Neville three
twenty three health care workers
protection act.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee.
In yes is the chair said this is
what we're calling the health
care workers protection act
this this bill does three
things.
It provides conscience
protection for number one health
care workers.
Number two health care
facilities such as a hospital or
clinic and number three a a
third party payers so like an
insurance company and protects
the conscience rights of of
those three.
groups and that's that's
essentially what the build us.
why am I bringing this why do we
need it well as as we've heard
before we we live in a multi
cultural.
Realistic society and I the way
that I'm saying society nowadays
is we don't seem to be living
together
with each other anymore we we we
stand politically to just be
kind of wanting to.
So do people su litigate.
And what this bill does is it
protects people from compulsion
meeting.
Okay we disagree but I'm not
going to force you to do
something that you think is
wrong and you should not forced
me to do something that I
believe to be wrong.
the United States really took a
big look at this during the
Vietnam War the in the sixties
and there's been there's
multiple cases that went to the
Supreme Court about
conscientious objection to war
and the traditional thought
behind this concept of
conscience conscience
protections that has to be
affiliated with some sort of of
religion or or someone that
believes in a god or supreme
being.
I'm and the that there is a some
folks in the secular community
that said look I don't I don't
really have a religion I can
point to but I just believe
killing somebody is wrong I
believe war is wrong and I
conscientiously object to that.
And in those cases we didn't
really have a precedent for
protecting those people that
have a sincerely held beliefs.
And what the court really had to
do was they had to say well are
these people just saying they
don't want to go to war they
don't want to get drafted or do
they really have a sincere
belief and so the court has has
really defined that
and and I'll just read a brief
quote from that decision says it
just a sincere and meaningful
believe which occupies it in the
life of its possessor and so so
that's really what what we're
talking about and let me give
you two examples and then I also
want to make sure my my experts
it is on Mr chair let me give
two concrete examples of what
we're talking about one would be
let's say it's an insurance
company and they're they're
formulating their rules and
bylaws and they say.
you know what we think
conversion therapy is immoral
and wrong and we don't want to
pay for it we're not gonna
reimbursed for that.
That would protect that
insurance companies ability to
say on a conscientious way that
that we're just not we just
don't do that.
same thing for and let's say it
let's say it's a OBGYN Dr and
they say you know what I believe
abortion is wrong and so that's
just not a service that I'm
going to provide and that's on
the committee to understand here
is this is not about
denying a service to a person
this is about having the right
to conscientiously say that I
just don't do the service areas
I don't find it I'm a
psychiatrist and I don't find
inversion therapy or on on on
this and I don't find the
abortion services because of
deeply held beliefs whether it's
religious or or not and so so
that is that's what this bill
does it is an attempt to
Really take a deep look at this
issue because I think it's going
to continue to surface
in our country and our state and
I don't want to see people just
trying to sue people into
submission to force people to do
things against their will which
once again that's idea of
compulsion let's not compel
people to do things let's let's
say Hey I'm not going to make
you do something that you think
is wrong and and vice versa so
that's really what this bill
does Mr chair
and
I would like to just maybe
briefly introduce my expert
witness mainly to make sure
she's on the zoom and then she
will be available certainly for
for some questions Mr chair is
Stephanie are are you on can we
hear you yes my name is
Stephanie Nichols and I am legal
counsel with alliance defending
freedom and very glad to be with
this committee today thank you.
Great thank you and it will
bring commenters stated Mr
Nichols.
I'm I would like to reserve most
of the time I know you're very
busy so I'd like to reserve most
of the time for questions the
committee may have but just a
few points I have studied
medical conscience extensively
and one of the things that I
wanted to make sure before I
could speak in favor of medical
conscience legislation is that
it is truly non discriminatory I
have done extensive case law
research and in states that have
comprehensive medical conscience
specifically Illinois and
Mississippi there have been just
a handful of cases in those
states and and none of those
cases has there ever been a
claim that someone could not
access need native medical
services or that they were
discriminated against under
those statutes and I would like
to give other people plenty of
time to speak and I'd also love
to answer any questions that the
committee may have.
Thank you Mr chairman on that I
actually on that last point I
would like to say need to be
clear the committee.
Once again this bill is about
the services that you can find
you you have to treat people
equally you can't you can't say
Hey this person here is
different and this person's here
is different and and I as a
health care provider is an
insurance company to treat these
people differently no whatever
policy you have whatever sincere
belief you have has to be
consistent across all people you
cannot treat people differently
based on any sort of of of
anything about about the patient
so with that I think we would
stand for a.
Comments Mr chair okay just
remember to set up the are are
locked.
We have a what is.
We also have.
Live streaming don't we
Representative set up as well
maybe one slide streaming.
There is apparently a button
that they can touch.
Which one.
Okay we're gonna give ten
minutes the opponents to speak
during the reasons why.
They're opposed and then ten
minutes for the supporters we
have a lot of money each so if
you just go down in order here
here here.
Right and start seeding when I
recognize you.
So speaking against Senate bill
three twenty three.
The star with the center of Penn
you should be following Vitali
rush for.
Dr.
Japan is not here will do Ellie
rush for intentionally followed
by Marshall Martinez.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee I am
the reproductive rights attorney
at the ACLU of New Mexico we
have a long proud history of
vigorously defending religious
liberty principles of
non discrimination in access to
health care for all that is
because we respect and defend
religious liberty as among our
most precious constitutional
rights we also proceed from a
long held position of respect
for health care access as
fundamental to an individual's
right to determine the course of
their lives.
We work to ensure that people
are not denied basic information
and health care they need
because of the personal views of
their healthcare providers and
institutions we work with
healthcare providers whose
medical decisions have been
hindered by others involved in
the patient's care plan in the
name of personal belief for
religion in particular these
beliefs are used to discriminate
against women and LGBTQ folks
and unsurprisingly those with
intersecting race gender and
sexual identities.
This bill plain and simple
creates a license to
discriminate in the healthcare
setting respect for religious
and moral beliefs does not mean
that the law can or should
permit and individuals or
institutions religious beliefs
to interfere with a patient's
access to critical care
information or the ability to
protect our health and life this
bill not only takes the I off
the patient it completely
removes the patient from the
equation importantly as noted in
the FIR this bill would create
confusion conflict with existing
laws and rules and most
importantly create barriers to
access to care during and after
a global health crisis for these
reasons we oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Marshall Martinez
all of the angels to a recent.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez and executive director
of the quality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization in two thousand
eighteen on may seventh when I
was thirty four years old I had
a stroke a TIA in fact which
means I am a significant risks
to have another one at some
point in my life I began to
develop a migraine while at the
office and had time to call my
partner to come pick me up by
the time my partner got to my
office I had collapsed in the
hallway my coworkers were about
to call an ambulance I partner
then took me to the ER I was in
so much pain I couldn't stop
screaming and crying from the
pain in my head I also have
fully lost my vision my partner
had to basically carry me into
the ER.
Because of the extreme pain lack
of vision and almost no mental
capacity at the time without my
partner alongside me if no idea
how it would manage the
treatment and after care of the
situation but when I was first
taken back in the E. R. W. to
begin to be examined the
hospital staff did not allow my
partner to even go with me
because they didn't believe he
was family.
Now imagine members of the
committee if the charge nurse
receptionist at you NMAG are or
any of the three nurses our
medical assistance was Tommy
over the period of the six hours
I spent there in excruciating
pain and blinded.
Or the doctor had decided at any
point during the situation that
they have a moral objection to
same sex couples I could have
been given port Care or waited
even longer to see a provider
who didn't view my sexual
orientation with moral objection
and because this bill has broad
liability shield neither I nor
my partner would have been
entitled to any explanation let
alone any recourse if the denial
of that care or information had
led to further harm or injury
Senate bill three twenty three
would have allowed any of those
employees responsible for my
care to deny my treatment or
information to my partner that
was critical my health for that
reason quality New Mexico
opposes this legislation.
Thank you Marshall Sierra
resumed followed by Constance
New.
Constance Wu problem by Nicole
Martin.
We've all the easy as he.
Yes again hello chair members of
the committee my name is Nicole
more in I am one of the co
founders for indigenous women
rising.
And I just wanted to say as an
indigenous person healthcare
providers and medical facilities
should not be permitted to
impose their religious beliefs
to not to deny anyone access to
health care that seems like a
very colonial behavior and as an
indigenous person I can't see
that happened in the in my
lifetime in twenty twenty one
some us to oppose SB three
twenty three.
Thank you.
Thank you Nicole you've just
been.
Thank.
The current Rader.
Thank you Mr chair I'm speaking
on behalf of the American
college of obstetricians and
gynecologists in strong
opposition to SB three twenty
three I inappropriately title
health care workers prevention
act this harmful bill threatens
fundamental high quality timely
and equitable health care for
our patients clinicians already
have strong legal conscience and
ethical protections at the state
and national levels this bill
would allow any health care
provider staff to refuse any
kind of care to any patient even
providing referrals or
information opening the door to
sub standard and biased Care
with requests for the patient.
Have to respectfully disagree
with Senator Schmedes this bill
could deny care to individuals
as an OBGYN myself pract
practicing in the state for
thirty years my job was never to
stand in judgment of my patients
or to impose my beliefs on them
but rather to work with them one
to one with our health care team
to help them achieve optimal
health on their terms
politicians have no role in the
patient provider relationship
this bill is dangerous and
unnecessary in any time and
particularly during the pandemic
please vote no to this harmful
bill that would result in non
timely inequitable care thank
you for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you doctor.
Right to be followed by Barbara
making any.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record on the director
of leaders advocacy district
Mexico I'm here today to state
are strong opposition to SB
three twenty three since soon
after its formation late
nineteen eighties TV evangelical
Lutheran church America has
committed to removing an
opposing obstacles of
discrimination and to protect
the civil rights of all persons
and we believe that SB three
twenty three is an example of
that therefore I urge your you
urgent do not passed on SB three
twenty three and I think this
opportunity to speak.
Need to be followed by Nancy
Jennings for.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara
back in any and I am a past
president of New Mexico Medical
Society and of the American
medical association speaking for
myself Senate bill three twenty
three extends the rate of any
health care worker or any person
remotely connected to a health
care facility to did I did not
care to any person based on the
workers personal beliefs the AMA
code of medical ethics which is
the basis for licensure in New
Mexico has a strong conscience
clause but we as physicians also
have other duties to our
patients specifically if a
patient up physician should make
it clear to potential patients
if they have a personal belief
it is my right as a physician to
hold my ethical beliefs but that
right stopped short of giving me
the right to impose my beliefs
on others either by omission or
commission Senate bill three
twenty three does not coach
conform to the code of medical
ethics please vote do not pass
on Senate bill three twenty
three thank you thank you Mr
chairman and Nancy thanks for to
be followed by Joan the money
and Senator.
Million centered to be followed
by Derek live in.
Listen to be followed by L. and
pines.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Derek lane and I'm
representing New Mexico voices
for children we want to express
our strong opposition to this
harmful bill there are already
legal provisions that
accommodate providers believes
but this bill goes too far in
the limiting critical
protections for patients thank
you New Mexican save in our
health care system contrary to
what the with the sponsor the
expert witness say there's no
way to control for
discrimination this bill will
have serious consequences by
allowing providers to
discriminate against patients
based on gender and sexual
orientation causing significant
harm to the LGBTQ community a
community which evidence shows
already faces worse health
outcomes and received lower
quality care because of
discrimination we should be
expanding patient protections
not eliminating them we urge you
to oppose this bill and send the
message that discrimination is
not welcome in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Elon trying should be
fallen by Joan one million
centered.
Thank you Mr chair Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition.
Can you hear me yes yes thank
you
People with disabilities are
often discriminated against in
health care based on the
perceptions of health care
providers as to their quality of
life and therefore this is a
very sensitive issue for the
disability community we believe
that Senate bill three twenty
three gives precedence to the
personal beliefs of individual
providers over insurance to
medical standards of care and it
does so in a very will of way
that would include anyone
involved in any tangible way in
the provision of care based on
any personal beliefs and does
not even include a requirement
to assist in the transfer of
care when the person has to
withdraw the sponsor has not
intention to authorized
individual discrimination and
that what he's trying to protect
is the ability to say I am not a
provider offering a service such
as conversion therapy but
unfortunately that's not what
the bill says so I think if
that's what he was intending to
do you need to go back to the
drawing board and re write the
bill as it stands we stand
opposition and we urge the
committee to do so thank you.
Thank you.
Joan lamanya Center followed by
Kayla herring.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is John Munyan
Samford I'm the director of the
New Mexico religious coalition
for reproductive choice and we
oppose Senate bill three twenty
three our shared religious
traditions teachers to work
toward justice and equity for
all and this bill will create a
moral ethical and theological
crisis for our state in which
people of all faiths backgrounds
races ethnicities genders and
abilities will be at risk for
being discriminated against in
the name of religion.
A health care corporation or
Insurance Corporation does not
have a conscience people do.
I want to be clear there's more
difference between those who
engage in civil disobedience for
conscientious objectors freedom
riders people who put their
freedom and safety at risk for
principles they believe it.
Others who insist that the rest
of us re order are we order our
lives to protect their
conscience and that we pay the
price for their principles I
call on you to remain steadfast
in your moral imperative to
opposed to discrimination in all
of its forms.
I would vote no on Senate bill
three twenty three thank you.
Thank you Mr Taylor hearing to
be followed by Melissa
Alexander.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kelly
hearing and the public affairs
chair with Planned Parenthood in
New Mexico I'm here on behalf of
one hundred fourteen thousand
supporters we have throughout
New Mexico serving over ten
thousand New Mexico patients
annually as a health care
provider at Planned Parenthood
we are alarmed that there is no
patient protections in this bill
it risks the health and safety
of all New Mexicans and leave
patients out in the cold
patients should not be denied
the health care they need I am
here to express our strong
opposition to Senate bill three
twenty three I strongly urge you
to vote against Senate bill
three twenty three thank you.
Thank you.
And Melissa Alexander.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this bill allows any
health care provider any
employee of a health care
provider or any healthcare
organization to refuse to
provide health care based upon
the personal beliefs.
New Mexico is one of the most
diverse states in all of our
great country it's Richard flows
from this diversity and respect
for all diverse peoples this
bill attacks the very core of
this region's and respect I
permitting healthcare providers
to deny health care to people I
will give you two quick examples
I in states where this law was
allowed I had a friend of mine
who is transgender who was
denied gold bladder surgery I
have another friend who was
denied treatment for sinus
condition this bill is
horrendous assault on New
Mexicans and it's a stab wish to
codified discrimination into the
laws of New Mexico for providing
health care to the citizens of
this state it is our read this
piece of legislation is poorly
drafted it's enshrined with
discrimination and I urge as
many but no.
Thank you.
Will know those ten minutes for
their opponents now we'll go to
the gym equipment for the
supporters and we'll start with
that's a lot harder to be
followed by a pretty still
Dowling.
Chris Darling to be followed by
don Jones.
Jones three dollars by Julie
Ford.
There is anybody who wants to
speak in support go ahead and
raise your hands we have some of
the people who signed up income.
So.
Julie board to be followed by
Rosemary she mentors.
The minister needs all followed
by Anthony Trujillo.
Trujillo to be followed by John
Rupel are.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block I'm a native New
Mexican and I support SB three
twenty three Dr Gregg Schmedes
bill is a commonsense measure
that protects our health care
heroes who we depend on as a
state this bill would be a step
toward equality and against
discrimination for health
workers conscience objections
which would establish necessary
safeguards enshrining
whistleblower rights from
medical practitioners who call
attention to violators of these
protections no health care
workers should ever be forced to
check their conscience price at
the door when they enter their
work for workplace the last
thing New Mexico needs is more
health providers leaving the
state because their rights of
conscience are not protected I
commended Dr Schmidt is for
bringing this pivotal Bill
fourth and I strongly urge the
committee to vote yes on Senate
bill three twenty three thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr block so thank
corroded very followed by
Colleen the dina.
Colleen may need to be followed
by chairman Rodriguez.
The Lisa Martinez let's go to
your.
Can you hear me yes thank you Mr
chairman members of committee I
just want to express my concern
about the state of affairs right
now in in in this matter with
conscience protections are
especially knowing that SB ten
which is remove the state's only
explicit explicit conscience
protection from our state law
other preventive medical
providers from being forced to
participate in abortions has now
become law so I think it's
important that we recognize the
rights of our of our medical
professionals and facilities to
be able to refuse to participate
not just in procedures that they
do morally
at reprehensible but also from a
humanistic point of view the
majority of Americans reach
fifty percent of Americans
believe that abortion involves
the taking of human life and you
know that we would force any of
our medical professionals to
make that type of decision
against our conscience against
their rights and against
Hippocratic oath I think is
unconscionable and we will see
an exodus of medical
professionals leaving the state
because of this very issue we
know that this will also trigger
if we do not to protect the
conscience protections that
there's already existing law
that will force our medical
professionals to assist in a
transfer reputation and provide
continuing care to the patient
until transfer can be affected
that's in the uniformed health
care decisions that so I think
it's important that we restore
conscience protections that we
protect our health care
professionals and give them the
security that they need in order
to continue the practice of
medicine and the practice of
giving lifesaving care and for
that reason Mr chairman members
of the committee I implore you
to please consider supporting SB
three two three.
Thank you Mr Martinez Sharon
Rhodri just to be followed by
Paul Mueller.
Is anyone else who wants to
speak in support please raise
your and they'll recognize you.
All Miller to be followed by
Bradley Carter.
Bradley Carter to be followed by
a movie screen and.
Followed by Romania over Torio.
We know we're Torio.
Dollars by Amanda Fiero.
Was AGN I mean Amanda Fiero to
the following finalizaci and.
is a yes to be followed by a
great Sen Richard.
Right passionate review the
final one to sign up in advance.
Anybody else want to speak in
support of this bill.
Senator will we'll go now to the
committee for questions and
discussion of Senate bill three
twenty three.
Thank you Mr.
Can I give a could I get my
expert witness just one or two
minutes to respond to a couple
of the.
The public comments yes
absolutely.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee if I
could direct if I could direct
you to page six section three at
you can see clearly why what was
said in opposition to this bill
is incorrect the core of the
bill is this a medical
practitioner health care
institution or health care
higher has the right not to
participate in or pay for any
health care service that
violates the medical
practitioners health care
institutions or healthcare
payers conscience it is the
procedure specific bills it is
not a person specific bill you
cannot deny care to a person a
very similar law has been in
existence in Mississippi since
two thousand four and in
Illinois since nineteen seventy
seven and I trust that the ACLU
would have sued to protect
citizens in those states if
there was an actual problem with
bills like these both of those
states have laws that protect
any procedure and any provider
so it is important for us to do
well in reality what we're
looking at this and the reality
is as far as faith based medical
providers ninety one percent
would rather leave the practice
of medicine to be forced to
violate their conscience it is
very important to realize that
without faith based medical
providers or other people of
conscience that you do not have
the resources to fight the
battle of this pandemic you
cannot make the needs of
citizens Furthermore eighty one
percent of Americans wish to
find providers who share their
moral values so it is important
that there's diversity within
the medical profession the other
objection that was rises that
there are no patient protections
in the bill.
And on page seven if you will
look at letter E. on that page
nothing in the health care
workers protection act shall be
construed to override the
requirement to provide emergency
medical treatment to all
patients set forth in subsection
date date of a certain section
of the US code which is the
emergency medical treatment and
active labor act that act is a
wonderful piece of federal law
that says okay an emergency
situation you're going to
present at a hospital and you
must be provided a screening
exam you must be stabilized you
must receive transfer if you
need a merger comex emergency
medical treatment at that
hospital cannot provide that's
that's a great law and there is
nothing in this law that
interferes with that instead
it's reinforced by this law and
further more this bill is ran in
conjunction with existing
federal and state non
discrimination laws there is no
conflict it is service specific
and I would never personally but
my name and reputation on the
line advocating for a law that
would deny medical services two
classes of people and I
wholeheartedly disagree with the
assertion that somebody could
offer the mention was made of
gallbladder surgery or sinus
Services if you offer a service
to one patient you're not
protected under this bill if
you're not willing to offer that
service to another patient so
the final point I would like to
make is this is America and
there is room for us all we need
to create room for each other
and we need to make room for
people of very different
believes to be in the medical
field and we need to make sure
that we respect the right of
providers not to have their
conscience intruded upon by
their employers or patients who
might demand them to perform a
service that they don't believe
in.
Thank you.
Questions.
Thank you senator thank you ms
we'll go to the committee that
we have Senator and finished
with your lotus followed by
Senator diagnosed.
Thank you Mr chair I was gonna
ask piece in a series of
questions but I think that just
because of the lateness of the
hour I'll just I'll just make
them as statements I have never
seen such an aggressive and
radical conscience bill has has
this one I think it conflicts
with the current standards of
care in the medical community it
could be dangerous to to
patients I certainly would not
want to go to of patient thank
me to a doctor or any and then
that's the other thing the
definition of provider is is
this is limited to doctors is
like anyone it's extremely broad
medical practitioner and and
then there are already in state
and federal law protections for
individuals and the affordable
Care Act and the
has a conscience provisions for
both abortion and assisted
assistance aid in dying or
suicide
and so there already is
protections and then the idea
that a corporation would have a
conscience I I I I I honestly
when I read this bill
Yes it's actually misleadingly
titled because I I was just
shocked at at what this bill is
and
And also the interesting thing
is another interesting thing
about this bill is what was said
in the for about medical a
medicated State couldn't have a
conscience protection so then
met
I was wondering whether Medicaid
could override the terms of this
act but in any event I think
that this would be the worst
thing that we could a past in
New Mexico and for that I for
with regard to medical care and
for that reason I I will vote no
on this on this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Gallegos Uranus.
you Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Munoz I I appreciate of
the op and talk to you on this I
guess on on the other side of
the spectrum because if I
understand this bill right
Mister chairman Senator you're
just trying to give some
protections in in in listening
to your expert witness Mr
Nicole's I I had quite a few
question but she cover him
really really well on it in the
pages and sections of the
Iranian but Mr Chairman center.
In New Mexico does not have this
now but that there are other
states that have this protection
type laws already in their
in their states do you know
would you be able to give me a
list of who has these
protections Mr.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos I I I
will do for to my experts but
the state of Illinois and
Mississippi have the most
comprehensive protections I
think there's also some
patchwork protections in some
other states as well as you know
in in back to the federal thing
we have a we we we have a
federal
choose as I guess of a movie and
further restricting conscience
protections and so that's why I
think at this point in time it's
very important to put those into
New Mexico because as people
said we have a very diverse
state and I I certainly agree
that this is a place that needs
to be welcoming and and what the
the the point of of the bill
really you know and people keep
talking about that the health
care workers and that's really
the biggest part of the bill
although we want to include
those other entities but it's
really to provide a safe
environment for people where
they don't feel like they're
gonna be they're gonna be forced
to violate their their beliefs
and so that that's really what
we're we're talking about but I
I would defer to ms Nichols to
see if there's any other states
or or to further answer
questions etcetera.
Mr chair thank you for the
chance to address that Illinois
and Mississippi are the states
that provide conscience
objections to in a provider or
employee it's it's not limited
sect to certain classes or
categories and it's the same way
with the type of services
covered any tap of services
covered and throughout the rest
of the state you do see a
patchwork of conscience
protections some more and some
less even in states that tend to
be more liberal like Washington
state Washington state actually
has a broad conscience
protection there the exception
there is certain services have
to be covered under basic
insurance plans but besides that
even Washington state has an
extremely broad conscience
protection it's limited for
payers in that state but that
that's just an example of you
know honestly I'm surprised that
we've gotten to the point as
America that protecting
conscience has become
controversy all and like I have
said before but I'd love to see
to say again is if there was a
problem with these types of laws
I trust that the ACLU would have
saved it's been in place since
since nineteen seventy seven in
Illinois since two thousand four
in Mississippi so we have a
track record that shows how
substantive comprehensive
conscience protection works.
Well Mister chairman Senator and
miss Nichols I appreciate that
but could you give me just a
little bit inside on California
and Colorado they are
California's what New Mexico I
would like to be in Colorado is
our neighbor can you tell me how
their conscience protections
work.
Well I'm actually you will say
kind of the opposite of
conscience protection not speak
to Colorado specifically a but I
am very familiar with California
and the California really is
conducting an assault on
conscience to the extent of even
bringing charges into court to
make sure that charges are
required to pay for abortions so
I I don't believe that that is
the place that New Mexico wants
to go to address the comment
that federal law already
provides conscience protections
that is technically true but
there's no rock I can access the
court system so you must
petition the federal HHS and
submit a conscience Klein and
their own words to me were that
they move at the speed of a
glacier that is not how you want
to protect important fundamental
rights is by relying on a
federal agency that is likely
never to get around to actually
doing anything to protect those
rights when people have tried to
sue you under those federal
conscience protections and judge
dismisses those lawsuits and
says your only recourse is to
file through the federal HHS.
And unfortunately I hope this
changes with the current
presidential administration has
chosen not to even defend the
HHS conscience role so it would
be a misplaced trust of New
Mexico to believe that you can
trust the current presidential
administration to protect the
conscience rights of citizens of
New Mexico.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative miss Nichols and
and just to clarify the Medicaid
discussion that a server studio
Lopez brought up was that would
you just talk about as far as of
federal piece is that the same
discussion.
I'm not really the important
point to make as far as a
Medicaid providers is honestly
federal law is going to
supersede state law so for
example if federal law says that
you have to provide a certain
service they M..
Honestly federal laws going to
Super stager New Mexico law
there that doesn't make them
that a Medicaid provider can not
just our conscience objections
but they can't just start
conscience objections in a way
that conflicts with federal law
and also you can't just start
conscience objections in a way
that conflicts with federal or
state nondiscrimination laws
that's why your conscience
objection can only be targeted
to particular services rather
than serving particular types of
people.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator in in just a of a
side note in New if I understand
right there already doctor
doctors that can refuse alike
Francis plastic surgeon if they
think it is ill advised for the
patient do they not already have
the authority to say that they
cannot do it Mr and Senator
smitteez.
All the questions so we're right
now if you're a physician state
if you're talking to a plastic
surgeon
it what what once again this is
about the particular surface and
so usually what what I've seen
done and and discussed is that
you know if your if your
physician and and you don't have
experience in a certain type of
procedure not no one can demand
that that's just a basic
standard of professionalism and
standard of care
is so I I don't know if that
answers your question once again
back to that plastic surgeon you
know your your your respecting
their ability to say that look
this is just not a service that
I provide and I'm I'm going to
exercise that rights to once
again on page six the right to
not participate in something on
us for this bill is please don't
make me do something against my
will that that is the idea and
and yes a and that would apply
to nurse a plot of plastic
surgeon
and that that sort of thing and
and set to go one step further
beyond the plastic surgeon
example is you know the there's
been some confusion about
conscience for an entity and
that's why we that that's why we
we spell that out in the bill
and in so I I think it's
important to is a problem with
the bill please show me where
that is because I don't I think
a lot of the things that are set
in the bill you just you won't
find in the bill and and so
that's why we define it and we
say that they have to have these
things you know posted in their
in their bylaws or articles and
corporations are policies and
regulations I can't just say
hello based on this person grant
and I you you payment has to be
part of who they are and who
they what they've agreed to do
and those bylaws and articles of
incorporation are applied
equally to everybody.
Thank you for that.
Mr chair and senator I I just in
closing just wanted a story a
I've been through three doctors
for my mall and one for my wife
in different points in time for
different reasons well the
doctor would tell me tell me on
behalf of my mom and then behalf
my why that they were no longer
willing to provide her services
or either one of and I never
once questioned given why I just
went to another provider got
them signed up there and got
them look neither more in any
kind of critical care need.
But it is just a general
practitioner but I thought to
that is if for whatever reason
they have that they do not want
to provide that service I looked
at it as a benefit to me if they
don't want to work on me all
that I want them to work on the
so I I I never called the
hospital I've never called in
and shoot anyone out I found
another provider the would do
the service that I needed for my
mom I want my wife.
That would not have any kind of
conflict and that's what I look
at this bill is providing an
alternative for the doctor the
nurse and the staff to say you
know I'm not comfortable with
this would you please help find
somewhere else to to look for
your services needed but what
that I'll yield I thank you for.
Your hard work I think you I
love the way they said on the
floor you know we look for
expertise and you are the doctor
in the room thank you doctor
strange thank you Mr.
Senator Wirth
next we go to Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you for bringing
this forward.
Alex very short answers agree
got nine more bills to cover
here at the hours late haven't
had suffered.
So I'm confused are we talking
about.
The Nile.
Okay we care we talk about the
Nile of payment.
Mr Mister chair and and senator
Tom
and
in the bill covers it covers
three so you could say
the simple again in the
beginning it if your if your
ensure third party payer.
And you could you could say we
don't we don't reimburse for
conversion therapy because we
think it's wrong okay
or as also has a care provider
right back to page to page six
as the state or nurse you have
the right not to participate in
a particular service that that
you feel is is morally wrong for
some reason it could be attached
to a religion or it could it
could not just like the
conscientious objection that was
filed on the Supreme Court when
some secular people were were
objecting to war.
So is both denial of care denial
of payment this is the medical
this three three things
all medical practitioners
hospitals or clinics or or those
sorts of facilities and third
party payers so we wanted to be
comparable you know kind of
comprehensive because those in
medicine those are the three
areas where where people could
you know exercise their their
conscience.
So thank you say if for example
you're in a rural area.
And
Your denied care and you have
to.
Be transported to a hundred
miles to get care and the which
resulted in the death Department
entry would you be held liable.
Mr chair and and etcetera that's
an excellent question and and I
think it's a that's a big
discussion because yes well let
me say a couple things on that
number one is we we thought of
that and that's exactly why on
page seven we say this has
nothing to do that's going to
override standards of care for
emergency medical treatment now
in my opinion we don't even
really need that in the bill
because it's just that's just
the standard of care but because
of that concern has been raised
this legislation we specifically
put that in as clarifying
language on page seven to say
that nothing in this act shall
be construed to deny this this
type of treatment and so I I
just want to be you know be
clear on that I would also say
you know in this this is very.
Well to me it's personally scary
the Albuquerque journal called
me after we were up passed SB
ten and they said we want to
specifically talk to some
doctors in the state about the
conscience protections
the the the first doctor I
called and left a voicemail the
second individual Be Giants as I
was calling I called and I'll be
doing in in a rural area okay
and she picked up the phone and
I said Hey um drive could you
help us out the Albuquerque
journal's looking for someone
like you to interview to see
what your thoughts are conscious
injection and what she said she
had already moved out of state.
We moved to Illinois actually
she was already gone and so.
Thank you very very concerning
to me and so who's taking care
of those patients and that rural
area now this is a health care
access issue we need to include
everyone in our health care
workforce.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chairman thank you doctor one
more quick question how often
does it happen whereby someone
ask a doctor to perform an
abortion does not put themselves
out as an abortion doctor
conform abolition.
Thank you yes somebody who
doesn't perform abortions to do
an abortion.
Right Mr chair and and senator
you know in in this is a very
specific question to New Mexico
I think and your question is
particularly insightful I think
applies to our state we have a
very very low health care litter
health literacy rate in New
Mexico people often don't even
know that their health care
provider is a physician they
could be some other type of
health care worker for example
and so a lot of and I get
personally asked this all the
time do you do this to do that
and and so health the the
ordinary just everyday New
Mexican without a lot of
background health care they're
not going to know these things
they're not going to say Hey you
know you're you're a baby doctor
so you must you must to abortion
so I don't think we expect
people to New Mexico the nuances
of what a surgeon performs or
what a doctor performs or
something like that and so yeah
I I I think in the majority the
cases gather someone that goes
to Planned Parenthood there and
all that they do abortions there
but but you're saying your OBGYN
doctor and I hear from a lot of
them and maternal settle field
medicine specialist and the and.
In fact in going up my phone
with text messages throughout
this entire session about their
concerns of of what we've been
doing because they know they're
going to get asked and I've
heard from maternal fetal
medicine doctors and other OBGYN
doctors in Albuquerque who who
do get asked and so the answer
the answer is yes I don't think
it happens you know all the time
because I think that once again
the the person that knows they
know that they might know where
to go or who to ask but it's
certainly not going to be
present
and.
All the time.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you doctor for your
Answers and that's all I have
Mister chair and we can move on.
Thank you senator.
Senator.
Mr Chairman.
Motioned to table.
Sen none debatable motion.
the secretary will call the
roll.
To table Senate bill three two
three Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am there are in all.
One of Durango.
Senator McKenna.
Motion.
Chairman I I have some questions
for the Billsponsored but we
still have to do this folks.
Yes.
Motion.
Sales or you can explain your
vote and ask questions your
doctor after the does pass point
of order Mr chair yes.
I'm I'm I'm aware that a table
motion cannot be used to
suppress debate.
Okay.
The secretary will continue with
the role and then we'll we'll
we'll before she announces the
vote will.
If you have some questions
senator address your questions
and then we'll return.
Mr chair I had my hand up and I
was recognize.
There was
no.
One Alison raise their hand when
I recognized of the motion
Senator so I'm not sure this is
this is a suppressing debated.
No Mr chair it's your call
you're you're the you're the
chair item in a I'm not going to
go against it well here's what
here's what I'd like to do I'd
like to finish this this this
vote and then then Senator of
Janet if you have questions you
can just good afternoon.
Your vote will affect the
outcome of the vote so if you
don't want to table we should go
to no on this.
Yes.
You're voting yes Senator.
Yes thank you.
Search movies.
No.
Senator Lopez.
Hello to table.
Source the panics yes while
Telemeds on yes.
So you know.
Yes Representative you are just
some questions.
But yes thank you chairman at
thank you Senator and Dr Schmidt
As I. eight.
What I've been reading about the
bill even going back to what
we're debating SB ten.
It's my understanding
A loss of this we don't have to
put in statute because if a
health care provider does not
want to participate in a certain
type of procedure here she is
that that's respected Act it is
that not accurate.
Mr chairman and senator
unfortunately it's not.
a colleague of mine
had his privileges revoked from
hospital because he was
unwilling to perform and medical
service and once again this was
not apply to a particular person
he just said Hey I don't do this
in general and his hospital said
well too bad we don't want
people like you in our hospital
and they revoked his privileges
and I don't know exactly where
he he is that now if you moved
out of that state it was in the
northeast somewhere that's one
personal example I could quote
some there's some other examples
in the media
and I'm with to give you more
examples if you need it but I
personally know someone that
this happened to he was fired
and and lost his hospital
privileges at this facility.
Thank you chairman and senator
and have you heard of any of
your colleagues or others who
have been.
similarly fired here in New
Mexico.
Been fired Mr chairman and
senator I'm not aware of anybody
that has been fired because of a
conscience protection personally
I didn't know that the the
doctor and I'll I'll keep her
name anonymous ask for
permission to share her name
and went back to the story of
that was telling Dr Thompson
when the Albuquerque journal
called me to interview me on
this issue I called I don't know
six or seven OBGYN doctors once
again one of them had already
moved out of state because of
her concerns and the other
doctors said they did not want
to talk to the journal because
they were fearful of retaliation
I can tell you working in a a
large hospital here that I no
longer work at
you feel it you really feel at
and people feel even a chairman
of a department that shared all
of the beliefs that I share.
He had to relock the watch
itself and not review wasn't
free to be himself because he
was in was so well respected but
even then he was so R. I guess I
guess fearful of this because
you hear what people say and you
hear who's welcome in who is not
welcome
there was one pharmacist in New
Mexico
that was
Involved in litigation because
they felt like it was morally
wrong to dispense abortion
medication I don't know where
that litigation is and I don't
know if the person has been
fired but they were they they
they were involved in some
litigation so.
It's here in New Mexico.
Very good thank you Mr chairman
and senator and one last
question.
What are the.
Medical procedures.
That you urged are your peers
colleagues are refusing to
participate in.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
mainly the the the hot topic now
is is abortion
and you know that's that that's
the biggest thing that people
worry about you know because as
as you know it's a very partisan
thing and
And I think we should expect and
this is one of the things that
was briefly brought up on the
floor you know if if you believe
that abortion was murder I know
you don't believe that but if
you believed it was murder I
would expect you to to be
against it rationally and and
the same thing that I understand
about my colleagues in the
Senate they they don't believe
that so why would I expect them
to think abortion is wrong it
would make perfectly logical
sense based on the way that you
view the world and so I'm you
know I think that's kind of
where we need to be willing to
kind of understand each other
that's been the the hot topic
for me you know I mean I I don't
I have some personal friends
really need audience I don't
have any I don't have any
personal friends in New Mexico
that are
are some of the other specialist
although I do have and I hope I
answered your question I ate a
very well respected
and he's.
Pediatrician in Albuquerque
called me about a month ago
maybe
over some trans gender issues
and he was wanting to be
inclusive of his medical staff
and trying to understand.
How can we take care of a child
a minor who I'm.
Who who is who is going through
these issues and questioning
what is my gender and how can I
take good care of that person
when I have a nurse practitioner
office that wants to do
something and I have a front
desk person that believes this
and that and taking a lot of
great care and I was able to
find some resources that
pediatrician so these things are
in my experience have been dealt
with very thoughtfully and
people who who even though they
they might kind of disagree with
and we're this summer they
really want to try to take care
of everyone in a professional
manner according to standards of
care but but also say look I'm
I'm a person my front desk
person is there a person with
their own different police how
can we just all get along that's
what I'm really trying to do
that's my intent of the bill
Senator.
Thank you thank you senator we
we really have to move on
Senator and you have a question
Senator McKenna I'm sure Senator
is a she needs to talk to
offline thank you Mr.
Thank you senator I appreciate
the debate tonight thank you
very much Senator thank you okay
thank you we don't have to
Senate bill three forty three
the crime of racing on highways
or streets Senator Padilla.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman and if I can have your
webmaster please allow Daymon
Martinez from the City of
Albuquerque into the meeting and
commander buyers he's the head
of traffic traffic units to APD
as well.
Related then as soon as they as
soon as they ask to be let in we
let people and wonderful thank
you Mr chairman I'll be as quick
as I can on my introduction here
I just
So I'm I'm coming to you with
Senate bill three forty three
essentially we're attempting
here to add racing on streets to
a crime that already exists the
crime of racing on highways we
want to add the crime operation
of highways and spin in streets
resulting in bodily injury to
the crimes are covered by the
crime victims reparation Act
to allow reparations to victims
it provides that a conviction of
racing on highways and streets
would result in mandatory
license suspension and it allows
the highest ranking law
enforcement official in the
jurisdiction to issue a racing
permit if if that is requested
at it defines approximately
causes and bodily injury Mr
Chairman we we've heard story
after story after story of these
racing
you know tragedies all over New
Mexico the bill or the law right
now allows for this this crime
and racing on highways but on
surface streets I'm gonna tell
you about a specific story of
your contract is in in my in my
district now this this area this
this particular incident I want
to be very clear is is currently
under investigation and and is
alleged but again we we believe
based on the statistics some of
the reports that come out so far
about this accident driver
driving a hundred and ten miles
an hour there was allegedly
another individual racing across
the circle of art and tower in
the southwest agency on and I
think Mr chairman you know the
area well you I've met with you
for various meetings out of
there in that area I'm sure
you're familiar with it
and as the speed racer was
crossing
This is a hard story to tell Mr
Chairman was crossing over to
our Erica Chavez and her two
year old daughter were in the
car simply she had picked up the
child from from work and I was
heading over to grandma's house
the grandmother of the little
girl and and the car was
sideswiped through what we would
call of you know over time it
you won't and the driver was
instantly killed this mother of
under thirty years of age this
two year old little girl vacuous
we survived I mean if you saw
the vehicle and there were many
reports and stories on it.
it's it's a miracle that this
little baby in this little girl
survived and and as a result
we're just trying to to to show
this is a very serious matter
and and these victims of these
these issues you need to have
some justice you know brought
here and and so I do have a
Daymon Martinez from the City of
Albuquerque's one of the chief
law enforcement officials there
impacted virus who is and I hope
I'm saying his name correctly he
is the traffic unit commander
and I'm gonna ask Mr Martinez to
say a few words before we go any
further.
I see as the City of Albuquerque
is is there as well that there
all Mr Martinez you want to
speak.
Mr chair Senators I would speak
briefly to say that what this
bill does is as Senator Padilla
said this bill allows city
streets to also have
jurisdiction with Dr rinsing
what I like to do at this point
because I think it's very
important manageress this year
alongside me is someone who's in
the trenches on it day by day
basis so understands how
important it is to have that
extra twill and I would just
turn it over to Graham to say a
few words.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on behalf of the
traffic units of the EDD this is
a major issue that we've been
running with on a daily basis
some of the problems we have are
just on weekends or certain
times of the day or evening and
it's pretty much all day any day
of the week
That's come up in the media.
Several months but Garcia
counselors getting quite a bit
thanks for more districts on
Mars all the drag race issues
APD's to gather several tactical
operations last on that this one
of the difficulties we have is
not having anything specific to
force the streets limits our
abilities and also any type of
insurance to keep them from
coming back to continue in the
same
so that we stand is the street
racers just on local highways or
will streets very dangerous for
the public as well as themselves
these high speeds Senator
mentioned in this story costs
serious and fatal crashes just
gives us something a little bit
more to enforce also help is
current for future issues.
Thank you Mr chairman that that
is our opening statements.
Well let me just ask you real
quick question before we go to
the the press.
So your bill's Senator.
It doesn't create a new crime or
is it simply add crime the list
of crimes for which the prime
victims reparation funds to make
payments Mr chairman it's the
latter what you just stated.
So there already is a crime of.
Racing in the streets this just
makes it possible to to get
reimbursement.
The crime victims reparation.
Fund for reimbursement of the
expenses and and and the
injuries suffered as of right
what will Mr chairman I yes you
said it very well with one
exception so right now the the
the crime that exists on the
books is on highways and we have
nothing that that that tells us
that what happens what should
happen on surface streets and so
that's what we're coming before
you with today because and
that's why I thought it was
super important that the City of
Albuquerque the commander of the
traffic unit you're from help.
Okay.
We have a number of people who
signed up as I guess I really
don't begin to go through all
the people who were for it we
will take a few and we have one
person signed up to speak
against it Kim Chavez Cook from
or the law office of the public
defender are you are you with us
HM.
She's not so we'll go there is
there anybody here wants to
speak against this bill.
We'll go to those who supported
each and what I need is raise
your hand if you're here to
support it and we'll just thank
you and and your that your hand
tossed up on the screen.
Okay Mister chairman can I ask
you you're gonna allow ten
minutes for this portion so that
way the speakers know that they
should limit their comments so
that most people can get into
our how long it will allow for
this this.
Well let's see how many people
raise their hands okay try to
limit your comments to one or
two minutes please each.
So I have June Gonzales here the
first one here and
Good evening Mr chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Julie Gonzales my
daughter was there could Chavis.
Erico was my only child a wife
and a mother of three beautiful
children.
She was always happy and brought
a smile to those who love to
and everyone she met.
On the morning of Saturday
September twelfth.
Erico was on her way home with
serenity her four year old
daughter at the intersection of
uncertain tower in Albuquerque
she was T. boned by a driver who
passed a red light.
Out where out what we were told
was greater than a hundred miles
per hour they affect kids my
daughter instantly and by the
grace of god Sir depending was
unharmed aren't.
I would urge you to support
Senate bill three forty three.
So that something else was as
racing on city streets does it
bring heartbreak to any other
family as it has to ours and
that no other child has to grow
up without their mother thank
you.
Thank you ms speeds and see on
as.
Yes can you hear me yes yeah we.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Steve ceiling is and I'm
speaking as a parent and friend
of all my fellow New Mexicans
that are alarmed at the growing
number of drivers thank you for
our neighborhood streets in
using them as racetracks placing
in danger not only the only.
But more importantly the
innocent lives of care for
drivers passengers and
bystanders no one should lose a
daughter seven or eight one pool
reckless driver.
It's consciously decided to make
our streets a race way.
Pretending it's some type of
PlayStation game and that's even
at a hundred or more miles per
hour down a quiet neighborhood
streets.
It's just fun and the game
without real consequences no it
does not work like that we all
know that the damage is real the
pain and terrible.
You can not simply press the
restart button if something goes
terribly wrong.
Unfortunately this bill will not
bring innocent lives lost
reckless drivers back but it
will help families who have lost
a loved one deal with the pain
knowing that our state is one
something to appoint the next
tragic and senseless loss of
life by a reckless driver using
his or her vehicle as well
because it's only a matter.
And not just I thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward
Eckel the public sentiment
supported the bill and
respectfully ask that you go to
paper up SB three forty three
thank you thank you Mr CNS Brian
Huebner.
Good evening Mister chair and
respected members of the
committee my name is Brian
Huebner and I'm speaking in
favor of SB three forty three.
As you've heard too often we
have lost the lives of the
innocent to drivers that are
putting their careless in
criminal ways ahead of their
fellow humanity.
To put our family through the
heartache of bearing a family
member because of an axe
accident is horrible to put a
families with the devastation of
knowing that that seem very
would not have happened but for
the reckless act another is
beyond measure.
Last September we lost a
beautiful soul.
She was a mother daughter
granddaughter white niece cousin
and friend.
Please do not let the death of
Mister Erica Chavis in
Albuquerque last M. September be
for not.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee and please vote
in favor of SB three forty three
and move it forward to keep our
streets and community safe thank
you thank you Mr Schumer.
Brasilia.
Good evening Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Edith price forty I'm
speaking in favor of SB three
forty three I ask for your
support of this bill I have seen
and heard too many accidents and
with it so thank the
technologies from irresponsible
people acting in these crimes
have not been properly
prosecuted further actions we
are able to go free about their
lives when the victims of
families are suffering from
their losses due to these
criminals thank you committee
members and I ask for your vote
in favor of SB three forty
three.
Thank you and then finally we
have Christina K. R..
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the health and public affairs
committee my name is Christina
Pineda and I'm speaking in favor
of SB three forty three I humbly
ask that you pass this bill so
that other families do not have
to grieve the loss of a loved
one due to reckless racing and
driving on our streets and
highways these this bill is near
and dear to my heart as it
recognizes the colleague and
friend of mine Eric could Chavis
who tragically passed away
because of a reckless driver in
September twenty twenty Erica
was a wonderful person mother
wife and daughter that left us
too soon Eriko left behind three
beautiful children in which your
youngest child liquor in the
vehicle at the time of her
passing this bill will help
improve our traffic laws and
also prevent this tragic
occurrence from happening again
in the future I'm in strong
support of just meeting forty
three and thank you for your
time and consideration.
You'll be the last one now rose
yes hello Mister chair and
members of the committee I am in
our as well of SB three forty
three.
The consideration you know
taking into regards the loss
that we hadn't September.
In hopes that yourselves and
other members of the committee
are victims of the tragedy that
we've gone through you know
these are Albuquerque stage for
some of the screen.
not only is our family on the
state or your number one the
number asking for your support
for SD three forty three to
ensure I'm not the New Mexico
family goes through the
heartache and the pain that we
have an expression trying to
explain to a four year old
little girl what happened to her
mom I'm the bad guy it's not
behind bars it's important that
we stick together as the state
and we won't for SB forty three
so that we can ensure that the
voices of these that have
expired but these Representative
with active driving.
Are prosecuted.
Another problem we have the
opportunity to.
I am accident knowing that our
streets are safer because SB
three forty three has
consequences to be reinforced
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Okay we'll go now to the
committee questions or comments
on this hill.
Senator dole.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this bill
forward thank you for all the
folks who spoke in favor of.
Senator Padilla is.
Is the fifty three million
dollars.
The.
Eleven.
This call for an A. F. I are in
the budget.
Three thousand three thousand Mr
Chairman but this restaurant I'm
sorry.
But if you're willing if you're
willing to help.
Well I'm sorry but.
Is that the.
Operating.
They and the.
That is another estimated
additional operating of eight
thousand what's the difference
Mr chairman and ask our experts
to comment on that but again
these are are really rounding
errors yeah I'm not sure I'm not
sure you're experiencing chest
to look at the by our budget.
These are from.
The cost of.
Changes in the in the chat
history system the legal changes
to permit license a provisional
license suspension process and
the estimated time to develop
yes in the changes is
approximately a hundred sixty
hours or four weeks or estimated
eighty three hundred dollars a
staff workloads.
Mr Chairman and Mr by strong
this is something that already
essentially occurs it's it's
it's and and and the families
and and and that the cities and
towns in the counties the
attempts to take these cases all
the way through the process but
then they wind up without with
with with a terrible result at
the end sometime soon again you
know it's a court of law and and
what what happens come what may
based on the evidence but but so
there's no additional cost of it
with that because we're already
doing this this simply gives
them another tool in your tool
belt to prosecute or to deter.
Okay support the bill I like it
but.
I ask one more question if
nobody wants.
To.
I don't.
Nobody wants to answer it that's
okay.
So I was wondering who this Kim
Chavez Cook what's L. PED stand
for legal public defender.
Is anybody know why they're
against it.
Mr chairman I received no
feedback from them directly now
okay I like to do on supported
and I I moved to pass.
Okay we have a motion for you
because we still have more to
debate on it is our second
ticket.
Seconded by Senator Stewart
Cervantes senators in the oval
office.
Thank you Mr chair
Senator thank.
Of what the problem is.
Okay I look to figure out what
the problem is the FY are has a
concerned about page seven one
seventeen ninety seven to
nineteen for the definition
approximate because and
you are you going to do this
year next year.
Yes so I then went through the
whole bill to try to figure out
where proximate cause was used
and I I'm not just I'm not sure
of.
So if you use proximate cause
you should probably use the
standard definition and not of a
different definition but what I
was wondering is because there
is there's a very well defined
definition of what proximate
causes and this is not it what's
in the bill however is this what
the CBRC.
One looks that are they doing
something different the probable
cause do you know Mr chair.
Senator.
Mr chair and Senator Sedillo
Lopez I'm gonna defer to Mister
Martinez.
Yes.
Mister chair Mister chair
honorable members of the
committee I'm sorry I missed the
acronym that Senator Lopez using
crime victims reparation.
So just just to be more clear Mr
chair it the crime victims
record Representative
reparations act I know when they
get presented with a claim they
review it and I was just
wondering if they did not
applaud the legal definition of
probable cause or if they just
look for some different
definition like maybe this one
whether the actions contributed
to the harm and was a
foreseeable.
Result is what what is in the
act which is not proximate cause
has in our tort laws what what I
was thinking is it possible that
the CBRC is looking for
something different in the legal
definition approximate costs but
I guess what I'm suggesting of
Mister chairman Senator is you
might want to work that out with
the lawyers before you get to
Before you get to Judiciary
because I think you're gonna at
be asked that question and
and we might you might as well
fix it before you get there.
Its way would you do would be to
call the CBRC and ask them what
they do when they review these
claims are the what kind of of
causation are they looking at
and if they use problems
proximate cause then you might
want to change the definition to
be more standard but if they use
something else you might use a
different terminology the
proximate cause.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez that'll be one of
the first things we do if we get
out of this committee.
And if you if you like to talk
about it I'd be happy to talk
about it offline Mr chairman I
appreciate that will follow up
on the Senator it isn't isn't
the case of the.
Family of.
R. Kristianstad we apply to
crime victims reparation fund
for for help and they didn't get
any they were turned down.
Mr Chairman and Mr chairman and
and and
I don't think that we're at that
point yet with this particular
incident.
I I don't want to speak any
further on it because I know
that it's currently there's
there's there are questions
about how long did it take for
the individual to get it if the
for individuals you bet you know
what I should even go there
because this is a public hearing
and I would not want to cause
any issues there.
Because it didn't seem to be
just follow up because it seems
like there are a number at least
one other.
Oversight vehicle great bodily
injury vehicle review of cases
for getting reimbursement from
the general fund so I I'm not
sure why we but we need to this
is a crime no they don't die.
Yes well even greater injury I'm
not sure what you gain by adding
additional was already in the
fund is there some something I'm
missing here that.
Some technicality it's making it
impossible for.
HM so I'm to pay.
This will thanks Mr chairman as
I understood it and how the
peace legislation was drafted
that it makes it very difficult
to further the case it's it's on
us a service street because it
is specifically called out in
the reparation Act on on the
highway and highway bracing Mr
Martinez out this diverted them
if I'm correct.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
Share our members Senator
Padilla is absolutely correct.
Well.
Great what was raise the other
side vehicle or great bodily
injuries by the echo those
leftovers number anyhow.
Well.
Mr chairman of the committee.
The way we approach this is
because we're trying to make
this applicables streets itself.
the city streets to other
details because right now it's
just request the current water
supplies the highways which have
state jurisdiction as opposed to
the US senators urge.
Well let me let me just double
check something with you and Mr
Martinez.
It was my understanding that the
purpose of the bill was to add.
To the.
Situations for which the crime
victims reparation fund could
make payments.
This speeding on city streets.
But it doesn't really add a new
crime doesn't.
Mr Chairman representative the
committee no it doesn't matter
new project it just allows the
current plight to city streets
of cells.
Because today Mr chairman it
applies to this occurring on a
on a state highway.
I know well.
All right I I will be leaving
the point that if you already
have any injuries caused by
vehicular.
Right on the injury five years
ago do you really need this
other one.
What more do you need.
Mr chair honorable members so.
Thank you Mr chair just to be
clear when you're talking about
the reparations to the crime
victims reparation at we're
talking about section one part
a.
As far as the jurisdiction
extending the jurisdiction
whether we're talking under.
Session two eight where it
extends it to.
Racing on highways or streets
pursuant to section sixty six
dash eight dash one fifteen so
one is reparations in one one
and then part B. is extending
the jurisdiction to the to the
streets.
Senator Sedillo Lopez sees
children of the question or you
just forget to drop your hands
I.
I'm sorry I forgot to drop
million okay.
Once the will of the committee.
We have a mission I think.
Senator Tallman did you make a
motion yes I do and I seconded
it.
Any other discussion Senator
magenta Senator Schmedes they
also many of the questions.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senate bill three four three
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Sir Tom I'm yes.
Number two seed Pino.
No.
Senator Padilla and you go on to
Judiciary thank you all very
much thank you and have a
wonderful evening thank you.
We'll go to the Senator
community for the crime of the
healer manslaughter.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I do
have an expert with me tonight
and that is also Daymon Martinez
and I would like to describe
what the bill is and will be
than happy to answer questions
up along with Mr Martinez so
there does exist an important
call in our state criminal law
and it's actually kind of a
public health issue as well and
I'll explain that in a little
bit the purpose of this
legislation is not to enhance a
criminal penalty instead the
purpose is to plug the gap which
currently exists where
pedestrians bicyclists and
people in vehicles are
unnecessarily hurt or killed.
Given this I proposed in New
Mexico adopt a vehicular
manslaughter.
R. as a person with medical
background I know all too well
the suffering which occurs when
someone certain kids by a
motorist who is not driving
safely and not paying attention
to the roadway.
Let me give you an example.
The
just how this might work let's
say there's an SUV driving down
the interstate becomes the
person driving a motorcycle yes
very moves over to the next
laying and passes the motorcycle
is a passes the motorcycle the
S. U. V. then falls back into
the order may substance front
tire of the motorcycle Center
website controlled Intel's drive
however the driver of the SUV is
probably not aware that that
just occurred because here she
was texting or talking on the
phone only after being stopped
by an officer are with the S. U.
V. driver realize that he or she
is that.
Currently the state law goes
from vehicular homicide to
reckless driving the Acura
homicide a third degree felony
is generally chargement driver
is in higher under drugs and or
alcohol and kill someone New
Mexico also has a great bodily
harm by the a law which is a
third degree
also an officer can write a
reckless driving ticket which is
only a misdemeanor no more than
ninety days in jail and then
this charge is brought the
defendant usually pleads guilty
to a lesser careless charge
you can strive jobs so in other
words and officers not having an
option to consider a charge for
fourth degree felony that is why
I'm introducing that the heck
for manslaughter charge you for
three felony.
This purpose the purpose of this
loss to make some drivers in our
state right about not driving
safely and pay more attention to
the road.
And as I get further into this
job I have sometimes have the
foundation myself of texting
while driving and that's part of
what we want to help.
People stop doing because it
really is dangerous our before I
moved here in another city a
texting person ended up and had
three other young women in the
car with their self just after
they had graduated and there she
was texting and moved over in
the line in the sand I have and
they often passed away
so I'm I'm hoping that this law
and the ability to charge of
fourth degree will help.
save people from being the
victims of unintended staff
Manslaughter and with that I
would need open up for questions
and asked Mr Martinez if he has
anything else you would like to
add.
Mr Martinez you want to add
anything Mr chair members of the
committee if I may just turn
this over briefly to commander
here's who's also gonna last
it'll just to say something
briefly as well as how important
this is
Mr this proposed bill.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee
Our traffic Division for APDA
response to drugs and that would
be seventy face all fatal crash
of the year we also respond to
an additional twenty to thirty
on average serious injury
crashes per year sit right in an
approximately a hundred
investigations are completed
either serious injury or fatal I
don't by state arrests forty
eight forty five percent of
those investigations on the
sales side what state into this
category so as the Gators police
apartment owners desiccated
extractions
we're very limited on what kind
of charge and were able to what
are you can either go with the
reckless chart which is a
misdemeanor and it might not
states the third degree felony
of the visits or manslaughter.
Sorry
one specific case that we had
there was a.
Female doctor that was actually
responding to a hospital
just you get called into work to
perform surgery plus the sitting
at a traffic signal
Representative might vehicle
going about seventy miles an
hour just crashes into the rear
of her vehicle and killed her.
some this issue did not make it
to the hospital you whatever
surgery or care was needed
but because that driver was not
impaired it would not states
they make you a homicide charge
so we're very limited on what
type of charge we could do some
issues that are charged with I
believe twenty one months in
jail versus a very similar to
the state investigators almost
stand scenario where someone
driving along units recommended
by a high rate is driver however
that driver was under the
influence of methamphetamines
and receives ten years in jail
for basically the same thing the
only question one person was in
talks and the other was not so
just
how many investigations we do
and where this falls
That's why we believe this is a
very important this bill is.
Thank you thank you thank you
the commander of the anything
else Senator Hickey nothing else
I stand for questions you have
an amendment Senator Hickey.
Oh dear
If you want you want to present
that amendment here USA the
navy's Committee.
I I'm sorry it's it's that my
mind.
the Mr Martinez could be
different this is will go to
Judiciary next and.
We could fix that there and Mr
Martinez could you describe the
amendment.
Yep Mr chairman members of the
committee of sanity the
amendment is going to be for
page one line twenty one there's
an extra work not.
That where it reads what that
not does not.
And be distracted first not.
The Steelers at here cedar
during budget in it is a are you
is there any opposition to
striking the extra not to
typographical.
Any other disease let's have a
motion to to do to adopt the
amendment.
And that.
Seconded by Senator we get any
opposition to striking red line.
Will consider the we are.
Built in amended any other
changes you need to do in there
Senator.
No I I this now very fresh in my
mind it's not not it's not it's
not not not not okay.
Let us.
There is can charter school in
the audience the issues for this
one.
She was also signed up to speak
against this one.
So she's over to the right.
you know a lot of the people who
signed up to speak to this one
spoke the last time.
Ask your own sanity is no.
I'm gonna ask.
Why that would be the chase
I'm not altogether sure but.
There isn't anybody here who
didn't speak on the last bill
who wants to speak on this one
could you raise your hand and
will recognize you can speak in
support of this bill.
I don't see anyone I think they
may have just.
Check the numbering builder
dangerously Water Street on some
so we're going to the committee
for questions and we'll start
with the senators to manage and
then Senator Schmedes since.
And it's Senator your lotus so
Senator student experience.
Thank you Mr chair and I have
some concerns about this bill
the concern I have is that
You know when there is a death
it is devastating and often it
can be very devastating for the
person.
Who because the debt.
And now we're and now creating a
felony and were changing their
entire life for the future
Senator could you talk about
that in.
Thank you Senator Stefanics and
Mr chair
I absolutely agree that this can
be life changing for the person
who because the situation and it
is terrible thanks to have to
carry around and one might say
that isn't enough.
but very often I believe that we
create loss
to get to help people become
mindful.
Of their responsibilities and so
my analogy our seat belts
before the seatbelt law.
Before CBS one large and there
were I think twice as many
traffic deaths in the U. S. as
today and then we get past the
seatbelt law but a lot of people
the then we got amended and then
a long lot people didn't do it
but again that law and being
enforced and and I've had that
in our economy having an officer
watched me get into a car I
wasn't looking and I didn't
immediately followed over
inflicted them
and the officer gave me a
warning and what this law does I
believe is give people a warning
because I do believe as I said
personally the temptation to
text while driving and this job
we're with I've never had so
many issues to try and deal with
all at one time there is that
temptation there and as the
officers
this there are there are
consequences to.
innocent people and so I think
that the reason to have this law
again I agree that the
individual houses and that
probably the large majority of
the time is gonna have a lot of
kids to to deal with and
but again F. if they hadn't been
texting you know because we all
think won't happen to me
and I'll just do this little tax
it's amazing how that lane
change really occurs and no and
and most of the time we get away
with that but sometimes it does
costs an accident and sometimes
because of that so that's why I
would argue that this law is
necessary it's kind of the
reminder to wear the seat belt
and not tax.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that response but I don't think
you know what our laws are and
so when that fourth degree
that fell on the worker I don't
think it's going to be a warning
to anybody.
But I was very hesitant about
creating a fourth degree felony
and changing a person's life
forever thank you very much Mr
chair.
Is this Senator committee chair
next.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for this bill
you know I I do share the same
concerns that Senator panic
shared.
and I'm gonna continue to think
about that.
But I I do want to bring up.
one other point in that I
thought it was very insightful
you to bring this up is you
kinda scribe this is a.
Hello of every other word to use
the whole loophole or something
like that.
And so I think about it
Not in the terms of the driver
but in terms of the family that
has lost their loved one.
And trying to.
Allow our judges to be
equitable.
And so here you are that someone
has actually died because
someone was no driving.
Recklessly are committing a
crime other driving.
And and all of a sudden if we
don't give our our judges the
tool has her discretion to to.
To apply justice.
For the victim's family I mean
what what are they gonna think
when they say will what's wrong
with our justice system when you
know you can drive around and
and and kill someone obviously
it's not with and with malice
for time not manslaughter but.
Some might my son and for my
granddaughters dead and the
judge said they could just do
this.
When a similar case you may
have.
A very equivalent penalty.
Or something very very minor or
or or so perceived as minor from
the victim's family and so I I
want this to be about equitable
justice within our.
justice system with our judicial
system and if we have a loophole
where we feel like we don't have
the tools.
To be fair.
Versus something that might be
less serious crime or more
serious of a crime and and and
and and we want this crime to be
an appropriate penalty kind of
in the middle of doing something
worse you get you get come worst
worst worst penalty if not
necessary all about the
the perpetrator it's also about
showing our society equitable
justice you know we don't have
someone that you know commits
murder and then they get a
sentence down here and someone
who's a shoplifter and they get
a more you know you know it's
it's if we have a very.
Hierarchical very structured
judicial system that this is not
perfect but when we identify.
A a hole or gap when equitable
justice cannot be implemented by
a judge I think we need.
To take care to look at the.
So that the victims families
feel like we have a fair
judicial system.
And and so on I that's why
that's one thing I like about
this bill I think it institutes
and fills a gap of fairness
although I do.
I do still have
is a felony is a big deal
however
and I'm not gonna ask you this
are I can get with the offline
This is the lowest degree felony
that we have.
And we do have an expungement
statute.
On the books in New Mexico so
we've we've created once again
and credit another layer where
is someone.
Hopefully they learn their
lesson they tax base work row
they kill somebody well they
learn their lesson and they're
behaving themselves not doing
that again and I'm gonna go out
and causing further damage or in
racks
and then they would have at some
point the opportunity for
expungement least that's my
understanding.
as well as you know I think some
other restitution.
So I'm gonna continue listen the
rest of date but those are kind
of the pros and cons that I see
in in this bill thank you Mr
thank you Senator Schmedes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I have a real
problem with this bill because
it's not a gap normally it is
you don't impose a felony for
something that is an accident.
Felonies are far for crimes
normally that are at least
reckless or or what function or
you know not just an accidental
because and you don't deter
behavior and you're talking
about a warning like this he got
word you don't deter behavior
that's accidental you deter
behavior lease the theory is
that the criminal law very is
that you determine behavior that
is intentional and so I I'm
sorry I can't support this bill
it's it's just a creating a
felony of about something out of
something that is accidental
just does not sit right with my
vision of and my understanding
of criminal law.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
and Mr chair I would like to ask
my experts the if they have in
the committee and the the
comments of the observations
that by the astute senators so
are waiting in on the stock.
Mr Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Senator Hickey
This was
the basis of this bill is
drafted rocking at case law New
Mexico and the way that the
language is presented it is to
deal with the case by name state
versus our rural and that's why
in in looking at the standard
without malice.
that's the that's one of the
reasons right now what is want
to point out is I understand
that there is concern that this
is a felony.
And it is extremely serious
offense the well what I would
want to point out is as senator
you spoke when we began this
tonight is that there's two
different type of third degree
felonies right now the first
one is behavioral or homicide
and the second one is great
bodily harm by vehicle so you
have two types of third degree
you don't have a four degree.
Just.
So concern that there's a felony
that could be charged in this
case well right now with the
available statutes that are
there for consideration I don't
think it's common for example to
do a number on the account
charge a third degree.
Would be very possible that if
there's someone testing in
person on a cell phone.
And and and that those results
and that
that person right now the way
stance could be charged great
bodily harm like vehicle third
degree so this actually is an
option to come down to fourth
degree which is less penalties
and thirty three as far as an
accident I guess I would just
the.
Challenging this is an accent I
would just send this over real
quickly to
commander appears to speak on
that.
Thank you chair members of the
So as investigators we don't use
the term accidents
when it comes to things like
cell phones distracted driving
or any type of violation of law
those are intentional acts that
somebody chose to you while they
were driving that are against
the law and as a result of that
constant crash there was a
serious injury or ality.
those were that was a choice
that they made if you have
somebody driving along and it's
just you know there's whether
ice on the road the slit and
somebody and they get killed
subsequently in a crash you to
that now that would be
considered more of an accident
you know something of this
nature something out of their
control you control whether
you're on your phone or not
looking at more before you met
range changed
what speed you're going things
of that nature so those are
places that are made so I would
just say that those are an
accident category because this
can be prevented so I think
that's kind of the goal of what
we're looking at is
to reduce those choices that are
made to prevent fatalities.
What's the will of the
committee.
I'm moody past Mr chair.
Yes is there a second.
Also could.
Their motions present second by
Senator Gallegos secretarial.
Mr got a quick question.
Yes.
The what is the penalty now just
a either different degrees of
meth of misdemeanor.
So is it what is the.
What is the.
Prime of a vehicle the head
coach or manslaughter right now.
Thank you senator Tom and and Mr
chair if I could Jack quickly
direct that to our experts and
so we can then move on to the
boat.
Thank you.
So are.
Two quick answers yeah.
Three years Senator.
And it's it's it's manslaughter.
Misdemeanor.
Senator homicide is up to three
years supported rate is up to
eighteen months and the
misdemeanors up to twelve
months.
So this exactly getting off Scot
free either.
So what is.
What is the charge now just a
simple maybe Mr manner.
In this situation is that I
believe that the commanders and
speaking about is it is charged
as reckless that would be up to
twelve months and maybe play
down their list which I believe
would be up to six months so.
Okay so are you.
Are you recommending this Mr
Martinez.
Hi Senator this is a priority
legislation for the City of
Albuquerque the more and for
aging yes senator.
Are there a lot of others cities
and states.
Have.
Make this a fourth degree
felony.
Senator I and I can speak to
California looking at
translation station for what you
see before you we look at it
hello help trend in California.
So this
hearing California.
We look at the legislation to
see what they had on the Senator
thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Senator thank you Mr Martinez.
We have a motion for a due
process and is from the Senator
Schmedes in a second from
Senator Gallegos.
Secretary will call the roll.
I'm Senate bill three four four
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator.
We can.
Thanks committee yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
No.
Thanks now.
Sierra.
No.
There are two panel.
So that motion is defeated.
And
Thank you secretary.
Coming.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
senators for considering this
thank you.
In the process are made some
very astute comments everyone I
appreciate it and I'm sure the
city does too thank you thank
you Mr Martinez and current
affairs thank you for calling.
A little too Senator Gonzales
and your premium and mileage
exchanges Senate bill three
forty five.
Thank you all.
Thank you Mr chairman and the.
No members so with those Senate
bill three forty five well Mr
chairman members so this is the
department of department of
finance that has brought this.
And what it does is so it
addresses you know of the
situation with per diem that we
have in our state and it's
pretty much very outdated
the it's for efficiency and all
the weight of it set up now you
know according to a secretary
will metal that so.
You know it's so costing us more
you know by the way we're
implementing it versus if we
were to be able to bring it up
to date and I know that it's
been a long night to know with
that of I do have secretary of a
middle that all she can makes
more common so then there is an
amendment we can do afterwards.
Thank you senator secretary
Romero welcome.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee I'm gonna keep this
release chart because I know
that it's long had a long day so
basically this bill as a result
of Senate memorial one hundred
that was passed by the
legislature in in two thousand
nineteen that Mario task DFA
with comedian the task force to
make recommendations to the
legislature on per diem and so
this bill basically addresses
per diem for board members and
commission members it adds
it dresses meetings which up
until this year we didn't
realize that was going to be a
thing and so so it is now and it
also addresses lengths of
meetings because we've had
issues with a couple boards that
they'll they'll meet for couple
hours the break and then down
reconvene and call that and and
you meeting and so we've kind of
put some some safeguards in
their to prohibit that it's it's
it's just give me what rates
were of those type meetings I'm
the other thing that it does I
think what's really important to
note is that the the last time
this was updated was in two
thousand and three and because
it's it's the amount is actually
specified in the legislation
which makes it really in
addition so it doesn't allow any
kind of adjustments and every
time there's going to be change
gonna come back to legislature
now ask for the change so what
we're recommending a what the
bill does is that it provides
DFA with the authority to set
the rates every July one basing
them on the GSA rates the
federal rates that are used and
so basically that's in a
nutshell Mr chairman so I'm
available for questions.
Just to clarify Senator and and
and secretary B. as per diem
rates.
Later legislators as well.
Mr chair I believe they do find
they do but although I think you
do have something a little bit
different in that you guys get a
flat rate when you're in session
for that little bit different
but I I you know I've let me if
I might I have more now how
is with financial control
probably can clarify that better
than I can.
Thank you Mr Miller.
Good evening everybody chairman.
Secretary for good evening
secretary Romero's correct they
they would apply when you're out
of session but not in session.
We're not in session.
Correct.
Yes my questions I I thought we
got your DM was like a hundred
and sixty five dollars a day or
something.
That's correct here in that's
correct Senator when you're in
session no no I'm in I'm in.
During the interim Reuters
Committee said we went to curls
that interim meeting early which
is Silvercity for meeting.
Remember exactly but Senator
Gonzales or billion.
Dollars.
I I might up no our system our
system supper because that's
from Legislative Council and
they stay with the you know
whatever's happening the federal
part any changes during the year
so ours would not be tied to
this.
Because so we're not we're not
state employees you know with
the.
See what ours is a little higher
than this are you trying to do
is say already
yes Sir that's the difference.
Okay anybody else want to see we
have some people signed up to
support this and one of them was
Mr Miller do you want to add
anything else Mister or Mister
chairman if I may of the recent
amendment that maybe could just
smoke so we could have a
discussion Mr metal explain it.
Sure we could.
And that is so point two one
nine nine four eight point one.
Server is putting it up now
thank you.
Mr metal would you want to
Kevin.
Secretary.
Mr chair Senator thank you so
basically what this amendment
does is we missed changing the
mail rates so we want those mill
rates to also not be set in the
in statute without allow the
flexibility to pop follow the
GSA rates for males as well.
We.
And the.
And we have a motion from
somebody on the committee for
discussion purposes to adopt the
amendment moved it out there and
that.
Also.
Soon as we see it will be able
to decide if we want to drive in
a.
There we go.
Okay.
Questions on the amendment.
Some tire to to a Senator okay.
Any discussion on the amendment
any opposition to the member.
During the consider the
amendment to be adopted the.
Senator Gonzales and and cover
COVID taking down.
And
We'll go to.
Thank.
You want to speak on this.
Yes good evening Mister chair
members of Canadian Franklin
Garcia with New Mexico
department of transportation the
duty staff in support of the
Senate bill three oh five of
Senator the duty staff that
would benefit from the per diem
increase our our maintenance and
our patrol crews who are often
the lowest paid staff at the
duty and this would help them
avoid having to go into the red
when they're on require travel
for work so thank you.
Thank you Mr Garcia and then
secretary.
Secretary general Schreier thank
you Mr members of the committee
I'm Jen Schreier secretary of
New Mexicos tourism department
and I stand in support of this
bill New Mexico has not seen an
increase in state per diem rate
since two thousand and three
since that time New Mexico's
hotel right average has
increased by fifty one percent
from seventy six point nine six
and two thousand three two
hundred sixteen point nineteen
in two thousand and nineteen per
the Rocky Mountains lodging
report this market increase has
not been reflected in New
Mexico's government per diem
rates because the statute
includes a flat rate also the
current statute does not take
seasonality into consideration
this bill enacts national best
practices in aligns with the
federal model for determining
per diem rates it allows for per
diem rates to be set annually
based on available data
including room rates typical
meal rates and ray incidentals.
Well this bill might seem
insignificant it will greatly
support economic recovery for
the tourism industry thank you.
Thank you very much Secretary
for our.
Anybody else want to speak on
this bill either in support or
against it.
One has questions I move it to
pass motion passed through
Senator Sedillo Lopez seconded
by house second by Senator
McKenna.
Any discussion of this I notice
in the race for virtual meetings
is forty five dollars.
Take into account rentals
arrests or.
Being clogged by your chat issue
hold on your lap during those.
As the virtual meetings and
Gerald.
Or the or the blue light Mr
chair a little bit that's.
All right.
Seeing serious discussion of
this measure we will then ask
the secretary to call the roll.
On Senate bill three four five
Senator Gallegos.
It was very their Senator.
On your side.
I know what I'm sorry Senator.
I am yes ma'am thank you.
Sir McKenna.
Yes
Senator Schmedes.
Yes there's a Lopez.
Yes.
Alex yes Sir Tallman yes there
are to see Pino yes.
Senator Gonzales you have a due
process Mr chairman members
thank you thank you very much.
And then we'll go to the Senate
bill three fifty five Senator
Sedillo this is bill and
parenting coordinators.
Thank you Mr chair I don't know
if my if our witnesses are
available I have a.
The general Armstrong Katie with
judge Jay Levi and Catherine L.
of Abraham Lincoln.
J. judge Jane levy is is in the
room by our the enter all good
good.
The others think yes Senator Sir
I'm sure I'm here as well and
doctors you should also be on
all good chairman enemies
trapped.
Thank you I couldn't I couldn't
see them in the on the.
and of course I was focused on
the last bill so I I do
apologize
Mr chair this bill is a is
find providing statutory
authorization in our family law
code for parenting coordinators.
And this is to address the
problem with enforcing custody
agreements so that the parties
don't constantly have to go back
to court and have a full hearing
before a judge a point of
hearing this bill defines the
term parenting parent
coordinator and allows them
taxes arbitrators
just working on disputes between
parents
it grants parent coordinators
protection as an arm of the
court it asked them it requires
a tax act in the best interest
of the children and it provides
for the payment of the
coordinator by the parties
pursuant to an order of a court
so with that I'd like to turn it
over to my experts
Is what I'll start with their
Armstrong.
Thank you senator.
Chairman thank you for having to
speak today I do you at the
interest of time I realize it's
already eight o'clock at night
very occasionally stops the more
bills to get through I do think
that it might be more efficient
for the the Committee to hear
from judge Katy and doctors in
and first I and just explain to
him I am the past chair of the
family life section of the state
bar of New Mexico I think the
judge leaving doctors in a
better experts and I am however
I will be available to answer
any questions at the end on
behalf of the section.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators thank you so much I'll
be brief the pair coordinators
are primarily mental health
workers social workers
psychologists therapists who
Work with families to try and
reduce conflict it's both a way
of staying out of the courtroom
for resolving disputes and also
a psycho educational component
in other words teaching parents
how to co parent it's not
something you're born knowing
and it's certainly difficult
once you may have gone through a
very high conflict divorce the
idea behind a parent coordinator
is to help everybody resolve
their case without having to
wait for hearing especially for
things like are we going to get
a cellphone for the child to we
need to relocate the transition
point because of at a certain
situation in other words trying
to address some of the issues
that come up that really require
a finesse and co parenting the
I'm arbitration component does
require both parents to agree to
an and that provision they can
be limited arbitration or much
larger arbitration but it really
does require parents to agree
and it would be reviewed by the
court so this is to allow us to
try and help parents you and I
are in high conflict reduce
attorney's fees and speed up the
resolution and help them learn
how to co parent so that's the
point of the bill with that I
will turn and back to you and
see if that drive the equipment
available thank you.
Thank you judge
doctors even.
Yes Mr chair and the committee
can you hear me yes.
Okay well thank you to the
committee for hearing this bill
this.
This bill I think is extremely
important for America for New
Mexico families where the
children have two parent homes
child and family psychologist
been a parenting coordinator
appointed by the court dismissed
times and I most often however
work in the year you were
evaluate.
high concept families related to
child custody matters and I make
referrals to.
Parenting coordinators
unfortunately our appointed in a
kind of a back door way work.
There were way to changes are
done now is created in
consistency it's created
reluctance for more providers to
work in this area.
And it is making it difficult
for us to expand services
outside major metropolitan areas
basically Santa Fe Albuquerque
Las Cruces and we really had a
major effort in last year to
recruit more professionals get
the training and to expand
services across the state of New
Mexico.
This bill will assist us in
having a standard authorization
the standard definition to use
in appointing.
Parenting coordinators and a way
to
help us expand to other parts of
the state.
And particularly to recruit.
Coordinators to get training and
working as scary.
Up here in coordinator is really
an important option for families
and for courts to use because
we're trying to find an
alternative that is non
adversarial to parents.
Coordinator is.
Really where do.
Rubber meets the road.
Talk to the parents mediates
with numbers educational is
preventative.
And we're very much.
Make sure that families have the
option.
so they can bring their data the
matters to deal with the current
coordinator and hopefully learn
to work together as opposed to
going back to court time and
time again so in summary I would
say parenting coordinators are
important because they're very
knowledgeable they really get
down to the nitty gritty with
parents the you know meet with
parents directly I will much
more timely and accessible then
getting into court and having a
judge make a decision and as
judge Lee is already told you
parents have the option to
stipulate to.
Having the parent coordinator B.
have arbitration powers
over the day to day matters if
the parents cannot come to a
decision through mediation with
their prerecorded that's
optional.
I would say.
Summary R. thank you we very
much need this bill to create
an authorization provides
consistency a clear definition
that allows us to expand
services to more jurisdictions
across the state and I would let
the committee know in closing
that twenty one states have this
authorization as a statute.
And every state which borders
Mexico.
Has such a statute and I believe
in New Mexico should join our
neighbors thank you right.
Thank you very much shortages in
the.
But we do have several people
who signed up to speak against
and for the bill.
The state of can you talk for
six minutes
Mr chair I have one more expert
Kinzer Ellington.
I I.
It is one of the millions
speaker if you want to speak now
go ahead.
I
just our rate is an expert.
Okay go ahead.
I thank you Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Mr chairman of the
point I wanted to make about
this it has in addition to what
a judge levy and doctors name
and said is that we have an
incredible amount of high
conflict families that could
really use this type of service
they the conflict in these high
conflict family just just
unbelievable the things they
fight about and the things.
The children witnesses just
unbelievable and very damaging
to them so the parenting
coordinator can help remove some
of that strife in some of that
conflict from the families and
that ends up in having much
healthier children longitudinal
studies on children show the
conflict is the most damaging
thing the results from a divorce
for children and so removing
some of that conflict is is very
helpful and will benefit our
children going forward thank
you.
Thank you.
So that.
Right signed up to speak yes I'm
not sure they're all here will
you need to use the equipment.
Still well followed by federal.
Hello good evening and thank you
for allowing me to speak.
I'm a parent that's been harmed
by an unqualified court
appointed parenting coordinator
Mr Herald Smith in the twelfth
judicial district this parenting
coordinator and I use that term
loosely has been wrecking
wreaking havoc in the third and
twelfth judicial district for
years now in my case Harold
Smith made life altering
decisions without any
investigative work such as
talking to the children who are
fifteen and seventeen there
counselors teachers or any other
adults in their lives this
because the children to act out
in extreme ways that was not in
their nature one child abandoned
her father at a gas station
taking his car in an attempt to
return to our my home where she
wanted to be my other child who
was fifteen has made multiple
attempts on his life due to the
decisions that this parenting
quarter coordinator and the
court has made the national
guidance for parenting
coordinators by the association
of family and conciliation
courts states that parenting
coordinator should be licensed
mental health or family law
professionals or a certified
qualified regulated family
mediator under the rules or laws
of their jurisdiction New Mexico
currently doesn't have rules or
laws governing that.
The court appointing court that
appointed this parenting
coordinator stated in the order
that this parenting coordinator
should also follow those FCC
guidelines neither Lori Gibbs
alert the guardian of light on
that created the motion or the
judge judge Angie Snyder that
signed the order bother to
ensure that the appointed
parenting coordinator met those
qualifications the court ignored
the issues and allowed Harold
Smith to do as he pleased
despite not having the
qualifications.
Another major issue is that
parenting coordinators when when
using parenting coordinators a
judge is more likely to leave
the supposed expert that may not
be qualified.
Okay Harold Smith has done so
much damage to so many families
the Los crucis daily sun news
has written an article about him
in July of twenty twenty I would
urge that you all do more
research this bill this SB three
I I does not state that a
parenting coordinator has to be
have any type of licensing I
would just urge that more
thought goes into the bill
before anybody considers passing
it.
Thank you Mr.
dollars in silence.
Good evening Senators my name is
a and I get really despair.
I remember some of you when I
was an analyst with the Senate
Judiciary Committee and
I it.
Devoted my life to
Representative children and
defending them.
And I have very very strong
concerns against Senate bill
thirty three fifty five I have
some concerns.
The legislature should impose a
moratorium on the use of
parenting coordinators anywhere
in the state and so there's a
study that shows pieces are
actually helpful for payments
and parents are surveyed to tune
and I'm in this.
this bill does not require any
qualifications for parenting
coordinator national guidelines
the bill should only allow
parity for years
parents agree.
The bill should require any
creditors to be paid for the
court.
I think we revert one of the
lowest income and Poverty stays
in the country.
The bill should follow national
guidelines which also do not
require parenting coordinators
to have immunity and number six
there needs to be a provision
for meaningful oversight
parenting coordinators not
relying on local judges this
concern I have is in the bill on
page two of two.
Improper delegation of judicial
authorities allow us to
foreigners may alter the cost of
your primary residence of the
child if the judge gives them
that authority.
I'm
going to read this statement
from an individual who gave me
is already to write.
Your twenty seconds.
Insurance or from genuinely
County the judges find a person
who's not anyway licensed
Representative munity and Rick
and that person refuses due to
deal with
his issues the.
This morning lied to the parties
lied to the court street is
among the party and money
without performing his duties.
It your the Senators I do wish
that this is
The concerned parents are listen
to this is a really big issue
and there's no qualifications
required in the statute.
Thank you very much Mr Gove
religious we should Gonzalez
followed by a and a and a
session.
Hello Sir.
Session info in my R. nesto
Soto.
any of them here anybody else
speaker yes Sen Bill.
Okay the.
Do you want to respond to
Senator said or have any of your
extractions Fund.
About.
Okay go ahead.
Okay good evening my name is
Mason I'm calling and I think in
opposition to SB three fifty
five I am a parent who would
like to share my personal
friends of the packing
coordinator here in office I
have an ongoing the battle from
a five year now I do think the
bank my case about more the
father agreeing to it the
coordinator of the fine does not
hold any licenses or
certifications you have no
background or education family
law child abuse or domestic
violence did you think did not
remain impartial throughout his
entire appointment he already
and more to report to the court
thank you know thing me with
malicious parent and our there
was no MMPI testing no parenting
inventory or training to make
any observations part the change
in custody he still recommended
to the court that there be an
immediate change of custody and
returning were simply that the
father had finished top of their
class in the battery program
then also add that our six year
old daughter does he'll I think
there is and I think the
diagnosed with PTSD and
separation anxiety the parenting
coordinator made their attempt
to communicate with her there he
acted at the apple period to the
other parent and I was right
back to my and every encounter
with that PC keeper and loss of
custody and criminal charges for
not dropped against the father I
have over twenty thousand
dollars in legal fees last year
alone fighting against
accusations made by this
parenting coordinator my
attorney filed a seventy page of
Constanta port and he didn't
even show up to the hearing that
he requested.
Power that according to the
given affects our lives
tremendously I ask today that
would be required on cases
background check be conducted
and they hold requirements but
you've been licensed interrogate
and or family law thank you.
Thank you is.
Okay did you want to respond to
the senators so the locus to any
this around here experts respond
I would like to defer to my
experts for response.
You know what I also forgot G.
G. and we we didn't go to the
thing is Bob Gallatin or is
Laurie Kamali's chaplain in the
in in the road is a sign of
discrete and supporters.
I didn't see their names but I
just wanted to check.
Okay you want to respond
Senator.
I would just invite any of my
experts to respond.
Well let's start with the
transmissions are.
thank you Mr chairman I I
believe that the comments that
we have heard in opposition very
well at illustrate the problems
that we're having because we
don't have a rule or a or
statute there is no uniformity
within our state about what
parenting coordinators can do
there is a corresponding rules
that goes with this that is
before the Supreme Court the
Supreme Court under the doctrine
of separation of powers
determines what type of
qualifications are needed for
people who appear before the
court and so the separate rule
has a great deal of detail about
training and procedure and can
perhaps address some of the
complaints that are are raised
by the speakers in opposition.
In addition to that
Like I say it because there is
no uniformity all of our core to
getting something very very
different with parenting
coordinators and there's
different expectations for
parenting coordinators within
the different districts and yes
was a very eye opening
experience for the people who
drafted this rule and and also
the statute and when we
discovered that these great
discrepancies existed and so
this statute will eliminate some
of that and the rules that is
before the Supreme Court will
eliminate the rest of it and
also provided guidance and and
very strict training
requirements thank you.
Judge levy did you want to add
anything I just to be clear the
judiciary is not pro or con this
bill the concern that was race
though is is the lack of
training consistency is the
issue and so that is the idea
behind passing this authorizing
statute and then allowing the
rules promulgated by the Supreme
Court to address what kind of
training annual training and
other procedures that need to be
in place to make sure we do have
mental health professionals who
are trained in family law and in
child development and family
systems in fact some trainings
have already started in trying
to address this but we we don't
have uniformity we do not have a
way of of providing guardrails
regarding parent coordinators
and so that is the reason why
there are concerns about I'm not
having law and that effect so
that is I think the the comments
against.
R.
understood and heard but I think
the issue is can we is it
possible to solve that by
putting the guardrails in place
by having an acting statute like
this which is not have a lot of
detail because it relies on the
rules promulgated by the Supreme
Court I also want to say I'm.
As a matter of interpretation of
the the the rule it is that we
already have arbitration
authority statutes in New Mexico
for family law case and it
always requires that the parties
go ahead and agree to the
arbitration so that's not so
different from law that already
exists it parents it basically
and we would also have to put in
that spring court would need to
promulgate rules regarding
arbitration just like they do
for just general family law
arbitration.
Okay let's go to the committee
Senator Tallman.
We do pass.
Motions you press.
Is there a second.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you are
second in which I'm the second.
Okay discussion of the motion
the anything else Sierra well
you made a motion you can't
Senator Smitty centre in
senators.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
had a question about the the
payment of this
my understanding reading your
bill it seems that.
The the judge can say okay we're
gonna do.
We're gonna do this coordinator
because it's those in the courts
on motion.
And then at the end it says the
fees can be just charged to the
parties.
Is that so is that how it worked
like a judge could say we're
gonna do this.
but then.
The parties are actually the
ones that pick up the expense.
Senator is a year then Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
I'm sorry Mr chair Senators
maybe is yes that's how it
works.
Okay.
Mister chairman Senator is that
I mean is that okay is that is
just one that.
That is typically done that the.
Just say you're gonna you guys
are gonna do this and you just
have to come up with the.
The cash for it I mean what if
they what if they can't afford
it I don't how has that worked.
And Mr chair I'll defer to my
witness because I know that in
some circumstances there are
volunteers and there are some
circumstances but in general of
the parties can pay for services
like a neutral color like a.
We lost your.
Mr judge Levi's want to say it.
You're just a thank you thank
you Mr chairman and senator is
yes so generally speaking at
most any expert or any party are
I'm sorry the guardian Adlai
item the parent coordinator the
mediators and facilitators are
generally paid for by the
parties however we are and very
poor state so both the assigning
of a parent coordinator and also
the reliance on pro bono work is
is part of what happens and and
sometimes you just have to
either.
A sign for a very low fee in
order to allow parties to not
feel that Senate but at the same
time recognize that.
A lot of folks cannot afford a
parent coordinator and and so
you do sometimes have to wait to
get folks to act as a parent
coordinator without pay.
Okay Mr Chairman etcetera I'm
gonna listen to the debate I I
think that this idea is yes
seems good on in principle I'm a
little hung up on the payment
issue I I'd almost rather
You know actually.
Operates a money here because in
at the end of the day you get
what you pay for you really do
and I've I've had some of that
where you have these.
Kind of.
Directions you going ask the
attorney on the side to do
something for free but really it
I mean if you if you put some
funding behind it and then you
really get a higher quality work
and and then that's the issue
that's that's what I'm hearing
from the opposition is that they
haven't seen high quality and I
understand the intent of the
bill is to try to ensure high
quality I just don't know if
it's if there's enough in the
statute I think we just need to
add more to this bill maybe at
instead of and and people know
I'm not I'm not always a fan of
of relying on rules
I I like to more I mean I.
You know with the legislators so
I feel like we need to not
advocate as much of our
legislative authority as
as as we often do so I'd like to
kind of see a little bit more
direction on the qualifications
somehow and then I'd like to
once again I think I'd like to
appropriate some money here or
somehow incorporate this into
the into the courts so they will
get a higher quality product
currently on the fence about
this one because I I think I I
get the intent but I'm I'm
hearing the other side to so I
think the that the very last
section there do subsection it's
pry my my biggest concern this
point but I'll listen to see
what other folks have to say so
thank you very point Senator
Woods I would mention.
Having been through some of this
myself.
Having seen some kids of ours
having to go through this the
alternative is far more
expensive which is the site
engages a lawyer.
They then battle it out battle
royal for years on end and
the courts and the as well as I
think it was a mention she
Representative twenty thousand
dollars in legal bills fighting
C. battle this might be.
The cheapest way of dealing with
it for a family.
Mr chair Senator guy in the
chair next.
Mr chairman and senator Sedillo
Lopez of Dr Schmidt is going
down the same route I was I do
have a question though on the
Supreme Court rules so it's it's
what this bill does not pass it
short like you guys put the cart
before the horse and I
understand the supreme court's
making all right.
On the state.
I'm getting rules now but what
if this bill does not pass how
does that affect what spring
court is doing currently.
Mr chair Senator guy goes I
think that the.
Going to move forward with rules
about this
Eight it does it
This provides consistency in
access to that authority around
the courts around the the
different judicial districts and
it's it becomes very clear I
believe that the judges have
authority to do this without
statutory authorization but I
will say that judges like to
have legislative authority the
basic a forty and then the
Supreme Court
and I think it's almost a matter
of separation of powers provides
the details the the rules were
around it I'm happy to defer to
any of my experts a particular
judge Leavitt Levi and she wants
to add something to that.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Sedillo Lopez yeah I think tears
point Senator areas that is.
Maybe we do need some guard
rails I'm here and I think that
the the the focus of having the
and eight and actual legislative
acts and having the law come
from this branch and then we can
find the details and then and
that can be modified later on
also by legislative action if
that needs to be addressed so I
think that is that is the focus
years to allow that the court to
deal with the the details but
the overarching authorization to
come from the legislature.
And and Mr chair just add that's
pretty much how our family law
is a family law comes from the
legislature and the courts
provide the details.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator and.
Your honor I guess my thing is
just to listen to the the people
and and and hearing center
smitteez talk but you get what
you pay for I know or wanting
higher qualifications but that
twenty thousand dollar court
agree that the young lady had
from last year really bothers me
I I am always in opposition to
what CYFD is does they seem to
put the parents first and in
this case it seems to be that
they're trying to harm the
parents by forcing them to do
this.
This phone bearing.
Just Senators and these aren't
CYFD chases this is correct
these are divorce case.
Met Mister I read that and I I
they CYFD responded on this R.
F. I. R. but their similarities
because I think here
I think I do put our children in
jeopardy here I see this put our
parents in jeopardy because
they're not getting a quality
product and this lady talking
about twenty thousand dollars
out in one year I don't know
how.
Your personal expression during
divorce can afford that I I I
just it really bothers me that
we've got this after the were
actually using it.
Without thinking this through
prior so
I'm like Dr Schmidt I don't know
the like the bill but I don't
know that we have any other
options because if we don't do
something now her bill will
continue at that twenty thousand
dollar increments the only one
to win or the attorney so what
that'll yield thank you Mr.
You Senators anybody else on the
committee.
We have a motion by Senator
Tallman the second by Senator
Sedillo Lopez the secretary will
call the roll.
And Senate bill three five five
Senator Gallegos.
Did you say pass our test
Senator no no ma'am okay thank
you.
Sir McKenna.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Thanks.
Yes.
Chair Thoman.
Yes.
You know.
Yes regulation Senator do yes
thank you experience for for
coming and spending the evening
with us.
This is the last Senate bill
we're going to do tonight we're
going to do the house we're
going to try to get into those
bills depending on how late I
don't want to go beyond.
We are nine o'clock so we can
increase in.
Yes we can all roll over my
three to do one till first bill
and variety.
I will take the Medicaid waiver
wage act.
I like the waiver wager.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
I was asked by the New Mexico
care givers Association.
It Kerry this a piece of
elector.
At and if you can't hear me I
will turn off my picture.
I'm.
Asked to fill.
To increase compensation to
direct support professionals
when Medicaid reimbursement
rates Hey to provider agencies
are increased.
The original bill says seventy
two percent and I think that's
on page.
Three.
Find it here.
I think it's just seventy
percent yes on page three line
thirteen.
And we did submit an amendment
that somehow did not get
analyzed but it's only a one
word change from seventy to
forty percent.
And so after we have a motion to
adopt the amendment to questions
I'll go to my experts.
Is there a motion to the
automated emotions.
Thanks a motion to move the
seventy percent your forty
percent of.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez legislature's restart.
What do you want us to adopted
yes let's go ahead and adopt the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment to reduce to seventy
percent to forty percent.
C. will consider in June then
amended and now you're experts
thank you very much it's my
experts today.
Adrienne Smith executive
director of the New Mexico
caregivers association and she's
our insurance.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Senator Stefanics for Senate
bill three forty two AM Adrienne
Smith I'm the president of New
Mexico caregivers coalition an
organization formed right here
in New Mexico in two thousand
nine we started as a result of
developmental disabilities
planning council funding and the
purpose of that money was to
determine whether there existed
the voice of a care giver
caregiver or in the words of
people in developmental
disabilities world professional
you might also know them as
personal care assistance for
home health aides they're the
people who get things done for
those who are elderly and those
with disabilities bathing
grooming toileting
things like that.
So today's decision is funded by
New Mexico foundation's national
foundations federal agencies
individual donations and
membership dues our very first
board of directors rolled into
our formation documents that no
single agency should ever have a
louder voice than any single
individual home care worker.
How did we get this station
ask Senator supplements to help
us with this well your workers.
And support professionals
parents and even agency
directors.
Stated during the very formation
years.
That wages were too low the
benefits were nearly nonexistent
for these workers and the
turnover in the industry was
unacceptably high.
And indeed the US department of
labor data show that in two
thousand nine the very year we
formed these workers were
earning and median hourly wage
of ten dollars and ninety cents
an hour.
Ten years later in twenty
nineteen they earn a median
hourly wage of ten dollars
ninety two cents an hour two
cents more after ten years
adjusting for inflation.
Median annual earnings for these
workers is twelve thousand seven
hundred dollars.
Putting sixty six percent.
eligible for some form of public
assistance and sixty four
percent of them living in low at
low income households below two
hundred percent of the federal
poverty level.
If as if wages were enough the
shortage of home care workers as
so many of you already know from
the multiple bills that you
consider each year.
The the the shortage will only
worsen in the years to come in
the next ten years in fact New
Mexico's long term care sector
will have to fill sixty six
thousand jobs in the sector
thirteen thousand due to growth.
Fifty three thousand just by
workers leaving the field for
other jobs or leaving the labor
force altogether.
One of the documents before the
committee members today is from
the department of health
developmental disability
supports division it's dated
April eighth twenty twenty it
went to every single provider in
the state
of New Mexico serving people
with developmental disabilities
I would like to the section from
this letter.
Well.
Question remains where we apply
the funds we have to do the most
good in other words where do we
apply the funds that we do have
in order to do the most good.
All continue with that letter at
the onset of this rate study and
right studies are conducted
every five years in the state of
New Mexico a workgroup was
formed that represented various
stakeholders to touch our system
and after that session concluded
the workgroup was reconvened in
every member was afforded an
opportunity to voice their
concerns and make concrete
recommendations as to where
money should be allocated and
the consensus was clear improve
pay improve working conditions
and improve retention strategies
for the direct support
professionals this is our
paramount the challenges are
parent turnover and vacancy
rates are unacceptable pay is
too low it is not competitive
with other markets I E.
industries and choosing to serve
individuals with disabilities
and their families should not
consigned someone to a life of
struggle.
The department of health it's
the intent and the expectation
all the way for provider
agencies receiving these new
funds use them to improve the
compensation package of direct
support professionals to be
clear the division expects the
direct support professionals
will benefit from this increased
and we fully expect to see that
total compensation of DSPs
across our state rice's so.
Senate bill three forty two says
that simply each time the state
of New Mexico every four years
raises duty waiver Medicaid
rates for agencies that workers
also see those increases in
their wages.
Indeed the very authors of the
study of the right study public
inserting themselves assumed a
fifteen dollar minimum hourly
rate for the direct support
workers.
As for any argument that
agencies are quote independent
contractors and don't have to
abide by minimum compensation
levels
I need not state that duty
waiver funds are public funds
and the state and especially the
legislature has any number of
tools at its disposal to direct
how public funds are used.
And indeed also wage pastors
have already been enacted in at
least twenty two states over the
last twenty twenty years
Washington Texas.
A California in Wyoming.
The Senate bill three the second
part and it says this.
that there's a required
reporting.
by you and by the New Mexico
department of health
developmental disability sports
division so as you all know the
US department of labor collects
data by employer and by
occupational classifications and
so direct support staff like I
noted earlier they look most
like personal care assistance
and home health aides sometimes
they're even
they can be job aids classified
as job range in the US
department of labor nomenclature
but the lack of data at the
direct support professional
level by the U. S. by that New
Mexico Department of Health
means that that agency has no
data to make sound policy
decisions affecting high rates
of turnover affecting things
like vacancy rates affecting
things like severe shortages of
direct support professionals.
State.
One example is C. C. R. C.
incorporated a need waiver
agency on the Navajo Nation we
are helping them now recruit
caregivers because they've
experienced a fifty percent
turnover rate just due to the
COVID nineteen.
So for any argument the waiver
reporting requirements would be
too onerous to agencies I would
say this.
Every other in an industry must
report which data already to the
US department of labor as due to
the waiver agencies in our state
and most of all provider
executives who value their work
force and we know that most of
them do and they wouldn't even
be in business they already
know.
They know a good deal about
workforce shortages they know
who they will awarded hazard pay
do during COVID they know if
they can award or have awarded
paid leave to any of their
workforce.
Finally I just wanted to say
this
because we work with a broad
range of stakeholders around the
state around the state that
touch the direct care workforce
I'd I do talk to many HSD
is senior executives and I can
tell you it's happened more than
once that
senior executives have talked to
me about them working with
direct support professionals
privately is to help them sign
up for Medicaid and it's so
ironic to me that the waiver
system funds and provides care
for people with disabilities it
creates businesses and business
opportunities for executives and
yet the very staff who do the
very day to day work.
Qualify for Medicaid.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
there are several moments and
proponents on this bill yes
there are and will some of those
who are speaking against it I
would just you keep your remarks
to two minutes or less please
rover Changle Charlie modus racy
period and zero.
Can you hear me yes.
I'd like to think you're gonna
right committee with the thirty
eight other people we have
stakeholder input from every
section of the waiver including
director person we have
Representative from disability
rights we did not have
representatives from the
disability coalition or on we
did not have representatives
from our we worked eight months
on that the providers
provided thousands of documents
are in order to come with the
true cost and a true right study
that would work for everyone all
we the we insisted all of us
including the providers that we
came up with a fifteen dollar an
hour rate right for director of
personnel this was done
according to regulations with
stakeholder input.
that was LFC of they nineteen
million dollars LFC that will we
won't do that when one here will
do to so DDS the cut it in half
LFC got it and cut it in half
again they've gotten four and a
half million five million out of
nineteen million dollars there's
a lot of hard earned providers.
Had some little pieces of their
up.
Product R. service only funded
that they should be able to
spread that out over the whole
thing unfortunately LFC elected
not to provide extra funds for
the duty of providers making
increase minimum wage
regulation.
This bill is had very little
stakeholder input which is
required under federal
regulations we have a system in
place that determines what what
what's an acceptable in.
One of my biggest objections of
this thing is that this bill
appears to slander the
reputation of the provider
needs
By enacting this legislation
we're raising a red flag in
front of LFC will use any reason
in the world not on this waiver
we've known that for fifteen
years we give them an excuse
they won't fund it and that's
what I see is coming down the
pike this needs to be tabled it
needs to go to the interim and I
would like to finally point out
that are truly disabled folks
can't participate in this
process and I'd like to interim
and this time in the interim I
would like the advocates to
actually bring disabled folks to
speak for themselves and not on
their behalf I would be I think
any.
Thank you Richard times of.
Charlie Marcus two minutes
please.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee I will try to be
direct and keep my comments to
that limit
vision come before you today as
a registered lobbyist for two
organizations us up and New
Mexico health care association
at camp is the association of
developmental disability
community providers.
With all due respect to all the
sponsors of these organizations
must stand in opposition to this
bill.
We don't oppose the intent of
the bill however it is a
consensus of what organization
that the legislation introduces
challenges that cannot be
overcome in the way that works
for both.
The legislation in section three
of us pointed as was pointed out
by Senator Stefanics.
Now being.
Forty percent of.
All future reinforced
reimbursement rate adjustments
must be directed to our direct
support professionals in the way
of rate increases and again we
do not object to the pay
increases of both business
organizations are made up of
independent businesses that must
take into consideration all of
the needs of they have which are
very fluid and must be addressed
and addressed and it just it
made to meet the ever changing
demands of the business to keep
them viable and sustainable.
When considering of rate
increases because often they
don't come every four years
sometimes they come every six
seven eight years all these they
develop a pent up demand of
things that have not been funded
and so if we direct even forty
two percent twenty by it doesn't
matter on to just one facet of.
That is not.
Gets to
compete with things like what is
the cost of electricity what is
the second letter showing okay
bottom line is is that we have
just doesn't work with the
business model and again it's
Robert indicated were open to
this discussion and the rules
and to come up with an inclusive
comprehensive concept Senator
Stewart as the intent of this
measure thank you very much.
Is Tracy period there.
No seeing her she Romero.
This year.
I will go to those who want to
speaking supports that I'm not
going to take everybody because
we just can't give everybody two
minutes a so I'm gonna take a
okay for people of.
Sarah this is Patsy I just
couldn't myself but if you
minutes sure.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Patsy
Romero I'm the CEO for some of
the money out of me up on my
many intermediate care provider
for intellectually disabled
adults I'm first I would like to
thank the sponsor and the group
that has been working on the
intent of this legislation but
as a provider of disability
services I want everyone to know
that I invest heavily in my
direct care professionals
especially during this difficult
time the pandemic however Senate
bill three forty two addresses
compensate only a certain group
of staff members and last
consideration of the fiduciary
responsibility to operate it
provision of care we have been
told that Senate bill three
forty two does not apply to the
intermediate care facilities
however the provider agency
definition on page two yes
practice this legislation lines
eighteen twenty hi and
continuing on page three line is
one three three could be
interpreted by attorneys
administrators and other
employees who served the
disability community at the role
will include all the
intermediate care facilities in
New Mexico and I am personally
concerned that legislative
interpretations would
potentially cost legal
challenges to the ICFI T.
programs and due process
language is also excluded in
this legislation in the event of
recruitment as scribe in section
six this is the providers Mr
chair open to subjective
interpretation which could cause
great hard and remind us of the
experience with behavioral
health in twenty thirteen and
one more point.
Five minutes five seconds later
but it's in direct professional
support definitions would
include every direct care
providers in the state that
would include some of ours and
therefore there is a huge
discrimination factor
identified in this legislation
that puts us into potential
litigation which we just cannot
afford Mr chair the legislation
is impractical it is unworkable
it is unnecessary yeah we would
love to work with the sponsor
and the experts to come up with
something that is better to
address the needs of our
director professionals thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Okay let's go to the people who
support this and then I got the.
Going to hazard panelists
average is she here.
Yes.
The Jim Jackson after.
Just received by five people go
ahead have more.
Two minutes thank you thank you
for the opportunity to speak one
of the things that I would point
out is that.
What we we are using the the
part pry your great study and we
are using the the the that that
rate increase as an example this
bill does nothing that would
retroactively affect any
provider or force them to make
wage increases of the day this
is all about future wage
increases with future right
studies and I appreciate those
providers who with the current
rate.
Increases have provided
increases to their direct
support staff I know they exist
but I also know that it's it's
and an even mixture with
different providers doing
different things I know that
some people have provided
raises based on just hazard pay
or both.
Bonuses during the COVID but the
rate increases from last summer
permanent and it's not clear how
much of permanent raises the
direct support staff will
receive.
In the previous bill Senator
Schmedes has had mentioned that
you get what you paid for.
And you do and that's true with
direct support staff as well it
has been really difficult and
really challenging to recruit
and retain staff over time.
to the this.
Second part which is the data
part because I just think that's
so critical when when the art.
New Mexico met with the
department of health in the
midst of the pandemic and set
out and asked for information
related to staffing vacancies.
As well as they could.
Was that they tell us because
the don't require think that
they get that information from
the providers we need more
transparency thank you thank
you.
But Jim Jackson followed by a
Stephen Campbell followed by L.
and probably.
Thank you Mr chair Johnson here
for disability rights New Mexico
I'll be brief so you can hear
from a few others as well it's
important that we achieve good
wages for direct care workers
because they're the heart of our
whole disability service system.
And this bill simply ensures
that if providers get a rate
increase for the services that
they provide those I need some
percentage of those increases
will go to the workers who are
paid to do the work that the
providers are getting that rate
increase for in the first place
well it also calls for some
important reporting requirements
on basically information about
wages paid to these direct care
workers I have to say disability
rights is a little bit concerned
about this reduction in the
percentage of but of we still
support the bill even as amended
and encourage the committee to
support thank you.
Thank you Association Campbell
followed by L. and fines
followed by a lot of the might
do this.
Thank you Mr chairman for
holding this hearing today and
thank you Senator Stefanics for
championing this bill I'm
Stephen Campbell data and policy
analyst at PH I a national part
station based in the Bronx New
York our organization works to
transform elder care and
disability services by promoting
quality direct care jobs is the
foundation for quality care I'm
pleased to have the opportunity
to speak in support of SB three
forty two a bill that could make
a significant positive impact on
the developmental disability
services field in New Mexico and
then a lot of direct support
professionals or DSPs yes please
provide critical supports to
people with intellectual
developmental disabilities
assisted them with daily tasks
leading trading and dressing and
support their clients to live
with independence in their homes
and communities during the
pandemic risk their lives to
provide these services often
while suffering personal
hardship some tragedies at home
as Adrian noted spite their
importance DSPs earn poverty
wages in New Mexico and across
the country this poor job
quality hasn't actually
pronounced impact on women of
color in New Mexico struck Care
workforce who constitute seventy
percent of these workers they're
more likely to live in poverty
and rely on public assistance
than their white and male
colleagues while job growth is
strong in this field that
doesn't necessarily equate to
economic growth rather job
growth in this field as an
engine of greater inequity as
jobs are currently structured so
there's a clear need to address
this crisis by improving wages
for DSPs in New Mexico by
investing directly into history
wages we can strengthen their
economic standing of workers
stabilize care for consumers and
boost New Mexico's economy when
DST jobs are strong we all
benefit.
So while the recent public
investment and waiver programs
for people with ID do was
certainly commendable and of
medical for those providers to
cast on wage increases to
workers as a result.
It's still important that we
make sure that as the state is
investing millions of dollars
into the system that the
intention to increase wages is
fully realized for all DSPs and
all the agencies contracted with
PTSD.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman our own
prime time speaking tonight as
the registered lobbyists for two
organizations disability
coalition and the caregivers
coalition the workers who are
the subject of the this bill the
direct support professionals or
DSP to provide services in the
developmental disability and
medically fragile Medicaid
waivers are really important
they're absolutely essential to
the ability of people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities to live independent
lives in their community so both
of the coalition for the
disability coalition and the
caregivers coalition have an
interest in making sure that we
treat these workers rights and
make sure that we have enough of
them because without them the TV
and medically fragile waivers
could not operate no they are
essential workers.
I think that this bill Senate
bill three forty two actually
promotes those goals in a way
that is least burdensome for the
provider agencies because it
doesn't require them to do
anything right away it doesn't
mandate any particular way it
just doesn't say they have to
make any change right away it
just says that when they get
money they have to pass it
through to the workers as miss
Smith pointed out the department
of health in a letter last year
directed the agencies to pursue
exactly the approach in the bill
but because of legal advice from
their council they were unable
to mandate a particular wage or
pass through amount and we're
told that legislation with
needed this is that legislation
and one last note I'd like to
respond to this more Meryl's
comment about how this bill
could apply to the ICS like the
one she runs if you look at
section G. on page two line
thirteen through seventeen you
will see that the intellectual
and developmental disability
programs are defined to be the
do do an adequate fragile
waivers of under Medicaid so she
simply wrong on that point thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you.
If you want to make a comment I
heroes earlier did you check
your hand so yeah I'm here a
good Mr chairman members of the
committee I am a lawyer Martinez
and I'm here tonight in support
of is as maybe three forty two
because we need this bill now
more than ever before of New
Mexico is rates for the company
your workers I know and work
with our how the jobs which
invokes they can get up our
local ones in of the same time
they don't see those increases
on their wages rates have gone
up for the agencies about this
wages were always likely the
same in two thousand nineteen as
the wedding to thousand nine.
We need to.
By this thing they do so this is
an important deal we need your
help is a better place for all
workers thank you.
Thank you Stephanie Welch please
one minute just try to make sure
we're it's nine o'clock.
Mr chair members of the
committee I will keep it brief
thank you for allowing me to
speak my name is Stephanie Welch
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and Senator supports this bill
because the workers to provide
these important services deserve
to be paid fairly during the
pandemic they've continued to go
into other people's homes to
provide this necessary care in
their rate is not much the
importance of their work how
difficult their work is nor the
risks they face this bill
doesn't require an immediate
raising their wages but it
ensures at least a minimum level
of fairness that when the state
increases its payment for these
services the workers who do this
hard work will receive a portion
of that increase so we urge your
support thank you thank you Sir
okay members of the committee.
Questions should motions for you
are you.
Senator Schmedes and up.
Okay so.
He turned up the whole screen
here okay Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
have a couple questions
Does this CMS not have the
ability to just.
You know mandated these wages go
up is that why it I mean is that
why we're having to do a bill
like this on the on the state
level or or what would they be
able to fix this problem.
Mr chair you and senator if you
remember this role minimum wage
is lower than our state and
a couple years ago I came in to
get our care givers the same
minimum wage that we were
talking about here in our state.
So as an that's still well below
it's like ten dollars or ten
dollars and fifty cents so as we
talk about raising wages that
concern is if there is more
money you put into the Medicaid
contracts it federal match with
a state match yes it's not all
it's not all state money that
some of that use for wages so
the federal government really
Lisa to every state.
Okay okay I'm very focused
question Mr chair Senator on
page four it says that in this
is kind of the enforcement
piece.
Which I think is important that
you put in
I'm online twenty three.
And so it says the department
you know if they think the
provider agencies not doing
their job with the wages they
can request information from the
provider agency on how it's
being used in is that I just
wanna make sure is that is that
legal because we're gonna pull
in a a corporations finance
data.
But now the department's going
to have it in me is that gonna
be subject to it per is that
going to is that going to cause
problems there.
So Mr chair and senator when I
ran the US state agency and non
profits to buy at any contracts
with the state or the federal
government my records were
auditable every year and while
individual names were not
provided I had to find.
X. number person at this wage X.
number personal and different
wage it's Serra so I had that
done up by administrative
overhead with the administrators
direct service staff at cetera
so that personal information is
usually redacted but.
In my experience nonprofits have
been X. X. our experience in
providing that information
whether or not state agencies
are still asking for it I have
no idea.
Okay and then my last question
Mr.
is still on the same lines it
the statute is saying that the
department can requests but what
enforcement do we have against
these provider agencies so it it
says the party can request but
where does it say that the
provider agency has to
Find his information what if
they say Hey are are we are the
highway you can audit us if you
want to but we're not we're not
going to get it to you because
we we don't feel like it applies
and how would that work I'm just
trying you know some people
mention litigation here so I'm
trying to I don't want pre
litigation I just want to hear
M. and B..
I just want to make sure we're
we're not going to create.
Yeah conflict between the
provider agency departments
really want to get out of Mr
chair I'm gonna give one answer
and then perhaps someone would
like to offer another one
there are appeals process these
are when
Nonprofit contractor is
requested to do something and
then impact of given a deficit
mark but as you know from past
years we have also had our
providers seriously hurt in the
state I many contracts being
cut.
Whether it was because of
executives whether it was
because of cuts to federal funds
and state funds but are
providers of.
You know what it's like a see
saw they go up they go down they
go up they go down so I think
that their concern is valid but
as we are discussing we also
know the workers concerns are
valid as well.
Okay thank you for that
Senator and and Mr chair I I
would just conclude by saying
that
You know that this is difficult
obviously this is a difficult
situation
I'm I'm disappointed.
At the pay for these providers
because ultimately.
The I don't think it's the pro I
mean you can argue these these
workers are being undervalued
but I think.
If you go deeper it's it's these
clients the clients it's the
patients that at the end of the
day are being undervalued and
that that is really the the
biggest problem for me is that
these these people with
disabilities are being
undervalued
and so excuse me.
That's that's troubling to me.
I I do have.
You know I I I I do have some
concerns with us telling us a
provider kind of how to make
their business model I I do
think there be downstream
effects you know when you say
you got to pay more people more
than how are they gonna react I
don't know how they're gonna
react you know they're free to
react in a lot of different ways
obviously
but I I I I do really like what
this bill is is looking at to
try to really value both the
workers and then ultimately
these these these folks with
disabilities so thank you very
much I'll conclude my remarks
with the thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Your muted Mr chair.
Senator Tallman sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
the center of bringing this of
bill forward I think the both
sides need to get together work
out their differences there for
I move to table.
None available motion seconded
by Representative Senator
guidance yes Sir.
Okay early the secretary will
call the roll.
Senate bill three four to move
to table center guy a ghosts yes
ma'am.
McKenna.
No.
Committees.
Yes.
Lopez no.
X..
No.
Sir Tom.
Yes.
There are to see if you know.
Yes and here's why there are
explain my realization what what
is that given the talent.
For yes.
Three no and one that is okay
here's the deal it's so late in
the session this is the Senate
bill.
It's still got to go to the
finance and what what is it you
know there should be sure if we
were to president.
Getting it all the way through
are almost zero.
But I thank you for your your
gathered I hope both sides have
gathered there.
There needs to be some serious
negotiation Senator Tallman
said.
I would hope that we can come up
with something that would.
That would.
That we can pass next year.
Thirty day session.
There would be a reasonable way
of dealing with what's clearly a
major issue but I honestly don't
know why forty percent.
I can imagine indigenous models
rubric service agency they
wouldn't want forty percent of
any increase to go to the people
are doing the work of the front
lines electricity isn't that
much your insurance costs don't
go up that much and so it just
seems unreasonable not to not to
support this but the reality of
the session is it wasn't going
through anyhow this is a chance
to sit down to work on this I
think a lot of us feel like they
should have gone through this
late in the session is going to
be lately that that would happen
so please get together and work
on it so we're doing the
interim.
Anybody else have any comments
on this before you can go to the
next bill.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Thank you senator suffice.
We will now go to the last three
bills these are three house
bills.
They were added to the agenda
after we we did the.
Consent calendar so let's go
first to Senate I mean that was
bill one forty six I do want us
to move fairly quickly on these
if we can.
Without I mean I don't want to
go to the right of people issues
status let's talk about it
Senate bill one forty six to
ensure some duties to district
courts.
Representative.
Mr chair members of the
committee good evening H. B. one
forty six is a bill and a piece
of legislation that sponsored
headed by the judiciary's
unified budget process this bill
simply cleans up a couple of
statutes that are remaining to
reflect the Supreme Court
decision made in April of twenty
nineteen to move the magistrate
courts under the district courts
and out of the administrative
office of the courts with me
tonight I have
Jason Clarke from from the AOC
and we stand for any questions.
Mr you want to say anything.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
no I in the interest of
privative I'll just stand for
questions of thank
representative Cadena did a good
job of summarizing the bill.
Thank you very thank you members
of the ability I did anybody say
no we don't have anybody signed
up on this order believe.
So.
I move a do pass.
Motion for a due pass from was a
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Is there a second.
Is there a second was second
thank you senator Solomon
secretary will call the roll.
On house bill one four six our
guide also.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Okay yes.
Thanks.
Six.
Sir Tom and.
Yes.
This panel.
Yes.
Graduations Representative your
patience is being rewarded.
We.
That we have Representative
Ezzell was house bill one ninety
six as amended regional Housing
Authority changes.
We heard in the interim was the
mortgage finance Authority
oversight committee.
Mr chairman members good evening
house bill one ninety six as
amended proposes during made
certain provisions that require
the oversight of the regional
housing authorities by the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority.
From two thousand ten to twenty
one point four million dollars
was appropriated to the
department of finance
administration for disbursement
to the mortgage finance
authority.
For training and oversight of
the regional Housing Authority
this is already in place with
federal agencies federal housing
assistance program this bill
eliminates the need for state
funding for oversight purposes.
It is a re done didn't rule that
is going on in the regional
housing authorities are already
are subject to federal rules
regulations and Reckitt relevant
rig compliance and oversight to
the federal spending the reserve
Mr chairman members of the
committee joining me today are
Mr Chris Herbert the executive
director of the eastern regional
Housing Authority and Mr Beckel
Velarde of the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority if
you guys have any questions we
do stand for questions at this
time.
Thank you the USA think faster
you want to just wait for
questions or Rebekah.
Rebecca blank you can't
question.
Okay thank you Chris and thank
you want to say anything.
No Sir I've always question Sir.
All right you would waiting a
long time the only have at least
one question for you Chris.
Okay members of the committee.
What is here is Senator guide
us.
Mr Chairman just wanted to
clarify my wife actually worked
for Christian I know that the
training they have is already
done by federal entities so the
I do understand redundancy just
wanted to make sure he tell my
wife that I am at work.
you Senator your you said you
want to make a motion Senator
Gallegos all may come to pass
motion Mr I'll second.
There's a motion and a second to
any discussion any other
questions for Chris or Rebecca.
They waited this long and scan
supporting that you have more
questions but.
Secretary will call the roll.
I'm house bill one ninety six
amended center guy it goes yes
ma'am.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Yes there is a Lopez yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tom.
Yes.
There are two C. panel yes.
Graduations Representative is
good to see you in this
committee and I.
We don't often see you here it
is nice to have you or will it
was a pleasure to listen to all
the discussion that was going on
on these bills and thank you all
for taking this into
consideration for your support
on it I agree thank you very
much
thank you your ex for witnesses
thank you.
Your
last middle of the night H..
The minimum wage for disabled
persons.
House bill two fourteen
Representative Ferrary and
Rubio.
I want to be sure not to
standing at the wrong time
report thank you Mr chair and
committee members house bill two
fourteen repeals the existing
provision in state law which was
enacted over fifty years ago
that authorizes the state labor
department now workforce
solutions to issues determine
certificates to businesses and
nonprofits allowing some
employees with disabilities in
New Mexico to be paid less than
the minimum wage in this
provision has never been
utilized and no state
certificates have ever been
issued of the New Mexico statute
is based on an even older
federal law section fourteen C.
of the fair labor standards act
which is still in use and many
New Mexico nonprofits have
relied on Federal certificates
in the past but the number has
dwindled dramatically in the
last decade
working people with disabilities
are no less deserving than any
other employee and at the
national level there is a
growing movement to phase out
the federal law so with that I
just like to introduce my co
sponsors representative Thompson
and Rubio and Representative
Rubio and Jim Jackson is my
experts are experts from of
disabilities rights New Mexico
and Jerry Myers with the
attorney general's office is
also here to speak.
Please.
Who's who's gonna go first.
Well we could just go to
questions if you'd like and if
no one had it.
Recent just you know make a
statement or something right now
representative Thompson do you
want to say something thank you
I just want to say that the
message that we send to pick
what disabilities and to society
as a whole when we allow them to
be paid less than minimum wage
is that they are worth less and
we don't want to send that
message thank you Mr chair.
I'm just going to jump in here
because a new you know we've had
this discussion in the interim
committee many many times.
And I still remember parents
coming up to me after one of
these meetings saying.
She we don't care how much here
and she doesn't care how much
here she loves going to work in
if you make people employer paid
her minimum wage they may not be
able to afford it any longer
bill maker stayed home all day
long.
How would you respond to that
Representative.
Mr chair I'd like to do for that
too Mr Jackson.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think it presents a
false choice between either
paying minimum wage or staying
at home isolated and secluded
that is not the reality for
people.
The and this bill simply
recognizes that disability
providers across the whole
spectrum of New Mexico small
communities large cities and so
on we have providers all over
the state that are providing
either getting jobs that do
provide a minimum wage or are
providing of engaging the
opportunities of productive
opportunities for people so it's
it's not simply a choice of you
either pay minimum wage or you
don't do anything that is just
not the reality for kids in New
Mexico well but you know we
we've had this discussion I
don't agree with you and I I you
know I know you've got the loans
probably go through but I just
think the consequences may be a
lot of people who are able to
work now and jobs that really
are necessary to the employer
but they like to have.
That sense of participating in
the community so they offer the
job and and and if you make them
pay what they could hire
somebody was higher skills they
may not be willing to.
And.
You know we'll see I know would
you say this is but there are a
lot of these employers who
really are doing it because they
want to offer a community
service Mr chair let me just be
clear that is not just a private
business in New Mexico that has
one of these certificates the
only two agencies that do this
are two non non profit
rehabilitation agency so it is.
It's not a question of private
employers not wanting to do
this.
There are contracts are with
private companies that hire them
because they they know that they
can get a dependable reliable
employee the one who made this
highly skilled to somebody else
would you made him pay the
minimum wage it would be that.
We went going round and round
and is that what it is our
nation particularly but I'll
defer to the committee let's
let's let's committee decided.
I move the do pass.
There's a motion for a new dress
second.
Seconded by certain groups.
We cannot.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr us a couple
questions on on slate
Has anyone
You know because I can see how
and I I was I remember interim
committee where we had a room
full of parents I was like all
New Mexico was there I was like
well what's going on with what
are all these people here for it
they were there for that topic
and I thought wow I I didn't
realize this everyone was
willing to drive drive down.
And take time either day for
that issue but what about.
You know the the the ADA and I
can see on the other side people
could say look this is
discriminating against people
disabilities you're you're
saying you get paid less because
you have a disability so is
there anything in the court
system has been challenged in
court this is re sort of
existing case law that and up
holds this and says well yes it
is okay because I I would have
thought this this would have
been litigated and and we would
have come to work this out by
now.
Mr chair and representative
Senator Schmedes I'm sorry
there has been of.
At the federal level where they
are phasing it out and it will
and
granted the right now there
aren't any certificates eight
inspired or I think just applied
of with one company in New
Mexico and another wedding the
Gallup area so there are very
few certificates right now being
used and most people are only
working in those jobs five hours
or less per week and most spent
the rest of the typical work
week in other productive are
inclusive activities so what
nationally is we're trying to as
other states senator of Alaska
New Hampshire Maine Maryland
Texas Nevada Oregon and
Washington and cities such as
Seattle Reno are at.
Either completely I'm not
affording that
seven minimum wage to be allowed
but also
That.
Then at the national trend that
and at the national and of the.
By an administration has made it
part of their the COVID relief.
Bill so whether that stays in or
not right now is not.
You know for certain but we do
know that you know there are
other places Representative
Rubio might be able to mention
about some how the other
companies have based out of that
and don't and rate you know
regular wages.
Yes thank you Mr chair arm Mr
chair yes so I ate my mic sister
who live
work run an organization that
supports people just with
disabilities for as long as I've
been alive which is forty two
years
they have never participated in
in paying some minimum wage and
and it's just based on.
This issue around values that
people and and I think
representative Thompson spoke to
that is that
Just because you just because of
the your of whether you believe
that a person is is capable of
producing should in.
Negate whether or not they
deserve a fair wage I think
that's where we're at right now
is where we believe everybody
deserves a dignified wages that
this is a very archaic
policy that is in the books.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Senator Schmedes senator
Brandis.
Mr chair listen to the debate I
think this means a lot more
consideration I move to table.
There is a the non debatable
motion to table.
Also I can Mr chair.
Secretary will call the roll.
On house bill two one four
Senator guy a ghosts to table
yes.
No.
Yes I just briefly explain
please
Lopez no.
So.
Yes vote.
Senator.
Yes I wrote thank you.
Sierra.
Yes.
The panel.
Yes and to explain is both
Senator Schmedes and then
Senator Stefanics thank you very
much Mr chair
this bill is tough for me this
issue but I have heard from the
families of her from the parents
and and as I said before a job
is not just about the wage and
I'm not convinced that this.
Representative of people wants
the wage they they want the
value that comes from the job
and if worse if we're just
focused on the wage itself and
the dollars I think we lose what
value is imputed on these people
with disabilities.
And so I understand how people
say we're gonna do value because
we're not gonna give as many
dollars but are we gonna do
value them and and and detaching
them from a job or the work
potentially so that that's my
concern even though it is a a
difficult vote for me thank you
Mr.
Senator.
I'm very brief
I have a mother in particular
Molly will
talk to meet monthly about this
issue and she has come to every
hearing to say her daughter
would not have a job this couple
hours a week full details of the
Holiday Inn.
Now I want people to receive a
decent wage and maybe what we
need to think about it say
graduated progression.
so that people who have minimal
skills skills can.
Start with your ticket and
progress.
And maybe that's part of a
future plan thank you.
Thank you and thank you
Representative station for
waiting so late and to.
With the.
Meeting is adjourned thank you
all thanks committee members
have a great night.
So you're
ready.
Make sure the webcast is turned
off.
