The committee has a problem we
pull it off and then we'll hear
it is a regular bill that
ordinarily we just zoom through
the things on the grid and try
to get it done quickly because
they all are essentially
appropriations bills.
So Senator if you could just
explain your bill to thank you
Mr chairman honorable members
Senate bill two hundred sixty
one
deals with the individuals and
families living with a LS LS is
you know is a debilitating
disease that has no cure there's
a I'm trying to get up some
dollars in the house bill two
and and why use this bill to for
folks that use language for
their junior appropriations but
I would like this to a move on
to to finance if we could
there's a wonderful statewide
organization with fantastic
leadership that works with
families avail that suffer from
LS they work with you NMHA
another hospitals as well as
purchase of it's very expensive
to modify your home you have to
you know in a perfect world you
have of that and that that's
that's self will chair of
functional and and what's
wonderful about Ellis community
is it's only about a hundred and
five families hundred five
people suffering from at any
given time is they stick
together and they sadly when
when a family no longer needs
the the wheelchair the van or
whatever it goes to another
family so so I think it's a
money well spent not.
And with that I stand for
questions thank you senator is
there anyone here who is in
support of Senate bill two sixty
one.
Is there anyone on the zoom in
that way is there anybody at all
and zoom.
Okay anybody opposed to two
sixty one members of the
committee.
Senator of.
thank you chairman thank you
senator my Estes have a question
and and with your experience in
the legislature chairman and
senator you pry of really good
answer for me
so ALS is not going to go away
in a years so what happens in FY
twenty five.
Since the money goes to revert
to the general fund thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator McKenna I'm confident
that the organization can could
spend that that money within a
fiscal year and then
Obviously if we deem it worthy
than we that we codified in the
house bill two ongoing Lee but
this particular bill is just to
raise consciousness within the
leadership of the department of
health and the members.
Okay the chairman and senator so
okay so this will be like the
first year see how it goes and
then for twenty twenty five you
would approach House Bill to to
get it in for subsequent years
Mister chairman Senator specific
McKenna yes okay or ideally the
health department itself will
say this to me we want to
include in our budget request
and it'll Mister chairman
Senator that's that's the plan
to just raze consciousness
within the department of health
but I do have a quick amendment
if I may we have an amendment
then we can do it is a grid
human whole the amendment till.
Yes.
Finance folks I think thank
thank you.
Thank.
This is the word change let's
will of the committee.
There's a motion for depression
Senator Hickey is second from
Senator Ingle.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator guy angles Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes so you
have a due process thank you Mr
Senator Lopez let's hear about
project echo.
Senate bill two two eight Mr
Chairman
I'm here in front of your
committee to present.
Of the bill Senate Bill I'm
sorry.
Because of my members of Senate
bill two to eight and Mr chair
is so simple funding request for
project echo of course which is
out of the university of New
Mexico and we have Dr here if
anybody has any questions with
regards to project echo right
it's good to have you doctor did
you want to say anything briefly
about project echo and and the
six million dollar appropriation
thank you
Mr Chairman said to Senator Pino
and members of the committee if
you could use a hand held Mike
eight picks up the zoom picks it
up so much better.
Yes.
We.
Yeah this is the purpose of this
six million dollar request
regarding quest is that.
We want a massive expansion of
project echo to improve health
care.
And education in New Mexico.
In addition to the projects we
have going on in New Mexico and
project echo the one to stop an
additional twenty to twenty five
echo networks the focus of these
networks is going to be to Ford.
One is we want to improve the
health of children mental health
in New Mexico.
Not the purpose for this is that
is very few child psychiatrists
in New Mexico children in rural
areas cannot access this this
gap very few child psychiatrists
in Albuquerque or Santa Fe
either and primary care
clinicians don't know how to
diagnose depression anxiety
trauma it's at trying children.
It is unlikely that the state no
matter how much money we spend
can get child psychiatrists in
the rural areas.
Our proposal is the best way to
do this is to train primary care
doctors nurses community health
workers social workers across
the state of New Mexico all of
them on how to suspect diagnose.
And if possible at the primary
care level provide treatment for
these people but have effective
tree AJ so when you concrete in
the rural area you sent to a
psychiatrist so don't overwhelm
them the second part of this is.
In schools we want every school
teacher and school base a notice
in this state.
You have the ability to diagnose
childhood mental disorders
suspected and get appropriate
treatment so the idea is to
prevent addiction if you look at
the children who become addicts
in the future.
They almost always have a psych
I've mental health background
which wasn't treated
appropriately the want to tackle
that at a massive scale in New
Mexico and echo was the only
model that can do that four
thousands and thousands of
primary care clinicians we have
already had sixteen thousand
healthcare providers the second
part of this appropriation.
Is about literacy and math
education in schools we know and
Mr chairman you what I thought
education hearing I mean but if
you we know that the best rate
that predictor for health in New
Mexico is.
Education if you don't have
educated children.
You're not going to have healthy
population.
but only thirty percent of our
children in New Mexico can read
at grade level math is that has
similar problems signs has
similar problem.
V. have already mentored twenty
five hundred school teachers in
New Mexico on many many
different projects more than
twenty echo projects in
education we know they love it
they attend in large numbers it
is very successful we want to
scale this up for literacy.
Math and science in New Mexico
thank you for your attention
thank you and anything else
Senator.
So let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wants to
to show their support for this
measure.
Good.
Good anybody in opposition.
Is there anyone on zoom yes for.
The the here is one support okay
we're not gonna take that that
we will recognizes Sarah fitz
Gerald this call to support
this.
And members of the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and drive and
Senator Lopez thank you for
bringing this forward I'm about
to cry
because my father passed away
from something very similar to
LS super nuclear policy very
debilitating long term and then.
The good doctor and myself had a
discussion of of this
of three months ago with doctors
Adonis and it was and ideas that
that he it had and we kicked it
around and I got so busy I got
the I lost track of it it's
incredibly important to be able
to diagnose aces early on and to
look for the signs and symptoms
without that then it exactly.
Pathways for potential addiction
start to get bills and then
which is why I'm so focused on
nicotine and vaping because it
just enhances those pathways to
lead to further additions but
going in fairly early is
absolutely critical and even
though this committee will hear
my bill for mental health parity
unlike the federal bill we're
requiring health plans to cover
spouse couples in marriage
counseling because so much of
the a situation starts with the
difficulties between the parents
and just negotiating all of
life's problems so this all fits
together so well so that's why
I'm close to tears around this
because it again this is a route
bill like the nicotine it gets
to the root of the issue this is
one of the roots of the issue
and being able to fund this it
will do so much more than all
the if we're throwing it at the
zillion programs treating
symptoms of depression and
mental illness this gets to the
root of that so I want to thank
you and commend you and to
encourage my colleagues to vote
for this thank you senator
anybody else was will of the
committee some motion for do
pass from Senator Tallman
seconded by Senator Hickey and
the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator guy angles Senator
Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Clemente.
Center to the penal yes.
You have to do passed by the six
to zero vote with the three
excuse and once you stay right
there center will go ahead and
take your bill and Senator
possibile and diversity.
Here's here's the deal we're we
we I announced on the floor that
we're going to go to a six
o'clock because of the snow I
want to track people here and so
we cover as much ground as we
can so we're trying to move fast
it will take Senator Lopez is
built with Senator pope two two
six Senate bill two to six.
The diversity act.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
We should use this so it can be
heard better have yes okay.
Mr Chairman more Mr chairman and
members of the committee
we are here I am here right my
colleague senator pope is here
to present Senate bill two to
six is called the diversity act
Mr chairman members of the
committee
yeah we've introduced over the
years several different measures
dealing with other systemic
racism issues that exist in many
different institutions across
the state of New Mexico and this
one we have worked with formerly
with some house members.
And the C. personnel office
What I know of at this point
there are certain departments
within the state government that
are beginning to work on anti
recent races and training
looking at more the systemic
issues that we do have and
if this bill passes of course
and becomes law this will
centralize the function inspo
state personnel office where
they can have an office of
diversity and inclusion so that
there's continuity within state
government for the trainings so
with that Mr chair will.
Let my my colleague say a few
words also Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair and centers
of the committee
I just think this bill is
important you know we're talking
about inclusion but putting
someone at the top to look at
this with and all the agencies I
think people tend to forget that
you know we are still having
many firsts when we look at who
is serving in our state
government and the big reason
for that is also the fact that
in many cases some of the
systems and institutions were
not built for everyone to
serving them and so I just think
this bill is important and
having someone to look at this
and ensure that we are being
inclusive and all New Mexicans
have an opportunity to serve in
our state is important
thank you Mr chairman great
thank you Senator let's go to
the audience is there anyone
here who is here to support
Senate bill two to six Karen did
you want to say anything about
it.
Come up and use the Mike.
Karen Canaday with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
strong support thank you thank
you Karen there anyone here in
opposition to this bill we have
somebody on zoom who supportive
Emily will doubt did you want to
speak only.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee I'm and we will
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and I just want to
stand in support of this bill we
really see this legislation is a
great starting point for New
Mexico to
Really focus on our state
agencies actively assessing our
current systems and policies
that affect racial groups and we
hope that you join this kind of
first step today to pass SB two
sixty six thank you thank you
Emily anybody on to oppose it
members of the committee.
Any discussion I notice in the
FIR the the person state
personal office raised a
question about hello this is far
more than we can handle what do
you what would you say to that.
Mr chair of course that's
language we've heard previously
for other times that we've had
this discussion last year we
were able to put some money into
CPO that would help them be to
begin to organize and I know
that there's been a change of
course for Mr Sarna over to the
new CPO director so it could be
maybe from the new person who is
that I forget her name right now
Mr I'm sorry.
Yeah I anyway but I have a phone
call in which to chat with her
just a letter now and and maybe
with Mr certain a secretary of
DOT right now so that we can
have more of a conversation but
it was it's very possible to do
this because your bill
appropriates the money to them
for this new office and then
they begin to okay anybody else
yes Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of.
Bring this.
Thank you to senator bring this
forward
Senator O. did you pass a tax
similar this.
But right now at last few years
that
yes Mister chairman Senator
Tallman quite honestly this is
the fifteenth year that we are
trying to get something passed
that deals with training for
inclusion diversity anti racism
but we did pass this similar
bills two times last year here
before both chambers passed it
but it died on the house floor
due to seven a debate that was
on going in the house at the
time.
Both of the security is a
service director to have.
At.
Enacted something is similar we
got to the Senate but not the
house.
Mr chairman it passed house
committees but it died on the
house floor yes time for the
voted down no Mister chairman
Senator due to some of the
conversations that were not
happening on the house floor at
that time this was not able to
be debated and passed.
So.
So Mr chair this to this bill
will collect the specific data
in order to identify the
specific problem.
Mister chairman Senator we're
hoping so at least we can begin
to gather more data within state
government yes the bill it is
part of thank you for that
answer.
That's all I have senator
Senator Mr chair any other
debate or questions from the
committee plus will of the
committee.
Two passed we have a motion from
Senator McKenna for a do pass
seconded by Senator agency this
any other discussion on this.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator there goes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my SS yes.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
etcetera Tommen yes center to
the panel yes so on a five to
one vote to have a due pass on
this.
I'm pretty good expense yes
finance thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you Senator pope what we take
your open enrollment the we're
gonna hold your other one and
till the end so we see that open
enrollment will take Senate bill
one twenty.
Thank you Mr chairman and I hope
to have another quick build like
I did last time on Friday.
this bill Senate bill one twenty
and what we're doing here is
just ensuring that.
military dependents school age
have the opportunity to enroll
in our public schools on our
public charter schools without
having a permanent housing so
when folks when we did the
advanced enrollment a couple
years ago they could get their
orders and Raul but this also
allows when folks arrive and say
they are in temporary housing
and don't have the permanent
housing yet they may be staying
on base temper in a temporary
housing they can still apply or
enroll into a tried in rural
school order charter school they
would be able to apply for the
lottery now it was amended in
the last committee
has.
Because we are in the original
bill we allow them to be
enrolled in our concerns about
taking up slots from the charter
schools because there's only so
many available and so and then
there was talks of concerns of
US department of education
funding not being given if we
did that because I guess there
are only four preferences for
folks to get automatic
enrollment versus the lottery so
we had to amend the bill to only
allow military dependents in
temporary housing to be to get
into the lottery but not
automatically enrolled so for a
for charters for charter school
they can still enroll in any of
the the public schools correct
correct okay this okay let's go
to the audience is there anyone
here who wants to speak in
support of this bill.
Anybody here opposed to this
bill anybody online for this
bill but we do have somebody.
So we have the support from Bob
Carroll you want to say anything
Mr Carroll.
Yes Sir I would Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Bob Caroline I'm a member
of the veterans military
families caucus we support SB
one twenty specifically the
amendment to section three
paragraph three B. it gives
parents the flexibility to
choose whether to keep their
student in their current school
in the air where they may be
temporarily house or move them
to the school attendance area
their permanent house that's why
we support the bill so I think
you Mr chairman and committee
and thank senator pope for
watching out for the interests
of military families good thank
you thank you Mr kero members of
the committee any discussion.
Senator Hickey motion for do
pass seconded by Senator Ingle.
Any other discussion.
Question secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna health centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
By six zero vote you have a
three excuse you have in past
and will hold your other one
over a problem thank you Mr go
to senator birch because we have
a lot of fire firemen here and
if I are fighters and they may
be needed out in the snow in a
little while so.
Senator Burt this is Senate bill
two fifty.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and of
simple bill
race to firefighters survivor
benefits what this will do is
bring firefighters up to parity
with our peace officers in the
state that oh one million
dollars
For a spouses and families
should a firefighter die in the
line of duty.
Did you want to say anything to
do expert witness by anything
please Mister chairman Senator
is it's a pleasure to be here
before you this is a very
important bill unfortunately as
a fire chief from Bernalillo
county fire and rescue I joined
a group of chiefs that have lost
someone in the line of duty
under their watch and it's with
a heavy heart that I come before
you and ask that we don't let
that go in vain and that we
recognize the sacrifice that was
made by lieutenant Matthew king
and many others before and
unfortunately those to still yet
to come in the future by making
sure that we take care of their
families as they've taken care
of ours thank you.
Thank you for let's go to the
audience to those in favor of
this bill if you'd indicate by
right raising your hand.
Good anybody want to speak on
this bill Larry did you want to
speak Mr and to use the Mike
Leri condition.
Mr chairman this committee Larry
around registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico municipal league
Senator Burt said it well it's
an issue parity we dealt with
this issue for law enforcement
officers two years ago and law
enforcement reform of New Mexico
became the the number one state
for paying death benefits for
the law enforcement officers and
we should have done this for
firefighters at that same time
so this does create parity now
firefighters and law enforcement
those first responders who are
truly putting their lives on the
line on the daily basis we'll
take care of their families
better than any other state in
the country we think this is
good piece of legislation the
only regret we have is that we
didn't roll into that bill two
years ago so we thank the
senator for bring it forward and
urged to pass on the bill.
Thank you thank you very.
Anybody in opposition to the
bill.
But in opposition or effect okay
members of the committee of
senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Byrd thank you to you
thanks for coming up the wanted
us to look look at and consider
not today but
if this passes this committee on
page two Mister chairman Senator
Burt.
Lines eight through thirteen.
This so this is the up where the
money where the money goes it's
up subparagraphs C. on section
one it says goes to the
surviving spouse if no surviving
spouse equally to the surviving
children have no surviving
spouse or children to go to the
parents that's totally
reasonable you know and and and
And and you know basically good
public policy it tracks the
language in the police
survivors benefits statute what
we did couple days ago with
regards to of national guardsmen
was we allow the national
guardsmen to name a budget to
named beneficiaries simply
because and and the this this
came up in conversations because
I worked on the the state police
officer bill that it that
eventually have the million
dollar.
That survivor benefit is that.
Someone could have three kids.
The married twenty years get
divorced get married a week
later die and the new wife gets
all the money which may be fair
maybe just but how what what the
national guards I'm sorry what
the military affairs department
is going to do is just basically
you know you know fill out a
quick form bone the money goes
to to these persons they can
always change it so anyway what
I'll do is I'll make all come up
with an amendment made with the
next committee on the floor if
you're amenable to a thank you
Mr who is the sponsor of that
bill do you remember.
It was up etcetera Mister
chairman Senator it was up
Center for the and Senator pope.
So you know you might check on
that we're doing you may prefer
this worry it's kind of up to
you.
Yeah we just wrote it out on the
floor today we just had it again
it was a question of equity to a
copy of the if you would mind
centered appreciate that that
just to consider it the one
thing that they meant that the
one point on that Senator that
they made was they already have
whenever they mobilize.
They have a form that they
already were filling out so this
is just part of the paperwork
that goes in and and need for
you all you may just do it once
and then it'll stay in effect so
it may not be the same thing but
keep that as a possibility in Mr
Chairman firefighters have the
same do they have a prep letter
you know that goes in so that
they're always covered should
something like that happened so
but I I I assume well certainly
consult with the room but I
think that would be a friendly
amendment so you can really
designated exactly how you want
to distribute as opposed to.
We lined it out for them so they
can have a Mister chairman
Senator from what I
conversations with police
officers within amend that bill
at the very end would have time.
but it was it was brought to us
by the.
By the name of men and women of
law enforcement.
Given the modern family dynamics
thank you Mr chairman the.
Anybody else Senator Senator
Ingle moved to do pass seconded
by Senator Tallman.
Any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Clemente yes center to
the piano yes.
Six six five six.
In the affirmative zero negative
with three excuse you have a do
pass Senator thank you thank you
thank you thank you too for
coming.
And I will take Senator pearls
Bill the
we're having I know right it's a
health insurer provider
information and reimbursement
Senate bill two three two.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of this bill is
something that's been a work in
progress for myself and many
other providers around the state
for a while we were able to put
into statute I believe it is
who's twenty sixteen somewhere
in there that made a very strict
timeline for credentialing
doctors because what was
happening is doctors would come
over fill out their
credentialing packets and then
they were not credential by the
health insurance organizations
H. M. O.'s and then they were
not paid or reimbursed and so as
a state it was very hard members
of the committee to to recruit
doctors into especially a rural
parts of the state if it it was
one of the issues of will come
but you gonna sit in a room and
not get paid for it for work
that you may do and what this
this aims to do is is through
through the years there's been a
few loopholes one is with come
companies have credential
provider within the statutory
number of days but failed to
load the provider into the
insurers payment system so the
provider can actually bill for
services so this bill would now
require that the insurance comes
credential and load the provider
in so that they can start to be
reimbursed for the work that
they're doing second the bill
decreases the number of days and
ensure has occurred
credentialing low providers from
forty five days to thirty days
and then Mr chair we do have an
amendment for an issue that was
brought up by Blue Cross blue
shield.
Okay is that the is.
What Blue Cross blue shield did
a lot of amendment if.
Okay we have a motion to
consider the.
Explain.
And thank you Mr chair of the
amendment
allows an insurer an additional
period of time and this is just
for a small number of people
that that apply that may be a
flag pops up they they have a
felony charge or they were
flagged during that initial
review process so this would
just allow for that small number
of people Rick requesting to be
credentialed that that the
insurance companies have a
little bit more time to look
into those issues that were
flagged and brought to their
attention.
The same thing all the way
through all these changes thank
thank you guys seen before you
order.
Any questions on this
ammendment.
Your comment it's good I yes I
just read it quickly is the
first time thank you Mr chair of
first time that I've seen the
amendment but if if it's all the
same essentially people who red
flag comes out there in the
they're in the national database
legitimate reasons to do the
extra due diligence and process
up I think it's in the reason
that it is a reasonable
amendment to the bill.
Is there a second for Senator
Hickey is a motion to adopt the
minutes Senator Ingle.
Any discussion any further
questions on the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
amendment to have been.
Added to the amended on to the
bill and we will go to the
audience anybody here to speak
in favor of this bill.
Yes care.
Members the committee.
Care robin printer with the New
Mexico Medical Society I think
you have to keep the button down
okay better.
Kerry robin printer with the New
Mexico Medical Society we
discussed this a lot and in turn
with the health and Human
Services Committee fully support
we appreciate the work with
blues for the amendment as well
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Kerry Marla here you're here for
blues.
You got the blues yes Mr
chairman members of the
committee Marlys show it's
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross blue shield in New Mexico
we appreciate the sponsor and
the New Mexico Medical Society
working on the amendment and we
support the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody and up in opposition
anybody online neither for four
against members of the
committee.
Senator Hickey.
Mr chair I move for a do pass of
the amendment at and if I may
comment of the bill as amended
of the bill as amended.
having having spent the a great
deal of my career in insurance
companies
The complexity of of quote
loading information into a claim
passionate is this close to
rocket science that's not an
exaggeration that because one
piece touches another touches
the other however I will say
that the the the companies have
tended in the past to do the
sequential first get the
credentialing in and then do the
loading and this is really
cause significant loss of
revenue to a lot of groups who
are bringing in new drafters
because basically they have to
pay them because they have a
contract that everything that
they do in record because they
can't get loaded into the claims
engine doesn't get paid in the
past it's just been a second up
group and is no retroactive now
there is no retroactive and I
believe this bill I.
Read it correctly requires that
should they not actually have
the claims the the information
loaded into quote the claims
engine so that the bills will be
paid there is retroactive of
reimbursement that they will be
able to get that for so
basically particularly in these
times of the vastly increasing
physician shortage and the
inability of groups to be able
to hire folks this is really a
critical piece that we need to
get behind us so that that's not
something else that stops new
positions from coming into the
state thank you Mr thank you.
Anybody else that we get a
second no you have a.
Senator Ingle seconded of I
think I.
We heard a lot of discussion
this in the interim committee
particularly the the delay in
loading and and and the.
And the incredible hardship to
that puts on somebody who might
want to move into a community do
this service and they can't they
can't get anything from
insurance companies that but
then the other issues every
single separate HMO and
insurance company has their own
certification so they they go
through this once and the next
time a patient comes in is in a
different HMO they have to do it
again and again why don't we
have a central.
Certification Hey your an
insurance guy you can explain
this to me up thank you Mr chair
and colleagues
Getting credentialed actually is
an activity that the hospital
services corporation does on
behalf of a lot of the health
sciences so we have made
progress around that however
it's still a broken process and
there is no central repository
of truth anywhere me
theoretically because they
credential it they know and I
did put into my junior money
a couple hundred thousand four
the OS hi to work on this issue
so that you can create this
uniformed central source of
truth database that was kept
current on a weekly basis so
when a position left to state
they would have to notify when a
with a physician is part of a
health plans offering it's clear
in this centralized database so
not only would clean up a lot of
unnecessary work would be quote
the central source of truth and
it's not too hard to do it's
actually very doable and other
states have something like this
and so we are working that move
the money to them to work on a
plan to be able to do this so
that it keeps going for but we
people need to know is is my
doctor no sometimes in the
exchange Blue Cross that have
fifty six different plants you
have no idea if your doctor was
out or that so this this is will
address that issue but this will
address the equity issue of
compensation but let me ask you
a question that because we're
we're we think we found a path
forward on the compact one of
which is the medic the doctors
compact.
If a doctor from another state
who belongs to the contact us to
practice in New Mexico do they
still have to get certified to
practice here.
That I believe having yes they
do there is I I I do not know
the there's no way to work day
and on the road and on the
compact but yes they would have
to get loaded in and and I
believe if I'm not wrong and
someone from the audience could
feel free to correct me I
believe that they would get
loaded in as well and this
thirty day time period.
Well thank you Senator Pirtle
for bringing this forward to we
definitely need to do something
is there any other discussion
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes.
Senator Ingle yes center Maestas
yes Senator McKenna have
Senators smitteez Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator Tallman
yes center to the piano yes so
by six zero vote for three
excuse you have to do passengers
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and our last bill
of the night will be the of
Senate bill two forty to the
medical cannabis bills at the
department of health.
Appropriation for.
One nine check out look at it I
I I can't do it.
If you want me to okay we'll
look at the yeah I can
understand I can I can do this.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee Senate bill two
forty two is a bill that the
department of health brought to
me and it it it.
Cleans up of the the problem
that we've found developed
within the medical cannabis
licensing regulations we we we
require them to get in we will
issue them the three year
license but we still require
them to go get a a doctor's
they don't color prescription a
doctor's authorization but sort
of certification every year.
And the the dilemma with this is
that some some of them aren't
insured one reason they're using
cannabis is that they they
didn't have insurance and they
couldn't get it so the the
dilemma is it going every year
can be an incredible hardship
some doctors charge several
hundred dollars for this and up
so this is a been attempted
aligning the certification
requirement with the issuance of
the card and and L. like my
health department to.
expert witness explain in detail
answer any of your questions.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chair honored members of the
committee my name is Dr
Dominic's are low and I'm the
director for the medical
cannabis program division and as
senator TCP is a piece to help I
apology
has actually outlined what is
happening right now with our
patients is that their card says
that it's a three year
expiration on it but every year
they still have to go in and see
their doctor this is caused a
great amount of confusion among
the patients and the medical
providers because they're not
sure if they need to go see
their provider not see their
provider and this creates the
potential where patients are not
able to access their medication
simply due to this issue so what
we're actually have proposed and
are asking for is a compromise
on this we're to be a two year
chart where the individuals
going get their written
certification from their medical
provider every two years and
that is also equals the length
of time for them being in the
program at the end of that two
years thank you again then get
re authorized by going to see
their medical provider again
that would simplify the process
save the patient's quite a lot
of money because again patients
especially those who are seen by
federal providers such as in the
veterans administration and that
Indian health services their
providers due to federal
prohibition are not able to
certify the patients that they
see so that actually forces
these individuals to go to
another medical provider rate
additional money just to get
their certification for
medication that their medical
provider may say that is
required we actually estimate
that this will save patients
with us having currently
approximately a hundred eight
thousand patients enrolled in
the program over eleven million
dollars average each year.
Thank you.
Thank.
And with that will stand for
questions Mr chairman.
We'll go to the audience anyone
the wishing to speak in favor of
this bill.
Anyone in opposition.
I hearing and we have any one of
them.
So we'll turn to the members and
we have a I just this.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Ortiz Pino
thank you Sir the.
Drop the fear when I saw this
bill.
Just as we did the we did the
original bill up.
Back in two thousand seven but
why is section one in the bill.
Mr chair at Senator Maestas
members of the committee thank
you that's actually just the
first section moving to part
seven of that section is what I
believe that is.
So will bill because it it is
pretty much the entire section
of the bill.
Okay Mister chairman that
senator Ortiz also so section
one is they're just so we read
it so we know what section to
just talk is referring to I
don't see any amendments to the
current statutes mysteries also
are.
For
page three line eighteen all of
those.
Your full beautiful beautiful.
Thank you very much so we've
change up so section one for the
folks listening at home changes
the word three to the word to.
And then
And then also.
Income.
Once we learn this gentleman
about the the the supply side of
cannabis of.
Once kind of the the market
stabilize itself and we're
assured that patients do have
access to.
The medicine what not
Do you contemplate a day were
there's there's there's two
where we don't need a medical
cannabis program.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator my assets I do
not and the reason I don't is
because one of the main
provisions of the the current
bill.
With regard eliminating
compassionate use act is that
the patients are able to
purchase it without paying the
tax that we currently have on it
and that's actually very
important especially when we
look at this as a medication for
patients so I do see that as
long as we have those other
prohibitions on a federal level
with cannabis not being
considered a medicine on the
federal level when it's
considered statewide we're going
to need to continue to have a
medical program to ensure that
those patients do not have to
pay tax on.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentleman no that's that's.
I see the point yes
theoretically the budget could
crack down and all that good
stuff I
I think I'm just a tax
everything.
Kind of guy I think every
commodity should be taxed then
we have lower taxes for
everybody and we have a
functional government
but I know that'll never happen
with regards to to medicine
but I don't need a prescription
to.
To buy verb it means so I think
I think some at some point in
society we there will be no need
for a medical program because it
will be accessible and granted
out a doctor can say had
recommend this but
But I think that someday that
may happen thank you Mr so thank
you Senator minus next to hear
from them.
Senator Dr Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this forward this is
just common sense and also I
think it's in I would like to
offer my own personal opinion
that those who are using medical
cannabis are often using it for
a bit and
to help them cope with stresses
and and mental health and what
have you and therefore being
able to keep a a human
interactive connection although
I don't want people coming in
just to renew a license but
certainly for any therapy
cognitive therapy is it is a
good thing and so that we keep
this designation rather than
saying well you just go by you
are on
Self medication often times is
not a great thing south doing it
with consultation up makes a
better so thank you for bringing
this for thank you Sir thank you
and and I and I move I do pass.
We we have a do pass we have a
second.
The second from the Santo my
****.
Please call the roll.
Center coast Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Center my is this yes Senator
McKenna of centers committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Tallman yes center to the piano
yes.
Six.
Thank you permission the during
this meeting bill because we're
gonna try and we're going to try
to squeeze in one last part of
this the last one.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Of the.
But you said it was real
listening on the on the drug
test the yeah no I just knew
that I needed to come down on
this is because we would have
taken your first year landed to
be first really Mr chair I'm
used to the old days we just
still here the billion of the
sponsors not here one is just
that good do you know what I
didn't want to take a chance you
are on the grid Senator which
means we do minimal public
comment minimal right and
committee debate and it's a
simple appropriation we leave
you to your face and finance but
right on okay I know the drill
Mr all right so go ahead and
explain what Senate bill two one
ninety is all about this Mr
chair colleagues I used to be on
this committee and I miss you
guys and it's great to be great
to be with you all tonight as an
alarm you are eligible for
attending our committee dinner
which would be really in March
yes we offer accepted.
Senator you the only one was on
the committee when you ask in
fact that is a true snow Senator
Ingle predates all of us except
for center to the pandemic he's
been on this committee since
beginning I think think think
Sedillo Lopez was on it when you
were here to us good point she
was in the course the crack team
in the back okay moving on the
bill
Mr chair colleague so.
We all want to provide more
substance abuse in the state of
New Mexico but it might shock is
solved to find out we really
don't have a plan of where those
needs are exactly what type of
substance abuse disorder exists
where what the treatment
strategy would be and how much
of a check we should be writing
is the state to meet that need
we just know that they're great
it's kind of hard to find
something you know what the plan
is so I've been working through
the years with Dr Neal Bowen
who's the head of the behavioral
health services division he and
I worked on this bill and course
Dr Hickey and you Mr chair
signed onto it as well but
basically what this bill funds
is the creation of the plan
study the demand create a plan
tell us where the needs are and
how much of a check we need to
write so that we can then rally
around funding that plan there
were some great analysis in the
bill from that behavioral health
services division that was very
welcome to see in their analysis
which is that the plan really
needs to include lots of
different players out there the
department of health the UNM
health sciences center doctors
that don't just lots of people
to help make sure that we
actually get a good plan
incorporates all the knowledge
it's out there in the state and
so and so that's what it does I
will share the good news that
I've already funded this in my
junior bill appropriation.
And I think the department feels
I can get half of this funded by
the feds some forty funded it
so
we're good to go Mr chair that
will just go to the audience
anyone besides Karen who's in
favor of anything putting money
in to be a year of.
Karen go ahead you have anything
you want to add.
I didn't know was funded so I'm
very happy Karen candidate with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we're strong support
at this thanks Karen anybody on
zoom no.
Members of the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Steinborn for bringing
this forward
it is is is I've had the
opportunity to enter into this
August body and and look at
various issues it has somewhat
mystified me that we haven't had
a plan to deal with substance
use substance use disorder in
particular as I've said on many
Committee occasions you've heard
me this is a
the in experience in my family
and I think probably most of the
families if we all work to to
admit it and many of us really
don't know where to go what to
do and what have you and even in
the state we we have some of the
first steps down with the R. T.
C.'s residential treatment
centers but but I think you've
also heard me say and I've
learned this both with my
professional career as well as
my lived experience and working
with some of the best
substance use programs and in
the country
you have to have your sobriety
to get sobriety and if you don't
have a plan for a year of
sobriety you just you back in
the washing machine all over
again and so we do would put
people into our TC's at great
expense for ninety maybe a
hundred twenty days a week that
works but then people get lost
in the go back into the same old
stressful situation what we need
to have is a plan RTC to
intensive outpatient to a a or
other groups and the other words
that I want people to remember
is.
The the concept of engagement
the individuals when they it and
those those who have
unfortunately the genetic
Did you charge have the genetic
pathways that lead to craving
the end you don't know what it's
like until you've gone through
it or you would have lost a
loved one go through it and and
the changes the person that and
if we don't have a mechanism by
which people can engage with
other people to get through
those very difficult times you
can't get to the year of
sobriety but this is all going
to be planned out it has to do
is sober housing but essentially
in other words connection where
is the connection always a human
connection it's got to be there
and if you don't have that laid
out in the plant the probability
of going back into addiction is
overwhelming and so having a
plan is just fundamental to get
to that year sobriety in
connection and I'm sorry for my
soapbox on this that this is
fundamental I mean we've done a
lot of fundamental things
tonight this is one of the
fundamentals thank you Mr
speaker thank you Senator
Steinborn your and your your
bill does not.
Is not limited to residential
treatment it's it's the it is
the full spectrum right it could
be the full spectrum absolutely
let Leah Harrison who's in
charge of facilities for the
department of health handles all
the state funded inpatient
facility like turquoise lodge
rehab center in Roswell is a she
she wrote we over the weekend
she wrote to me because I had
said something about half of our
facilities are empty our our no
our facilities are all half
empty and and she said sadly
that that's largely still true
but she's now got turquoise
lodge up to about seventy
percent and in the anticipate
very soon it'll be at full
capacity and they're they're
working on the state hospitals
are working on the rehab center
so.
There's hope of foot let's let's
push this forward I appropriated
last year some of my junior
money for us to the bureau of
services division to the
collaborative I put it in the
collaborative and they've let a
contract for a study a statewide
city behavioral health services
so here is I think is a nice
compliment and it fits in with
the senator told.
Thank you Mr chairman in the in
wholeheartedly agree with
everything that Dr Hickey said
and.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward and
Senator a.
Participate in my the alluded to
a question which.
The price of Pittenger to ensure
authorized a US study to be
done.
noise those talks so how does
that.
Relate is this over a.
That was good if I could add to
that was overall behavioral
health services and focusing on
the mental health this is more
focusing on the substance abuse
peace of that.
Should they be combined well one
was already left the country is
already let this to be a
complimentary secondary contract
but I will say I will say this
Mister chairman Senator is that
they are complementary to be
sure and some people just said
you know we just let this
contract make sure these
everyone's talking to each other
so we're using research that's
already happened in integrating
it but okay Mr chair and senator
Asian of a lot of people have
both affidavit health and
substance abuse absolutely
absolutely I would hope that you
work that they work together
have to yes.
Well the money goes the same
division I mean again so I
haven't really need to the.
You send your money to the
debate division I sent money to
the collaborative but.
And so so this is the.
Mr this is long overdue should
have done twenty years ago I
understand a lot Senator Lopez
sponsor to build two thousand
four to do this for whatever
reason every at un again applaud
you for bringing this forward
and I wholeheartedly support
this thank you Mr chair one of
the reasons it didn't get done
then as we move the behavioral
health responsibility from
health the Human Services
because they had all the
Medicaid money both reform yeah
I can take for for the they just
got it just kind of got lost in
the shuffle Senator Hickey
another comment just on that
point seventy percent of people
with mental health and substance
abuse have co morbidities hi you
cannot treat the one without the
other and there are actually.
A guy got over build this year
so to speak Mr chair but I was
actually in in my mental health
parity bill was going to require
that any
substance use RTC or what have
you would be required to
diagnose and treat any mental
illness because I understand
from some people that some of
them that more private ones will
not do that and and so we'll
we'll deal with that on down the
line but the co morbidities are
huge.
And so both have to be treated
thank you what's the will of the
committee so we'll have a motion
for do pass from senator Tom and
seconded by Senator Hickey.
And any other discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
For the second.
Senator my ****.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes thanks
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz piano yes because this
time Senator Ingle is going to
be different right.
This is gonna be different
because we are a can I do a
quick explain my vote yes thank
yeah okay now because Senator
Ingle you're absolutely right we
don't.
We don't have accountability for
what happens to these bills and
but not the need to change bill
if you want me to come to
finance I'm happy to to say
there will be a report due at a
specific date on what is being
learned and what is going to be
down next and and that needs to
be continuous and continuous
overseeing I hope you build that
into your bill at some point
thank you it's a it needed the
bill ends pretty much now
because it is a finance bill but
I would say Mr chair hopefully
let's get the schedule in the
interim and the and you're
committing Committee and let's
let's let's really it's it's
essential are into it to throw
away money I did as we can get a
plan that we could all rally
around and and really.
Addressing this problem so.
We'll do it I thank you very
much thanks committee so you you
have a by a five to one vote you
have a do pass.
Three excuse that concludes the
agenda.
it just shows how fast we can
move that there is no storm.
