have a corn present.
center block.
Senator Boone, Senator Charlie.
In our Gallego.
In her nova
And our Pinto, then her Scott.
Senator Serio Lopez.
And her hickey.
Senor Lopez
Forum
Um I'd like to say is that uh
Um
Friday, which seems so long ago,
doesn't it?
On Friday, we had done um in.
Introduction and listen to
comments from the audience,
either in favor or against
Senate Bill 66.
So, as I had mentioned at the
end of the meeting, that wasn't
Friday, this was last Wednesday.
Wasn't it?
It just seems it was Friday. The
days seemed to roll together
anymore.
Um, anyway, we had left it at
that point in time to do.
Uh
Continue the bill, the hearing,
going to questions or comments
from committee members.
So if you would like a Senator
Nava just to give a short
synopsis for
For, uh, how to say a reminder
for those of us to uh kind of
come up to speed on Senate Bill
66, and then we'll go into
questions or comments from
committee members, so please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
happy to be standing here, uh,
on behalf of my colleagues, uh,
Senator Duhagan, Senator
Bergmans.
Um, I just do have to, uh, Madam
Chairwoman, give a shout out to
Senator Bergman's daughter. It
is her one year birthday. That's
why she could not be here, um,
but I am now a co-sponsor of the
bill, and as a reminder for
members of the committee, Senate
Bill 66 protects children and
vulnerable adults by allowing EC
ECD aging and long-term Services
Department and Healthcare
Authority, Children, Youth and
Families department and the
public education department to
consider a certain misdemeanor
convictions.
Such as enticement of a child,
stalking, and battery of a
household member when conducting
background clearances and
licenses for caregivers.
Agencies currently uh
prohibited.
are prohibited by the criminal
offender employment exemptions
from considering any
misdemeanors when evaluating
suitability for caregivers. So
what this bill does is, uh,
Madam Chairwoman, um, it creates
an exemption for childcare
providers and certain caregivers
from the limitations of the
criminal Offender Employment
Act, allowing for the
consideration of misdemeanors
for background clearances for
childcare providers and
caregivers, and I would also
like to pass it over to my
expert witness just to
reintroduce herself.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Shelly Strong, general counsel
for the early childhood
education and care department.
And I uh appreciate your
consideration of this spell, um,
what we're talking about here is
the criminal offender Employment
Act makes a lot of sense when
we're talking about most many
public employment in that
industry, but when we're talking
about the stamp of approval.
From the state saying in a
background clearance saying that
you are safe to work with
babies, children, disabled,
elderly, vulnerable populations,
we need to. It doesn't require
us to deny anyone a background
clearance because a misdemeanor
exists on the record. It just
allows us to look at it in uh
the whole picture of the
evaluation of a person and
whether or not they are safe to
care for these vulnerable
populations.
Thank you very much. So now
we'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
Senator Pinto.
Madam Chair members of the
committee and thank you for uh
bringing the bill for.
How do we
How is this considered if
they're out of state.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
Senator Pinto, um, the.
Agencies when they'd run
background clearances, um, do a
national check, um, and they do
statewide checks, looks at
statewide anywhere that um
they've lived in the past
certain amount of time, usually
5 years, um, and so we get that
national check and then state
checks from the previous 5 years
and then we consider, um, any
conviction currently any felony
that's on their record now, but
we, um, with if this passes, we
would also be able to look at
those out of state.
And Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, how does this
work if it's done over the
internet?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
um, I'm sorry, I, I don't quite
understand the question when
what is done online. Madam Chair
members of the committee, what
if any of these enticement of a
child is um one of the things
I'm uh looking at.
As if they're out of state and
they're um talkinging our
children online, um, for, let's
say they go to an app.
And there is um
They know that the person on the
other end is a um adult.
Um, that didn't stocking in that
sense, and they're out of state.
Does any of this cover that?
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator
Pinto, um, if that were to occur
and they were convicted and they
applied for a background
clearance here in the state of
New Mexico, we would then be
able to consider that conviction
when deciding whether or not to
clear them to work with these
populations. This doesn't change
how the law of enticement of a
child, that respect, but it
would allow us to consider that
conviction when clearing a
background clearance.
Madam Chair, members here that
are gonna be considered that if.
They were convicted and if it
occurs online, it's covered.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
What about those uh fences that
occur on tribal nations.
Uh,
madam chair, Senator Pinto, if
that, um, is a conviction that
occurs under state law, um, and
if or if there's a federal
conviction in reviewing a
background clearance, um, so it
would have to be an official
conviction.
Um, for us
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, can you name the
database in which then offense
on the tribal nations that it's
collected federally.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
I believe that's the NCIC, um,
database, uh, the national, uh,
criminal information.
Growing house, I think is what
NCIC stands for, but
Um
I know it's the NCIC.
Madame Chain remembered um.
You know, the turnaround time
from the conviction database.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
no, I, I do not.
To Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that is one of the
issues.
We can go through this and put
the bill through, but if
they're, if the injured into the
database and then there, here we
go, Hiram your consideration to
remedy that, Madam Chair
members.
Um,
Madam Chair Senator Pinto, uh,
one of the ways that we have the
ability to do that is, um,
especially if it occurs in New
Mexico is we don't just check
the NCIC, we also work through,
uh, the Department of Public
Safety. We also work through
Adamuz, uh we also work in the
past, uh, other than New Mexico
in the past 5 years, we get
their state records from that as
well. The federal databases is
the NCIC, um, I, I do believe
it's fairly fast, but also we we
don't just rely on the NCIC,
there's multiple.
All other databases that we
would be able to check.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Is the background check, um,
understand they were backed up a
while back.
We're trying to get a lot of
people licensed.
is that still an issue?
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, no,
we have received the um
authority from the FBI we have
our um credentials and we are
able to access those accounts at
this time and we are not backed
up at all right now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we see that a lot of
this is geared towards a
household member enticement of a
child.
In that sense of
Substance abuse.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
uh, the list in front of you is
the misdemeanors that we
currently cannot consider when
we are, um, doing the background
clearances for these, we
consider those felonies, most uh
substance abuse offenses are um
felony level.
to my days.
We actually had a teacher in
that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
we are already allowed to
consider felonies, so, um, those
felonies selling uh drugs to a
child would definitely be um a
trafficking of a controlled
substance which would be a 2nd
degree felony and we would be
able to consider that. So we
already have the authority to
consider felonies under the
Criminal offender Employment
Act, we with this bill, we would
be adding the ability to also
consider misdemeanors, which we
currently don't.
Thank you, Senator. Senator Sao
Lopez. Thank you, um.
I remember the the criminal
eligibility or criminal offender
Employment Act was to ban the
box.
Um, Bill, and it was 2019
because it's my my very first
session and it was sponsored by
um Senator O'Neill.
And um,
I think it's really important
that agencies, um, listed.
Have, have the ability to go
deeper and to and to search
things.
What is a little um.
Not concerning, I'm still gonna
vote for it, but it allows that
it has a potential for
overturning the whole purpose of
the criminal employment law,
because it's a huge loophole.
It's the agency.
Creates the rules, um, and
creates the rules about what
they can consider and um
And, and I'm not gonna ask you
to do this, but I'd ask you to
consider it, um, an agency
exempt and pursuant. This is on
page 2. An agency exempted
pursuant to subsection A of this
section shall shall promulgate
rules related to criminal
history screening for the
purpose of determining
eligibility.
It would be great if it said
related to the purpose of the
agency.
So that if there's some uh
Limitation on what the rules
would say that it's related, so
if they're dealing with
children, it has to be related,
like enticing children
apparently is a misdemeanor. Oh
my God, that needs to be listed
and um.
You know, if for any agency
dealing with children, um, I'm
not gonna suggest you do it. I'm
not suggesting the flight, just
consider um.
Because these, you know, we're
happy with these agencies, we
trust the agencies now, but this
is a law that's gonna go into
the future.
And I just hate for the idea of
the band, the box thing that
could be completely overwhelmed.
Um, with a lot of crimes that
aren't related to the objective
or the purpose of the agency.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
thank you for that suggestion,
and we will definitely, I wrote
it down and we will die.
Oh, thank you very much,
Senator.
Are there any other questions?
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Shelly, thanks for the office
visit going through.
I think Senator Nava is doing a
phenomenal uh doing her birth.
birthday cake stuff.
Quick question on this. Can you
tell me, uh, real quick the
process, so somebody applies for
a license, right?
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So I could just
interrupt, I apologize, but
please turn your microphone on
because the web the person's on
the web can't hear. Thank you.
I'm sorry for that, thank you.
I was gonna say the same thing.
I can't hear you, but I, I
assume your answer was a good
one.
Um
So Madam Chair, uh,
Shelley with the department
there in there who's making a
decision whether to on the
background check.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator block
of the department, um, using its
uh OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So I, I assume it
goes through some type of risk
management framework where they
go through, do you have this?
Yes, certain amount of points
you have this no, you have this
yes and there's like a
Not a subjective, but there's an
objective line where
Yeah
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
yes, that's correct. We also
have, there's an appeals
process, um, the, they are
allowed to appeal through
administrative hearing officer,
and if that isn't in their face
as well.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So,
This database here, these are
all not people that are charged
or they convicted.
Madam Chair, Senator B block,
uh, the NCIC will often show
both. It'll show arrests and
it'll show convictions.
Um, we do get information on.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So in regards to somebody
arrested for whatever reason,
something happened and the
charges get dropped. Do you take
that into the calculus.
Of arrest or do you just uh set
that aside because.
You don't really count that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator B
block, if it's gone through the
entire process and they um have
not issued a conviction, we
would not consider that. OK,
thank you. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, then Senator Pinto
brought up substance abuse. I, I
thought that was a pretty good
point to bring up, um.
So are you looking at the whole,
you're not just looking at
certain some of these cry, but
are you looking at other crimes
that are related to
The
Drug possession.
Um
I don't know so many others out
there, do you take all those
into account or you only look.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
we do look at the felony, uh,
convictions and felony records
as well, um, we look at the
whole picture of the applicant
to determine any conviction
whether or not it is relevant to
the the employment and whether
or not the age of the
conviction, how old it is, how
recent it is, those types of
things we do consider, yes. OK.
Thank you very. Thank you very
much. Any other questions?
See no other questions?
There's a motion for a due pass
from Senator Sio Lopez with a
second from Senator Block. Thank
you.
Senator Block.
Hi.
Senator Boone.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos.
Then her nova, yes.
Pinto
And Scott
Yes. Then Serio Lopez.
Yes. Senator Hickey.
Senor Lopez, yes.
And we have a full committee, so
by a vote of 10 to 0, you have a
DuP pass recommendation. Thank
you.
Madam, I remember some Kenny,
thank you.
Thank you very much.
And now we'll move on to Senator
Trujillo.
Um, Senate Bill 46.
Interstate medical licensure
compact.
Yeah
Good opportunity to present on
the medical compact licensure.
Professional compact licensing
at times.
I recognize it um as simple as
possible.
Compact licensure has also been
discussed.
During interim session as a way
to increase.
Uh, professionals in our
community. This is the medical
compact that will be discussing
today, but it's the same concept
for all of the compacts.
Currently, New Mexico has one
professional licensing compact.
In the state, and that's the
nurses's compact.
It's been in function for many
years and
As a result, there's a large
percentage of nurses that work
in New Mexico that are not
licensed through New Mexico, but
her licensed by one compact
state and then have the
opportunity to that has the
compact.
The medical compact is just a
little bit different than the
nursing compact, and I will
explain those differences.
Professional licensing compacts
is also supported very highly.
by the Department of Defense,
and the reason that the
Department of Defense got
involved in compact licensing is
because it's family friendly for
their um enlisted members.
If you are an enlisted member
and you get moved to one state
or another.
And your spouse or your family
members come along with you, it
can take months, if not a year,
to get licensed.
Under the compacts, if you get
moved to a state that is also in
a compact from your.
State of origin where you're
licensed, you can automatically
begin practicing in that state.
So, let me talk a little bit
about the interstate medical
compact.
The Interstate Medical licenser
Compact is an agreement among
participating US states and
territories.
Work together to significantly
streamline the licensing process
for physicians.
Who want to practice in multiple
states.
It offers a voluntary, and
that's important to remember, it
offers a voluntary expedited
pathway, the license for
physicians who qualify.
The mission of the compact is to
increase access to healthcare,
particularly for patients in
underserved rural communities.
The compact makes it makes it
possible to extend the reach of
physicians.
Improve access to medical
specialists and leverage the use
of new medical technologies such
as telemedicine.
While making it easier for
physicians to obtain license to
practice in multiple states.
Currently, the compact is in 40
states.
The district of Columbia and the
territory of Guam.
These jurisdictions.
These jurisdictions.
are licensed by 52 different
medical and osteopathic boards.
In New Mexico, our osteopathic
and our medical doctors are now
under one board, that's the
medical board. Two different
boards, but now it's 1.
I want to talk just from a
personal level. I've had that
have faced the same thing that
I'm facing for my family.
And that is that my husband has
been diagnosed almost to the
very, very rare good news is
that it's very slow growing. The
bad news is that there's no
treatment for it other than
what's called the Whipple
surgery.
That's a very invasive surgery.
And they won't do the surgery
until it grows to be too
thankfully, his is just at 1.7,
and so we're on what's called a
wait and watch.
The people who have the most
expertise in this very rare form
of cancer.
We cannot.
Do a telehealth conference.
With an oncologist.
So we have to drive to.
So he'll go down there,
obviously for scans and biopsies
and anything that has to be in
person, you know, we drive down
to Phoenix and we'll stay for
usually about a week.
And then we'll come back.
But those tests are not always
ready for us when we get ready
to leave.
And we're not really in a
position.
I know a lot of people might
think that we're all very
wealthy, but we're just to just
stay in Phoenix for two weeks at
a time.
So
We come back here.
The results come in.
We have to go back down. So we
have no results to come in.
Now he did get to have a
telehealth conference on the
20th of February.
Because he got a new oncologist
for another um treatment that
we're uh working through.
It is actually licensed in New
Mexico and in Arizona. So he was
able to have what ended up being
about a 5 minute conference.
With his new oncologist.
And we did
We're not the only family that
experiences that.
I talked to a young family that
had a 3 year old child.
Who was diagnosed with cancer.
And
They got a diagnosis here in New
Mexico, and they started
treatment and they wanted to go
for a second opinion.
Their son was not well enough to
travel.
To go get a second opinion
outside of New Mexico.
And so they were not able to
that they wanted to get it from.
I just tell you these stories
because that we find a way of
finding these other compacts.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'll
stand for. Well, thank you very
much, Senator. Uh, we'll go to
the audience. Is there anyone
here in support?
Of a Senate Bill 46.
And if you'd like, um,
Introduce yourself and a short
statement, please.
Excuse me,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Richard Romero. I
represent the uh New Mexico
Medical Board, and we are in
support of this bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Christina Fisher,
associate director of Think New
Mexico. We strongly support
Senate Bill 46, uh, which is
Senator Trujillo said will make
it easier for New Mexicans to
get care from doctor's license
in other states, including via
telehealth.
This compact is one of 9 major
interstate compacts for
healthcare workers that we do
not yet participate in. In fact,
we are one of just 5 states that
is only 1 or no compact. If you
look at our surrounding states,
Arizona, Colorado, Utah,
Oklahoma, even Texas is in this
compact, so we are, we are
putting ourselves at a major
competitive disadvantage by not
participating in it. Just want
to emphasize that this compact
is very protective of patient
safety and of state sovereignty.
Every doctor licensed elsewhere
that wants to practice here will
be under the jurisdiction of
our medical board, our medical
board can approve or disapprove
their license. This just
drastically streamlines it and
puts us in the company of the
vast majority of other states,
and I hope you will.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Camila Feibelman,
and we've watched our family
friends struggle with their
child's cancer and have to
travel unnecessarily to
California and Pennsylvania,
some of that for needed
treatment, but not being able to
get telehealth a huge weight on
a family that already has. Thank
you in support?
Anyone in opposition?
It will go to Zoom.
And I do have a list.
So we'll start from the list
that I've received.
Um, and I think this first
person is Julia Rotten.
Hi there. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Julia Ritten, and I'm
the senior director of
government affairs at the New
Mexico Hospital Association and
on behalf of our 47 Community
Hospital members and the
thousands of New Mexico
clinicians, including half of
the state's physicians that they
employ and thousands of patients
they serve, we stand in support
of Senate Bill 46. We worked
with Senator Trujillo on this
bill in the past, and I'd like
to extend my gratitude to you
for your continued work on this
important bill, as has been
mentioned, this interstate
compact.
strikes the appropriate uh
balance between public safety
and creating a more efficient
pathway for physicians to
practice in New Mexico, and we
ask for your support of this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Adrian Gomez.
Hi, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Agent Gomes here today for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber.
It's no secret. New Mexico has a
critical shortage of doctors,
and this one, this is one way to
get more providers caring for
New Mexicans.
As the medical board points out,
states that participate in the
compact via significant increase
in physician licensure in their
state, which we anticipate would
occur in New Mexico.
The Interstate medical license
or compact, which currently
covers more than 37 states.
We'll make it simpler for
physicians to enter.
Into practice into Mexico, in
New Mexico.
To provide telehealth services
to New Mexico patients and to
practice part-time in New
Mexico, each would alleviate the
shortage of all types of
physicians within the state.
Healthcare is the cornerstone of
a healthy community and a
healthy economy.
And it is key to New Mexico in
being competitive. The chamber
urges your due pass vote on
Senate Bill 46. Thank you.
Thank you. And next is Michael
Cassels.
Thank you, Chair Lopez and
members of the committee for
giving me this opportunity to
share my family's story and to
explain firsthand how the
interstate medical licensure
compact would impact our lives.
My name is Michael Cassau, and
I'm the proud father of
Sebastian, who in 2021, when he
was just 2 years old, was
diagnosed with stage 4
myoepithelial carcinoma, an
ultra rare and aggressive cancer
that has no proven treatment.
On admission to UNMH, we were
told that his prognosis was poor
and that he would need to start
chemotherapy immediately.
Nobody at UNMH had ever seen a
patient with MEC, much less
treated this rare disease. We
were being asked to make what
felt like impossible medical
decisions. What chemo drugs
should be used. Should we
amputate his hand? Should we try
an experimental drug that hasn't
been used on children?
Desperate to talk to someone who
had experience with this cancer.
We did what any parent would do.
We frantically contacted doctors
who could provide second
opinions from the leading cancer
centers across the country. Then
we ran into a roadblock that
seemed unfathomable. Many out of
state physicians were willing to
speak to us via video
conference, but when they
learned that we were in New
Mexico, they told us they would
not be able to do so.
Why? Because New Mexico was not
a member of the Interstate
Medical Licensure Compact.
One oncologist in Pennsylvania
who also had a medical license
in Texas, told us he would speak
to us if we were in Texas. So we
have, we have had to drive 4
hours across the state line to
Texas 3 times just to speak with
him over Zoom.
This year we have an opportunity
to fix this fixable problem by
passing legislation that would
have New Mexico join 40 other
states in the interstate medical
licensure compact.
3.5 years after his cancer
diagnosis, 10 rounds of grueling
chemotherapy, 3 recurrences and
6 surgeries. Sebastian is still
fighting. We are beside him
fighting too, and we still need
access to these invaluable
virtual second opinions.
No parent should have to hear
the words, your child has
cancer.
And no parent should be denied
the expert advice needed to make
informed medical decisions about
their child's health.
We thank the bill's sponsors and
urge you to vote in favor of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next is Karen Carson.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Doctor
Karen Carson and I am the chair
of the New Mexico Medical Board.
We are in full support of
joining the Interstate medical
license, your compact. We
already can process applications
within 9 days and give a license
within 9 days, but that
application has to be complete
with the compact, we will have a
complete application at the
time.
the person gives us their
request and so we can process
and approve a license nearly
immediately. We know that this
will improve care for the
patients of New Mexico and we
are in support. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next is
Karen.
Um, Kush.
I can't pronounce so
your name, but it's Karen.
Karen, are you there?
OK.
And hunt
Hunt.
Sherry Dotson
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Sherie
Dotson and I'm an ad advocacy
volunteer for AARP New Mexico.
On behalf of the 240,000 AARP
members statewide, we support
the interstate license compact
bill SB 46 to help alleviate
some of the workforce shortages
that often impede access to
quality care, especially for
the the for New Mexico's aging
population and those who care
for him.
We are due to pass hospital, uh,
Excuse me, SB 46 to improve the
healthcare outcomes throughout
New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And that was all today?
Was there anyone in opposition?
No.
OK.
Uh thank you. Um, there are, uh,
Senator, a couple of amendments
that are here in front of the
committee.
Um, one of them is one that I
will propose, and the other one
I believe was one that you were
to propose or they were both
supposed to be my.
There's, there's a bit of a
change of difference.
Um, Madam Chair, I suggest OK
because I do believe that
they're they're they're nearly
identical. They're nearly
identical. Yes, OK.
So let's look at, yeah, we're
gonna.
We'll proceed if you could pass.
There were 2 amendments that
were being proposed and we'll go
ahead and proceed with, and it's
being handed out right now.
one, I don't, madam.
If you could make sure that the
sponsor also has a copy.
Madam Cha why, those will be
hand being handed out. Can I
just make some?
the nursing compact and the
medical compact is that under
the nursing compact, you just
have to be licensed in one
state, and you can practice in
any state.
One of the complaints that the
nursing board has shared is that
they don't know exactly who's
coming into New Mexico to
practice process, there's no,
uh, you don't have to notify the
medical, the nursing board,
nursing board still has
authority over those um nurses,
but they don't know who's
practicing in New Mexico.
Under this medical licensure,
you actually have to get life
practice in.
But when you're going to
practice in a state that's part
of the compact.
As the president of the medical
board stated,
It's nearly an instantaneous
application process. We've tried
some workarounds to get to
having a quick license and
expedited licensure some of you
may remember that we've passed
in the
And prior legislative sessions.
But that doesn't just makes the
license process.
So medical doctors will still
have to get licensed in New
Mexico to practice in New
Mexico, but the information will
be housed at the National
Compact level.
And the medical board here will
just have instantaneous access
to it and can process the
information instantly.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Bear with us, we're having some
technical difficulties, so give
us just a few minutes. Thank
you.
Give us a few minutes because
before we proceed with an
amendment, we have to have a
complete bill. It has
Both even an odd number pages,
so.
Well they go and make copies.
Bear with us.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm available for
questions if you want to ask
questions.
Well, use a proper procedure as
we go through the amendments
first before we move on.
So I'd like to follow kind of
the path.
Sorry.
And thank you for your patience.
Just, uh, some technical
difficulties, at least the print
shop's not too far away.
Again, my apologies.
Patience is not one of my
virtues.
I said, um, you're seeing that
patience is not one of my
virtues, so I. I know.
Members, you may wish to look at
the copy. One of them only had
um odd pages.
It was only odd, so the new.
copy your receiving.
Has both
Yeah, even and odd pages.
So make sure everybody has the
correct copy.
Yes.
OK.
All right
Then, um, the chair would
proceed with
The amendment that is numbered.
231192.1.
Again, 231 192.1, the amendment.
So if you go to page 12.
OK, page 12, line 23.
And
Thank you for whoever brought
this in. I appreciate the notes.
Um, before the period,
Insert, but only to the extent
that both states agreed to and
are participating in a joint
investigation pursuant to the
Interstate medical licensure
Compact.
And a part of
A senator
Um
What we're looking at here.
I, uh
23.
Where we're talking about a
subpoena issued by a member
state.
Shall be enforceable in other
member states.
But again, making sure that both
states have an agreement.
That it's not just lopsided as I
would say in in plain
terminology. So that, that's the
reason for this particular.
On page 14.
Between lines 23 and 24.
Um, I will read.
This new section here, um,
paragraph says, a license,
certification or authorization
that is automatically suspended
or revoked.
Pursuant to this article.
Shall be immediately reinstated.
If the suspension or revocation
is solely on the basis that a
health care practitioner
Performed, recommended, or
provided reproductive health
services or gender-affirming
care.
As authorized in Article 1 of
the Interstate Medical Licensure
Compact.
And again, um, Senator, I, I
propose this amendment.
Uh, do you do some concerns that
can happen at the national
level.
Um
Wanting to make sure that those
who are providing care in the
state of New Mexico are
protected.
Or anyone who is even coming to
our state to provide care also
to make sure that we also
extend.
Uh, that particular, um,
protection to them also.
And then on page 22 and asking
with this one to strike.
Lines 16.
Through 25.
And then over on page 23,
striking lines 1 and 2.
And essentially uh senator.
Uh, this particular, um.
Amendment is striking the
immunity clause.
And feeling that this is
something um
Important for us to make sure
again that.
Uh, we are still protecting
those who are receiving care.
And after that it's re-letter,
the succeeding sections uh
accordingly.
So, uh, the chair would move.
At this amendment and if there
could be a second for discussion
purposes from
Senator Sah Lopez.
And um
If you'd like to, any comments
as a sponsor. No, Madam Chair,
thank you. Um, this is a
friendly amendment, um, I've
been working with some attorneys
in New Mexico and um you're
actually saving me some time, my
amendment for this committee was
simply going to be number 12.
Um, but you've added in number
3, which I thought would happen
in judiciary. And so this is
absolutely friendly, I think
it's important to note that in
the past these bills have.
Not been approved and have not
made it through the Senate.
For paragraph.
The paragraph on page 22, line
16 through 25.
And so this is an important
thing to remember is that.
You may hear individuals say.
If we make these amendments,
they won't let us in.
I will tell you that there are 2
other states that have taken
this paragraph out.
And they're in the compact.
So I've been doing this for
hearing, if you change it, we'll
not let you in.
I say we, and we move forward
with it, and if other states
have gotten in, then there's no.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
support of this amendment?
Anyone in opposition?
Is there anyone on Zoom?
OK, um, again, this is open for
discussion, so questions or
comments from committee. Senator
Serio Lopez.
On the amendment.
Thank you Madam Chair. I am so
happy about this amendment. I
can't tell you, as you know,
we've discussed this in a while
and um.
I'm just really grateful that
you did this amendment and we're
moving forward because I think
that's gonna overcome a an
obstacle that's been here for
what, 67 years?
Um, since I've been here every
year, the compact has failed to
pass to my profound
disappointment.
Um, and I'll talk about it when
I talk about the bill itself,
but that's why I was working on
a workaround, but I'll, I'll
talk about that later. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Senator, for your help in
opening up this file so that I
could get this drafted, um, uh,
prior to being sworn in, and I
know that changed and we were
notified of that, but you gave
me the very, very early in the
year. My absolute pleasure,
madam.
Thank you. On the amendments,
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh
Senator Trujillo for bringing
this forward on the number 3 as
I understand that has been
A blocking point.
Um
So just to for clarity.
If there is a
Legitimate malpractice.
I am here that.
That older adjudicated.
Um
And it happens to be because of
a telemedicine or whatever.
In another state.
Um, first, that individual.
In the general compact, I
believe can be sued.
Under our torch.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
removal of the qualified
mulation to the officers and and
employees of the Interstate
commission has nothing to do
with the doctors that are
licensed under that, nor the
residents of New Mexico. It has
to do with the individuals who
are working and are appointed to
the commission.
OK. So the answer to your
question is it has no impact on
that.
OK. 00, well, I'm, I'm OK. So
I'll come back to that, but I
think they're related.
Um
So, if there is a a a punitive
suit.
Or $400 million like.
Um, does that mean then?
That the uh plaintiff's
attorneys and then turn around
and go to this board.
Uh, that oversees the compact.
And to them as well as being
vicariously related.
Or maybe maybe directly related
and is a whole another potential
po.
potential source of
Revenue for this suit.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I won.
And even if
Taking this out simply says that
under New Mexico law.
Those individuals who are
officers and employees of the
internet not have qualified
immunity.
And the practical side of that
is that for this state.
Mexico will appoint 2 members to
the commission.
That would be the
A DO
And an MD.
And their participation on this.
is gonna be limited to their
partition, I'm not in a position
to tell you whether or not that
any if they decided to sue for
that reason that those
individuals will be held liable.
But that's would be ultimately
for the court to decide whether
or not this.
New Mexico law applies, and we
do not have qualified.
Um
Oh,
Adam Chair.
Senator, so you
found two other,
that is correct, and I believe
it's Louisiana and Nevada. I
know it's Nevada for sure, but I
think Madam Chair and Senator,
the general counsel.
Uh, for the compact board.
Allowed them to take it out and
it was signed on behalf of the
board without this language.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, I'm
not familiar with that.
Right now I'm just working on
getting that information was
available online and was
provided to me that there are in
fact, and you can double check
it, that there are in fact two
other states that have removed
this language from the bill,
from their compact and are part
of the compact.
OK.
Um
Thank you. Uh, uh, rather than
go for there, but we'll look
into that and see. I just, I, I,
I would hate to see our two
physicians here who are on the
board.
You know, get sued for punitive
damages, lose their, lose their
homes in order to pay for that
and so forth because
so many punitive damages.
So, which we haven't seen.
So I'm just, I'm, I'm trying to
protect New Mexicans.
Um, some sort of
And I'm not a lawyer.
But somehow I, I know there are
vicarious lawsuits, um.
I, I'll call him vicarious. I
know that one end.
One group that's being sued
because the laboratory came
back.
And did the test wrong with the
wrong, the wrong value.
And the clinician believed and,
and it was an accredited.
lab test yet.
The uh physician, even though
the suit should be against the
laboratory, the physician is
quote vicariously.
Liable as well.
Or damages and potentially
punitive damage.
So that, that's why I'm so
sensitive to this issue is
because this could be another
thing that makes New Mexico.
Um
Not, I mean, people might sign
up for the compact, but I'm not
gonna play in New Mexico. I just
want to get that clarity.
Since we, since we have such a
loose.
Malpractice structure this.
Thank you. And I'll look into
it. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I've just remind you.
Thank you. Any other questions
on the amendment? Yes, Senator
Scott.
Hm
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I'm also on page 22.
These officers and employees of
the interstate.
Commission
Are they
compensated.
Partially by.
All of the states that are
participating in the compact.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, that's
a really good question. So my
understanding of this medical
compact, which others may be
different.
My understanding of this medical
compact is that if you choose to
be licensed under the compact,
so you can still get to be part
of the compact license.
Um, and just have just a New
Mexico license.
But if you choose to be under
this particular license, I
understand that it's $700 to um
for.
Um, you know, to, to, to get
that license and that money all
goes to the commission, and they
use that to pay for.
The database that they have the
staff that they have the
meetings that they hold.
Similar to the licensing boards
that we have in New Mexico, they
all function on their licensing
fees.
Um, this would be the same
thing.
Now, is there another fee that
the state pays? I am not really
sure about that yet, and I can
get that information.
Oh, OK.
And Madam Chair and senator,
these folks would not be.
Directly involved.
In any of these care decisions
being
Being advanced by.
The physicians
Operating in New Mexico
themselves.
They would
Merely
Over sea
The compact terms.
Is, is that correct, Madam
Chair, Senator, that is
absolutely correct. In fact, the
commission itself will not be
making decisions about one
procedures or is allowable in
New Mexico.
That is decisions that are still
maintained by each state.
So if you're licensed under uh
this compact and let's say New
Mexico is your home state
because you practiced 25% of
your practices in New Mexico and
you reside here.
If you were to go to say Idaho.
You have to practice under
Idaho's.
Medical practice laws.
You do not take New Mexico's
medical practice laws and carry
them forward.
You have to follow the laws.
For the state in which your
patient resides.
And you provide that service.
Senator
If this piece of legislation
passes.
It really doesn't guarantee.
Acceptance.
Into the compact that's still.
Got to be somehow.
Voted on by this.
Interstate commission.
Is that accurate, Madam Chair,
senator, that is correct.
It's not an automatic. There's
steps that you have to go
through in order to be accepted
by the other members of the
compact.
So
Well, Madam Chair and senator,
if any
Is anybody inquired?
Of these of this interstate
commission.
As to whether or not the
deletion.
Of this
Paragraph.
Combined
With New Mexico liability laws.
I mean, I can see.
These officers going, well, why?
Why let these folks in.
When we're exposing ourselves to
New Mexico liability laws.
It is, is, is that
investigation.
And conducted is any question
actually been asked of the of
the officers.
Managing the compact, Madam
Chair, Senator, we have been the
drafter compact.
Um, attorney.
I do not have anything in
writing that says they'll accept
us in if we delete this.
Because they don't have the.
That is a decision that would be
made by the compact members in
an open meeting.
I a vote and so they can't
conclusively say that New Mexico
would be allowed to enter
without this.
What I can say though is that
there are 2 other states that
were allowed by the compact
members.
To be a part of the compact.
But Madam Chair, and Senator, we
do not know.
What those other two members'
liabilities law laws look like
in comparison is that.
a true statement.
Madam Chair, that would be a
true statement.
Madam Chair, Senator, I will
just say though that those other
to in.
Their legislatures would not
have known whether they removed
that.
Paragraph either.
Because again
The acceptance doesn't happen
until the full commission is
together.
They have an opportunity to
review the compact and an
opportunity.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I'm
gonna ask you for an opinion.
And would it be your opinion?
That if this paragraph.
Remained in this piece of
legislation.
With our upward our.
Odds of getting into the
compact.
Be significantly improved.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
don't. Thank you for your
answers. Thank you.
Uh, thank you. Further
questions, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, just to
Maybe
Ask Senator Scott's question a
little bit different here. Uh,
refresh me again, how many
people are part of this
interstate, how many states are
part of this.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
senator.
Right now there are 40 states.
And Guam, let me find that down
here it's OK. I don't really,
doesn't matter about the
territories. I was curious about
the states. I don't wanna.
want to press, keep pressing
here. Thank you. The compact
currently includes 40 states and
the District of Columbia.
And the territory.
OK.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
so out of the 40 states.
Are you, are, do I understand it
correctly? 38 of them.
Have
Um, the paragraph in there that
we're deleting and only 2 do
not, Madam Chair, Senator, that
is correct.
And what's, Madam Chair, what
states do not?
Um, what states have that
paragraph? What two states do
you have that deleted, do you
know? Um, Madam chair Senator, I
thought you were gonna make me
go down the list of the ones
that the 2 it might be a test of
my knowledge of the states.
Um, no, my, I, I, I know Nevada
is one. I couldn't find like.
Yeah thank you uh thank you, Ma.
I'll, I'll take your word for
it. Is is there, is there a
reason why those two states were
able to take out paragraph.
I do know that, um.
That there there are.
Other states.
That qualified immunity.
An organization that's outside
of our state.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, Senator, are we
Is New Mexico part of any other
type of
Uh, Interstate, Madam Chair,
professional licensing. I don't
under the professional license.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Now, under that,
Is there, is there a similar,
um,
Similar doctrine, similar
verbiage on that particular
compact.
Um, that the state of New Mexico
took out as well.
Madam Chair, that's a good
question that I'm not familiar
with, but I will tell you that
if they did, if it is in there,
the, the qualified immunity was
removed.
From New Mexico after.
We've been part of the compact.
So I remember the first year
that I was a state
representative. We had an
emergency bill happening because
our compact was expiring and it
hadn't been renewed.
That was renewed, right? So
we've had the the nursing
compact for many years.
But it was renewed in 2017.
OK, thank you for that. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair.
So, can, can I assume then with
this uh this body, the
interstate, uh.
Mission compact.
And I assume they can make their
own rules in regards to immunity
like we're, we're trying to do
here for our state as two other
states did.
Madam Chair, question.
Um, entities.
This is a non numbers.
And their staff.
As do many nonprofits. Most
nonprofits.
Enter in numbers of their staff.
And the members. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
What is, let me ask it this way
then.
What is the advantage to New
Mexico?
For us to delete.
That paragraph on page 22, how
does that, uh, how's that
advantageous to
Um
New Mexican healthcare.
Madam Chair, Senator, it takes
away the conflict of all.
immunity being allowed for
technically people who are
outside of New Mexico.
Where qualified immunity is New
Mexico.
So it. Thank you, thank you,
ma'am. I'm sure. So I'm really
trying to understand this. So,
um, let's just pick a state that
Has this qualified immunity
let's just say it's.
Utah.
Um, this doesn't inhibit access
to care for those people in Utah
that are that are using these uh
these compacts, nor I, I'm
assuming it would inhibit.
New Mexicans uh from getting
treatment as well.
Um
If this was
If this amendment doesn't,
doesn't pass.
Madam Chair Senator, what
We are not in a position.
We map entity, in this case that
they don't.
Have a higher level.
Of
Legal protection in New Mexico.
It with the.
quality of care that we receive,
it has nothing to do with the
licensure that we provide for
the licensure that happens, it's
serves.
And employees of the commission.
Thank you. Really, you're
telling me it doesn't really
matter then because based on
their
laws and I'm curious about
Nevada and Louisiana, if they
have.
Some type of similar regulations
or law in the book that we have,
which is why we're doing this
and, and it's, and I don't know,
it sounds like you don't know
either, and that, that's OK.
Um
Let me just get back to real
quick on the the other amendment
here in regards to
On page 14 lies 23 and 24 with
the, well, let me ask you this
way, um,
Before this amendment was
proposed, I heard all the
medical organizations.
Say, hey, we approve this. Um, I
don't know if the medical
organizations were aware this
amendment was coming because
this is the first time we saw it
as well.
I'm, I'm curious to know their
position on this because this
changes it.
Uh, significantly in my, in my
opinion.
Uh, that being said,
On page 14 with
The amendment, um,
Proposed by the chair, I believe
that you found friendly.
We're, we're talking about, we
just read it so I understand it.
Oh
So this goes back to
Disciplinary actions, correct?
Yes.
Yeah, Madam chair, yes,
investigations.
So a new section, a new letter,
uh E echo, a license
certification or authorization
that is automatically suspended.
Or revoked pursuant to this
article.
Shall be immediately reinstated.
If the suspension or revocation
is solely.
On the basis that a healthcare
practitioner performed.
Recommended or provided
reproductive healthcare services
or genderfirming care.
As authorized in Article One.
So, in article one of that, and
I have not read.
The interstate medical
Is this covered in there?
Already?
Madam Chair, uh, senator.
That's OK. Um, what happens with
the discipline.
Under this
The home state.
is really an important aspect.
There's some requirements for
that, one of those requirements
being that you reside there and
that you.
Practice their 25.
The, the, the licensing state.
Has a lot of authority over your
license.
Even though you get licensed in
other jurisdictions.
The home state.
Has a lot more authority, the
other states.
If
You get disciplined in that home
state where your licenses.
And the seed is the basis of
that license.
If your disciplined in that
license is revoked in that
revoked in all states.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So why are we only
talking about reproductive
healthcare. How can someone
can't get their license
immediately.
If they're in ortho or if
they're a urologist or if
they're
A cardiologist. Why, why are we
not talking about that and just
these two because
The president just had this
executive order, and I don't
know if genderforming care, do
you take that, Madam Chair and
senator?
As on, on children as well.
Or is that adults? Uh, is that
what's the spirit and intent on
this one?
Madam Chair, uh, senator.
I'm not. I stayed at a Holiday
Inn last night, yeah.
Um, so I can't actually answer
that question, um, I would love
to put you in contact with
someone that's OK. So I, I
guess, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
I'll go back to my original
question.
Why are we just talking about
these two specialties.
And not other specialties.
They're not being treated
equally.
That's, that's a problem for me
on this.
Madam Chair
I believe
I'm not speaking on behalf of
the.
A woman who proposed this.
But I believe that because of
the challenge in these
particular.
Medical practices.
And New Mexico's deep.
Eat, protection decisions.
As well as gender affirming
care.
That there's a goal and a desire
to ensure that.
If you are licensed.
In
Another state.
That's your home state, and that
state revokes your license.
But you're also licensed in New
Mexico.
immediately reinstate you as a
licensee in New Mexico outside
of the compact if this.
We
The treatments that you were
being denied.
Now, the caveat to that on this.
Is that
If you are involved in
negligence.
Or if you're involved in.
You know, something that would
be disciplined in in any
practice. It could be in any
kind of practice, even these
two.
Practices that are listed as
we're gonna give you a new
license. If what you have been
disciplined for would be
disciplinary act and we would
still have the ability.
To take disciplinary.
So it's not a protection. Thank
you, thank you for that answer.
uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
because I, I was on board on
this bill till I till I read
that and the immunity piece as
well cause I'm just not.
I'd like to hear what the
amendment here.
But your argument is
Well, the political environment
on reproductive healthcare,
which, by the way, is protected.
You can have an abortion from.
You know, the very earliest
times that you find out you're
pregnant all the way up to, you
know, up to birth in New Mexico,
that's protected, that that's
probably not gonna change.
Um, and that's unfortunate, but
that's just the way it is here
in New Mexico. That's what
people want. I, I'll respect
that. On the gender-affirming
care, I worry about, and we
talked about this on the Senate
floor yesterday. I think you
were there when Senator Brandt
brought up.
Uh, potentially losing federal
funding based on executive
orders coming down from the
administration.
That being said, also,
When we are looking at
We still have a fair amount of
traveling.
Medical providers that come
through New Mexico because we're
so short on providers, and yet,
If one of these providers here
are specialists.
Is having some type of issue
with their license, and we need
them here in New Mexico. We're
gonna say your cardiologist,
we're not gonna, we're not gonna
reinstate you, but if you are
one of these two.
People, we're gonna treat you
differently.
And, and that's, that's to me,
um, very, very pro problematic
because I really, really love
this bill.
And I, I think of Antoine
Senator Antoinette Sidil Lopez
with her bill that she had in
telehealth.
And I think this bill would be
very, very helpful, except now.
Uh, because of this amendment.
Um
Makes it very, very problematic.
And um I'll leave on this note,
uh, Madam Chair and senator.
Um
My, my very best to your husband
going through pancreatic cancer
treatment. I, I pray he's, he's
doing well.
And um
I also wanna just uh if uh
Michael is still listening,
who's the father of his son
going through that, Michael, I
mean, we hope your son uh
conquers that and lives a very
healthy life, but I think uh
we're discriminating here.
In this compact
I think um
I have some concerns with
Senator Scott brought up. If
we're taking out this immunity
piece.
We may not get in any way, and
that's gonna be a huge problem
in relation to access for New
Mexicans on healthcare.
So, um, Senator, if, if, if
these bills, if these amendments
weren't there, you'd have my
support, but I appreciate you uh
trying to move the ball forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
I'm sorry. May I just explain?
Sure, OK.
I will just say, um, Madam
Chair, senator, that.
This amendment
Doesn't add anything, those
practices.
That are authorized in New
Mexico will not change compact.
But if we are authorized to join
into the compact.
This language does not change.
What's authorized.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, however, we are
specifically.
Um, calling out two specialties.
That will immediately reinstate
your license but not other.
We're treating.
These providers differently.
And I don't think that's, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I'm still on the
amendment, um, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um.
I want to talk a little bit more
about the amendment on page 14
and just make sure I understand
this.
Correctly. And I'm gonna provide
a scenario and
Um
If a medical doctor in Texas.
Loses their licensure.
For providing
Certain reproductive or gender
affirming care.
Their license
would be reinstated
automatically and.
Am I tracking? So, Madam Chair,
Senator, if a.
In New Mexico, I mean, sorry, in
Texas as their home state.
Then the disciplinary action.
In Texas, but if they're
licensed in Tennessee and
they're in the compact, and they
go and practice in Texas and do
not follow Texas laws.
And Texas disciplines them for
that, let's say for providing
women's health or gender
affirming care, and it's not
authorized in Texas.
And Texas can take action
against it.
But it doesn't odyssey then.
Could say, OK, well, we're going
to take disciplinary action too.
But if the state that you're.
Removed from is the state that
your home state.
And I know that's really.
challenging. That's why I was
all the other states.
But all the other states don't
have as much impact. It's more
discretionary, um, that another
state could then say, well,
based upon what happened in
Texas.
Um, even though Tennessee is
your home state, we're gonna
take this so this provision
would simply be related to.
If they're in Tennessee.
And their licenses revoked from
Tennessee.
Then they're automatically not a
part of the compact.
They can no longer be.
And what we're saying is, is
that we'll, we'll already have
all, I will not say that I don't
think even with this language.
I think that the medical board
action is, and they're going to
take, they're gonna make a
decision.
It's not going to be, you know,
an automatic.
Right, the medical board is
still going to take the time to
look at and make sure that there
wasn't some negligence or some.
Even if it was gender affirming
care.
Was it something that would have
been illegal.
In New Mexico for some reason
that New Mexican lies.
We're saying they'll be moved
into a New Mexico state license.
And again, it's going to be if
they want to, right? We're not
going to force them to do. Thank
you Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um.
The original
Scenario that I offered.
If a provider in Texas.
Their license as the home was
affected by providing.
They would still, it would be,
it would.
Have the potential to have a
license. Yeah, um, madam chair,
senator, what New Mexico would
do would then just move them
cause there's always gonna be
going to be, are you applying
for a compact license or you
applying for a New Mex so if
they applied for a compact
license.
And
They had then they would be
given the option to
automatically restrict them to
only practice in New Mexico, and
I do believe that.
Medical board, there wasn't
then.
alternative reason.
Um, for that license being
revoked. Yes, and Madam Chair,
Senator, what I'm trying to get
at is.
could this potentially attract
medical providers to because
we're offering protection.
For these two certain areas that
are under attack on the federal
level.
So Madam Chair, senator, that's
a really good question, but I
will just say that I'm not sure.
As much as we folks because we
allow, it doesn't, it doesn't
add or subtract from the
treatment that's authorized
here.
Being a part of the compact.
Um, is attractive to folks
because if they get like, they
could potentially crack Colorado
or Texas.
Think of our families who live
in Las Cruces, who may want to,
you know, also work over in El
Paso.
Or our families who live on any
of our other borders, they may
want, but our license alone
doesn't authorize them to do
that.
And so that in and of itself, I
believe, but if people are
attracted to Mexico because
they're authorized to provide
that will be completely out.
Thank you.
Um,
excuse me, Senator Hickey.
Hickey, I almost feel like Madam
Chair, Senator Hickey, that you
should be answering some of
these questions for me.
Uh, I'd be tempted to, but
that's not the uh procedure we
use so.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, um,
After, uh, and, and this is
And to be focused on uh the
third part of the amendment.
The, um,
After some discussion with
My colleague to
The left. Uh, I understand the
limitations.
Um, in terms of New Mexico law
not being able to sign the
compact.
And
Um,
But I think the most compelling
part.
of the other discussions as you
were talking with Senator Black.
About Nevada.
In particular,
That
We apply
We apply with the stipulation.
If they're going to reject this
particular stipulation, they're
gonna reject us altogether.
And so it, it kind of becomes
mute, but they did allow
avana to do that.
And
Given
The long history of not.
Being able to join the compact.
You know, 10 years ago, it was a
little academic, um, now it's
critical.
Now it's just, it's functionally
critical. People's lives are at
stake without us being in that
compact. People cannot find
healthcare.
Anywhere. Yesterday I
Because of my relationships, I
backdoor to practices to to get
something done with uh an issue.
I'm one of very few people who
know how to do that because of
those past relationships because
most back doors are closed now.
The Legislators, everyone.
I mean, we have to have.
Access through this compact.
clinicians who can work through
a telemedicine type of
situation.
And even
And there's even physical
Diagnostic electronic
information that they can get to
help make a decision with
someone in an office somewhere.
So it's so fundamental that that
we get this.
Um
And, and seeing that one
example, I, uh,
I mean, I'm glad I brought the
point up.
And I, but I also see the
clarification.
But if we come in and say only,
and, and we get rejected, then
we're back here next year and
we're gonna have to figure out
something because
People's lives.
And, and they're suffering.
People who have chronic care
exacerbation.
We can't, yeah.
A relief from their symptoms,
their pain.
The travel that we talked about
is much bigger than any party
issue, any, any of the tiginous
issue.
Um, we have got to get people
care and this compact.
Offers that opportunity. So I
wanted to have a chance and, and
I really appreciate the bait
because I learned a lot here and
um but I, I would encourage my
colleagues.
Do not
Get stuck on that issue, cause I
think we're OK. And the second
issue we can do ifs, ands, or
wherefores all over the place.
Um
And, and maybe it's not perfect
in your eyes.
People getting access to care.
I, I would hope.
From my, my viewpoint, my
opinion.
People being able to get access
to care to relieve their
suffering. We don't hear about
the ones who die.
Because they can't get access to
care, but they're dying.
That you would, you would
overlook these other pieces and
we come back and fix it somehow,
some other time, but that you.
Consider voting for both this
amendment as well as this bill.
But I just, I wanted to be able
to say I learned something here.
I thank you, Senator.
And um and I hope that you can
put that
Compassion. I heard that.
Senator from Utah asked for
Trump and, and chainsaw man.
What's his name? Musk, yeah,
chainsa man.
You know, they have some
compassion.
And let that be your guiding
light as you deal with this bill
and law. Thank you.
Thank you. And then Senator
Gallegos for the first time and
then we'll come back to Senator
Serio Lopez for a second.
Ericas. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator.
Uh, uh, last Friday when you're
on the agenda, I put a definite
yes on this now with this
amendment.
I'm gonna be a no, but I look
forward to it being a bipartisan
yes because getting in compact,
uh, just a couple of questions
being that we have an automatic
using your words, you have the
two tracks, compact and
automatic mixer license.
Why would you need this
amendment?
If you already had that option.
My center
Madame Chair, Senator, I'm not
sure that I said automatic.
I, what I, what I, what I mean
it is
the compact license within, I
think she said 7 days.
But that's once it's complete
and a complete application.
If you apply for it probably
shorter than 7 days.
If you apply for, which is
they're not going to be that is
required, your transition,
nothing is automatic about an
expedited license.
Yeah
Or the the the language that was
put in here.
What this language says is that.
If
Your license is revoked New
Mexico will.
Consider
Because they're gonna have to
look at what was the
disciplinary action in relation
to.
Providing you with access to a
new medical.
Medical, medical license without
having to go through.
I appreciate that, uh.
Yes, when you're on school
board.
It would be like bringing a
teacher in.
From another area that
We've not vetted, is that
correct?
representative, the vetting
would have already happened if
we're part of the compact
through the compact in our
state, but not in not in our
state until we get into the
compact that's what I'm
understanding. Take someone
else's.
Very and take it as credible
information, Madam Chair, that's
correct, Madam Chair and
Senator, my last question is,
thinking it through back uh when
we had the father with child
with Cantron.
On the zoom
Uh
Adding E or subtracting d.
What does it do to the effect
of, uh, to the compact.
Just his issue.
insurance
Manager, um, senator, it, it
makes it if we are in this
compact, need to have second
opinions or.
Um, consultation in Mexico will
be able to have that with 4
physicians in 40 other states in
the District of Columbia,
I'm gonna apologize. I don't
know if it was my hearing aid or
your mask, but can you just give
me, would it affect him?
Positively or negatively.
Madam Char, it will be a huge,
huge positive impact on his
child.
An insurance center which the
addition of E or subtraction of
D.
Be a positive ad.
Madam Chair, joining the
compound.
And chair center of what I'm
trying to get to is in his
situation.
This E or D matter.
Madam Chair, I, I, I can't
answer that. I don't, I, I mean,
I know he talked about the hair
that he was getting.
But I, I don't, I don't know how
either of those would impact
healthcare in New Mexico. What
impacts us not being part of
this compact.
Oh, Madam Chair and Senator, and
I'm going to be
Uh, consider my wife's got
cancer, so I understand the need
for.
The consultation, but I would
think that.
If reading this amendment.
You would look through what it
would do for you.
For me
The general of this child
because.
That's reality of the original
discussion.
Was what adding to the compact.
Would do for him and for your
husband.
Right now you don't have an
answer on that.
And I don't understand if he's
at it or he subtracted.
What the obligation or what the
opportunities or what the losses
of opportunities are.
your husband
My wife
And that young man
Uh, I just wanted to clarify
that because I think now sort of
like um my colleague.
Our only doctor in the room
says, uh, we can fix this
sometime later.
I think that's a bad way to do
policy.
So with that all you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator for a 2nd
time, Senator Silvio Lopez.
OK.
Thank you, Senator Scott for a
second time.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
senator, would it be?
A license to practice medicine
in New Mexico, whether it's
Here
Or via the compact.
would still leave.
of practicing physician subject
to.
New Mexico laws.
If they're practicing here, is
that correct, madam?
Madam Chair, Senator, that's
absolutely correct.
OK.
Madam Chair Senator, I'm, I'm
gonna vote against this
amendment and I, and because I
believe
That if it is not adopted, we'll
have a better chance.
Of getting into the compact.
As the other 38 states.
That are subject.
That
qualified immunity.
have already accepted.
I think even if the amendment
passes.
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
I'll still vote for the bill on
the off chance.
That we are able to get in.
And I see no reason why these
commissioners
should accept that.
Given that they are
So far removed from the actual
care of the patient.
Why would they not qualified
immunity.
And Madam Chair and Senator, I
think this
Vividly demonstrates.
The whole
That New Mexico legal system,
the New Mexico trial lawyers.
Have
On our medical.
Liability
And that desperately needs to
change, and if this amendment
doesn't go through, that would
be a small step.
In the right direction.
Uh, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
all.
Thank you.
Lopez on a motion for a past due
pass on the amendment.
With a second from Senator Nava.
And if you could call the roll,
please.
another block.
Senator Boone.
Oh
Senator Charlie
And our Gallegos? No, ma'am.
And her nova, yes.
And our Pinto
Senator Scott.
No
And I said Lopez.
In her hickey. Yes.
Lopez. Yes.
Revealism amended senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Now we're back on the bill. Are
there any questions, further
questions or discussion?
Senator Block.
Thank you, um
Madam Chair,
I, I maybe I, it was mentioned
earlier and I.
Missed it. Um, how many times
senator has, have we gone
through this to get a bill to
join this um compact.
Madam Chair, Senator, I've been
working on on compound other
professions around 7 years.
Thank you. So, Madam Chair,
Senator, how about joining this
particular
Um
Interstate medical license or
compact. How, how many times
have we've been trying to get
this bill passed,
Madam
social work, physical therapy,
occupational therapy, I could go
on.
OK, thank you. Um, so Matt,
Madam Chair Senator, and where,
where did it die last time? Was
it voted down or did it just um
Ran out of time.
Madam Chair, um, I, I, I can
tell you that they, they, those
other professions have, um, uh,
challenges.
Um, all related to what we're
talking about today, for the
most part.
Um, but I do believe that the
medical bill was introduced in
the house last year. And I don't
know. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, do you know, do you
know why?
I wasn't in the house at the
time. I was the staff and I was
supposed to be um neutral, so
I'll mean.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and did you happen to see
the bill at the time?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, what
was that? Did you happen to see
that
this previous bill at the time,
it hasn't changed. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
You can call her.
We were on the amendment.
Right, that was the amendment
that was passed, so yes.
Now we're on the bill. Thank
you. I think I've gotten too
much into the discussion.
Um
What is the wish of the
committee, Senator Pinto?
Question, yes.
We're still in discussion.
So this, um.
Going into this, I don't see in
the pardon me, madam chair,
appropriate.
I'm sorry, um, uh, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair and members of,
could you speak to why there's
no appropriation on the bill.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator,
there's not any cost will be for
the licensee.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh,
So when we talked, I don't.
So the home state is really for
the license.
And you mentioned that you, uh,
if there's a withdrawal.
by the state.
Or the home state.
So
Hypothetically speaking, you're
getting care in another state.
Of a sudden something happens to
unpack and they
to withdraw.
Um
How does that affect the care of
the madam chair, I'm not sure
that I'm understanding your
question.
compact state with them. We're
saying it's OK to do that.
All of a sudden there's a
withdrawal.
What happens with the patient
that's receiving that care.
Madam Chair, Senator, if, if
another state in their
physicians would no longer be
able to practice outside of
their state, and our physicians
would.
But what happens to the.
Madam Chair, that I'm, I'm not
sure that you're receiving
treatment in the other state.
They're providing then there's a
withdrawal.
Does the treatment stopped so
far there's not been a state
that's into it.
But, but honestly like I have a
whole chain of doctors who have
moved out of New Mexico.
That I've had to then go find
another, the patient will likely
have to find a new physician.
And madam chair so that cost.
is incurred by the patient. Find
another position, Madam Chair,
Senator,
I, this has nothing to do.
That would be, I I don't know I
I'm not really I'm sorry, I'm
not understanding.
The
The patient would have to pay
one doctor or another, and so if
they have to get another
physician, yes, they.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
The um
That's where I'm having a little
bit like oh it's gonna be, it's
not gonna cost us anything.
I think it's gonna cost
somebody. When did these states
start these compacts.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, the,
the compacts have been around
that this particular compact has
been around for a while because
it does take a while for states
to join. Um, but as I said
before, there's, and even if
this law passed out of the
Senate and the House and is
signed by the governor, New
Mexico will take as much as a
year before we.
would be considered any cost to
the medical board.
And it would be at a much later
time and within the next, so
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
They were saying enter into this
compact.
But we don't know how long the
compacts have been in practice.
And we don't, we know that
nobody's withdrawn.
To this point
No
To really say they were
successful in that sense.
Um, you're saying, well, it
takes a while to enter to the
into the compact.
But some of the discussion on
the amendment is kind of about.
Developments that have happened.
During a
4 year period.
So if it's been less than 8
years, less than 16 years.
I find it hard to really say
that.
They're successful.
Um, and having these compacts in
that.
I don't think they've really
been tested.
To say that this is something
really we but we should do.
Um
Because it
In some sense.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
We're not meeting the needs of
the patients locally.
Or even with our own.
Hospitals
Trying to really seek out um and
do what we can to meet our.
are
New Mexicans needs.
Um
We're gonna, we're gonna go
elsewhere.
I, I, I, I, it's.
Uh
Especially if we don't really
know how long these compacts
have been around.
That we've actually really
worked to.
Um
do what we need
for the madam
put this forward in this time
thing it's, it's really.
Great, um,
But when we talk about
evidence-based.
Practice data.
We're not really
You looking that far back.
I mean, I can see where we're
trying to.
support this thing.
But
I don't really see where we've
really.
Do all we can.
Are you already in some?
but
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
this is really about the
patients and.
The, um, I just looked it up
really quickly. The the medical
board has been licensing people
for and and the compact came
into existence in 2013, it was
first introduced.
And the first state started
joining it and again, I will
just I will just reiterate that
having.
is not
Medicine in New Mexico as the
authority to make decisions.
So when
I know we talked a little bit
about liability too.
How does that work if the
patient seeking care in another
Madam Chair, Senator, could you,
I'm, I'm not, could you say that
again?
Um and referring back to the
Madam Chair, the if the uh
patient.
From someone who is outside of
New Mexico, divided where the
patient is.
And so that would remain in New
Mexico.
Thank you, thank you for that.
Thank you, Senator Hickey, and
then Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
and
No, I'd like to speak to a
couple of your points.
Um
I, I wish this were an easy way
out of our doctor shortage.
It's, it's not.
Um
A lot of the time the
individual's gonna need to be
seen.
The um that through
telemedicine, they, they can at
least get partway there.
And having telemedicine for
issues that, where they really
don't need to be seen or
examined with the hands or what
have you. Um,
That takes the pressure off the
current docs who are already
here.
And overwhelmed.
Um
I know one group who has stopped
a large single specialty group
to stop taking any more
referrals.
There are 2000 referrals behind.
And they know they have to clean
that up first.
This could potentially take some
of that 2000 pressure off of
them and get these docs
available.
to be seeing patients sooner.
The um
We are, we are undertaking
efforts.
Um
Uh, a few years ago in
discussing with David Abbey.
Uh, chair of the Senate Finance
Committee or the head of the
center of finance excuse me, not
the chair.
Uh, he began to understand how
The
Large scale, 50% of the
reimbursement in this state
being Medicaid and that being at
60 to 70% of Medicare.
Was making it difficult for
Large groups, any groups to be
able to recruit. Uh, I think he
mentioned.
went very popular group where it
was only 2 weeks to get in and
the last time he checked it was
6 months.
He began to understand that and
did agree to raise.
Medicaid payments to 120% of
Medicare for primary care and
behavioral health, the next year
up to 150%. So we are making.
Some steps
To get to the reimbursement
issue, uh, controversial as it
is, I do have a bill.
should be hearing it here.
Uh, 176 that addresses the
malpractice issues.
In, uh, really putting the
patient at the center of it, not
being harmed.
Uh,
Uh, potentially. So, but that'll
be coming. So we are addressing
these issues, but, you know,
when someone
Uh
When a doctor retires here.
Patience still has to find
somebody somewhere.
Um
Some, some folks, you know,
they, in the old days, when you
retired, you made arrangements
with other practices to take
over your patients.
Nobody can take him anymore.
They're too overwhelmed.
It just, it's, it's kind of
well, or, or it's a you go all
the way back to the very, very
end of the queue.
And it 6 months at a minimum now
for some specialties up to a
year and a half.
So what this compact allows.
people from other states who at
least could begin to initiate
the history, um,
and perhaps some
Uh
That uh uh electronic uh
diagnostic information to come
in to at least begin to see the
patient, and I would
think that when a patient lost
the physician here, they could
call the board or through the
compact and put a notice out,
there are clinicians in other
states who actually where there
are XSSysicians in urban areas,
we're looking for business and
are doing the telemedicine, and
this ties them in. And so, you
know, we should be able to to
help that individual.
But
I think that what this really
does is it increases the access
that we don't have.
And um,
You know, getting, getting
assistance.
Uh, is gonna be important.
Uh, if they're in the exchange,
well, maybe they don't have a
navigator anymore. I heard that
was being cut out by Congress.
Um, but
But there are
Methologies.
You, uh, through the um
Uh, the physician or the
provider recruitment, I can't
remember their name, they're not
for profit that gets funded by
who can help guide people where
they might be, and if we get the
compact,
You just get a list as big as
this room.
And so, I really think that
I I would hope that you look at
this as a, as a patient.
Answer
You know, rather than a, a
burden bill, and I agree with
you, we've got to act fast.
Be able to get the compensation
up, I'll have a bill next year.
Raising this is a little
complicated, but it's part of
what you got to do, raising
commercial.
A floor of the
Like 200% of Medicare.
So that that then can be used in
the formula that computes the
maximum amount.
That you can raise Medicaid.
To on the Medicare scale, and
right now that's 175.
Um, and, but we're gonna have to
get
Because our commercial on the
average is, is much lower than
200. And so there are a lot of
pieces that are gonna come
together that
Will hopefully within the next
few years.
bring people to the state to
treat, but this is a stopgap.
And I again, I want to say
people are suffering and dying
today because we don't have it.
Oh, thank you.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate those words from uh
Doctor Senator Hickey because I
think I'm one of the few
Republicans to sign on to your
uh malpractice bill, which I
think we'll move the ball
forward, but, um, Senator, I, I
want to
Really stressed the point where
this might increase access to,
you know, to do the
telemedicine.
But it's not doing anything from
Um, bringing doctors in.
Because doctors are still not
coming here for a variety of
reasons to New Mexico,
specialists and things like
that. So when you have to wait.
My case, not to be too
transparent, but 7 months, uh,
for a urologist.
Uh, that's not very
compassionate, like, you know,
Doctor Hickey was talking about,
we're not very compassionate
here with what we've done to
healthcare.
Um, Senator in New Mexico.
And I want to understand, I want
people to understand this is not
giving more access to specialty
care by any means. You're still
gonna have to wait months to go
see a dermatologist or a
urologist or a
Cardiologist, whatever it is.
And my, my question is, when it
comes to uh medical malpractice.
Uh, for this type of care.
Is it?
They follow the doctors
following the malpractice laws.
Of the states that they are in
getting treated in this context.
So if they have a medical
license in Texas and one in New
Mexico, but they're seeing.
A New Mexican goes to Texas to
get care.
And something goes wrong.
Um, in the, in the New Mexican
decides to sue the doctor.
Who's licensed in both states,
according to this compact, you
can do that.
Uh, what malpractice laws are,
or, or which ones have
jurisdiction?
Madam chair Senator, the
patient.
Where the patients located and
treated is the laws that will.
Thank you so, Madam Chair,
Senator, if the patient is going
to Texas.
Where
Are they under the Texas?
Malpractice jurisdiction if the
patient goes to Madam Chair, if
the patient goes to Texas for.
OK.
So that's kind of my point is
that a lot of these providers
Especially in Texas, because
they, I mean, they're flooded
with doctors from what these
hospital groups are telling me.
Because they have uh low.
Uh, caps on medical malpractice.
So,
You know, if, if you're seeing a
specialist in in Texas.
You're gonna, that guy or that
woman doc is going to say, I'm
not going over to Mexico, you're
coming to Texas because the risk
is way less on me.
Uh, and, and the laws are
friendlier over here, which is
why access in healthcare access
in Texas is one of the best in
the country.
So I just wanted to make sure I
understood that point where.
New Mexican New Mexicans may
still have to travel for health
care based on the providers.
Having a lower risk in the
particular state.
That they're in.
Um, I think that's something
that we need to understand, so
this will not really
Uh, attract doctors or other
professional healthcare
providers to New Mexico.
Uh, but it does get them in the
door, um, like, uh, Senator
Hickey was talking about and I
agree with that.
Um
So I think that's an important
point to make is
It's not a recruiting tool by
any means, because they ain't
coming here, and I hope, uh,
With Senator Hickey's bill that
I signed on to, we can fix the
malpractice uh laws here in New
Mexico to get people here
because right now.
No one wants to come here, and
it's sad because we have uh.
A lot of older docs, no, no
offense to uh my friend Doctor
Hickey, um, a lot of them
retired, they stay here, and now
you've just stressed the system
even more, a lot more.
And um
You're still gonna cause a lot
of New Mexicans.
to travel to get care. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Napa.
of
There's a motion for a do pass
from Senator Nolan.
With a second from Senator Salio
Lopez.
And if you could call the roll,
please.
Senator Block
No one to explain my vote.
Senator boon.
No
Senator Charlie.
And our Gallegos.
I'd like to explain my vote.
No, and I'd like to explain my
thoughts.
And another
Yes.
Pinto
Scott
Center Serio Lopez.
Sinner Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
And to explain their votes,
Senator Gallegos.
I'm sure at the center block was
first, but I will.
Uh, Goa, I just wanted to say
that I, I really like the idea
of the compact.
Um
I actually thought that the
amendment was to Trump in New
Mexico, then Doctor Hicke has
already explained.
Use the uh name the term I've
never heard before, chainsaw
man, so, uh, maybe we're
chainsaw Manning.
Protection from New Mexico, but
I just think that we should stay
on the
Original thought of the compact.
I hope there's changes later.
Uh, that would make it easier
for me to vote for it on the
floor, but to fix something
later.
Is not the way to do.
put that on you.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
reason I'm, I'm voting though is
I think you're gonna have some
serious issues in regards to the
immunity piece from what I'm
I'm getting from some of these
uh.
People involved in this compact.
The other piece is, again,
We talk about treating everyone
equally here in New Mexico, and
we're not doing it in here.
We're treating different
healthcare providers, different
docs, differently than other
docs, which
Uh, I, I just, I, I want to
support this bill, but I just
can't because we're, we're
discriminating, in my opinion
against other healthcare
providers when we shouldn't be.
In regards to um
You know, um,
Chainsaw, man, I mean, I think
it's
There's so much more money that
we could be dumping into
healthcare where we just found
already less than a month.
55 billion in waste.
That should be going to
healthcare instead of uh Baghdad
Big Bird. Um, I would love to
see.
A lot of this fraud, waste and
abuse being
Identified is a good thing, come
back to healthcare to help.
New Mexicans get the care that
they need so we can have prices
that doctors will be accepting
patients, and right now it's not
that way, so.
Thank you, Senator, for
everything, and again, once
again my best to your husband.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
My yes vote was reluctant.
But I do believe
But this
Deserves a robust debate.
On the floor of the Senate and
perhaps
Some amendments.
To make this piece of
legislation better.
I don't think
Joining a compact.
Solves any of our problems.
But it might help.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much. That's all right.
Thank you, Senator Cynthia
Lopez.
Thank you, madam, thank you for
committee members. Um, I am on
my way to Pope Joy for Les
Miserables, so.
You all have a great afternoon.
Thank you,
Senator Les Miserables.
It's
Senator Padilla, if you would
join us up front, Senate Bill
78.
Senate Bill 78.
Nurse anesthetist.
role.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
vice chair, uh, you want to join
us down here as a co-sponsor of
this, please.
Um
And uh ranking member and
members of the committee, uh,
we're here before you with the
Senate Bill 78. I do want to
just say ahead of time, Madam
Chair, a couple of things before
I I jumped into the explanation
of the bill.
Um, I do have uh Doctor Shannon
Allen, who is the president of
the association here to my left.
I have my
Uh, a chief co-sponsor here to
my right, uh, Senator Doctor
Hickey.
And I will tell you that 2 years
ago, the two of us shepherded
through the um AA's a piece of
legislation similar to this, and
we agreed to get this done as
well. And so here we are
together again. But I do want to
let you know, Madam Chair, that
this bill has a lot of uh
tremendous bipartisan support.
We also have Senator Trujillo
who, who just exited the room,
uh, obviously Senator Hickey,
Senator Gallegos, Senator Block,
and Senator uh Mo Maestas, and
so I just want to let you know
that ahead of time that we have
a tremendous amount of support
here, almost uh almost a third
of your committee is
co-sponsoring this bill.
Um, and so I just want to make
that mention. And
I'm just gonna introduce it here
pretty fast. Um, essentially 78
uh grant certified registered
nurse anesthetists.
About 10 times fast after 3
years of carrying this
legislation, I can't, I'm still
having a hard time getting that
out. Uh, the authority to
practice independently without
the requirement for supervision
by physicians, osteopathic
physicians, dentists, or
podiatrists. Uh, the bill
defines independent. The
independent role is performing
any action related to anesthesia
care without supervision.
Um, the key provisions in the
bill.
Our licensure requirements, uh,
CRNAs must be registered nurses
who have completed an accredited
nurse anesthesia education
program and are certified by the
National Board of Certification
and recertification for nurse
anesthetists.
Uh, scope of practice is also a
key provision CRNAs are
authorized to provide
preoperative, intraoperative,
and post-operative anesthesia
care and related services
including ordering diagnostic
tests in accordance with
guidelines issued by their
national Professional
association.
Independent practice, as I
mentioned a little while ago,
CRNAs may function independently
or in collaboration with other
healthcare providers as per the
policies of that actual
healthcare facility and whatever
that's designed and wherever
they've agreed to work.
Uh, independent role, as I said,
is defined as performing
anesthesia-related actions
without supervision.
Uh, they do have prescriptive
authorities, CRNAs with the
prescriptive authority in
anesthesia practice can
practice.
prescribe and administer
therapeutic measures, including
dangerous drugs and controlled
substances, etc. um, expedited
licensure, the board of nursing
is required to issue expedited
licensing to CRNAs for this
purpose.
Um, the pros and why we really
want this done, Madam Chair, is
Um, enhanced access to care
primarily in our rural areas,
and I do want to let you know
that what I'm holding in my hand
right now, Madam Chair, is
Just a whole list of support
from primarily rural parts of
New Mexico, but hospital CEOs,
eye surgeons, general surgeons,
vascular surgeons, operating
room, uh, charge nurses, uh,
gastroenterologists, surgical uh
services directors, uh, New
Mexico uh school, I'm sorry, New
Mexico State University School
of Nursing Director, uh,
patients themselves, pediatric
dental surgeons, foot and ankle,
and I could go on and on and on,
but I do have them in letter
format here. And then I also
want to let you know that um
If you look at where these
letters that I just spoke of
come from.
They're all over New Mexico,
truth or consequences to
Lovington, Los Alamos, Las
Vegas, Grants, Gallup, Espanola,
Farmington, Santa Fe, Las
Cruces, Albuquerque. There's a
tremendous amount of support for
this work and I, I, I just want
you to know what I'm kind of
flipping through here, all of
the support letters that I just
referenced. I want to make
mention of that because this is
a critical part of sort of the
healthcare ecosystem for New
Mexico in some communities,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee have never had a
healthcare professional other
than a CRNA. And we want to make
sure that they are able to
continue practicing what they're
doing, uh, cost efficiency is
another reason we want this
done. Professional autonomy and
also alignment with national
trends.
Um, so those are the highlights
of the legislation and I'm sure
there'll be some questions. I'm
gonna ask uh Doctor Allen to say
a couple of, you know what, I'm
sorry, Doctor Hickey, if he'd
like to say a few words and then
um
And then we'll go to Doctor
Allen.
Madam Chair and committee
members, uh, there's so many
perspectives uh to site on why
this is such an important bill
that kind of in light of uh the
Lack of access to care around
the state, having this bill
where there's clear definition
that the CRNAs are fully
independent, and there's no
question about that is critical
because they will be able to
help hospitals and, and are
already doing so, uh, doing
procedures, that's why the an
general anesthesia, uh, and
procedures are unfortunately in
this country, we tend to reward
that more than cognitive.
in our payment system. But it's
really fundamental to
particularly the smaller rural
hospitals that they are able to
have these procedures done.
These individuals are highly
qualified, they can oversee it.
They can get it done there. And
uh it, it's just an expansion of
care in the state and all the
other reasons that my colleague
identified, but I just wanted to
bring that particular
perspective that it does enhance
the revenue of our otherwise
vulnerable. And thank you.
Madam Chair, with your
permission, like Doctor Allen to
say a minute or two of why she's
here and why she supports this
legislation.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Shannon
Allen. I'm a certified
registered nurse anesthetist,
and we say CRNA because it's
much easier to say and I'm very
happy for us to use that today.
As he mentioned, I'm the
president of the New Mexico CRNA
Association. I am from Lee
County, which is a rural area.
I've been doing anesthesia for
over 25 years there do
approximately 1000 anesthetics a
year, so that means I've given
well over 20,000 anesthetics
without supervision in my career
safely.
We have the trust, we have the
support of our community, we are
an all CRNA county with two
hospitals and both have all CRNA
groups, which is the common
trend in New Mexico.
Currently, CRNAs do between 79
and 80% of all anesthetics in
the state of New Mexico, uh,
without supervision, and this
comes from billing trends.
In the rural areas, uh, we do in
the very high 90 percentiles,
um, so we're we're, we're doing
a huge chunk there for the state
and filling the gap.
Senate Bill 78 will clarify the
nurse Practice Act language and
give us clear roles. It ensures
our patients have continued
access to care, and it makes
sure that CRNAs like myself are
working to our full potential.
The beauty of this bill is that
it allows choices and it's
dynamic.
Hospitals can change their
policies as team compositions
change or
Just like during the pandemic
with the stroke of a pen, they
can change their policies, uh,
cause we needed all boots on the
ground whenever the pandemic
hit.
This bill was vetted and
successfully passed this
committee in the prior session
and like senator uh Padilla said
we did run out of time with one
committee left.
Uh, in closing, I just want to
take off my CRNA hat and I want
to put on my patient and mom hat
and let you know that I recently
had surgery myself in Lee
County.
I trusted my colleagues to care
for me, and they did a great job
and with the mom hat my daughter
also, there is nothing more
precious in life than the gift
of a child, and I put her in the
hands of my colleagues because I
trust them and she did great. In
fact, she woke up rapping uh in
the pack you like a rap star, so
you know that might be a
potential future career for her,
but, uh, I just wanted to say
thank you for all of your
support and I appreciate all of
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, want to just say that the
legislation is passed through
this now. You have a lot of new
members, Madam Chair, but, um,
has passed this committee 3
times previously. Um, and again,
um, with our autonomous practice
in the CRN, the field of CRNAs,
we are a very attractive state
for folks to relocate to, which
they do, which will really help
to fill this, this gap that we
have in healthcare here in New
Mexico, primarily in our rural
areas. So thank you very much,
manager. That's our opening
statement.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, let's go. Is there anyone in
the audience in support?
Of this bill?
And if you want to make a
statement and identify yourself
please with the microphone.
You do so.
Madam, I'm, I'm the register
lobbyist for the New Mastic
Association of nurses,
anesthetists. Um, I just want to
remind this body that this bill
has been vetted.
Uh, not only here on the side
and the Senate but also in the
house, um, the majority of you
have voted yes.
Uh, for this bill.
Um, that's the, the first point.
The second point is this is
about
Quality and safety.
Cost and value and your
constituents will be able to
continue accessing.
Quality anesthesia services
around the state.
And 3rd
Please vote yes for this bill
because I promised my daughter
that bill passes, I take her to
Meow Wolf.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is David Hussley.
I am a currently practicing CRNA
in a rural hospital, and I would
like you all to support this
bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mia
Austin, and I am a certified
registered nurse anesthetist,
the RNA. I currently provide
anesthesia services at Socorro
General Hospital.
Where I'm one of 3 solo
anesthesia providers, um,
serving this critical access
hospital. Um, I strongly support
Senate Bill 78 because it is
essential to ensuring continued
access to quality healthcare in
our rural communities.
This legislation will help us
maintain and expand the vital
services we provide, allowing
patients to underserved areas to
receive the care they need close
to home.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Is there anyone in opposition,
please come forward, identify
yourself and make a statement.
Yes, my name is Doctor Margaret
Miller. I'm a semi-retired
anesthesiologist.
With over 33 years of clinical
experience to where CRNAs were
trained.
Our independent CRNA practice
does not lower the cost of
medical care as they are
reimbursed at the same rate as
anesthesiologists.
Recent studies have shown that
independent CRNA practice does
not increase access. The current
opt-out practice status that
Cernas have in this state has
not ameliorated the shortage in
all areas. In fact, this bill
may decrease patient access to
medical care by reducing a net
number of operating room
anesthesia providers. CRNAs will
be motivated to leave the
stressful demanding operating
room environment to open more
lucrative medi spa.
and conduct ketamine clinics,
outpatient clinics are not
aggressively scrutinized for
safe practice standards when
compared to hospital facilities.
The people in New Mexico deserve
high quality health care. This
bill will not achieve that
objective.
Thank you.
Is there anyone on Zoom?
No one? OK.
And then we'll go to questions
or comments from committee
members.
There's a motion for a due
passed from Senator Silvio Lopez
with the second from Senator
Charlie.
And there's still time for
discussion, so.
Senator block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I'd like to thank um
Well, I'm a sponsoring this as
well with, with you all and um
I'm very happy to do this
because I'm a big proponent of
access and I, I understand the
doctor who's opposed to this,
uh, her position as well, but I
Um
I'm gonna vote for this bill,
but I just want to get a couple
of questions out there, Madam
Chair and, uh, Senator.
Doctor, Doctor, no, nurse.
Doctor anesthetist I feel like
spies like us, doctor, doctor.
Um,
So.
So let me just ask real quick
here because PAs are treated a
little bit differently than
nurse practitioners, uh, PA's,
uh, my wife's getting ready to
go through the program. They
have to be supervised by, by a
doc.
Do you have to be supervised,
um, by a do because I
In the bill here on page 3 in
the underline on line 8 it says
as used in this subsection
independent role means
performing any action.
Including determining,
preparing, administering, and
monitoring anesthesia care,
anesthesia-related services
without the supervision of
another healthcare provider. Um,
And I don't know what what your
hospitals like down in Lee
County. I, I live in Rio Rancho,
so it's a little bit different
for me.
But what type of oversight do
you have as a nurse, uh,
anesthesiologist. Madam, you are
actually members of medical
staff. We sit on the board, um,
and voting members and we have
um
Committees who would look at,
uh, you know, anytime the train
goes off the track, anything
unusual happens occurrences.
Fortunately, we've not been
brought before this committee,
um, we have a physician who sits
as the director of the
department.
Uh, they do things such as
helping policies, but as far as
supervision in the operating
room.
Um, we are not required to have.
Uh, supervision, in fact, right
now the current practice Act
says that we are to bring our
expertise to the not require
any.
OK,
thank you just one little thing,
um, Madam Chair and Senator
Block. So whatever the facility
also calls for in terms of
required collaboration steps.
Of the CRNA, if they choose to
work in that facility, they,
they're required to follow those
steps as well. Doctor, I don't
know if you wanted to add
anything to that.
Yeah, in the accredited hospital
has to have peer review.
So, so they are under peer
review.
Uh, thank you, panel. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um
I, I want to verify that the New
Mexico hospital, um, they are
supporting this bill, is that
correct?
Madam Cur senator, yes, and I
have a letter, uh, from them,
uh, and they have supported
through this, so they strongly
support us. You have on you?
It is dated January 23, 2025.
It's written to my attention and
it's a letter of support. I can
certainly.
Have that delivered to you,
Senator, if you'd like to see
it.
It's on their letterhead.
Yes, I would actually like to
see that,
Madam Senator, I I think they've
always come and stood and spoke
on our behalf, but I think
because I didn't find out till
yesterday, we were actually
here.
And then they, I just want to
make it super clear, Madam Chair
and said that they've they've
been here to testify in support
of this legislation every time
I've carried it.
Thank, thank you panel. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I just
wanna read one piece in here
that's important to me because
it mentions uh my friend Gary
Johnson, the previous governor
who did this.
Via executive order.
Uh, it says, uh, Madam Chair,
with your indulgence, um, this
bill codifies what has been in
practice in New Mexico for more
than 20 years.
Since 2002, New Mexico's
certified registered nurse.
Um, I can't pronounce that word.
Well, yeah.
have been able to practice
without the supervision of
physicians due to an executive
order issued by Governor Gary
Johnson.
This practice has a lot of our
state's hospitals, especially in
rural communities.
To provide necessary anesthesia
services to patients receiving
surgical.
Uh, obstetrical, uh,
You what you medical people, I'm
a nuclear guy and pain
management services, I
recognizing the scope of
practice, the legislature will
be supporting access to care.
on the Mexicans regardless of
the hospital which they may
receive care. That's, I mean,
that right there is, is
critical. So I, I'm gonna
support the bill, um.
I appreciate uh Governor
Johnson's executive order from
23 years ago, finally getting
codified in law about damn time.
We tried to do it several years
ago.
Uh, Madam Chair and panel.
Two quick things.
Does this bill increase risk to
the patient and does this bill
increase any malpractice costs
to the provider or the hospital.
And chair and senator on on item
number 1, question number one,
I, I do not believe it does
because again,
Uh, the training that's
required, all the things I
called out in terms of, you
know, the um
Everything that they're required
to to to obtain this only takes
them up to the training that
they have, number one, so they
can't go beyond that.
They also have to meet the
requirements of the facility
where they're practicing.
That is also an oversight and in
guaranteeing there but.
On the malpractice. I don't
really want to, I don't feel
like I can address that because
each in each situation is
different, Madam Chair. We don't
know what the individual case
would be.
That thank you, sir. That's
that's that's fair, that's fair.
Um, I know, Madam Chair, that
um,
We did have someone on Zoom. I'm
hearing from the New Mexico
Hospital Association on Zoom,
uh, but, but that's fine.
Um
In support, by the way.
So, uh, lastly,
I would argue
Well, I would ask you
With this bill passing, will
this make a difference in
recruiting more of yours?
CRNA folks to come to New
Mexico, Madam Chair and Senator,
yes, absolutely, uh, it's gonna
recruit the best and the
brightest because they wanna
come where there is autonomy and
they work to their full
potential.
Uh, so this, this very much will
Uh, recruit and Madam Chair and
Senator, I think the other
reason that we'll look very
attractive in the series,
there'll be some certainty now.
You choose to move you or your
family or whatever to New
Mexico, you're gonna have some
certainty on what your future
looks like.
Right now
You don't always know that with,
with how it's, how it's
administered right now.
I agree completely, uh, panel,
because the rural health is a
huge issue. It's a priority in
Sandoval County.
Up, up in Cuba and some of the
tribal areas.
So, I'm more than happy to
support this since I
co-sponsored it, and I
appreciate the
You're pushing this forward. So
thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair, if I
could have my letter back at
some point, I'd appreciate that.
Senator Gallegos
Thinking I er.
Senators and Miss Allen, um.
I just wanted for the body to
understand that, uh,
Your granddaughter or your
daughter and my granddaughter
friends, so we've been able to
associate for a long time.
Uh, watch them grow, but uh I
wanted to bring out just a
point, uh, earlier Center Block
brought out the uh.
recruitment piece
Uh, but I'm also wondering if
this would help with the
retention of those CRNAs that we
already have in the system and
if so, why?
I, I would just comment again,
Madam Chair and Senator uh
Gallegos, the certainty is going
to allow these folks to
essentially nest and make a home
here and don't have to really be
looking elsewhere for, because
they know what their future for
their career, their field, their
Practice their education, what
it's gonna look like for them,
but
Let's hear from a real
practitioner.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Ah, absolutely, this will lead
to retention because it's job
satisfaction.
Uh, knowing that you took
excellent care of the patient
and going home feeling well and
knowing that you did all that
you've been taught and trained
to do.
Uh, I, I need to say that after
last session when our bill ran
out of time so close, it was
heartbreaking and we have
actually had some CRNAs who left
the states. It was
heartbreaking, like I said.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and senators, Earl.
And uh the sound uh just also
wanna go back. I, I'm, I'm gonna
ask a question on.
If you explain why it's
important that we update the
statute and what kind of message
it sends to to the students CRA
students at uh New Mexico State,
but I wanna.
that in caveat, so I'm turning
senators and Miss Ellen, you
know, my granddaughter's going
to be graduating from junior
college this year going to.
The Mexico State University, but
because of the
Personality you are in Lee
County. She's looking into TRNAs
uh.
Going back, you talked about you
had to give someone else the
authority for your daughter and
even for your care during your
surgery. Recently, you were my
my wife's CRA.
And so it's, it's very important
we have people that we can trust
in the room.
And care for our family members,
but can you explain to me what
this message would do like I
said earlier, uh, to those that
are in the CNR
program in New Mexico state.
So
our resident nurse, um.
Down at NSU we do have a program
that's open now.
They will be uh trained and
educated.
In the rural areas with rural
CRNAs to make sure that they are
qualified on the day that they
graduate to go out and work
independently.
Uh, as far as recruiting for our
school, we're gonna recruit the
best and the brightest CRNAs are
required to work in critical
care before you can even apply
to and so, you know, once again,
this is gonna be very helpful
with our NMSU uh recruiting some
of the best and the brightest
knowing that when they graduate
and have a home with job
satisfaction and have.
Thank you for that, Ms. E.
sins and so on, uh, my last
question or that last part of
that is what needs updating
statute, but it's sort of like
center block talked about that
it's already been implemented by
Uh, previous governor and now
lock it in, uh.
As far as value to the CRNAs,
does that give you comfort that
it's it's locked in and not a
movable target, is that the main
uh reason for this to be locked
in.
And it clarifies our role, it
lets us know that we're working,
uh, according to the laws and
statutes.
It's very important to know that
as technology increases and
there are more medications added
to formularies and as skills are
introduced to a profession, a
lot of times change happens
before the law, before the
statute.
And, you know, according to the
nursing organizations and the
articles that I submitted to the
analysis that frequently that
happens in about every 5 years.
A board of nursing or a nurse
practice act should be updated
to make sure that they match and
that's what we're trying to do.
Mouner centers this my last.
Uh comment but uh to me what it
looks like sounds your lining
the law with the practice that's
already been.
Used
But this would just find it.
Is that, would that be a fair
assumption.
And this codifies it
gives a lot of more certainty to
this field.
Aarian senators and Miss Allen,
I appreciate it. uh, thank you
for.
Uh, clarifying for me before
this on why this bill is good
for us, even in the rural areas
we talked to Mr. Shaw this
morning just to uh get the feel
of how important it is in our
rural district, so, uh, he was
very, very supportive, uh, very
complimentary of you and
everything you do, so.
With that, I yield and thank
you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
We're on a do pass motion, and
if you could call the roll
please.
Senator Block.
Hi
Senator Boone. Yes. Senator
Charley, yeah.
And our Gallegos
center nova.
Pinto.
The nurse. Yes. Senator Serio
Lopez, yes. And hickey.
Senor Lopez. Yes, you have a Du
Senor Lopez. Yes, you have a
recommendation. Thank you Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
And all my co-sponsors that are
in the room.
Senator Stewart.
Senate Bill 83.
Thank you, madam chair.
Uh, Cetaphil 83 is primarily an
appropriation bill.
To 7 state agencies that are all
working under 2 executive orders
from the governor.
So this bill creates the
innovation of state government
fund.
Which will enable several state
agencies to.
create master plans and increase
capacity to implement
sustainable policies provide
technical assistance to
organizations seeking grants to
address climate resilience and
to reduce barriers to
implementing climate change
policy requires reporting of
progress and budget to DFA.
So essentially, I have 9 FIRs
here from the state agencies.
They all are appreciative and
want this, uh.
Three of them have said we'll
need a little bit of money to do
it, but we can take it from the
fund and the other ones say, can
we take it from the fun if you
move this along, that's
definitely a question for
finance.
For example,
Uh, workforce solutions uh has
been uh working on having more
firefighters, having more of an
emergency response people.
Uh, they don't have the funds
really.
To do that good of a job to
implement that workforce. So
they are very excited about
this.
Uh, that's generally what the
bill does, and I'm happy to
stand. Thank you, Senator. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support?
Of this measure
If you would like to come
forward, you're more than
welcome to, but please be brief.
And there is a microphone.
After Madam Chair esteemed
committee members. My name is
Arsa Chavez. I'm the CEO of NAA
and the EDF EM Native vote. Both
organizations work closely with
tribes, nations, and pueblos.
And both urban and rural native
communities. When the inflation
reduction Act became law. We
began working with our
communities to assess what
funding they might want to apply
for.
And the barriers to access
technical support or federal
grant writers who were made very
clear.
The federal funding process is
complex and resource intensive,
and demands um that place
additional barriers to
underresources, underresourced
tribes governments without
additional support.
By investing 10 million to build
capacity at the local level, SB
83 would support tribal
governments to navigate and
access essential funding
streams. This doesn't this just
isn't an investment in
administrative support. It's a
straightforward bill that will
allow all of us to fully realize
the investment in the resilience
and sustainability of our
communities. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak in support
of SB 83 and thank the sponsor
for prioritizing the capacity
needs of all.
Mexico. I strongly urge you pass
on SB 83, this investment will
help close the gap and ensure
that all communities have the
capacity they need to succeed.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Camila
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. Climate
change brings us complex
problems, so we need agencies
with the agility to help support
those solutions and for that
reason, we support this bill and
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alex Shoebanks, and I'm
here on behalf of the Southwest
Synergy Efficiency Project.
And the clear horizons, New
Mexico coalition, which is a
partnership of 32 organizations
and businesses committed to
advancing climate action in New
Mexico.
We all strongly support Sin Bill
83.
Because it makes a critical
investment in our state agencies
and the skilled public servants
who lead us through the clean
meeting New Mexico's climate and
clean energy goals isn't just
about setting targets. It's
about making sure that we have
the people, expertise, and the
resources to get the job done
right here in New Mexico.
State agencies need trained
professionals who can implement
policies and force regulations
and help communities access
funding for clean energy
projects.
But right now, many agencies are
stretched too thin.
SB 83 ensures that public
servants have the tools and
support they need to turn our
clean energy vision into
reality.
This bill also ensures that
every community in New Mexico,
from our largest cities to our
smallest villages have access to
the benefits of the clean energy
transition.
Without strong agency
leadership, we can expand
opportunities.
With, sorry, with strong agency
leadership, we can expand
economic opportunities, modern
modernize our energy systems and
ensure that no community is left
behind.
This is about empowering the
people who do the work.
Giving state agencies the
capacity they need to support
businesses.
Local governments and families
across New Mexico.
On behalf of the sweep and the
Clear horizons, New Mexico
Coalition, I urge this committee
to support Senate Bill 83 and to
invest in the public servants
who will build a cleaner,
stronger future for our state.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name's Brittany Poss and I'm
the co-owner of Single Space
Strategies, a data and research
consulting firm based in
Albuquerque. And I want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward. Over the last 3
years, a big part of our work at
Single Space has been tracking
federal grant opportunities
And helping connect local
governments and institutions of
higher education to these funds.
As we've worked with these
agencies, we've often been asked
to perform work that's outside
of our wheelhouse because folks
are in need of funding, but,
unable to meet tight deadlines
with current staff and technical
capacity.
$10 million is a small price to
pay to build this capacity from
within, especially as we think
about gaps likely to come from
the current administration's
layoffs of federal employees. SB
83 will equip local and tribal
governments in New Mexico to
implement work to address
climate change and to access the
considerable state, federal, and
philanthropic dollars available
to invest in their communities
and to implement the laws passed
in this building. I urge.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Tammy Feebleorn.
I'm with Western Resource
Advocates for several years now,
we have been trying to build up
expertise and resources within
our state government agencies to
implement the great climate
change work that you are doing.
And I see firsthand how hard it
is once those great policies are
passed to actually get them
implemented in a timely fashion.
This bill helps with that. It
helps get the work that you're
doing actually implemented on
the ground in a quick and
efficient manner and helps us
build.
expertise at our, at our
agencies. So, we highly
recommend that you support this
bill, and we thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward.
Good afternoon, chair and
committee members. My name is
Justin Garroot, and I'm the
climate and energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico.
I'm speaking today in support of
this bill. This is legislation
that's going to provide 10
million in critical funding to
state agencies to support
efforts to reduce carbon
emissions and fosters
sustainable economic
development. Now, I want to give
you one example of where this
funding is going to address the
current gap. As you're gonna see
in the current version of House
Bill 2, the executive's request
of 3 million for the New Mexico
Environment Department to
develop, implement and support
climate change initiatives has
not been fulfilled by the House.
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Among other distributions,
Senate Bill 83 would provide 2.5
mil for the environment
department nearly addressing the
original $3 million request.
Finally, I want to share with
you that 77% of registered
voters in New Mexico, that's
more than 3/45% of us support
the government taking action to
reduce carbon pollution that
contributes to climate change.
That's according to the hot off
the press Conservation in the
West Pole that was released by
Colorado College, My alma mater,
just last week. Please support
SB 83. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
See nuts on.
The uh Zoom we do have in
support Charles Goodmacher.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for this opportunity. I am
policy advisor to Healthy
Climate in New Mexico and also a
registered lobbyist for
earthworks. We thank the sponsor
for this critically important
bill. The innovation and state
government fund will provide $10
million in funding to seven
state agencies to help implement
the policies and programs
already authorized by the
legislature SB 83 does not
create new policy.
Although none of the health
agencies are among the, those 7
directly receiving uh funding
from this bill. I know many
public health professionals,
doctors, nurses, and other
health providers who, for health
reasons, support the bill. By
strengthening the capacity of
state agencies, this bill will
ensure that New Mexico has the
skilled public servants
necessary to guard our state
through the clean energy
transition, which will result in
cleaner air, cleaner
environment, and thereby
preventing health harms to us
all.
SB 83 will protect our people,
land, air, and water from
threats posed from our everyday
pollution, as well as from
extreme weather and ongoing
changes happening in every
corner of New Mexico. Thank you.
Please vote yes.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition on, there is none.
All right, so we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee. Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair members.
You have 5.
If, uh, different entities that
will receive this money. Do we
know if this.
Uh, Madam Charitz, 7 agencies
and it was included the last
time I checked, but of course
that.
But it is very wishy-washy.
Thank you man, uh, thank you,
Senator and Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
We talked about trying to
policy.
and we've seen a surplus these I
find it very interesting that
with certain entities, we don't
fully fund them so that they can
do the work they need.
And here we are again with
another bill.
Asking for more money to me.
Another need that um.
Through all these entities.
It, it appears that they're not
receiving the full funding they
should to do the work they need
to do.
And you're saying 7 different
Departments or agencies.
I comment on that, Senator,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Protem.
Um, for this particular
Program here.
Can, can you tell me how is this
10 $10 million? Is that correct?
And sure, yes.
OK, so we're gonna spend $10
million. Is that um
Madam Chair and uh Madam Protem,
so how do we know if we're doing
well? What type of, um, what are
the goals of this? What, what
are the metrics that we're gonna
have to know.
$10 million of our taxpayers'
money is going toward these
various different
Uh, organizations here cause I
see nothing with
As he reports being written.
But I see no, no, no metrics
that this money is actually
going to do anything. If you can
just clear that up for me.
Uh, madam chair are uh agencies,
um, have to uh executive orders
that they're following uh this
addresses that work that they're
doing on page 3 is the report
and budget, uh, showing how the
funds will be expanded.
Uh, it's 2 years. It's for
fiscal year 26 and fiscal year
27, um, these are, are all go
towards the.
Uh
The powers and duties that the
agencies have.
To implement sustainable
economic policies, it's laid out
on page 2, provide technical
support to entities applying for
grants, implement enable, reduce
the barriers to implementing
climate change policy, work
towards having increased agency
capacity to achieve net zero
emissions.
OK, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Protem. OK, but
again,
So let me ask you this, is the
$10 million going to be spent to
reduce
CO2 atmosphere in.
Over New Mexico, is it going to
be spent to?
Uh, we're going to see changes
in our air quality because we
are meeting air quality
standards now.
But man cheer depends on the
agency and what their task is,
as I said before, the workforce
solution FIR really drilled down
onto the workforce issues, uh,
especially for firefighters and
emergency response, a Department
of Transportation has
transportation projects. It
depends on the agency.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So really,
There's no, there's no mission
statement here of what, of what
this money is going to be really
used for to improve New Mexican
lives. We've already have.
Executive orders on EV mandates.
We've passed the energy
transition Act. We've, I think
SB4 is making its way through
for
Zero emissions.
And
We're not talking about reducing
carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, we're not talking
about air quality here.
We're not talking about other
issues that this money, in my
opinion, could be used for,
especially in my county of
Sandoval of infrastructure and
supporting the tribes and our
seniors who are
Having a tough time making ends
meet and relying on Meals on
Wheels and, and other healthcare
issues as well.
This is there going to be more
people hired using this $10
million Madam Chair, Madam Pro
10.
Madam Chair, perhaps again it's
up to the agencies, I think
they, the FIRs range from one
agency said they needed $11,000.
Uh, most of them said more like
100,000, as I said, 3 of them
thought they could use it out of
the funding that they would get.
That has to be checked with the.
Uh
Uh, finance committee, uh, this
is essentially an appropriation
bill, they always look different
than other bills, um, because
we're tapping into the current
hours and duties and how these
agencies are supposed to be
looking at climate change,
working with each other,
developing policies, and they're
all doing that.
So this just enhances the work
that they've been doing for 6
years and that they'll continue
to do. OK, thank, thank you. I
appreciate that answer, um,
Madam Chair, Madam Protem, so
for 6 years,
What what have these agencies
done that have uh
helped climate change
specifically here in New Mexico
with uh specific data.
Mount all kinds of things the
New Mexico uh edge environment
department has put out an
incredible a book summarizing a
lot of the issues that they've
dealt with the last 6 years of
the uh interstate stream
commission has put out a 50 year
water plan that they've worked
on several aggencies, um,
there's all kinds of data if you
just look at the websites, it's
all available.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
So, Madam Prote, do you, do you
specifically know, have they had
any impacts on
Reducing any warming in New
Mexico or reducing carbon
dioxide in New Mexico, and I
would argue.
And I think you would agree our
oil and gas industry.
Uh, is the cleanest in the
world, by the way, and how we do
it.
Um, and it's one that is
powering our uh
Our economy
But in regards to
Its climate change.
Because that's what this is
here. This is to look at climate
change.
How the millions of dollars that
we've spent
The mandates that are coming
down and we can't really look at
the data.
Project, yeah, cause we don't
have the data.
But again
What impact
Specifically
Data-driven, are we lowering
temperatures in New Mexico?
Are we cleaning the air in New
Mexico, um, with the past 6
years, because when I look at
the data here,
Temperatures have actually
remained rather constant,
the snow cap has been um.
A little bit different based on
Weather patterns which up the
road, Colorado's having a very
wet winter and we're having a
very dry one which was
predicted.
So again, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Protte.
have
Has this program?
In the 6 years, has it reduced
climate change in New Mexico?
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, I think
one thing we can look at that
has been very significant.
Was the 2022 adoption of our
messhane rules.
Between 2020 and 2024 in spite
of the methane rules, uh, uh
production in the oil and gas
and Permian Basin has doubled.
So we've done a good job of
putting regulations on, uh,
we've started a sustainable
economy task force and involves
6 agencies.
And yes, the methane emissions
have gone down and
significantly, so we should be
very proud of that.
However
2024 was the hottest year on
record.
And before 2024, 2023 was the
hottest year on record.
And before 2023, 2022 was the
hottest year on record. Already
this past January has been the
hottest January on record.
So we still have a long way to
go, which is the purpose of
these bills and this work with
our state agencies has worked
towards reducing greenhouse gas.
Thank you for that, um, Madam
Chair, Madam Prote, um, it was,
it was tied to the warmest year
on record in Albuquerque.
Um
And the data only goes back to
1892.
New Mexico has seen uh
temperatures uh increased over
the last several decades by just
a couple of degrees.
Uh, hottest temperature ever
recorded was 122, uh, at the
whip, by the way, in 1994.
Um
Air quality here is, is.
Exceeding federal standards,
state standards, um, unless.
You know you get storms and
then.
Some other stuff that is
affected some air quality with
The way the winds are blowing in
certain places.
So, um, I, I guess.
What I'm not hearing is if, if
New Mexico's had the hottest
year on record in 2024, Madam
Chair, and it's been that way
since 2023, 2022, 2021, 2020,
2019, the last six years. What,
what is our money buying us?
Mr. Chairman continuing to work
on the issue.
Thank you for that.
Um, and sir, I appreciate that.
I would argue.
Our money would be better well
spent, uh supporting our
seniors, supporting those with
the drug treat drug issues, um,
it would be supporting our
schools, higher pay for
teachers.
Working with our tribal nations
on infrastructure.
I appreciate all this very much,
and I, I think our, our prote
for bringing it forward, but the
priority should be our people,
the
The one issue that is
Cataclysmic to the human race.
It's not climate change.
Is war
is nuclear war.
And I can tell you that as a
nuclear launch officer with
thousands of nuclear weapons are
ready to go.
That is the issue.
Uh, that is facing that humans
face extinction every day on.
Is nuclear war and as a guy who
pulled nuclear alerts for this
country, I can tell you.
You can just wipe out the human
race like that.
And I'd rather spend more money
on making people's lives better.
Making sure they're fed well,
making sure they have
healthcare.
But not saying this is an
important issue, but the other
things are more of a priority,
so.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, I.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Hm
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
This looks
Substantially similar.
To some legislation we passed.
Several years ago that
closes down the
San Juan power plant.
With a proposal to spend
Uh, I believe it was $40
million.
You mitigate the job's impact.
On that piece of legislation.
Could you describe that chair
and senator.
For the committee
How that's worked out.
A man sure that's not what this
bill is.
I think those buckets of money,
uh, mostly got spent, not all of
it.
Um, I do know that the Indian
Affairs department has just
released an RFP.
For the remaining about 2
million.
Uh, that looks substantially
like what we're bringing here.
And Madam Chair and senator,
it's my information.
The very few.
those good high paying jobs.
In the mining and power plant up
there.
have been replaced.
With anything close, and I say.
That this $10 million. I'm on
page 4.
Madam Chair, that, uh, line 5.
In line 6 we're going to add
some new jobs.
And replaced the jobs.
That rely on the extractive
industries, so.
Madam Chair and Senator, let me
ask again what we
What we cost.
Up there was.
Over 1000 jobs.
And
And mostly tribal communities.
Now what
This piece of legislation.
I advocating
Is the replacement not of 1000
jobs.
But 135,000 jobs that are a
consequence.
Of the extractive industry.
Madame Chainster
It, it just doesn't, it's not
computing.
And, and a consequence of
Of my southeastern communities
losing those good high paying
jobs.
It just will, will decimate.
Our
our
Municipalities
There won't be any reason.
For people to live in southeast
New Mexico anymore, and that's
what
Madam Chair and senator,
I would like you.
To try to address because
This piece of legislation
reports.
To expand taxpayer money, money
that we're providing.
To replace those good jobs and
our history.
I
Complete failure in that regard.
Would, could you address that?
chair.
It's just such a silly question.
You know, in the last 4 years,
production has doubled.
And the Permian Basin.
Those jobs aren't going
anywhere.
There's going to be more of
them.
There are communities around the
state who want to have better
training and other kinds of
jobs. That's what this is.
We are trying to diversify our
economy.
30% of our budget right now is
from oil and gas.
You know, in a few years.
5678 10.
When oil starts going down,
that.
We'll have hopefully a more
robust economy using other
sources.
This bill doesn't do one thing.
To lose any jobs in the
southeast part of the state.
Mm
Madam Chair and senator.
It purports to spend, expand.
taxpayer dollars.
To try to replace those jobs in
the southeast part of the state.
And the question
would obviously be.
Madame Chair and Senator
replace them with what?
I'm sure this does not purport
to replace jobs. This is partly
a job training.
that's certainly what workforce
solutions focusing on they're
focusing on firefighters.
And emergency response, um,
under the ETA we tried to do a
little bit of focus on mine
reclamation, which was good, but
we do need uh jobs around the
state that are not just from the
extractive industries, and this
is what this promotes.
He to train.
Oh, Madam Chair and Senator, is
it being represented?
That we're spending this money
for firefighters.
And
An emergency responders, those
folks, Madam Chair and senator,
aren't the wealth generators,
they are not creating.
The tax dollars and the gross
receipts dollars.
Or any they they are consumers
of.
Of uh of productive.
Enterprises.
And
No question about it very
necessary consumers.
And providing services that we
rely on.
Madam Chair and Senator, what
I'm trying to get to is what are
we going to replace the wealth
with.
What are we going to create the
wealth with.
And that answer is not in this
document.
And Madam Chair, this is an
appropriation bill, $10 million
for 7 agencies to continue the
work that they're doing now.
That's all this is. It's not
what you're making it out to be,
you can try to make it that, but
that's not what it is.
OK.
Madam Chair and senator, let's
presume for a moment that
That these efforts are
completely successful.
Could you name
Greek goals and objectives that
might be achieved if this is
completely successful.
Madame chair, I'll pull out a
couple of the FIRs, I'll start
with the workforce solutions.
A um
Workforce innovation Opportunity
Act state plan is what they were
referencing energy transition,
public safety or priority
sectors, including firefighting
and emergency response. This
bill addresses the long-standing
need to fund sector strategies
and increased capacity to
address high priority industries
for the state.
Every one of these FIRs
mentioned something like that. I
can read a few more.
You would like.
SB 83's focus on creating master
plans for more diversified and
sustainable economy works in
conjunction with other bills
which will direct target
investments toward a variety of
purposes, including economic
diversification.
is from the economic development
department.
Since the
Additional resources to conduct
strategic planning toward a more
sustainable and diversified
economy will optimize the impact
of the department's activities.
Furthermore, with the addition
of an FTE SB 83's added focus on
comprehensive climate planning
enables economic development
department to better coordinate
with sister agencies.
minority participates in the
climate change task force to
support the governor's office
with economy-wide climate action
planning and its contributions
will be strengthened through
added capacity.
Madam Chair and Senator, I
I appreciate all the verbiage.
But nowhere in there.
is
Yes
The master plan.
To create jobs and prosperity
and, and Madam Chair and
senator, I would submit to you.
That everything we have done in
the last 6 years in this
direction.
All of the money that has been
expended in these efforts has
been a miserable failure.
We have created
I believe I saw a study, Madame
Chair and Senator, the, the
That our renewable energy
industry
in total.
At the capacity.
and that this was a UNM study at
the capacity to produce
something like 8000 jobs.
Madam Chair and Senator, 8000
jobs doesn't even.
Again
To replace
What we will lose if these
policies are implemented.
And Madam Chair and senator, I
just
I just
Support
Efforts and expenditures.
That move us in this direction
because the cost benefit.
Any cost benefits
specifically with respect to
jobs.
would just be completely upset.
Uh
Thank you, Senator for your
answers. Thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Stewart.
Um
I think this is a great idea.
And for several reasons, um, I
came from an organizing advocacy
background space.
And um one of the things that I
came to really understand in
doing that kind of work, which
is community based change work,
social justice change work.
is that we have to be
innovative. We have to make a
commitment to sourcing new ideas
for these like climate change.
And I was just jotting down a
couple of ideas that.
Solutions that I became aware of
through my work.
That I just wanted to throw out
there, none of them are gonna be
about climate change, but I
wanna help substantiate what
this would do, what it could
look like, Madam Chair.
Um
Essentially what we're doing is
asking if you had a little more
funding, what could you do?
What's possible? Because $10
million it's not a large
investment, and if my mom heard
me say that.
She'd roll her eyes.
But, but when we're talking
about about our government and
the sur surplus we're in right
now. It's, it's not a large
investment, but it is a
worthwhile one.
Um
There is an example of in the
Midwest, there was a bar after
hours.
Tons of fights.
tons of people getting arrested,
the bar owner asked.
What could we do to kind of help
this, right, because staff for
waiting, there are all hours of
the night, all of the problems
when people get involved in the
carceral system. One of the
employees said, what if we
handed out lollipops?
At the end of the night.
Arrest went down, fights went
down, it was like, let's have a
night, let's give people the the
possibility to have ideas.
Um, for anyone that's read, the
body keeps 4, there is an
valuable lesson in there about
innovation.
Um, when Vietnam vets came back
from the war. There was this
test done where the Vietnam vets
who took aorkeshaw test.
If they could make images if
they still had a connection to
their creativity.
Um, they were less likely to
transcend substance use, their
PTSD, their houselessness
issues.
and it became really clear and
and established that the closer
we are to our creativity, the
closer we can make our way past
a problem.
Um, I'm thinking about a
Japanese car company. I can't
remember if it's Toyota or not
or not that asked its employees.
For a small solution to help
save them from bankruptcy and
one of the employees said, you
know, if we modified this one
piece and had it in saves the
company millions.
And brought them back from the
brink of bankruptcy.
Dyson asked their employees,
Explain to me how a vacuum
cleaner works, and that's how
they came up with the technology
for the.
Um, the vacuum cleaners we have
today and I'm saying all of
these things, um, Madam Chan
senator.
Because we're what we're asking
for is just a small investment
into the people who are doing
this work every single day.
And there are real potential
solutions that we're just not
funding right now. Again, it's
not a big amount of money, but
the problem is big.
What one of my colleagues set up
here about us meeting standards,
that's true right now.
But if we want to meet those
standards that we've set out for
ourselves, we because New Mexico
doesn't have.
Uh, the, the greatest clean air
we just read an FIR yesterday in
our conservation.
Um, committee, that Lee and
Eddie counties have some of the
worst air quality in the nation.
You can't say it sit up here and
say things that aren't true for
the sake of saying them.
Um
Um
I'm getting to a question, Madam
Chair, um.
Which is Senator Stewart
Stewart.
What are some of the ideas that
are out there from some of our
departments right now.
I'm sure it's such a great
question and and thank you for
all of that I.
You know, as a teacher.
I mean
Getting innovative and creative
and thinking outside the box and
doing things outside the boxes
what we always want to see.
Uh, so, you know, because this
isn't.
This isn't the agencies coming
and say we have this, this and
this and this.
This is trying to get, this is
one of 3 climate bills that I
have, it's trying to get funding
to the appropriate place because
you heard the.
The um polling from Charles
Goodmacher.
73% of our population want us to
work on climate change.
It's just hard to deny.
Right now
Um, with the fires and the
flooding that we had just last
year alone.
The Governor had 141 executive
orders. It's almost $200 million
that she had to send out because
of the uh uh.
Neats and Roswell and Ridoso and
in the northern part of the
state, so, you know, I always
want and look for innovation,
and I believe that people are
really capable of that.
This really is trying to give a
boost to these agencies to work
with each other, work on master
plans and to do what they're
ready to do and they just didn't
have the money for the workforce
solutions always come.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator. Um, I'll just end
with sometimes we don't know
what we don't know until we ask
the question, and this goes a
step further to offer some
resources to seed those ideas.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Senator.
To the Olous.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, I
just wanted to, uh, well, for
one thing, I wanted to declare
something that was clarify
something that was said.
P&M announced the closure of the
San Juan generating station.
Um, in 2017.
The ETA was meant to soften the
blow.
Um, of that which would all the
P&M had already planned.
Um, by offering some of the
money to through the cost
savings to be returned to the
people. So I really wanted to to
clarify that I was uh
I was new to the Senate when all
of that was happening, so I've
been following it really
closely.
Um, but I also wanted to
compliment the sponsor on this
bill, um, I, for everything that
um my colleague Senator Charlie
said, that's, that's really
true, um, providing this
flexibility is just so
important. And the other thing I
wanted to highlight about this
bill is on page 2, increasing
the agency's capacity to provide
technical support to entities
applying for grants and other
funding that seek to address
climate change.
Sometimes in our communities we
have really great ideas, but
especially in small communities,
you don't have the capacity to
apply for like federal grants
cuz it.
I've done it. It is a very, very
long and tedious process with a
lot of detail as well as with
foundations. I mean, you really
have to know what you're doing.
And so raising that capacity, I
mean, I was lucky. I, when I've
done it, I've had a a
development director that really
knew what she was doing, um, but
that's if this is like helping
provide development director to
all of our small, uh, businesses
are small communities.
Um, that might be able to get
access to even larger funds. So
I see this as an investment, um,
in that has the potential to
multiply.
Um
And I think that can only have
great um.
Great results for New Mexico,
Madam Chair, when you're ready
to take a motion, just let me
know. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, ma'am and thank you,
ma'am prote
uh just a couple of quick
questions. I noticed in the
money division you have 2.5
million to the Department of
Environment and Energy.
Minerals and Natural Resour, the
other 5, I think are pretty
critical to the state also. Is
there a reason why it's taking
those two departments more
money.
To do what's asked in the bill
in section one.
Madam chair, those, those two
agencies do more.
Or uh climate change issues than
than any the environment
department,
but also senator of the reason I
ask is about those issues those
departments do a lot of uh
penalties in Lee County oil and
gas, uh, I was looking for a
picture and I found it, uh, an
aunt of mine had sent me a, a
picture of a windmill.
As you go from Grady or.
Senator Woods lives and the San
Juan, there's a huge windmill
farm, and I'm just wondering
why, Madam Chair and Senator,
that I've never heard any
penalties on the windmills that
are leaking oil into our
environment. I'm just wondering
if your bill has anything to do
to help resolve the issues that
are, should be a balanced.
Approach across the state that
are only directed in Leonetti
County.
center
Madam chair uh funding to these
age that we do right by everyone
that were fair to everyone.
I don't know anything about.
Been, I don't think they do
either because they don't look
for any issues with wind or
solar.
Just highlighting oil and gas,
so, uh, I just wanted to bring
that to your attention. I thank
you for the 2.5 million so I
could see a penalty on the wind
farm in.
That sector in um.
And a Brady area.
I'm sure you, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, President Pro Tem for
bringing this bill forward. Um.
I would like to also uplift, uh,
Madam Chair, um.
The voices of young people in
the,
um, and Madam Chair, those
voices are clearly missing in
this room, clearly missing in
many of these conversations that
we have, but yet they will be
the ones that are most affected
by all of this work, all of
these investments.
And I think it's important that
we acknowledge Madam Chair.
That
The investments and the funds
that we receive are facts,
right?
Investments, um,
That we receive from oil and
gas. Those are factors, but
diversification is critically
important.
And when I think of many of the
young folks who I work with,
folks who are critically engaged
and involved in climate change
work. I know that their voices
are not here today, and I want
to ensure that we uplift them
and that we bring them to the
table. And also acknowledge that
this work has been happening,
but we need it to continue. Now
more than ever, and as someone
who can't comes from the
Department of Housing, I have to
share, um, there was a lot of
work on climate.
resilience that I got to witness
and see across this country that
was innovative, that was eye
opening, um, but that now is
threatened, uh, Madam Chair.
And some of those priorities
included increasing resilience
to the impacts of climate change
by protecting public health, uh,
conserving lands, water,
biodiversity, um, and just
spurring economic growth and
creating jobs, because I do
agree with my colleagues,
whereas we need to ensure that
we are creating jobs that we are
investing in research that
expands opportunity, um, but
Madam Chair, I think it's
critically important that we
acknowledge the history, but
that we acknowledge the future.
And that future.
is for folks who are not in this
room.
And we need to ensure that we
acknowledge them, that we
respect them, and that we have
them at the table. So I would
just acknowledge that and thank
you for bringing this forward,
um.
president of Protem and Madam
Chair, thank you for thinking of
the future.
And those who are not sitting.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Very good.
Madam Chair, Madam Pro 10, thank
you, uh, just for informational
purposes, I was just wondering
there it was mentioned that
there were 73% of of New
Mexicans want.
Want more work on the climate
change, could we be given some
documentation of that?
Uh
Copy the poll or whatever just.
I'll try to find that.
I didn't bring that.
I've certainly seen polling like
that, but I will get it for you.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Senator Sabia Lopez.
I move a do pass.
for
a second from Senator Nava.
If you could call the roll,
please.
Senator B block. No.
Senator Boone. No.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos.
No, ma'am.
And her nova, yes.
And our Pinto
Senator Scott.
Centerio Lopez, yes.
The hickey
Senator Lopez
Yes.
And by a vote of 6 to 4, you
have a due pass recommendation.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn. If
you would join us up front,
please.
Give me, I'm gonna have a doting
moment, Senator Steinborn, if
you would please. Thank you,
Madam President, colleagues.
Forgive me, colleagues, I, I can
be a little sentimental
sometimes and um
And I'm a little nostalgic at
this moment because I'm joined
by Adriana Morales.
Who, when I first met her, she
was 17 years old, brought me
this issue. I'm now proud to be
sitting next to New Mexico's
first Rhodes Scholar.
In 20 years.
Which is Ariana.
Thank you. Oh no, can you hear
me? Yeah, thank you. And uh
She was also a Truman.
scholar and uh UNM grad and
us all very proud. She's also
become an advocate.
I'm sure um
Not something she ever asked to
do, um.
Madam, Madam President, or
excuse me, Madam Chair, um,
colleagues, believe it or not,
what I'm about to present you
with something that we actually
got passed several years ago and
there was a drafting error that
actually removed a section of
law and it had to be vetoed.
It's one of the most brutal kind
of things because we got this
through the legislature, started
off actually much more
expansive, much bolder. What
you're about to hear was a
compromise based upon all sides,
some of whom I'm sure you'll
hear today.
But uh, but uh, you know, with
all the talk of crime and
justice, this is a piece of work
we have left to do in my
opinion.
On this issue and so without
further ado, I'll get into it.
It's very simple.
And I want to warn everyone this
involves sexual assault, you
know, if, if that, if, you know,
that's triggering it all, you
know, that's what we're about to
get into here.
But Madam Chair, colleagues,
this legislation increases the
statute of limitations.
Or what's known as criminal
sexual penetration.
Right
For a child between the age of
13 and 18.
Currently under New Mexico law,
that statute of limitations for
somebody who's had
This crime occurred to them is
limited to 6 years past their
18th birthday or 24 years old.
If you are under the age of 13
under New Mexico law, considered
a first-degree offense and there
is no statute of limitations.
It's a lifetime.
You turn 13 between 13 and 18
cuts off at the age of 24.
And the bottom line with this
legislation, and I'm sure
colleagues, that is not long
enough.
Research has shown that many
people have this crime occurred
to them, don't.
aren't able to report it, come
to terms with it for a variety
of reasons until their
adulthood.
What this bill would do, again,
as a compromise position, all
things considered is race at age
from 24 to 35 years old.
would raise the statute of
limitations for a second degree.
That
18 to 24, excuse me, 1318 to the
age of 35.
That's all this bill does.
We have the drafter here, of
course, not here to speak and
for for a favor, but if you have
any legal kind of statutory
questions.
drafter is here, but of course
I'm joined by our superstar.
Advocate, um,
Adriano Morales, if she can
maybe make a.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, as uh,
Senator Steinborn said, my name
is Ariana Morales and I am a
sexual assault survivor,
advocate and activist on behalf
of victims of crime or youth
impacted by gender-based
violence. After my own sexual
assault when I was 15 years old,
I started a nonprofit
organization called Sexual
Assault Youth Support Network,
and I've been doing that work
for the past 7 years, going on
to become a national
spokesperson and advocate on
behalf of youth impacted by
sexual violence and other forms
of victimization.
Um, as a crime victim, but even
more importantly as an advocate
for crime victims, I believe
that youth impacted by violence
deserve a full and fair
opportunity to access justice.
On average, a victim of child
sexual abuse does not report New
Mexico's current statute of
limitations for child sexual
abuse crimes, particularly
criminal sexual penetration or
CSP for, you know, shortening of
that, uh, of minors between 13
and 18 years of age, not only
provides insufficient time for
victims to come forward in the
space of trauma, PTSD and other
barriers.
But also is inordinately low
compared to other states
including New York, Colorado,
and Texas, all of which either
have no statute of limitations
on this crime, or that those
that extend to the victim's late
20s or early 30s on par with the
proposed legislation today.
Uh, we know that survivors of
crimes like child sexual abuse
need more time to report, and we
know that victims deserve the
opportunity to pursue justice in
the face of those barriers
identified earlier, and I
certainly hope that we can all
agree that child sexual abuse,
particularly CSP is an
incredibly violent and traumatic
crime. At this point, as Senator
Steinborn expressed the current
law makes it such that, you
know, for a crime or CSP uh
committed against a child
between the ages of 0 and 13 has
no limitations.
But for 1318 year olds, that
they're required to report by
the time they're 24 years old,
which is 28 years earlier than
the average age that I mentioned
earlier of 52.
As I said, I think we can all
agree that the victimization of
a 14 year old is just as heinous
as that of a 10 year old, right?
Yet the current law treats these
crimes differently, and this
bill seeks to rectify that to
bring New Mexico law in
accordance with law of other
states and to ensure that
victims of child sexual abuse
have opportunities and options
to pursue and access justice.
So, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members.
will stand for.
Thank you, Senator, and, and
welcome to the committee.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of this anyone in
opposition.
And then we'll go to Zoom and we
do have one.
Nap Dean
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Nadine. I am a
disability advocate. I am a
person with multiple
disabilities. Uh, no eye rolls,
please. I know I appear quite a
bit.
I was a victim of rape when I
was at, at age 14.
I was not able to acknowledge it
until the age of 19, at the age
of 19, working with a therapist.
I was able to begin to process
it, but many years later and
trying to bring it forward,
there was no avenue for me to
bring that forward. I am in
support of this bill because it
provides more opportunities to
come forward to be able to make
sure that it does not happen to
someone else. That is the guilt
I carry is that I was
not able to stop this from
happening to someone else, and I
knew when it happened and when I
brought it forward, that the
perpetrator was very skilled at
committing this crime,
repeatedly, and I was unable to
stop it. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, sponsors, and
advocates.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition? No?
Mm, OK.
Uh, we'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
Senator said, Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to really
thank you for your courage.
Madam Chair, in, in bringing
this forward, um, I spoke on the
floor, um.
A few years ago,
To, to speak about um.
What happened to me and what
happened to my daughter.
And it was very, very difficult,
um, but, and
I just really admire you so much
because you are so young.
And able to do that and able to
convert this trauma.
Into advocacy for others.
So I, I really wanted to, to say
that to you and to thank you,
uh, for bringing this forward.
I personally believe that there
should be no statute of
limitations for rape at any time
at any place. I think somebody
who's committed this crime
should worry until the day they
die that they may have to answer
for that crime.
However,
This, I understand that that's
not.
What what was negotiated last
time this bill passed, um, and
so I strongly support the bill.
I do have a little, uh,
question, and I'm gonna vote it
no matter what, so this is just
questions for my understanding.
But the bill says
Or that if you exclude provided
that this subsection shall not
apply to violent first degree
felonies or to paragraph one of
subsection G of section 30-911.
And so I was looking at
subsection D, and that's um uh.
Promote sexual penetration
perpetrated on a child 13 to 16
years of age when the
perpetrators at least 18 years
of age and at least 4 years
older than the child. So this is
statutory rape.
And perpetrated by a child 13 to
18 when the perpetrators a
licensed school employee.
And who was at least 18 years of
age, at least 4 years older than
the child and not the spouse of
it. I hate that phrase, not the
spouse of the child, by the way,
but learns while preparing uh
While performing services in for
a school that the child is not a
student in school. In other
words, that's exploitation by an
adult.
So I'm wondering why is that
excluded Moun?
I think, um, Madam Chair,
senator, I think that our
drafters gonna speak to that in
a brief, but from what I recall
from the first time this bill
went through, I think that was a
compromise that was worked out
in committee, basically, there
was a lot of opposition, um, or
the opposition, I guess, but
questions about including the
extensional limitations. I think
that was a compromise that we
had reached at one point and I
in the drafting of the new bill.
So I'll let the senator and
drafter speak to that as well.
And Senator. No, it's, it's, I
will say this, um,
What's really tricky about
drafting this particular statute
and why we ran into a problem
before was
You want to do what you want to
do, but you don't wanna, you
don't, you're not, you don't
want to impact anything else
around it. And
What we sought to do very
clearly, even me being quite
You know, repetitive with poor
drafter Sean is making sure that
we were only changing this one
statute of limitation and not
anything else, not any other
provision.
That's all I can answer your
question with, um,
Um
Senator and I realized you, you
are an attorney and, and a very
bright, you know, bright one.
But uh yeah, the, the bill is
just intended to
Increase in factual limitations
for the 2nd degree crime and do
nothing else. That's, I think
what the language does do.
So first degree felony.
Um, I'm reading this correctly,
this subsection shall not apply
to violent first degree
felonies.
So they would have a shorter
statute of limitations if they.
We're violent against the minor,
Madam Chair. Well.
Right, so, Madam Chair,
senators, so first degree is
lifetime. No statute of
limitations.
First degree murder is.
And murder is
First degree, first degree
regarding this lifetime.
Could you show me?
I sure
Subsection J, Madam Chair.
With that, you know, are you
able to just speak to the OK,
I'd like to, I see, I see, OK, I
see for a capital felony of
first degree violent felony or
second degree murder pursuant no
limitation period still exist,
OK.
So it doesn't cut it short.
Thank you. That's, that's,
that's a good, good
understanding. Well, I very
strongly support this bill, um,
it's, but I, like I said, I, I
would support.
Absolute no statute of
limitations. And especially
you're only dealing with minors,
so there is a statute of
limitation against women who are
18 + 1.
And that's what I hate about
statute of limitations. If the
woman or the child recovers the
memory, just a day after the
statute of limitation runs.
It's, it's out of luck, which is
why I, one of the reasons I
support.
No statute of limitations at
all, because if they're, if the
evidence exists and a lot of
times this is DNA evidence
because.
Um, there are rape kits that
haven't been tested or other,
other evidence, and my feeling
is if there's evidence, there
should be prosecution.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator Steinborn.
Expert on bringing this forward.
The, um
I know that we had.
A phenomenal backlog of rape
kills, and I know that.
The Attorney General's
And trying to clean that up, but
has that been
Are we caught up yet?
With that backlog.
Mount Chair Senator, I believe
we are. I mean, I, I know that
was a big priority of
non-trivalent, OK. So, in some
cases, perhaps so it sounds like
not in all cases.
Yeah
Given that, given that being the
case.
is 35 gonna be long enough?
Well, Madam Chair,
Senator, yeah, that is a great
question, you know, when I
initially started this, my bill
was no statute of limitations.
And it was for all sex crimes
against kids.
What you'll hear from the other
side is, you know,
Anyway, just concerns about
evidence prosecuting cases, the
ability to mount a defense,
yadda yada yada. I don't believe
35 is long enough.
On a personal level, but again,
that was a compromise at the
time, at the time, and I don't
think new legislators should be
bound to hold compromise. Let me
say that as well. I will just
say that's the history of the
debate, um.
Um, at the time in the Senate
Judiciary Committee of all
places was 35 was the number
that kind of got that through at
the time.
And that is a significant
increase from 24.
Uh, but having said that, you
look at the research, the
research shows that many people
come forward after the age of
35.
So
You know, I, I'd really love to
get something done for these
victims and also to catch
perpetrators who are still
alive.
So, uh, anyway, answer your
question, Senator.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you for that. I
Somehow recall my wife, uh, who
was insane in their medical
director for a long time.
Noting that there were
A pretty long cases in some of
the backlog that.
was being uh finally cleaned up.
I, I guess.
I'm interpreting what you're
saying here is that if we went
to 35, we made the whole bill
judiciary committee, um, and so
you're being realistic.
With this, at this time.
Um, but
Potentially could we go to 40
and then compromise to 35 while
we're there.
Here's Madam Chair, here's what
we can do. I'd be more than
happy to go to 40 today. Um, the
challenge is getting it heard in
the next committee. I wouldn't
say that 35 means that we, we
get.
Even a hearing. The next
committee candidly, um, after
the bill got vetoed, I
reintroduced it because there
was a technical thing in the
bill never got hurt again.
So I'm not saying 35 is the
magic formula that unlocks the
door, so.
I'd be down for getting it right
if you all would.
Help lock arms and let's, let's
get this included in
You know,
New legislation, but it does
raise the bar on the difficulty,
the more you increase it. But,
but the bar is very difficult to
begin with just
Not without its challenges.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
understand that too much.
Um
And
Um, so does it go to judiciary
after here?
Uh, 5 years isn't very much.
Uh, madam chair, Senator.
Um, I mean, it, it isn't very
much, and for some.
And um I don't know if you'd be
willing to entertain emotion, or
do you think we're just shooting
our simple.
Well, I, I'm always wanting to
shoot for the ideal, Madam
Chair, you know that about me.
Uh.
This is one of those things
where we kind of what's
appropriate.
Yeah, I would not, it would not
be an unfriendly moment. I'm
just saying it's gonna, it will
make it harder.
But having said that, it is
already hard and no.
We're all going to need to
advocate people who find this
important.
find this reasonable proposition
we're gonna need to advocate
that it be hurt, so.
It it would be a friendly
amendment if that's what you
wanted to do.
Madam Chair and and Senator, I,
I'm, I'm hearing what you're
saying. Um, let's, let's get
this one through.
And
Then
In
A couple years come back and see
if we can.
Oh thank you, I will not be.
Thank you for your can.
Thank you, man.
Thank you. Any other questions
Senator Scott?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
So
35
I'm curious as to how we arrived
at that number, that's 17 years
beyond.
18
Yeah.
How, how did we get to that
number?
And what circumstances.
Trigger
These recollections.
That far out from the
From from what happened.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, and I
love Ariana to answer the second
part of that, but on the first
part of it, you know, it's just
one of those negotiations
between
between the folks who were on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
at the time.
the people that were advocating
it, we went into that committee
with a lifetime bill. That's
what the bill started out as,
and not just criminal sexual
penetration, but criminal sexual
contact.
And other crimes.
Um
And, and, and ultimately we
ended up with 35 on criminal
sexual penetration and criminal
sexual contact is memory serves.
Um
But again, it was a negotiation
because on the other side what
you're gonna hear from
Public defender trial, you know,
defense, criminal defense
attorneys and others who are
concerned about the bill is that
over time,
Evidence becomes colder. And so,
and, and, and so it's harder to
mount a defense.
When it's kind of maybe hearsay
type of thing and so those are
the so that's the other side of
the argument. And so that's
where
It was, it was a negotiated
agreement that got the bill
passed, and those are the
factors that contributed to that
agreement.
Oh, Madam Chair and Senator, how
would you address those
concerns?
A memories fade, corroborating
evidence goes.
is nonexistent.
And uh
And you may or may not have any,
any witnesses or
Or any other evidence beyond
He said, she said,
How would you address those
concerns?
Madam Chair, Senator, I can try
and take this question. Those
are all very valid concerns
important thing to call out with
regard to your most recent
question um about the presence
of evidence and that being a
valuable thing is only about 50%
of rape cases even reported
within the statute of
limitations have DNA evidence
available, right? So I think
it's important not to overstate
the role and reliability of DNA
evidence for securing a
conviction and even with a warm,
you know, uh minimal statute
limitations if I was to have
been violated.
As 15 when I was sexually
assaulted. I reported it within
a month of it happening, right?
So say that happened to me,
there is no DNA evidence as to
what occurred. There was no
witnesses as to what happened to
me and so essentially you could
end up in the exact same
scenario within crimes that are
already, you know, prosecuted
within the statute of
limitations to begin with. So,
of course, you know, evidence
does get colder, time does, you
know, continue to grow, but the
presence of a I guess discourse
between what happened or debate
over what happened. I think is
rather common to sexual violence
cases, and I think it's
important to note that the
statute of limitations being
extended.
does not change the need for a
probable cause to, you know,
have an arrest for someone that
has committed but accused of
this crime, nor does it change
the preponderance of evidence to
secure a guilty conviction. So
in the event that he said she
said is not substantial enough
for substantive enough to make a
jury believe that someone is
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt
that would lead to the same, you
know, no, a not guilty
conviction, so I hope that makes
sense.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
expert, uh, just added to my
confusion.
Because
But I don't know how.
Let me go back to the, to the,
let me go back to the question,
Madam Chair.
Senator, what
circumstances.
Trigger
The recollection of these
activities occurring, and can
you tell me?
Statistically.
How often these
Uh
These
Things occur between strangers
and how often.
They were occur between between
two people that are acquainted
with one another.
So Mount Chera, I wouldn't say
that in all cases, it's like a
memory that gets triggered. It's
more like a memory that gets
repressed because a lot of times
to answer the second part of
your question first, it is
familial.
It's somebody close to him.
That's pretty common.
So it's because of that reason
that there's intimidation and
fear and
A lot of
So,
you know.
To not report it often until a
family member may die, even.
But
I've heard victims talk about,
you know, they remember the
smell, they remember the touch
that it's a very
I mean, it's a mental imprint is
the way it's actually been
described on me.
It's about
When they're able to kind of,
but I, I think I wouldn't want
to ascribe a one circumstance
fits all kind of a
And of a uh
Physiology to it, but um, you
wanna add to that?
Yeah.
Certainly try, and I apologize
for adding to your confusion at
all, um, Madam Chair and
senator, I just, when it comes
to the circumstances in which
someone might recall that this
has happened or this memory
might come up for them, I
believe the community, community
member that spoke and supported
the bill kind of talked about
her experience of being 19,
talking to a therapist for the
first time and then by being
able to finally kind of put to
words or understanding that what
had happened to her in her
childhood was in fact, um,
sexual assault, right? I think
when it comes to children.
you know, 0 to 1313 to 18,
having the language to or even
the conceptual understanding of
what you know, rape is sexual
assault is, especially if it's
been framed, uh, you know, as
not that by a family member or
perpetrator. So say for like a
hypothetical example. Say that a
family member is sexually
abusing a child over a period of
years.
Um, it can be in all likelihood
that that family member does not
frame what they're doing to that
child as I am raping you. I'm
sexually assaulting you. It can
be framed in terms of a game. It
can be framed in terms of so
many different more innocuously
labeled things, right? That a
child might not fully understand
as being illegal or criminal
until they're older. They're
talking to a therapist. It
occurs to them at some point
when they're learning about
those subjects for the first
time. That might be an instance
in which that comes up for
somebody. But as this uh Senator
Steinborn.
You know, mentioned, a lot of
times the barriers to reporting,
um, sexual assault, rape in
particular, are more
environmental, um, in terms of
not having access to the
criminal legal system. So again,
I was sexually assaulted when I
was 15. I didn't have a license.
I didn't really have a concept
of what the criminal legal
process was like, I didn't have
a way, so I was lucky that I had
parents who believed me when I
told them. I was very lucky that
I had that, that they drove me
to the police station that they
let me talk to a victim
advocate.
There are so many youth in the
state that do not have that,
will not have that until they're
of the age of 18 or even beyond,
uh, New Mexico has a lot of
multi-generational family homes.
There are lots of people who
live with their family well into
their twenties. So I'm 23,
right? I was relying, I was
living with my parents until
like a couple of years ago. So
in the event that I was living
in a household with the person
who is sexually abused me
growing up.
I might even be aware that I
could report the crime, but not
feel that I had the liberty to
at risk of my own economic
mission. So there are a variety
of contexts in which these
memories can come up for people,
but really the most important
thing, the most salient thing,
is the fact that somebody might
not feel that they have access
to these systems that are meant
to support them. And this bill,
the extension and statute of
limitation provides that access
in a meaningful way. So I hope
that's helpful. Thank you.
Senator Scott.
OK. Uh, thank you for your
answers, very persuasive.
And thank you.
Thank you
The motion for a due pass from
Senator Pinto.
With a second from Senator Sidil
Lopez, and we still have
discussion.
Who asked Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
First of all, I, I just want to
say I'm very sorry to you and uh
Miss Dean who was on the line
and and all women that have gone
through this.
Uh, it has hit my family, um,
you know, you said something
that just really was extremely
profound, um.
Two things actually. You talked
about.
The person could be in your home
that you have to live with for
years, and that just really puts
a lot of
distress and burden on the
victim.
You also talked about living
with this day to day.
From 8 years ago, I believe
you're 23 now.
And
You know,
I'm I'm going to support the
bill.
But the and I can.
I firmly believe just my
opinion, the, the man who did
that to you.
Person who did that to you.
Just my view and anyone who does
this.
should either be castrated or
executed.
That's just what I feel because
in my mind, these people are
wired.
Differently
And uh they shouldn't be in
society.
Just my opinion.
But I'll also say to you,
Uh, Madam Chair, Ms. Morales,
that
This stays with you.
Um
For the rest of your life.
You have to live with it.
It happened in my family.
I will tell you also that I
can't compare my experience to
you of
PTSD of the things that I saw
and did in Afghanistan that have
stuck with me now for
Almost 20 years since I've been
home of.
Seeing some of the most
atrocious things.
You could ever imagine that I
had to bear witness to over
there around that country.
And when you talked about
Maybe it was born talked about
uh
Sometimes these you repress
things for years.
And um
I get that.
I totally get that.
And I think there's been a lot
of.
People, men and women who have
repressed.
Some type of trauma in their
lives for years where they
remember it vividly years later.
We talked about
Smell sounds.
I can take you back to that
moment and just puts you in a
really bad place.
I don't think it matters.
A day later
50 years later.
My colleague was colleague was
talking about over there.
But it's gonna stick with you
every single day until your last
breath.
Of your life, and I'm sorry for
that.
Sometimes counseling, it just,
it doesn't work and you just
have to bear with the pain and
just where the pain for the rest
of your life.
Like many veterans do in many,
many so.
The smells that you talked about
is something that in in the in
the sounds.
Anytime there's a loud banging
here.
My colleagues have probably seen
me freak out a little bit.
Um
I, I haven't, I got issues as
well of something. I'll just
carry it for the rest of my life
and I accept that.
But
For you and
I'll say millions of women.
Like you
There's gotta be, there's gotta
be a way to hold people
accountable.
There's a.
Whether it's to the age of 40 or
whether it's not, whether
there's no statute of
limitations, I don't know what
the right answer is. I, I don't.
But I know voting for this, and
I can totally understand.
Oh, you're a Rhodes scholar.
You're very well.
Spoken, very, very bright.
And uh looking at you there
makes me uh very hopeful.
So I want to just tell you, I'm
gonna support this.
Your courage.
To be here
To talk about this.
It inspiring
And I hope it might bring other
women forward.
To tell their story.
And to tell other women to be
strong and other men, by the
way, it happens to men as well.
So I want to thank you for
coming in. I think you are very
Courageous
And um
I really look forward to uh
All the amazing things you're
going to accomplish in your
life, no matter what pain you
can.
Uh, thank you. Any other
questions, comments?
And just for a committee to
know, um, I had mentioned
previously when I was looking at
for committee that we're having
a hard stop at 5:30 today.
So we're not going till 9
o'clock or whatever, so just so
you all know.
The chairs, my energy is like
dwindling.
And we still have a few senators
who've been waiting patiently,
and I'd love to be able to get
through.
So, just FYI, Senator Gallegos.
I'm sure I'll be brief, uh, I
work with hearing aids, so I'm
having a hard time hearing you,
but what I did hear from you was
very, very impressive. So
Senator Block did a good job of
talking about PTSD and what
you've gone through, what he's
gone through in the past I did
Rachel's Law and also uh
prostitution of a minor, even
though I was just a legislator
in the room.
It holds memories.
And, and so.
I, I've never been molested,
never had anything like that,
but I had a lot of compassion
for you and I just want to tell
you as a Hispanic legislator,
I'm so proud of you for being
able to come do this to, to be
able to speak to a group of
people about your life and your
tragedy is huge for us and it's
like he'd said, you know, when
you walked in, um, Madam Chair
and senator, I was trying to
think through worship parents,
uh, you look young.
And, and you, you, you're
incredible. Just think through
what you've you've gone through
who you are and where you're at
in your education.
Speaks volumes about
What you've done through your
tragedy, but I just wanted to
stand up and say publicly that
I'm so proud of you because it
takes people like you that have
the backbone to bring reality to
this capital so we can
understand what's happening out
there. I just wanted to
Pour out my heart and tell you
thank you for what you do and
let you know that we're in
support of you and thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you.
I do believe we're on a motion
for a due pass in a second.
Senator Block.
And boom. Yes. And Charlie, yes,
and to explain my vote.
In our egos. Yes, ma'am.
And her nova. Yes, and to
explain my vote.
And our Pinto.
And Scott.
Yes.
Cio Lopez, yes, Senator Hickey.
And our Lopez
Yes.
And to explain your vote,
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Steinborn and Miss
Morales, thank you for bringing
this forward.
I wish
I went through
But I knew that when I was
running for and the work that
I've done with the coalition
with stories of pain.
But also of healing.
I think you, it is the it is one
of the office.
was to be on, and so it is just
my honor.
Thank you, Senator Nava.
bringing this forward and thank
you, Morales for standing here
and sharing all of
Your experience with us, your
knowledge, your wisdom, and your
expertise, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, Ms. Morales, I just want to
thank you for the countless
women and voices who have not
had the ability to bring their
stories forward because we know
they're out there.
And many of them, many of us
know those stories, not everyone
has been able to uplift them in
the way that you have, and I
just commend you because your
story, uh, Madam Chair, uh, Ms.
Morales, your story.
is one that only you understand,
no one can claim to understand
at all.
So, I just am very proud, uh,
Madam Chair, to stand and
support and, and deep gratitude
to you, Senator Steinborg.
For your empathy and your
willingness to uplift the voice.
Thank you. You have a Du pass
recommendation.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senate Bill 96.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. We
want to start this. Good evening
or good afternoon to all of you.
Today I'm presenting Senate Bill
96, which proposes changes to
the definitions created to the
off-highway Vehicle Act.
These proposed changes will
update the definitions and will
facilitate the sale of modern
vehicles and electric vehicles
in the highway vehicle market in
New Mexico.
Joining me this late afternoon
is Mr. Brett Moore, who is going
to speak a little bit more about
the proposed changes.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Brent Moore. I am a
registered lobbyist for Polaris
and also I'm going to describe
to you the, the very specific
focused nature of the
definitional changes that we're
proposing in the off-highway
Vehicle Act. Those definitions
are intended to update and
modernize the act, and so you'll
see 4 different changes within
the act. The first one is we
change the reference to low
pressure to non
highway. And the reason why
we're doing this is the
definition is old and it doesn't
really reflect off highway
vehicle tire technology and
vehicle design today.
Uh, the second change that you
will see is a change from gross
vehicle weight to unladen dry
weight, and the reason we
proposed that change is because
only two states use gross
vehicle weight at this point. Uh
those two states are in New
Mexico and Alaska. Um, the, the
near universal standard of
measurement now is uh dry
weight.
Uh, the 3rd change that we have
is to change the reference from
10,750 pounds.
To 3500 pounds within the
definition of recreational
off-highway vehicle. Um, and the
reason why we're proposing that
is what the industry would like
to do is to produce more modern
type vehicles and
in doing that, what you can do
with these vehicles is you can
put doors on, you can put full
cabs, and then also you can uh
put in um things related to
electric vehicles, including
electric motors and.
lithium ion batteries which we
know are quite heavy, but it
helps with the facilitating
electric off vehicles getting
into the marketplace. The last,
um, the last change that I would
describe or the 4th change is
removal of the reference to
engine displacement of less than
1000 cubic centimeters. Uh, the
reason why we're doing this is
once again, uh engine
displacement is only found in 2
states, New Mexico and
California. So our definitions
are quite old and not really up
to date and inconsistent with
other states and with that, uh,
I will stand for questions.
OK, thank you. Is that all your
presentation, Senator?
Yes, madam chair. OK, we'll go
to the audience. Is there anyone
here in support?
Of this bill.
Yes. If you would like to make a
statement, there's a, a
microphone.
You could identify yourself
please and then your statement.
Madam Chair, members of the.
Commit. My name's Rick Alcon. I
own RNS Power Sports Group in
Albuquerque, um, talk for uh
several dealers in the state.
I'm the chairman of the New
Mexico Off-highway Vehicle
Safety Board, um, and immediate
pass to motorcycle industry
council.
Uh, dealer advocacy board, um.
I was also a part of this
legislation when it was created
back in the early 2000s, it
represented the vehicles that
were on the ground at the time
and a little bit extra without
throwing a broad net over things
that we didn't have at that
time, since then, vehicles have
evolved. The product has
changed. There are vehicles on
the ground now that um by every
definition should be in here,
um, but are excluded by these uh
weight and measurement, um.
Numbers that were in the past.
So it's just simply a
modernization that reflects what
is on the ground and those
products that are certain to be
on the, on the ground shortly.
OK, thank you. Is there anyone
else in support?
Anyone in opposition?
See no, is there anyone?
No? OK.
go to questions or comments from
committee.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
What do we do about honesty?
Madam Chair.
And Senator Pino, I will do my
best to answer the question, and
I also have uh folks who are
more knowledgeable than I in the
back if I get it wrong, uh, the
changes to the definition are
related to vehicles that we
would have here in the state,
and there is an attempt to uh
change the definitions to
facilitate electric vehicles as
they are here in the state when
you have a vehicle coming in
from another state, I would
believe that those would be
registered in a separate state,
um, and as
We sit here today, I don't know
the answer to if they were to
move here, how quickly they
would have to register,
potentially register it here,
but I would assume they would be
in the same difficult situation
that many folks are now with
this issue of challenges with
registration that was noted in
the FIR.
I hope that in. So people.
Chance to the
Big license.
000.
But they bring these in men.
And
They
I won't.
And
When I go to the lakes.
In some areas.
Certainly, and we know these
off-road tires have the
detraction.
Chanels in there
And by the lake, which is the
autumn and they start.
There is
It cause all
That's why I'm like, well, what
do we do campaign or we stop.
Or do we require to to stop.
And even the operators.
Sorry, I'll leave it at that
question first.
Madam Chair Senator, so if I'm
hearing you correctly, you're
thinking about these uh vehicles
that are over the weight limit
that they're bringing over a
state line to do the recreation
in New Mexico. And so in the
states that those vehicles are
purchased,
It's more than likely legal for
them to register them.
In the state of New Mexico, it's
legal to purchase that type of
vehicle. We just can't get them
registered. I don't think that
as a state we can stop them from
a registered vehicle that's come
into the state of New Mexico.
That's legally registered in the
state where it's purchased and
where it's registered.
members of the committee, it's
more along the lines of if
they're gonna that there should
be some educational kind of
outreach.
Make sure that
Because it costs us.
Cause us to maintain or repair.
But someone from out of state
comes and does fiscal impact.
Do believe
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, uh,
all the points that you're
making about responsible use of
my client would agree with and
I'm sure Senator Armio agrees
with in the use of our highway
vehicles, folks need to be
responsible and they need to not
tear things up and they need to
be cognizant of when they're
using these vehicles to use them
in an appropriate manner. I
would say this as it relates to
the issue that you were talking
about with hunting, off highway
vehicles are currently subject
to the regulatory authority of
the game and fish.
apartment when it comes to
educating folks who are also
getting hunting license from the
game and fish department. I
think you're on a, a very good
track in terms of talking to
folks who are using these
vehicles while using permit or
hunting permits or licenses,
that's a really important point,
and I, I'm sure that we can both
agree that that type of
education is important. I think
that's a subject that would need
to be addressed with the game
and fish department to say, hey,
you have the licenses that
you're putting out there.
have folks coming into the
state, potentially they're using
these vehicles, and they should
use them in a responsible
manner. So I think, I think
we're on the same page in terms
of responsible use of.
And Madam Chair, members
committee, it's when COVID hit.
But coming into Albuquerque on
the west side area.
Uh
A lot of this, especially in the
anything illegal happening, but
they have Albuquerque because
there's.
The
Licensing, are we requiring
So who, who has the authority to
stop to just fish.
About these vehicles.
Um, to check
the the person that's driving is
even a age to to operate,
especially when we talk about
um.
Accident out there, especially
out in the uh.
In that area.
Madam Chair Senator, I'm going
to speak as my experience as a
former county commissioner, and
I think Senator Block can agree
with this. Is it then became the
law enforcement of the city or
in this case, the county since
it's typically offroad that it's
the sheriff's department in
Ririba County who would check to
make sure that one, it was
somebody licensed to drive that
vehicle and to that that vehicle
was registered. And so I don't
know if that was the same in
York County but in Ririba
County.
fell on the sheriff's
department.
And thank you.
So
We're updating
Will our local entities also be
are are they ahead of us and
we're behind.
On this.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
these definitions are in state
law, so this would be applicable
uh throughout the state.
so the the local entities would
need Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
I believe so. I mean, everyone
has to follow state law.
Um
So do we know because I don't
think I've seen.
really require motorcycle to
have.
guardrails and you've been
driving that we seem to be the
state that um.
Drivers don't like guardrails
here.
You like to take them down.
And I don't think we're, I don't
know.
Oh well, we're
You know, it's our
driver up to date enough.
You
Make better drivers of the
Mexican.
Versus
And I go through to Mexico and
you go to.
Don't want to encourage them
regularly.
Is that all, Senator?
Senator Pinto.
Is that OK?
Senator Scott.
Thank you, madam chair.
Senator
Expert
The smart fall under the heading
of Be Careful what you wish for.
Because if we're using apples to
apples comparison.
On these weights
The 3500 pound.
Moves to 4500 pounds.
When fully loaded with people,
fuel and
Shotguns or whatever.
So what you
The practical effect of this
will be to make
Toyota pickups.
Legitimate off-road vehicles.
Is that
Where you
Wanting to go? Madam Chair
Senator, I'm going to give you
an example at Los Alamos
National Laboratory. We use
these vehicles to ensure that we
can get into areas where we need
to do scientific research and in
some cases, there are no
highways or roads to get to the
places that we need to do some,
whether it's water sampling or
looking at the um
The conditions of the air, um,
we're trying to reduce our
carbon footprint at Los Alamos
National Laboratory.
But right now, if we were to try
to go electric with the side by
side vehicles, the weight limit
isn't there. It's, it's too low
for what we would need to be an
electric off-road vehicle. And
so I'm taking that from our
experience in Los Alamos that we
we're trying to tie in these
vehicles to do scientific
research right now to go
electric, there would be no way
because of the weight limit
that's currently restricting us.
OK.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Senator, thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator, good, good evening
and Mr. Witness.
Um
So we were both county
commissioners.
Um
This does not
Uh, supersede any kind of
ordinances that may have weight
limits in their counties. Uh, do
I understand that?
Madam Senator, we all follow the
same state statute with those
weight requirements.
OK, thank you.
Um
Is there, Madam Chair, um.
Senator, are there other
off-road vehicles that weigh
more than
3500 pounds.
Madam Chair, Senator, I assume
that there are, but they
wouldn't be legal to register
for off-road.
Thank you, sir. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. So
Where, where did we get the 3500
pound from, is that because it
encompasses maybe.
80-90% of these off-road
vehicles or is that a standard
that we use from somewhere else.
Madam Chair, Senator Bloch, uh,
that standard is within some
states, some states have that
as, as the measure. Some states
have no weight limit when it
comes to these types of
vehicles. But when it comes to
the 3500 pounds, uh, 33 states
have that specific, uh.
A weight limit and so that's
the, the greater majority of
them are at that number, but
some states don't even have a, a
restriction, so that's
So
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You know, in Sandoval County,
there is um.
With this, with this apply to so
like a firefighters, right?
Sandoval County Fire Department.
They may have a vehicle.
That weighs more than 3500
pounds, would, would they have
to?
Um, would they have to give up
that vehicle because it's used
for rescue or training.
I don't believe so.
What I, what these definitions
apply to the off-highway Vehicle
Act. If they have existing
vehicles, I'm assuming those
existing vehicles are registered
in some other capacity and this
bill would not force them to
give up anything. If anything,
we're dealing with a very
restrictive set of definitions
and all that we're doing is
increasing um the, the, the
scope.
Of vehicles that could be
registered on it, but if they
have existing vehicles and
they are properly registered,
this would not negatively impact
them.
Oh, OK, so let me make sure I
understand what
So if a government entity or a
non-government entity.
Had an off-road vehicle that
weighed.
3,501 pounds or greater.
Would
Would they have to
I
Is there a weight limit?
Where you have to register an
off-road vehicle in the state of
New Mexico. Is there a
requirement for that? I take the
first part of it and then Madam
Chair, Senator Block, um, I'll
take the first part of that and
then I will, I probably defer to
some of the experts in their
room, but.
Whatever that vehicle is and
whatever it is currently doing,
whatever it's registration
status is. If you say we're
talking about 3,5001 pounds.
At that number, you are much
above the 1750 under this
definition, moving it up to 3500
will not change what's happening
with that vehicle. In terms of
the registrations of the types
of vehicles that you're talking
about. I'm not quite sure, but
I'm happy to defer to the
experts in the room that
understand the full gamut of.
Of the vehicles that are like.
Um, I'll leave it up to the
chair if if she will allow the
witness your expert witness to
come forward. I just want to
know if they're
You know, when we register
vehicles in New Mexico, do we,
what's the standard? Is it 3
wheel, 4 wheel, is it 500
pounds? I, I, I don't know, you
know, a dirt bike.
Um, I have no idea. I was
wondering if someone could just
tell me that real quick and
I'll, I'll let you know.
Madam Chair remembers that.
This bill
uh
Senator Pinto was asking about
some guard rails, so the whole
OHB Act has guardrails in it,
has child use, guardrails. It
has requirements for
non-residents to get a
non-resident certificate, the
minute they come into our state
to use their vehicle either.
Temporary or permanently, um,
There's state statute that
requires a lot of things inside
this bill.
What happens is,
If the vehicle right now is
above the 1750, for example,
weight limit. It goes outside
the guardrails.
So all the things that have been
set up for safety, for
education, for child protection,
all those things are outside the
guardrails.
Because those guardrails were
appropriate when we developed
this definition in 2000.
Now, the vehicle's gotten
bigger. So what, in an effort
not to cast the net too wide
back then and catch some
inappropriate vehicles, we've
allowed some appropriate
vehicles to be outside the
guardrails. So all this does is
move the guardrails outside to
bring those vehicles back inside
the act.
And so
Passing it.
puts them under all the other
things that are required in this
act from a safety use and
otherwise standpoint, not
passing this.
Allows these vehicles to
technically be
In limbo they're not.
Street vehicles because they
have branded titles that say
they're off-road vehicles.
There
They're outside the scope,
technically they could avoid
registration, they could avoid
taxation, they could avoid a lot
of things that the OHB Act
requires of a vehicle like this
that's branded off-road vehicle.
So by passing this, all you're
doing is expanding the
guardrails to say these are the
vehicles that really exist out
there on the, on the grounds.
We're bringing them underneath
this act in the appropriate
subclassification that they
belong.
Thank, thank you, sir. Thank
you, Madam Chair. That, that
actually is a great answer.
Because my follow on to that is
all these vehicles that
Or over that 1750, is that I
think.
Do they need to be refitted or
um any type of requirements that
people would have to do to those
vehicles that are between that
1750 and 3500 pounds. Is there
additional cost to
Um, the public who owns those
vehicles.
Absolutely not. And, and a kind
of a I'm sorry, um, Adam Chair,
uh.
The current law actually has a
provision in it for the
Department of Game and Fish.
To say
That vehicle looks like it's
spade, it's a spade. That looks
like an off-road vehicle. It's a
off-road vehicle, even if it is
outside the scope of the 71,750.
The problem is they can't get
that into the sub-vehicle
categories that the off-road Act
requires.
And so there is nothing that's
different between a vehicle
that's 6 1749 pounds.
In 1751 pounds from a user
standpoint from an operational
standpoint, from a titling
standpoint from a state
registration classification
standpoint, there's no
difference. The only issue is,
does it, is it get inside the
guardrails of the act, and is it
properly categorized once it
gets in. In other words, you ask
the question, off-road
motorcycles, snowmobiles.
Altering vehicles straddle
vehicles, and sit-in vehicles,
which is what these are, have 4
subcategories and there's
different parts of that act that
that fall under.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Yeah, I'm just
You know, the other, the other
pieces, uh, I think Senator
Pinto brought it up, uh, she
might have been alluding to it
as any.
Type of um
Environmental wear and tear
concerns because in my district,
um, Rio Rancho Estates.
There's a lot of stuff going on
out there, and um
You know, we got the Arroyos and
we want to make sure that with
the added weight, added traffic.
What type of impact does that
have on?
On Arroyos, especially where I
live, I we're worried about
water uh direction. Madam Chair,
this, this.
Specific component.
does not address that. This is
simply bringing those vehicles
under this guideline, but
indirectly it does because for
example everyone under the age
of 18 in the state of Mexico
must have writer education and
training. One component of that
by state statute, is that we
Train them on local and cultural
affairs that would relate to
this and so with them being
outside the guardrails of this
currently they don't have to be
trained.
They don't have age use
requirements. We bring them
inside the guardrails. They have
to be trained. They have to get
that education, they're inside
the guard rails. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chair. I yelled. I'm still
here. Yeah, I haven't gone
anywhere.
I have not gone anywhere. I'm
still here. No, I, I know you
were talking. I just.
Doing it to Senator Hickey, so
in case you needed to talk more,
you could.
Do whatever you had to do was
Sorry.
OK, are you finished?
That was all
OK, all right.
Any other questions?
Motion for a due pass through
Senator Pinto with a second from
Senator Hickey.
If you could call the roll,
please. Senator Boone
Senator Charlie.
And Gallegos and her nova.
Senor Pinto Senator Scott.
Yes.
Senator Serio Lopez, yes, and
her hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
And to explain your votes,
Senator Pinto. OK, Madam Chair,
members of the committee that I.
It includes clown cards.
Cloud cars, madam chair, we'll
make sure that clown cars are
included. Thank you, madam chair
members of the committee. Have a
great evening and I'll see you
tomorrow morning.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Woods, please
join us up front.
Madam Chair, today I present to
you Senate Bill 97.
I have with me an expert witness
thecenti Vargas.
And this is a uh
Funding bill
Appropriation bill for
$19,700 700,000 dollars. I'm
gonna let uh Mr.
As Santi Vargas explained the
bill real quickly.
And uh we'll go from there.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Vicente
Vargas. I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Health Care Association, New
Mexico Center for Assisted
Living, um, we're a trade
association whose membership uh
includes assisted living
facilities, nursing facilities,
and intermediate care fac
facilities for individuals with
developmental disabilities.
Um,
The appropriation requested is
um intended to rebase.
Nursing facility, Medicaid
rates.
Rebasing of Medicaid rates is a,
is a process, um mandated by the
New Mexico Administrative code.
Whereby the health care, the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority.
Analyzes cost reports.
statutorily required to be
submitted by nursing facility
providers.
And that analysis is intended
to, um,
Determine whether costs uh meet
state statute and state
regulation and also to um
Um, rebates or to um
just Medicaid rates in order for
those Medicaid rates to reflect
what it costs to operate a
nursing facility and most
importantly, what it costs to
care for those residents in
nursing in those nursing
facilities.
Um
The reason we're asking for this
appropriation is that nursing
facility rates have not been
re-based since 2007.
So with that, um, I will send
her questions. Thank you very
much, Senator and Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Was that
all?
OK. We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support of Senate Bill 97?
Anyone in opposition?
See on questions. Oh, excuse me,
is there anyone in Zoom?
No? OK.
Any questions or comments from
There's a motion for a due pass
from Senator Sio Lopez, but we
still have questions for
discussion.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator expert, can you tell me
how many people?
would be impacted by this.
Madam Chair, senator, there are
um 68 nursing facilities in the
state of New Mexico.
Um, of and in those 68, there
are over 6000 licensed beds on
nursing facility beds in, in
those facilities. So,
presume, you know, not knowing
that not um not all beds are,
are, um, occupied every day.
could be over 6000, but just as
importantly, uh, this funding
will also impact the uh
caregivers.
In those facilities so that
those caregivers are um paid a a
wage that they deserve and also
to recruit additional
caregivers um into uh into
nursing facilities.
Yeah
Madam Chair, Senator, and
expert, I understand.
That Medicaid reimbursements
across the state for
For about every
Service
Or
Well below
What's required for many.
Of organizations to break even
is this create
Any special treatment.
Or nursing homes that
Is, is not being afforded.
You
Other areas of the medical
community.
The only way that I can explain
that is that the nursing home
industry is gone from a single
ownership.
More of a corporate ownership
and the reason for that is
They just, they're just not
bringing in enough money. We've
got a lot of
Um
patients in our state that are.
Medicaid patients.
Uh
level that, that
the federal reimburseed Medicaid
is based on the poverty rate.
Of the state
And uh regular Medicaid.
A federal government pays
73.26%.
And uh
The
Reimbursement rate on nursing's
home at present is 71.
17, I think percent.
And what we're trying to do is
uh we have to match those rates,
we can get more federal money if
we have more.
More state match.
That's what the 19 million is.
is to try to get more of that.
That federal money into the
state.
Uh, if we get 19.7 million it
will match federal.
Bonds of 49.838,000.
Uh, for a total of 69 538.
and
5,069,538,000.
So
That's what we're trying to do
with this bill.
is to bring in
And supplement.
Those nursing homes.
For the Medicaid.
OK, so this is.
With the Madam Chair and senator
with the, with the federal.
3 to 1 match this about $60
million.
Yes.
So this is roughly.
$10,000 per bed.
Um
Close to $1000 a month.
That's
That's a pretty substantial
increase.
Oh
Yes, one last question, this.
This uh
If
Yeah, Madam chair Senator, to,
to your point, it is a
substantial increase,
absolutely. Um,
but please keep in mind that
these um
That the proposed funding is
based on cost reports that are
audited.
Um, so it is, it is what is it,
it's based on what it uh what
the cost of care is.
Conditionally
The rebas is significant because
facilities have not been
re-based since 2007.
So it has been a number of
years, but please let me, I, I
have to be clear on this as
well. It does not mean that
nursing facilities have not
received rate increases since
2007. There have been rate
increases that have occurred
between 2007 and today.
Still those rate increases as
generous as they were from this,
from, from this legislature.
According to the healthcare
authority, we are still $60
million.
Short on what it costs to care
for residents.
OK, thank you.
Madam Chair and sen, just 2 more
questions. Is it in the budget?
There's 7 million in the budget
right now.
9 in the budget right now.
And then second question, this
appears to be the FIR.
had a 3-year impact that this
appears to be a one-year
solution.
Is that correct?
That's correct.
Thank you, sir. Thank you,
madam.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, I misspoke.
The, the 9 million is in the
reoccurring side.
So it won't be the total 19
million, but there is a 9
million reoccurring
appropriation.
In the reoccurring. OK, thank
you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator Woods for bringing
this forward, um.
So the
So this is just a one time.
And if I
I used to know cost formulas
that I know for nursing homes,
but this will help reset a base
within that formula, which will
then bring more additional
revenue and time.
Is that what you're doing with
this?
Madam Chair, Senator, it's
exactly, yeah, exactly. It is
formula based.
OK. And then just to put this in
context, tell me if I'm wrong.
Uh
One time nursing homes were
profitable back about.
007.
Um, as I recall, but they become
progressively
Unprofitable, I was just saying
that they're they're not able to
bring in enough revenue, so they
alternatives are, well, some of
these nationals have come in,
but
Their alternatives are to close
them.
In my sense is, if we don't do
this, we are going to close.
More nursing homes.
Because you
Can't make up money, you can't
pull it off the trees when
you're running a deficit. And
so, if we don't do this, we'll
close the nursing home, but I'd
like to remind
The
Uh, my colleagues that
We have one of the oldest
populations in the country.
It is growing.
As the baby boom moves into it,
it's going to significantly
increase, and we desperately
need more of these nursing
homes.
So, but we won't get them if
they're running at at a a
continual.
Locks
So in my misunders
Am I misconstruing what I think
is uh
Um, basically,
Uh
Medicare, Medicare makes up
about 17, 18%. It's one of the
highest in the country of the
population they, and it will
grow substantially.
So we, we really have to do
this, we're gonna have a lot of
people.
Literally out on the street,
don't you?
My, my exaggerating.
No, you're not exaggerating, and
I don't know if any of you
people have put any of your
parents in these nursing homes.
It's very expensive proposition.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Um
I just wanted to add a comment
that I have a friend, dear
friend of mine.
It was in one of the private.
facilities?
And the cost she was having to
pay was 6 and it was, you know,
just, you know, extrapolate
that.
He passed away, but
still the car private and that
was not one of the higher end
places.
So as we grow older.
Some of us are a little head
than others.
Um, it's, it's a reality that's
here.
Um
You don't have that insurance,
quote unquote.
So I just wanted to add that.
If
You could very well whatever
your assets were built up in
your lifetime.
Can be put right into that
nursing home.
And, and for the care for your
final care.
And, you know, this.
My mother is in one right now.
And I hate it because I'm not
able to go home and see her.
Uh, uh, she's got.
Dementia.
And I worry that the next time I
go home, she's not even gonna
recognize me.
But, you know, every time I go
in there, that's a chance I
take.
But
Sorry to bring that up.
In the other discussion, we are
on a Du pass motion.
You could call the roll, please.
block
boo.
Yes. Senator Charlie.
And our Gallegos and her nova
yes andino.
The nurse got.
Yes.
Inser Lopez.
And her hickey and her Lopez.
Yes, you have a 10 to 0 do pass
motion, senator. Thank you.
Our last for the evening.
And this will be on Senate Bill
102.
Are you ready, madam chair?
They're passing out the bills
right now.
It's just a
A few seconds.
Yes. And I know that you do have
an amendment, but would you just
Yes, and uh if I do a brief
introduction, the amendment will
make a little bit more sense.
Uh, I would like to, to
recognize Jessica Hathaway, who
is the assistant director,
deputy director of the
Legislative Education Study
Committee who is here for help
with any potential technical
questions. Um, this bill though,
they, it is titled as being uh
guaranteed basic income or
universal basic income, it is in
fact a conditional cash.
transfer bill, but most people
know these more as GBI bills or
universal basic income bills.
Uh, what this bill would do is
uh provide funding.
Or
Pregnant uh families until the
child turns one year old of
$1500 a month.
We know from numerous studies
that the trauma of young
families when they have to worry
about eviction, food insecurity,
uh, when they get pregnant is
very, very expensive, causes
lots of trauma that the child
then carries through the rest of
their lives. Uh, this would
alleviate much of that early
trauma on the family that is
then carried on to the child,
uh, $1500 a month, the child
doesn't, they don't have to
worry about being evicted. One
of the major causes of trauma.
food insecurity, being able to
buy diapers, a crib, being able
to stay home with the child
after it's born. Uh, this would
be a pilot program for
approximately 2000 children a
year. They have to be the
conditions.
150% of poverty or less so that
it is focused on low income,
they must participate in home
visiting or in uh first let me
say they must participate in
prenatal care. We know that
makes a difference. Uh, that
also low income families have
the lowest uptake of prenatal
care. And so this incentivizes
that. It also would require once
the baby is born, that the
family participates in home
visiting. Another program that
we know makes a difference and
low-income families.
have the lowest uptake of home
visiting programs. The amendment
was recommended by the early
childhood education and care
department because this would be
under the Department of Health
because they're already in the
business of writing checks to
families and therefore the
infrastructure is already there.
The amendment changes and puts
the home visiting portion of
this under early childhood
education and care department,
they are the ones responsible
for doing this. That makes
perfect sense to do.
so, and so it's very friendly
and highly supported amendment.
Um, and with that, I think we
would be ready for to move the
amendment and then questions on
the amendment.
Madam Chair, I move the
amendment.
There's a motion um to for
purposes of discussion.
Uh 230425.1.
And I will second the motion.
And would you like to?
Madam Chair, I think I already
explained what the amendment
does is for the portion of home
visiting, it moves that under
the early childhood education
and care department and not
under the Department of Health.
OK.
And is there anyone in the
audience and support the
amendment?
none. Anybody on Zoom, um,
discussion on the amendment.
and is there any opposition to
the amendment?
None of you would just go ahead
and show all of us voting in the
affirmative.
You have an
We'll go to questions or
comments from the audience.
Madam Chair, we don't want the
um somewhat jokingly, we don't
want this to be a waiting list
because they're trying to get
pregnant and want to make sure
that they're on the list. And so
when they have shown up, you
know, they are pregnant, then
they would be eligible to make
application.
Clarify if they have to like go
see the doctor.
We're trying to meet that.
Madam Chair, that would
certainly be under rules and,
and how it would be administered
through the Department of Health
is to how they would want that
documented or something of that
sort.
Thank you, Senator Sidil Lopez.
I'm interested that there's a
why, um.
Why can't you look at data
that's already occurring with
these groups or data from
another school or only because
um
I don't know, it just it drives
me crazy when a control group
like this, we know.
I mean, I, my, the hypothesis, I
think is very strong that the
people who get this assistance
are going to do better than the
people who don't.
And so it just kind of breaks my
heart. I have to make that
comparison when I think you can
make that comparison based on
prior data that you have or
similar data from another
school.
Or I mean, another, yeah.
Another is I I guess it won't
necessarily know each other.
Madam Chair, I just asked that
question.
Madam Chair and Senator, um,
and, and that's not, that's a
great question actually. Um, it
is important that we have a
control group and the control
group actually identifies itself
fairly naturally, in the, when
this has been done other places,
there are some people who do,
who start the program and then
do not follow through on the
prenatal care, the home
visiting.
After you would have certainly
have compassionate exceptions
that they couldn't make one
appointment, you're not going to
kick them off. But if they
aren't participating in those
portions, they would be moved
off and then continued to follow
and track. What happens when you
do that is you start getting
dose effect results where you
can start seeing that the people
that had it for 2 months, they
got these kinds of results,
those who had it for 4 months
had these results. I envisioned
also the
As it goes in that it would go
in on a staggered basis and so
some would be getting it for a
longer period of time. Uh,
certainly during my dissertation
and my PhD, I have lots of
training in how you set up uh.
Research studies with control
groups and different mechanisms
for doing that. This one is
works beautifully for having
that dose effect type of thing.
And in fact, I have talked with
the director of the PhD public
health nursing program at UNM,
uh, Doctor Dameron and her
students, as well as uh faculty
at the Burrell College who are
very interested in being the
ones to actually design the
specific research and conduct
the studies and
follow-ups.
Madam Chair, so that's probably
where we'll be conducted is at
Barrow College.
I'm sorry, I missed the question
at the medical school.
In Las Cruces Barre College,
Beryl Burrell College is the
osteopathic program down there
and you know, as I look at this,
this has dissertations written
all through it as far as doing
the research, uh, GBI bills and
have been done extensively
across the country on fairly
small scale. This would do it,
I'm expecting about 2000, which
is about 10% of the cohort of
babies born in the, in New
Mexico each year. So it would
not be completely at scale but
in a much larger program and
All of the results seem to be
very similar, but have not done
the careful things with this
dose effect where you actually
see for how long they get it
with the different effects are.
Um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna support
it, but I just, I just have an
easier time with.
than, than humans who you know
based on past history.
And you know, um.
I mean
They say, you know, but the
hypothesis is be tested is
pretty strong.
Um, and so it just, and I
understand what you're saying
about. If the control group is
people who, who don't complete
the program, I'm OK with that.
But as I understand this, this
is designed that there will be a
separate control group that does
not get the benefit.
That would otherwise
Probably be entitled to it under
if they weren't part of the
control group.
Uh, I mean, I know I'm not
saying that right, but it just,
it just bothers me. I'm, I'm
gonna support it. I just uh.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
fully understand and typically
in studies like this, the
control groups start off as
people that didn't make it into
the initial group and if there's
an opening, they may move up
into that and then you start
getting some dose effect also.
So that they're sort of on a
waiting list, if you will.
Thank you. That's not described
in the bill. That does make me
feel a little bit better. Thank
you, Madam President, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Senator Soles for
bringing this forward.
Um,
In one of my past lives.
My academic, um, I was on an
NIH R1 cramp.
Uh, quality.
Uh, health care quality view
panel for kind of torture
because thats, but the point of
having the review committee was
to be sure that we could isolate
the variables in the study and
established true cause and
effect and in something like
this, I see.
Multiple, uh,
variants or confounders
potentially coming in to the
study that would weaken its
overall statistical.
Um,
Results statistics being
statistically significant,
right? Yes, the one point.
The 1500 per year made a
significant difference. And
So, um,
If I understand you correctly,
this is going to
give money to DOH.
They then will select.
The
Um
And grant writers here because
of the grant is done, but
basically,
Who designs the study.
Will be will be critical. I
mean, and eliminating all the
variables is gonna be
impossible. I understand that.
Um
But
What would be really helpful
here, and I often said business
is not that different from
research and business, you have
to, you have to kind of make
these decisions quickly and you
can't go into all the
confounders and what have you,
but you get a directional sense
that if you did X,
Um
Doing this, something like this,
you would likely get an outcome
and you'd be able to have at
least
Uh, some clear measures of, of
what it is that you're looking
at. So, um, I'm
I think this is a great idea,
and I'm, I'm taking it on faith.
Department of Health will bring
some academic rigor to how the
study is designed to eliminate
as many of the confounders
possible, and then I guess the
other question is,
Well, whoever takes this on, I
mean, this is kind of a
Um
An opportunity for the school of
public health or NMSU or someone
to come along and say,
You know, if I could take this
and turn it into an RO1 federal
grant right now, they're under,
they're a lot of it.
pressures, but, um,
The, it could, it could then.
Follow people for what I'm
looking for is following people
for a number of years.
And, and, uh, coming up with the
criteria of measuring ACEs.
In the group, it it versus the
control group. So,
Um, I, I'm hoping that the
department will bring some rigor
to this and also encourage other
to get federal grants.
Who continue to study the effect
so that we see this 1015 years
out with folks. So I'm just, I'm
making that as a, as a comment
and an observation.
My checkered past, I used to be
into that kind of stuff. Um, and
hoping that
The, uh, the department will
bring that rigor to it and
actually be great to hear at
LHHS this summer from the
department about how they did
that rigor, so that we can
really point to this result and
say, this ought to become
policy, not just here in New
Mexico, but in every state.
Madam Chair, if I might, uh, and
you touched on several things,
um, there will be some very
quantitative.
Results out of this where I
think we can point to this, have
this effect. There'll be lots of
qualitative research out of it
and also it, it is right for
lots of longitudinal research uh
in the $80 million that has
built into it money both for DHS
for administering the extra um
person that they're gonna need
or two to do that, but also to
pay for some of the research and
the study that goes with it. And
so, you know, that is built into
the whole thing.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Um,
what, what was your name? I'm
sorry.
Jessica Hathaway, the deputy
director of the Legislative
Education Study
Hathaway. Oh, Hathaway. Thank
you, Miss Hathaway.
Uh, just a couple quick
questions here, uh, Senator and
Miss Hathaway, um,
Madam Chair, and in the panel,
how, how many people are we
looking to uh get in here on the
control group.
And the test group, what what
are the numbers?
Madam Chair and and senator, uh,
there's sufficient funds in here
for approximately 2000 people to
be getting the $1500 a month.
The control group does not have
a large cost to it other than
just the research cost. If you
do the actual funding for 18
months, you know, some while the
prenatal and then through the
first year of life, um, it
typically works out if everybody
participated for the entire
time, it works out to somewhere
I think my
numbers were about 60 million.
Uh, this has enough money built
in like I said, for the
additional staffing for the
research arm and for um
People moving on and off, you
know, that it's, it's not a
clean number that happens all
the way through. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, the additional staffing
you just mentioned, that was a
question of mine, how much
additional staffing because I, I
assume that these 2000 people,
um, these 2000 pregnant women
are going to be all around the
state. Uh, can I assume that, is
that true?
Madam Chair and Senator, yes,
and that would be up to the
Department of Health, but the
idea is small communities, big
communities in every community,
um, and, and part of it is also
that $1500 a month get that gets
spent immediately back into
those communities. So there's a
big economic benefit. Thank you,
sir. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
Obviously, you have to be
pregnant to be in here. Are
there any other type of
requirements, uh, that you have
to meet, Madam Chair, as I
indicated, the only other
requirement is 150% of poverty
or lower.
And must participate in prenatal
and must participate in home
visiting two programs we know
work.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. How, how will the money
be distributed? Is it, um,
Direct deposit or is it a check
or is it a card?
Madam Chair and senator, um, I
suppose that I think that the
Department of Health cuts checks
to people, but they also do
direct deposit. I don't think
they do it on a card. OK, thank
you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. How do we track spending?
Madam Chair and senator, uh,
that would be tracked through
the researchers when as they ask
questions, what did you use the
money for?
Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam. That's, that's the big
question. Uh, what did you use
the money for?
Uh, that's something we have no
idea, um, a program similar,
similar to this was in Stockton,
California, and it didn't work
out too well.
The study found that it didn't,
um.
The uh the universal basic
income checks that they were
getting uh $500 a month.
Granted, it was a smaller
sample, about 125, but the study
showed it did not help when it
came to um finding people, you
know, helping people find a job,
employment, or anything like
that. It it kept them dependent.
Uh, that being said,
This is an interesting uh group,
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
pregnant woman, is, is there
another group that maybe you
guys were looking at, um,
besides.
Pregnant woman that were below
the poverty line, like, you
know.
Um, young, young males that
We are below the poverty line,
having some struggles as well or
some other type of group.
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
this comes directly from the
work that I've been doing on
ACEs adverse childhood
experiences and how incredibly
detrimental that is to their
future learning, their future
earnings, their future health
and trying to go upstream and
mitigate those before it
happens. Currently through CYFD
and other things, we always wait
till there's a problem and then
we throw a bunch of money at it.
Um, the research by James
Heckman, a Nobel laureate
economist, um, that its
this is indicated that the ROI
is $14 for every $1 invested if
it is targeted towards lowest
income and youngest children,
um, that's better than you get
anywhere else, um, as it goes up
to older children and higher
income, the ROI drops to 97, and
other things. And so this is
designed to target the where it
will make the biggest impact for
those kids for their future
education and future.
Society.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. One of the bills that um
I, I am putting forward with
Senator Thornton, that's been um
Co-sponsored by every Republican
in the House and Senate is an
oil and gas rebate, and that's
$500 per person.
Um, you know, mom and dad.
Son, daughter, um.
There and I think in that that
goes longer than than the uh one
year.
He, uh, which I think would have
a
More profound impact.
Uh, on New Mexicans, whether
they're
You know, in poverty or or at
that poverty level because it
allows them to spend the money
and
What they see fit or deducted, I
think is a good idea.
So
Um
Real quick, uh, Senator, Madam
Chair, is
It said here, it says here on uh
pastry at the very top, if a
participant fails to comply with
the provisions of
Previous paragraphs of the
subsection, they're placed in
the control group for the
remainder of the program.
So
I assume the participants shall
receive visitation from
employees.
Those are the are the home
visits every, every week, every
month? What what are those?
Madam Chair, uh, with all home
visiting, it depends. Uh, it
depends on what the need of the
family is. Uh, these are highly
trained people, and if the
family is highly in need, the
visits would be more often if
the family is doing well, they
could be once a month or, or
even less. That really is why,
you know, this program is very
open dependent on what's needed
by the family, making sure they
get their needs met.
Thank you, sir. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. So if they fail to
Comply with with the rules here.
They go into a control group.
Tell, tell me what that control
group is. Do they still get the
money every month?
Madam Chair, no, that's the main
thing is the money stops, uh,
but the control, the research
study would continue to follow
them and the children and see
what the outcomes were as to how
they did when they first entered
school or preschool or other
types of metrics, how the
family's doing as far as
evictions and rent and, you
know, there, there are other
measures that we can still
gather at the $1500 a month
would stop.
Thank you, Senator, for that
answer, and um
I think lastly, Madam Chair.
You know, because of the
variables of the family
situation, it's
I, I don't, I don't know.
You know, I, I think it's gonna
be very difficult to pin some of
these people down because, you
know,
You you got the uh early
childhood education care
department, not.
Knocking on your door at 5
o'clock and someone at the house
can say, well,
Susie's working or whatever, um.
And I don't know if you guys are
gonna be knocking on doors, you
know, from all 24 hours a day to
be flexible to meet the needs of
the family.
But I, I think there's a lot of
um.
Boy, there's, there's just a lot
of variables out there on this
one, and I'm just not sure based
on some studies, but, you know,
we can all have.
Cherry pick stats all we want.
Um
I, I would really
I like to see
Madam Chair and Senator.
You know, you get this group.
Have we done this before with
any other group in the state of
New Mexico?
Madam Chair and senator, this
has not been done specifically
targeted towards young families
like this. There have been
several uh GBI types of bills
done, some with high school
students, some with families,
uh, it's been extensively
studied in other communities
around the country, something
very similar to this was done in
Delaware, but it was a fairly
small sample of about 50 or so,
but had very, very good results.
Um, and so this is building on
lots of
those other studies and trying
to take some of the good things
and target it as I indicated
towards where it will make the
biggest difference. Thank you,
sir. Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
uh, does criminal history, if
there's a criminal history, does
that go into account if uh the
particular
A pregnant woman would be picked
for the study.
Madam Chair and senator, no. um,
and, and in fact, I think that's
really a very important thing
because those are the ones we
most need because those children
are most at risk and thus we
need to have them participating
in prenatal and in home visiting
because that's where we're going
to be able to get the other
services so that that child is
less at risk.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Then lastly,
This is New Mexico tax dollars
uh going to.
Uh, New Mexicans Americans, uh,
are you checking citizenship to
make sure they're here legally
if they are on a green card or
Some type of visa that they
would still be eligible for
this, or does it, does their
citizenship status not matter?
That is not a requirement of
this and should not be a
requirement of this, uh, in New
Mexico, our education laws, it,
it says all children in the
state, it does not indicate
anything else. OK.
Thank you, sir. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Si. I
share.
Senator Hickey's reservations
about
Coming up with valid results.
Out of the study because it
looks to me like.
There's at least one fatal flaw.
In that
Well, let me ask that.
With respect to the test group
control group.
There's 2000 people going into
the test group.
Yeah.
Approximately 2 years.
Are there going to be
2000
Or some similar number.
Apply for the program and be
rejected.
To provide a control group.
Or are those folks that will be
in the control group.
Only those that have dropped out
of
The test group for
Various reasons.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
it could be either way. Uh,
control groups do not have to be
the same size as the, the
research group in order to get
valid results. They don't have
to be anywhere near the same
size. They just have to be
similar in demographics and
makeup. And so it's not that
difficult to have a much smaller
control group than the actual
control group to get very valid
results, uh, by having people
who drop off of the program
because they didn't meet the
requirements, um, you've got
people who have qualified.
And now we've only are not
getting the money and so you get
again what's called a dose
effect. They had it for this
long, what were the results?
Someone else might have gotten
it for 6 months instead of 3
months. How did that affect
their, uh, readiness for, for
elementary school or for
preschool a few years later.
There's lots of different places
where you can monitor the, the
quality of the programs that
have been done similar to this,
there is a very good data about
the, the parents that got.
the families that got the, the
income having a reduced um
high-risk pregnancies which
almost all fall on the state of
New Mexico to cover and a
reduction of only a couple of
those, almost all of those
programs have showed significant
reductions compared to those who
were not getting the, the income
and so the, the control groups
can be
Some who would, would have
qualified but never applied. Uh,
there's always a little bit of
confounding of the people who
applied or more invested in
their kids. I mean, there's
always those kinds of things,
but that's where I would rely on
the people that are actually
doing the, the PhD
dissertations, the researchers
at Burrell College, uh, the PhD
nursing program at UNM, uh,
those are the discussions and
then that all goes before the
institutional research board for
approval to ensure that uh
The participants' rights and
things are being taken care of,
but also that it's gonna be
looking for valid research uh
outcomes.
Oh
Madam Chair and Senator,
wouldn't those folks
That were placed into the test
group.
And then fell out.
Into the control group.
A preordained.
To do a lot worse than those
folks.
That were willing
To stick with the program and
stay in the control group.
Madam Chair and Senator, not
necessarily, um, you know, and
that's part of why we do
research is because we don't
know what's going to happen like
that. If we knew exactly what
the outcomes were going to be,
we wouldn't have to do the
research. And so, no, they are
uh unless you come up with a
specific thing that makes them
different and some by applying
for the program, they
automatically are different. I
get that. But you're then
looking at people who had
applied for the program, but
then we're doing it more just
for the money instead of doing
the other requirements and so it
could drop off.
that. Uh, you know, these are
the kind of things that when
sitting around with doctoral
students that they debate, OK,
how do we control this? How do
we do that? That's what needs to
get determined by those who are
going to be doing the research
on it. It really isn't part of
the, the legislation.
chair, Senator drug use.
I'm sorry, say again, please.
Drug use.
Um, and what do you mean?
Turned, I was turning on and off
and got the wrong way. What do
you mean by drug use?
Madam Chair, and senator is
Drug use a factor at all.
In the selection or continued
participation in the program.
Thank you. I think I understand
now. Um, in fact, if these
children are going to be born to
parents who are using drugs, all
the more important that if they
get selected for this program
that they are getting that
because with the additional
funding to assist with their
mortgages with other things.
They do have to participate in
prenatal care.
That means that there are people
there that are going to help
them with their issues around
drug use. Uh, they have to
participate in home visiting,
which means all of those issues,
there are people there that can
get them to the resources that
they need. That child is still
going to be going into our
systems and into our schools,
and if anything, those are the
ones that most would benefit
from a program like this because
it gives the family, the
parents, an opportunity to start
dealing with those issues
because that child is going to
be in our schools in New Mexico.
And then, if we don't deal with
on the front end is going to be
very expensive for our state.
Madam Chair, and Senator, that
would also
Provide more resources to
purchase drugs, obviously.
Let me ask one more question.
What, if anything, with this
program do?
To promote
To parent household.
Madam Chair and and senator, uh.
I don't know that it's
specifically does. Um, I can go
back and talk about some with
developmental psychology and
some of the other things around
sociology that often families
break up because of financial
concerns and issues. Some of our
other programs around the
states, um,
The income of two parents gets
counted and therefore they have
to split in order to not get
some of the other services which
are very detrimental. This
allows the family to have a
really good start without the
extra stresses of uh lack of
income. And so my guess is it
would allow us to much more
stability in the family than
otherwise would be there if the
financial uh
vesses were, were higher.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, um, I think
this is a great program, and I
want to correct a couple of
things that were set up here.
I'll just start with the last
one, which is this assumption
that poor people use drugs in
other studies.
Um, when money is given to
women, what we know and there's
been extensive research on this.
Is that when women have
financial autonomy, they tend to
reinvest in their communities
and their families.
And those dollars actually go
further. Let's let's, let's hold
on to that premise together and
that understanding. Um, the
second of which I'd like to
address is the Stockton study
that was conducted several years
ago.
Um, it actually found that, um,
the program improved
participants' job prospects.
Financial stability and overall
well-being.
Of recipients were healthier,
showing less depression and
anxiety, um, and enhanced their
own well-being. And this is all
really well documented and um a
documentary that's on streaming
services right now, you can
actually follow some of the
families, um, in an individuals
that were selected for that
program and.
directly from impacted people.
Um, last year, I just appreciate
how, um, we're, we're leaning
into the adverse childhood
experiences.
As the criteria. Um,
Because we know that if you have
any of those experiences on the
list, you are more likely to not
be.
Successful in your adult life,
staying in school, ending up in
an abusive relationship. You
know, all of these things are
very predetermined. Um, and I
served on the board of a home
visiting program actually in my
previous life and know that
those programs are so good and
well supported by ECECD right
now, cause they get books into
homes, which is actually one of
the indicators on, um, 8th.
Um, they're checking for abuse
and neglect in the home as well,
because they have multiple
touch, um, but also help
families with stressors like
therapy, therapy, all of these
resources that a family might
not have otherwise. So we know
that these work.
I actually think this program is
gonna prove to us what we
suspect, which is when people
have access to resources.
They are better off.
Time goes down where you all all
of the good things right when
our basic needs are met.
So let's imagine this program is
funded and we followed these
families and we have some great
research, then what, uh, Madam
Chair and senator, what's the
big picture here?
Madam Charan and Senator.
If I were able to do this, I
would like to do this for every
single child born in New Mexico,
regardless of income.
We could do it. We have the
resources.
You know, we've got enough money
that we could do that and other
countries do it, and they get
much better outcomes than we do.
Um
There are
Concerns and laws about uh
anti-donation clause of which
there are exceptions for low
income.
So that's part of why we picked
this. I'm hoping that the
results that we get from this
are
So overwhelming.
That we truly believe that
children are important.
Madam Chair, senator.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Apologies to others. I just
wanted to actually do some
Clarifying, um, I've been able
to stretch back and
The, um, when I was talking
about confounders and so forth.
To me, the big question is,
But you just
A senator is if we were to do
this as a matter of policy,
would we have better outcomes in
multiple ways.
You, and as you said, this is a
qualitative study. You're not
gonna be able to prove
significance in all the
categories and, and, and
different variables that go into
it, but you can, as you, as you.
start the study, the, the
question is,
Can you list 3 or 45, what
defines a a better outcome.
And so that we can, we can
measure that. But
The
Qualifying as to who goes into
it, you really don't want to, I
mean, you just kinda wanna take
all the takers till you get
2000.
And you're right, in terms of uh
some statistical directional
significance. You don't need a
large control group.
You, but I would encourage you
to identify
A control group at the get-go
that in is as much as possible,
mirrors some of the variables
that you're looking at, and that
you find in the different
families.
And that those who fall off of
the of of uh the criteria, you
follow them in a separate third
category. What happens?
Them
And, but you still have your
control group that's pretty
clean.
In the beginning
You contrast with this other
group, but he's still study.
A what I call a third group,
what are those outcomes? And
there, and in that there's a lot
of qualitative uh folks, and,
and that I believe is I've had
Johns Hopkins come and pick up
some of my bills, and now are
getting our old ones from NIH
study, that's the no cost
sharing and so forth. I think
that there's huge potential.
Or
Grants to be obtained,
particularly because of the
state that we are who we are
with all of our diversity and
with the adversity that this
will be very appealing, uh,
given that the
Current
President doesn't destroy the
NIH, um, that there will be lots
of grants that will answer a lot
of other questions for it. So I
see it in the beginning, not
qualifying kind of who goes into
it or what have you, you, you,
you then go in and see who they
are, build your control group.
And then
What if the others fall off,
just that, that's an outcome,
and they, they fall off, but try
and follow them in terms of
these, the, the ACEs.
Um, finishing high school, I
mean,
Again, 4 or 5 simple measures,
uh, that can be
over time, but I think I see it
now that I wasn't see in the
beginning that just saying.
This makes a difference.
And I think you're gonna find it
and there are supporting studies
that say that, but this should
become a if, if it really does,
then this should become a state
power.
Thank you.
So thank you for letting me
expound on uh that, but again,
uh, a really good bill, and I, I
have a better understanding.
Thank you very much.
Mm, thank you.
Any other comments, Senator?
I'll move a pass.
Motion for a due pass from
Senator Nava with a 2nd from
Senator Pinto.
And if you could call the road
please.
Sinner. No, to explain my vote.
or boom. No.
Yeah
Senator Gallegos, ma'am.
In her novel. Yes, and to
explain my vote.
and Scott.
No
Senator Serio Lopez, yes.
Hickey.
Senator Lopez, yes.
Yes, to explain your votes,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
forward. Um, listen, if this was
such a great idea to make the
state policy, it would be it
would be implemented right now.
It's not implemented.
Because it doesn't work and it
costs way too much money and the
results.
Uh
The results might have some
positive areas, but there's a
lot of negative areas in this as
well.
And um
No state, even California, the
most liberal state.
Uh, is not doing this.
And every state this just isn't
happening. Everyone's tried it,
it has failed completely. No one
can afford it. We can spend our
resources, uh, better ways in,
in my opinion, but uh I
appreciate um the sponsor. Thank
you.
Senator Charlie.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
bringing this forward. I voted
yes because it's a pilot.
We're gonna see if it works.
Let's learn. Um, and I can get
behind that idea and I just
fundamentally believe that when
people needs are met.
We are all better off. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Nava.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for bringing this forward as a
former research assistant, I
know that data matters and I
know that research matters, and
I thank you for bringing this
forward. I thank you for
uplifting the voices of low
income communities and folks who
do not have access by means of.
funding and resources, and I
think this provides an
opportunity to look at the data,
look at the numbers, and move
forward with constructive and
strategic, um, plans to support
our communities at large. Thank
you.
Thank you, 6 to 4. You have a
due pass recommendation. Thank
you. Thank you and thank you for
your long time today. Thanks.
See you all tomorrow.
