So the year over licensing act
bill that that we brought early
in the session has been rolled
into this bill.
Okay in addition to that.
Last year we did house bill one
ninety one which did thirty they
licensure for people who are
license from another state want
to come to New Mexico after they
applied that legalize a
provisional license within
thirty days and then anything
that to do for New Mexico that
we got that first year to get
done.
This year we're adding social
workers.
Veterinarians.
Medical doctors.
Osteopathic doctors to that
list.
Of people who have their
licensing of the state in good
standing when they apply they
get a provisional license they
can start working immediately
and then they can take care of
any New Mexico's Pacific issues
so the first forward again were
the veterinarian social workers
the the foreign aren't veterans
social workers medical doctors
and osteopathic doctors.
Then in this bill we also the
interior design has optional
licensure and there aren't
enough for them to pay for the
board.
So we're transferring their
duties to the department we had
with the board we're still doing
licensure administratively
through the department.
And then there are a couple of
updates to private investigators
that was a rebuilt that we
wrapped in to this while we're
at it okay okay with that would
be happy to stand for questions
okay did you want to say
anything Madam the
superintendent Mr chairman
Dear dear friend has spoken
wisely okay is there anybody in
the audience who wants to speak
on this bill is a four against.
Yes care.
I didn't expect to come up and
speak.
Thank you for pushing the
button.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody on zoom.
The video zoom period.
Seven.
Okay very good.
Do do do they know we're not
gonna do the nurse practitioner
thing yes I okay great.
Okay so we have a full committee
so we can take action members of
the committee your discussion I
think you're also raising the
the penalty.
For from a thousand to ten
thousand Mr chairman that was
that is for unlicensed activity
and that was in the you will a
bill that that this committee
will wrestler so this would
incorporate that's right that is
correct okay.
Anybody else.
What's the committee.
Senator McKenna moved to do
pass.
Seconded by Senator misses any
other discussion or questions on
this.
Thank you because it a perfect
moment.
That that moment where.
Our awareness is at a very low
as senator Maestas thank you Mr
Chairman said Ivey Soto.
unable to feel welcome the just
if you could tell me how many
professions.
do we have reciprocity with and
how many how many do we don't
just off hand your Mister
chairman Senator so in RLD
regulation licensing department
we only had reciprocity true
reciprocity with a couple of
states under the real stated for
real estate commission that was
all everything else was a
responsibility that the board
had to come into agreement with
other states and that just never
happened and so when when we
jointly work together on H. B.
one ninety one last year we
included seventeen boards and
the reason it was seventeen is
because it was going to take a
tremendous amount of work and
like to
the over or under promise and
over perform and so seventeen is
what we did
throughout the year I discovered
that there was a really
significant barrier for social
work and that it hadn't been
included and so I believe even
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is aware
of this barrier specifically
that I have to prove that you
passed an examination not
everybody did those examinations
until twenty sixteen and so even
our our most qualified
individuals that are coming from
a state that didn't do that
examination prior to twenty
sixteen we can't license here
unless they go take the
examination again and that's a
huge barrier for people coming
from other states so there if
this bill passes there will be
seventeen at our old the plus
one so we'll be up to eighteen
and I am not sure exactly how
many are outside of our OB I
think nursing was the only one
last year outside of our of the
they now there would be two more
thank you madam chair Mister
intent Senators up to another of
the boards under RLD's umbrella
how many of.
Are not of those seventeen or
eighteen.
US eighteen eighteen minus
twenty nine would be eleven two
thirds to fair two thirds of the
way if in fact we believe in.
Current reducing barriers number
you professional service and all
that goes up for two thirds of
their.
Hi Mr chairman and senator just
as we are and in fact the
Pentagon has identified what we
didn't house bill one ninty one
that alone has making us
military and military family
friendly when people get
deployed.
The thank you Mr is that are a
result of the up and our
surveyors under RLD Mr Chairman
the engineers and surveyors are
not they're in our building but
they're not attached to a.
And then just off had Mr chair
Senators up to support us
professions that are not.
under our of the committee of
there's like maybe I on lawyers
doctors.
Mr chairman Senator so of the
lawyers of course doctors are
not under US nurses are not
under us but they wanted to be
included last year and then
teachers
of the the architects
veterinarians those would be the
ones off hand that I can think
of.
No thank you for that thank you
Mr chairman thank you centers to
prevent.
Senator sweeties Mr.
Page that.
The very bottom of thank you.
Nibert
says.
Any other information sought by
the department that that seems
pretty broad what kind of
information we talking about the
private investigators.
Right.
Mister chairman Senator this is
for licensure for instructors
for the PI board and I don't
know sorry but we don't usually
ask for any other information
but I believe with the drafter
was including in there is so
that we didn't have to name out
email address telephone number
of mailing address those would
be the kinds of things that
would be included in that any
other information we would never
ask for information that goes
beyond what the statute allows
us in less it's just
proliferation and that may not
be the right word for it thank
you information okay and so Mr
chair Senator just some.
Constructive feedback there then
it I I think it be.
You know nice to have have
something little identifying
from.
The west and that's one of.
The other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle yes
center my SS yes Senator McKenna
yes Senators committee yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Sierra.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Seven zero two of a depressed
Senator and and superintendent
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much of
the.
Okay we'll go now to
Representative Kate so I guess
you're you're here good let's to
use this to your bill.
The developmental disability.
Support providers employees no
we already passed the Senate
version this bill remind the
members and we'll be glad to
hear from you about the house.
House Bill three nine I.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
as your chairman indicated how
Senate bill two oh three
successfully passed through both
your committees and I think
unanimous on your floor this is
the mere bill is H. B. three
ninety five which made to the
same thing it is why I have my
expert witness is here I have
panelists Stafford and Adrienne
Smith from the care givers
coalition I this bill also was
working closely with the O. H.
D. DST add cap which is the.
Association for developmental
disability community prop
providers at Khan who's the CEO
of arcus so it's wonderful data
collection bill that has all the
stakeholders actually agreeing
on something to be able to
gather the data so that one of
it as legislators will be able
to make informed choices in the
future and I stand for questions
but did you want to add anything
or you you're just available for
questions also.
Okay let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wants to
show support for this bill.
Yes Elon you want to say
anything.
Would you support that you need
to say anything of a you I keep
that quiet can you let your name
be associated offices.
The national association of
social workers.
Right thank you an online we
have Chris leroy do you want to
speaker just show support us Mr
leroy you can on mute.
Thank you chair and ladies and
gentleman of the committee
finance personal are in the
public policy officer for the
ark of New Mexico you
Representative people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities throughout the
state we stand in strong support
of the US would like to thank
the sponsors and also Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino for carrying the
equivalent in the Senate thank
you very much thank you Mr leroy
and then Jim Jackson is also on
like you want to a new gym and
speak.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico I
don't need to speak anymore than
to just say that we support this
bill as we did here Senate
version of this thank you thank
you Jim is there anybody in
opposition to the bill here or
online.
Members of the committee what's
the will.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you.
There was a slight difference
you turn your my consent.
Thank you.
At the analysis says there's a
slight difference in the
amendments between the two
bills.
With the amendment on this bill
being the preferred language can
you explain
Or have you followed you have
all the Senate bill that's not
fair thank you Mr chair thank
you committee I'll defer to my
expert witnesses so it was my
understanding that the amendment
was a mere.
To.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
don't know the answer to that.
What's the different vendors
what is the difference
difference is.
For.
This is the one we want to go
with.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
and so yes we are we we do want
to collect data on direct care
providers not just that our
official employees but also
contractors were trying to get
that occupation not necessary
the classification so thank you
very much for that
clarification.
But.
So.
And then the their version is
the right one right but you can
amend the Senate for work.
I always get confused with these
double bills and I've done it
that number but and thank you of
each Senator at chairman and and
Senate committee I am confused
we all are always confused about
what these mirrors are but it is
my understanding that because
this bill got to the Senate side
first this would be the one and
so this would be what you'd be
voting on that we would we would
send to the to the governor's
desk and the other bill is.
It is and and and health and
Human Services and I could ask
if they but if if this one gets
there there's no reason for that
one to have perfect okay
no I I.
I didn't remember the amendments
and I remember that because you
just I think it's a really good
idea I thought so we are the
first time I have changed thank
you so much.
Yeah those when we just.
So so I think it's the thing to
do is to leave this alone.
Yeah.
Anything else Senators Sedillo
Lopez no thank you I support the
bill.
Senator Schmedes you look.
Questioning of a question know
that we have a motion for a due
pass from Senators committees so
second from Senator Tallman any
other discussion.
So as Representative Figueroa
did you get the word that your
bill passed out already.
Thank you okay.
Yes.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senate committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes Santo
Domen yes Senator gave us.
Center to the piano yes.
But eight to their of of you
have a due process one better
than the last bills.
Thank you so much okay will pick
up now with the this
Representative Serrato here.
Okay.
Okay let's let's hear.
Let's hear yes let's hear for
sixty six and then what we have
plenty of time for the house
bill one of five debate.
And.
Thanks for Senator.
Good.
Long term care facility dementia
training.
To get talking points but I
didn't so I think the easiest
thing will do will be you know
from reading the bill it's
obviously about changing the
training of for people who care
for dementia patients so I'm
gonna turn it over to the
experts I hope have talking
with.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you so much for taking up
this piece of legislation my
name is Tommy Hernandez I
service the public policy
director for the Alzheimer's
association's New Mexico chapter
and the bills that you have
before you today is simply put
as a refinement a cleanup bill
if you will two eight two
thousand twenty legislation that
was unanimously passed in both
both chambers and quickly
enacted by the executive that
build twenty twenty shares the
same titles the bill before you
today the long term care to much
training act and what we have
learned over the last two years
is that there was a lot of vague
language that was included in
that original piece of
legislation and so over the last
few months if not longer with
our stakeholders of involving
many stakeholders across the
state including my good friend
Mr Vargas here represents a long
term care facility is that we
needed to really narrow what the
training curriculum was calling
for in the requirements so
you'll see that change being
proposed here today we also
wanted to narrow and identify
and define what on going
education should look like for
all of the direct care workers
and I think at this point it's
important note that the direct
care workers of these long term
care facilities the this these
members of the specific
workforce are the ones who were
held to comply to this
legislation
we also made some other small
technical changes such as a
lengthening out the number of
days that a facility has to
comply with the legislation I
believe it extends it from sixty
days to ninety days.
Another lastly and perhaps one
of more important pieces of the
proposed changes before you are
that we wanted to provides a
greater a greater sense of
flexibility for long term care
facility operators to identify
training curriculum that works
best for their specific facility
we know that not one size fits
all we've learned that certainly
through many rounds of
discussions over many hours if
not more and so we want to
provide a flexible option for
long term care facility
operators to identify their own
training curriculum so long as
it meets the standards set forth
in the policy as well as it is
approved by the department of
health so we we proudly stand
behind all these proposed
changes in representing us so
many you know sectors and and
agencies I know the aging
department is is with us today
as well but these proposed
changes are certainly
thoroughly considered and we
feel that this would help bring
the at twenty twenty policy into
implementation plan spots right
there.
I am submit Mr chairman members
the committee just an acting as
an expert witness but also the I
hope this services also with my
support of the legislation and
it's fun to see that thank you.
Yes Mr chairman my name is we
sent about I guess I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico health care association
in New Mexico Center for
assisted living represent
nursing homes and assisted
living facilities across the
state of New Mexico thank you
for.
No we stand for questions or is
one of the ideas that anyone
here in support of this bill
yes.
About right.
W..
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Carmen let's under state
long term care ombudsman for New
Mexico on behalf of the on
button program an aging long
term services department we
stand in support of this
legislation we think that it
amends just so the
inefficiencies the original act
and help stop operationalize
this this act in a more
The way for the for the
residents of long term care as
well as the staff members that
are impacted thank you.
The firm
Lawyers in the state during the
interim looking there.
I want to recommend to us
absolutely right thank you make
a deal.
I'll do that thanks thanks.
The result Alliance for organs
you hear opposed.
Members of the committee.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chairman and senator
and gentleman I'm trying to find
out so you sit in twenty twenty
we had the original bill of what
type of issues that brought this
forward just give you some
background I've been care for my
mom for two years with dementia
she recently passed right at the
beginning session and I I wonder
because they're not I guess
there's no training for the
public but I wonder what kind of
training is for we had hospice
coming in we looked at a
facility which was very well
cared for
was one of my options follows
appearance session but I chose
to keep her at home but I'm
wondering what you guys found it
was the need for this bill since
the last two years Mr chair
Senator I guess thank you so
much for sharing limited
personal story at the
Alzheimer's association we
certainly recognize that
everyone knows someone whether
that be in their immediate
family tree or extended family
or social circles so to answer
your question Senator what we
have found and long term care
was at over fifty percent of
residents in various long term
care settings long term care
certainly an umbrella from
nursing homes to dependent
living to memory care units and
and others in between but we had
found through a lot of data
collection over many many years
was that over fifty percent of
residents had some degree of
dementia whether it's subtle
signs and behaviors or whether
it is advanced Alzheimer's
disease and their new memory
care unit so that was one of the
main drivers of bringing this
twenty twenty legislation
forward was recognizing what the
data was was showing us and and
further going to that point was
that many facilities
We're implementing some form of
training however that there is
no standardized practices
training of facility perhaps in
Valencia County then may have a
more robust training standard
the state facility in
Albuquerque or or anywhere else
for that matter so the twenty
twenty intent was to standardize
what the training curriculum
look like initially we had run
into was
One it's a baseline of four
hours anymore but it up but did
not find a cap
also the twenty twenty
legislation included that there
were core areas of training
topics for example effective
communication recognizing signs
and symptoms daily activities
for folks with dementia living
in these facilities.
So it had some core areas of
what the training needed to rid
needed to include however it it
did not put a cap on that so
during the rule making process
and and many in Goshen that
involve many other people what
we found is that the list of
what we thought needed to be
required proof tremendously and
as we kept putting more and more
topics that you know are are
certainly
respectfully regard in their own
right what we found was that it
begin to really deviate away
from the original intention
which was to help these long
term care workers know how to
interact with someone who may
show signs and symptoms of
dementia what common behaviors
are like mood swings
irritability are certainly
common staples of these
behaviors however.
This bill the N. twenty twenty
in the bill for you today I like
to describe it as really
improving the quality of care
not only for the residents not
only for loved ones of ours our
families in these facilities but
it also demonstrates a level of
care for the workers we know
there's at the high high level
of turnover among these workers
and these direct care capacities
so by us.
With this legislation proposing
we want to one improve the
quality of care of those
residents but then we also want
to ensure that those workers who
are delivering that care for
loved ones.
Is a disservice to them if they
are not adequately prepared to
recognize signs and symptoms if
someone's being.
Miss behave that day it's not
that they're beings behave it's
about that they may have an
early sign or symptom of some
form of dementia so that's why
this legislation was such a
milestone success
By our standards for the
association as well because it
certainly involves both parties.
Your responses to additional
questions by Representative
there I have crystal.
Of the eight.
If you're going.
Mr chairman and general center I
appreciate that because I I in
in watching on there's like two
different classifications people
that some are really really good
at the personal aspect can
someone really good it care
aspect you don't get those two
people same time same place so I
saw.
Motional changes
because one thing we found Mr
centers we had new lady that I
paid for off of hospice and my
wife told her you just walking
caller Graham.
The lady had touched her in ways
we didn't have any kind of
personal issues the one your
grandchild but she didn't know
so I I understand we're always
trying to figure out that way to
mold it just right so they can
get proper care but the.
Employees are a mystery to do so
and I appreciate that I just
wanted to I look this is
stepping stone and we find out
what works next and then we'll
continue growth in in care for
the elderly so what that are
you.
I'm people.
The Romero one to speak on this
and zoom and
As you go ahead.
Zero.
That that okay we'll come back
with that.
Senator incentive for the lotus.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator real quick question.
this.
In the correct is four hours of
training.
That was funds for the law Asian
long term services and if you're
familiar with that what they do
you're one of the volunteers Law
ombudsman yeah just like this
job and get paid.
So.
Hours are better you have to
admit.
Only did a few years.
So they're interesting but.
I am we got some training and
how to speak with people with
dementia at I found it really
difficult.
To
Carry on a conversation with the
people with dementia.
And people written books about
how to do that so my question is
for hours really enough.
The.
Speaker should.
Mr chairman of Senator.
It's four hours of a.
What we what we're trying to do
is refine this so it focuses on
care givers that are not in the
clinical into clinical world so
the state and that's something
the timing mentioned previously
was you we we.
During the rulemaking process we
were we were able to develop a
rural and training that took up
to twelve hours worth of work of
someone's time to go through the
training
But we were concerned about one
with that that training can get
very critical for folks that are
just The New.
Not at that level to to in in
their work to care for somebody
there are many times our food
service there you know care
givers for daily activities
So four hours is in our
standpoint is a good start and
then this time you mentioned in
the bill there's also
requirement for one hour of
training ever annually to make
sure that these folks these
caregivers continue to be to be
educated and that all the bill
also allows for additional
training if needed as more
research comes about
So hard to say whether for is
enough or not okay thank you for
the answer support the bill
thank you
Senator think that's all I have
Mister chair thank you senator
Tom Senator Sedillo office you
had a question Senator Tallman
asked my question but he he just
because thank you but the will
of the committee anything else.
It's will of the committee.
We have a motion for it to pass
from Senator Gallegos.
The seconded by Senator Tallman.
Then the secretary will call the
roll Senator gave us Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senator smitteez Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes center to the panel
yes.
Thank.
All right is there a vote yes to
divest.
Members.
Senator okay the.
Is representative of current
here.
Right there is okay good.
House bill one of five as in
the.
The.
Back up.
Then Senator Woods welcome
Senator Woods.
The element.
I apologize for being such a
chatter box on the floor today
Sir.
Clear that geared up for this
issue I probably will have as
much to say here but I that
brought the budget experts with
or has the.
So tell us what the house bill
one of five that was the
committee set up.
For us the is that our committee
or which is Mr chair there's you
don't have a committee so we
have a house bill one of five
okay and some of the CS before
your name means you've already
said that actually we amended
but we never did sub okay we
admit it out part of the bill.
my last issue I guess did
something to it in the house
Judiciary we we did an
amendment.
But we did not do a committee
sub okay so tell us all about it
okay yeah Mr chair house bill
one of five three relates to
real road safety it adds a new
material that would require at
least two persons at least two
persons operations of a row road
greater local loading that is
used to the movements of
freight.
And we remove the penalties in
the amendment so that we did
with.
So with that Mr chair I will
stand for questions and Mr chair
of this is simply a safety bill
of requiring two people on a
train so we have some testimony
on some
Actual of law case law that we
might this present real quick
just a few sentences go ahead
and read that program introduce
yourself Sir Philipsson yes my
name is already Martin I am the
assistant state legislative
rep for a smart TV and the
reason I want to bring this up
we have one Senator.
Here today Senator Tallman the
to read the last committee and I
want to bring this up because I
misspoke.
About one of the questions that
was asked.
and I believe with Senator
harmony of the of our meal asked
if.
This bill is passed this federal
law.
Preempt preempt the state law if
this is passed.
and I misspoke and I said the
federal of the.
I do have a.
A court case here in this was by
Albert and then P. C. this is
dated October second two
thousand and eighteen.
Of the authority of the state to
require two person crews has
been decided the seventh court
of appeals in the case and tiled
Burlington northern and Santa Fe
railway company.
Verses Doyle held that the state
of Wisconsin requirement for a
two person crew was valid and
was not pre empted by federal
law.
The court said that the state
could require two persons on a
train but could not mandate the
crew members being either a
certified engineer or qualified
trained it is a valid to simply
to simply to legislate that two
persons are required to operator
trying.
I wanted to bring that up
personally because I misspoke in
the previous committee just so
that we were clear on this thank
you thank you did you want to
say anything else about the bill
in general.
Rested for questions on that.
Okay and are you Sir did you
want to say.
But if I may suggest.
The vote have your say yes Sir
my name is climbers
a representative of the
brotherhood of locomotive
engineers and trainmen on
matters of safety and welfare
legislation and in the state of
New Mexico and two of.
Are you Mr Martin's point
specifically what would like to
call your attention to forty
nine U. S. code two zero one
zero six and it talks about the
national uniformity of
regulation as it relates
specifically to railroads
the state and it goes in it says
in part a state may adopt for
continuing for so law regulation
or order related to any real
road safety or security and tell
the secretary of transportation
with respect to real road safety
matters or this is the secretary
of homeland security with
respect to railroad security
matters prescribes a regulation
or issues in order covering the
subject matter of the state
requirement and I won't bore you
with the rest of that but.
The lobbyist in their here for
the railroads are very adamant
that.
Federal law will preempt state
law and therefore if we have at
this at the federal level why
are we wasting our time at the
state level and simply put we
need this at the state level
because as administrations
change.
You'll see this go back and
forth a lot of different
directions we this is been an
ongoing issue since at least two
thousand and eight.
Very good thank you Sir thank
you for.
let's get a feel for how many
people are here in support of
this measure just raise your
hand.
And how many people are here in
opposition to this measure.
Okay so we're gonna take ten
minutes for those in support and
ten minutes for those in
opposition.
And we'll start with those who
want to support it
I also have I need to tell you I
have two people
zoom who want to support Charles
Jeffcoat and Thompson Nicholas
so let's take them into account
too so we'll kind of keep close
tabs on how much time we you
have a go ahead Sir thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee on Donald guy goes I
am the estate provided the state
legislative director for smart
transportation division I'm also
the NTSB investigator for
Colorado Wyoming and New Mexico
so I I get a first hand look at
what's going on rel road and how
this applies to safety will
determine what that what happens
in the future we do have two
people on trains now removing
one of them would
Would
The the disasters that we will
have in the future like like
budget T. in east Ohio that
would be accelerated because
you'll have that second person
there to direct the first
responders to what's going on.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you Mr.
who else wants to speak in
support of this bill.
Hi chair members of committee
developed here so we can hear
you.
You go chair members the
committee my name familiar brown
I'm a conductor from the New
Mexico and I'm here in support
of H. B. one oh five
it's a safety bill the safety of
us as workers and the well being
of the community we are the
first responders should
something happen on that train.
And our neighboring states
Arizona and Colorado have
anymore to creating bills passed
into law and I would think you'd
be good to be congruent with our
neighboring states and we should
keep New Mexicans and employed
because this would cut the
conductors out if we go to one
man crew.
Thank you.
The president yeah but Mr chair
members my name is government
tell I have twenty five years of
service with the NSF.
I also represent hundreds of the
only two members of the
committee of communities.
I trust you all here free
constituents.
The communities and safety on
New Mexico.
We have a legislative side for
public's issues safety issues
such as this we have local
division.
State division and we need a
national.
We don't want to go to national
we're here for the state.
Mr chair committee my life is
not negotiable I need to shut
your communities.
If there's a much more Marci
issue what do we do.
There's been many incidents were
the second crew had to call nine
one one.
Sometimes we're a little areas.
conductors our first responders
qualified persons bond is the
first person.
At one gentleman said
in Ohio.
Conductor actually cut the train
separated it so won't be triple
the disaster that happened
everybody knows about vinyl
chloride I personally.
Working out of tricky and we
carry feared all right.
Your current.
Alongside New Mexico will run.
All right from Albuquerque to
Santo Domingo.
Closer to aluminum and metals
toxic inhalation hazards causing
tightness in chest and lungs and
difficulty breathing.
There's a bill here for Holtec
to run nuclear this bill go side
by side do we want one person on
that.
I don't.
Mr chair committee.
You'll hear today but they're
not gonna have one person one
person two if that's the case
please ask yourself by the I
mean this bill.
Also try to confuse you I'm
Marty this bill.
Just yesterday there was
testimony saying that we have to
person ready and that's going to
be there forever Dawn said that
would be there and to the rebel
decides to change it.
That's the strong New Mexico
strong.
I want to keep its New Mexico
safe and I hope you guys do too
I thank you for being severe
weather Representative talked to
I'm being kind issue all your
time.
What the hell.
Okay.
We'll take one more here or two
more here try to keep it short
because we do have several
online to learn to speak.
The.
This Mr speaker a centers on
this committee my name is Dustin
Underwood.
I'm an engineer of twenty five
years I work at a plant in
Mexico
I'm here to support is B. one oh
five
mainly.
for safety is the top concern as
it should be for a variety of
reasons you know
this job is extremely difficult
just put two people.
it's very dangerous.
and without that second person
up there we lose that second set
up by the could help prevent a
disaster okay
that person that second set eyes
up there also.
Is a person that looks over me
if something should happen
inside that cap like a medical
emergency which happened to me
last year.
I started having heart issues of
all of that work.
Locally I was within arm's reach
of the terminal when it occurred
I was able to get to a hospital
in Albuquerque or shortly there
after I collapsed doctors told
me that I nearly missed having a
stroke and I was going to be
life saving heart surgery in
order to correct this issue.
you can only picture situation
like this where someone is up
there alone.
There's no one there to reach
out for that person cannot call
out for help they can administer
CPR to themselves.
they cannot drive the trade or
operate the trade to a location
where first responders can get
to this person.
and like I said this this bill
is just mainly aimed at safety
for the communities where these
trains go through as well as the
people who are employed.
In this profession.
I would hope that all of you
find it within yourself to
support H. B. one of five today.
Thank you thank you Sir.
And John you'll be the last one
in in the room.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor I really cannot say
anything bad all these amazing
first responding training
treatment have already said but
I will just say that on behalf
of our thirty six thousand plus
members that are forty plus
affiliates across the state we
stand in strong solidarity with
our treatment and are treating
women in in implore you please
for the state for their safety
for the safety of our public
please support this measure
thank you.
Thank you I guess we have time
for one person online Charles
Jeffcoat.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Charlie
Jeffcoat I've been a locomotive
engineer for twenty six years
and I'm the legislative
representative representing the
P. L. A. T. eight eleven and
Clovis New Mexico we need to
keep the people in the cat for
the safety of the crew and the
public most of the territory
operate on is very remote.
If I were to fall ill in the cap
my conductor would be able to
administer first aid and direct
first responders to my location
there is no way the railroad
would know that I was
incapacitated until another
train stopped to check on me
many of our trains are three
miles long I need that second
crew member to cut in clear road
crossings in the event of an
emergency I can't cut crew can't
cut crossings alone New Mexico
has a chance to lead the nation
in rail safety for crews and the
public I support this bill and
the hundred seventy five plus
members of the B. L. A. T.
eleven support this also thank
you.
Thank you thank you Mr Jeffcoat.
Okay the we'll just have the
other ones it of read their
names out indicating support
that is Tom son Nicholas Natalie
Miller and Jeffrey Romero.
Okay let's go now to those who
are.
opposed to this is and and we'll
give you all of a ten minutes to
explain the issue who wants to
go first I got the okay please
you you you are.
You're all organized okay.
Mr chairman members of this
committee my name is Raquel
Espinoza and I am the public
affairs director for Union
Pacific Railroad so we have
heard a lot of valid concerns
today and.
The thing about these concerns
is that it's comforting to know
that there are two people in the
locomotive on every freight
train that moves on class one
railroad lines that is the
situation today and it will
remain that way indefinitely
because this is a product of a
collective bargaining agreement
that we have with our labor
partners to say that the number
of people operating a train is
not a product of the collective
bargaining process is simply not
true the process has been used
for over a hundred years and
that includes when we came to an
agreement to eliminate the
caboose just so that is a fact
and.
One of the things to think about
here is that a vote against each
B. one of five is not a vote
against labour it's a vote to
protect the sanctity of the
collective bargaining process
which is very important we heard
about a lot a lot about the
city's I sincerely disagree with
the fact that states preempt
federal law and our regulator
the federal road administration
has stated that they.
Want uniform laws because we
operate as a national rail
system we and we need uniform
laws not a patchwork that was
there were a patchwork of state
laws but the thing is even if
our regulator came down with the
rule that was other than to
people in the locomotive.
That we would have to follow but
we wouldn't be able to change to
people in the crew until we had
an agreement at the collective
bargaining table so those are
undisputed facts we also takes
safety very seriously of our
employees wake up and start
their day in and their date with
safety on and roads are required
to move hazardous products even
if we don't want to and in some
cases we prefer not and the
reason that the federal
government requires us to do
that is because it's much safer
than trucks ninety nine point
nine percent.
Of hazardous materials that move
on real arrive to their
destinations without incident
that's caused by a train
accident but that's not good
enough we are not going to stop
until one hundred percent of
these products arrive safely so
at this point we you know but
they're shared was valid and we
have two people in the crew and
the locomotive now and we will
have that for the foreseeable
future thank you thank you.
Mr trio welcome.
Mr Chairman always good to see
members of the committee my name
is TJ trio and I am a registered
lobbyist for building itself
right away with all due respect
to the good the Sanchez both the
house and the Senate in itself
opposes respectfully opposes
these B. one oh five.
I have a lot to say but I know
others want to talk someone to
try to make this as quick as
possible because of some other
colleagues in other industries
want to talk but
members of the committee
committee a.
It I respect the proponents
passion of and they are
employees some reporters at BNSF
and I have the utmost respect
for them and the the as built
travel throughout we just simply
have a very strong disagreement
I'm gonna talk about the legal
issues because others are come
after you're gonna talk about
some some other stuff and I want
to specifically address the
preemption issue
I have the case here and there's
other multiple cases but I can
tell you unequivocally and it
should be in dispute that the
federal rail safety act the
statute itself presents all
state regulations aimed at the
same safety concerns as the
federal rail administration
there's apple case law on this
point I won't read it but there
should be no snow dispute.
Simply put the statute that
you're gonna vote on today is
preempted by federal law.
And reading at all see that the
state of New York just recently
passed this exact pretty much
this exact same statute the
governor had enough sense to
preempt that are to veto the
bill based on preemption.
Number two I think the what's
most important is it is
undisputed that the federal rail
road administration has said
that quote it could not provide
reliable or conclusive
statistical data to suggest
whether one person creating
operations are generous
generally safer or less safe
than.
Multiple creating appropriations
in other words the regulatory
experts at the federal level
have acted on the question of
creating sizing the term in the.
Crusades Weatherby two three
five ten is not supported by
substantial evidence so no rule
on creating size should be
adopted.
Without legal background in mind
Mr chairman I'll leave you with
the following question that this
state statute is preempted by
federal law.
Why are we considering this bill
today.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think the answers
really relatively simple the
proponents of this bill what
this New Mexico legislature to
ignore federal law and address
an issue there's been
traditionally left to the
collective bargaining process
and instead place it under state
statutes under under the guise
of it being a safety issue.
I ask you to look behind the
rhetoric follow the applicable
law and facts the vote against
H. B. one oh five thank you
thank you Mr Trujillo Mr
Billington.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee will I think we
can all agree on one thing every
single person on this room
regardless of what side they're
on this issue we all care about
safety I hope nobody is
questioning either side about
safety claim cares about safety
Senator Woods cares about safety
and I can assure you the real
what's care about safety but
safety is a much more
complicated and complex issue
than a sound bite of two person
crew.
and this is a phrase that we
hear you know all the time from
from the support of this bill
that you can't know get
negotiate safety one no one's
negotiating safety you know it
is the current the current
policy in the state it's the
current policy in every state
that you must have two people in
a locomotive engine that's the
way it is because of the crew
consist agreements.
These are ironclad the railroads
cannot break these and these are
set in stone and they were
actually negotiated about thirty
years ago.
You know before we put our
trains on a computerized network
that's guided by GPS system we
had some horrific collisions in
this country.
Because we didn't have positive
train control we didn't have the
innovation in the technology to
prevent human donor and then to
auto corrected when the computer
system detected that so all of
our trains now in this state all
the main lines.
The GPS guided computer system
can keeps them from colliding
with one another we had a
horrible crash in California in
two thousand eight.
That was caused by the conductor
and the engineer missing missing
a red light and solid yellow
light and they collided head on.
So this system we have now
controls the speed of the train
if they enter treacherous or
dangerous areas who will
automatically adjust with the
speed the engineer has to
constantly interact with the
screen computer screen in the
train locomotive or the train
stops and because it's a network
that's on a computer it keeps
the trains it keeps the trains
from colliding.
Look this federal case that the
referring to was all about
whether states have the
authority to pass laws and two
person crew you do you can pass
this law if you want but if the
federal railroad administration
which is part of the department
of transportation if they say
that their rule is going to be a
minimum of one person and you've
got a two person crew law on the
books what you've done is you
have started down the path of
creating a patchwork across the
states of the trains have to
travel and they have to navigate
through different lost this is
the proposed rule in the Federal
Register it is a published rule.
They're taking public comment.
They're gonna dot this rule
there's no question about it
thank Congress even has a law to
require two person crew there's
no question in anyone's mind
that this is going to come down
at the federal level and that's
the point here it needs to be
done at the federal level so
that it is uniform and the
trains can operate efficiently
from state to state safety is a
complicated matter.
Please don't buy into the faulty
premise that it's as simple as
two people the locomotive all
the derailments that are
occurring right now that we hear
about they're happening with two
three people in the locomotives
we've got problems with the
wheel bearings we need more
innovation and safety technology
improvements coming down the
road and they're coming down the
road they're gonna be here.
And we're also going to have a
uniform rule will apply to all
states about having two people
in the locomotive thank you
thank you Mr Billington.
And that's right on the nose ten
minutes anybody online for this
in opposition.
Okay members of the committee
the.
Senator Gallegos fisherman's not
a actual question just comment
so I just want to stop I start
out by saying I've got the hush
regard percent woods eleven
Donald Gators in of the the my
problem comes into in this
committee Mr chairman and
senator Representative I've
always looked to arguments on
following federal statute in
high we don't look at that more
often I didn't get and I wish my
had a comment from a kind of
commissioner I wish you'd give
me this insight two weeks three
weeks ago in two days ago but I
had discussion today and it
really really.
Draws a hard point for me
because I'd been a test with
Donald for months because I
thought it was just about safety
but now after understanding and
analyst New debate more but
after understanding the
difference between federation
state rigs that I'm gonna have
to be in opposition your bill
but I do that with the most
highest regard for the to you
because you guys have done a
great job trying to give us good
until good information what that
are you and hello guys this
related to Senator Mr chair I'm
hoping so he's got all the
money.
Senator McKenna your next.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator Representative
And let's see and Mr.
Gilbert then now tell month jail
until thank you for your for
your
testimony
chairman and Senator
Representative question for ms
Espinoza Mr Trujillo Mr Boeing
ten.
are there any employees that
would be against this bill.
Senator.
You know are we have thousands
of employees railroads to and so
we are all unique in different
ways were very diverse and they
were probably going to be
different opinions on this but
again we stand with our
employees for safety that is our
top priority and they do a great
job helping us get there that's
that's why we're there but
again.
The safety and the staffing is
determined at the collective
bargaining table why because we
have the expertise and the rail
union leaders there to make
those decisions and see what
exactly is most appropriate.
Okay I hope this helps chairman
Senator Representative and Mr
Spanos if I can
has this issue gone to
collective bargaining and what
happened if it did.
It has I mean forty two people
in two person crew there are
there have been discussions and
there was a case that that JD
can can talk about a little bit
more up but there were there was
a rule that that required us to
go into arbitration and after
that was decided and the rule
was or that the ruling was that
we should talk to our labor
partners at the local level this
is not ready yet but those
discussions should start at the
local level and there are
discussions at at with with one
of the one of the chairman but
again this is to start small to
start looking at the situation
see how it may or may not work
is the technology there if it's
not then we just continue to to
move forward of the and so that
that's that's word that stance.
Okay chairman Center
representative thank you Mr
Spanos a.
Yeah what the reason why I ask
that Chairman representative
Senator is if there have been
discussions then then why do we
have the legislation in front of
us add to that of Mr chair and
representative Representative
these make promoted
Representative.
thank you for the question that
you asked earlier and earlier
testimony one of the committees
the ability to the legislation
said to be negotiating this for
forty years.
Okay for forty years to be
negotiating this at the table to
be on the table for forty years.
Today they didn't say anything
because I caught it I guess and
they figured out that that they
did sound that but didn't child
right.
The the go save it for forty
years they haven't done
anything.
So somehow or another somebody
has to do something.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative center thank you
for that that that clarify
something in my mind because
Yes if if things are fall have
not
If a decision has been
crystallized by then then I know
why we were this built in front
of us and chairman Senator
Representative what what
concerns me is when we leave
when we're leaning on the fence
to take care of it that doesn't
give me comfort and I say that
because as far as I'm concerned
the president failed the rail
workers in December
when he signed a bill which did
not include sick leave for the
railroad workers and and I'm
just so disappointed in the
president I'm and so so
consequently Chairman
representative and senator
Real workers have to use
vacation time.
To go to a medical doctor
medical appointment.
That's just terrible it's a
terrible way to to treat
employees chairman Senator
Representative and I'm really
disappointed because I hear we
have BNSF here.
BNSF is owned by Berkshire
Hathaway and warranty both it
owns Berkshire Hathaway so I'm
wondering.
I really Mr warn you if you
really want your company to do
this two employees
And.
Workers may have a decent.
paycheck I've seen I've seen
some numbers here but even even
if you're well paid you still
get fatigued.
And tired.
And so the rate doesn't mean too
much me if we're compromising
safety
Let's see.
I think that takes care of my
top line concerns chairman and
Representative center and thank
you for bringing this
legislation I I will be
supporting it.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I've been dealing a lot with
of preemption and because I've
been dealing with it in with
regard to the special immigrant
juvenile visa and immigration
law and then what is the law of
the age of majority for a child
in New Mexico eighteen or twenty
and and how that works I've been
studying it so it turns out that
the federal right Representative
the federal railroad safety act.
Specifically says that a state
may adopt so with the state
government always has a state
can do this and whatever so
state more adopt or continue
enforce a law regulation or
order related to revert safety
public.
Dr continuing forced.
An additional or more stringent
law regulation order related to
railroad safety or security when
the law regulation or order is
necessary to eliminate or reduce
it is essentially local safety
security hazard.
The remoteness of the state
because our state has a lot of
remote areas and we heard
testimony about the kind of
cargo that is carried which was
frightening to me and then every
seems like every month we learn
about more more frightening
cargo they could be carried on
our our railroads and one of the
reasons I believe that railroads
are safe safer than trucks
carrying this cargo is because
they have to to of.
More than one person on on the
in the crew and then it goes on
is not incompatible with the law
regulation or to the United
States government it's currently
not incompatible because the
rule has not been passed and
then does not in reason would
burden interstate commerce well
again all you have to do if
there is a less stringent law is
at the at the border.
Put put the appropriate of
creating in which happens all
the time you see them they stop
at the border and they adjust to
make sure that they comply with
requirements of the state so I
think it is permissible under
state law.
I also think that it's a good
idea I mean it frightens me to
think that I'd be running on a
train of this cap of this type.
Or that we would have these this
type of train carrying this type
of cargo and only have one
individual what if there was a
stroke what if there was a heart
attack would I mean it's just of
a huge concern so I I'd support
this and I disagree with the
analysis of preemption.
It's very clear that the act
specifically allows us to do it
as long as we have these factors
remoteness of the state and the
kind of cargo carried so I I
support a bill.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman you're next.
Thank you Mr.
Jeez.
So thank you Mr thank you of
Senator was serving as for first
of all I'm not anti you face in
the goshi contracts labor
contracts what is the city
manager and the smaller towns
and we got the bigger city
somebody else that it.
So I'm not convinced that this
is a safety issue I hear safety
one more time I'm going to
scream obviously the railroads
don't want these trains to
derail any more than anybody
else but the expenses I have to
go to an east Palestine Ohio.
The residents are you talking
about the railroad having to
pick up the difference that
their help their homes I was
gonna lose value.
And I think they're gonna have a
good case of Representative was
going to have to pick up to the.
The.
The losses that they're going to
suffer in the the real estate
values so that is not costing
millions of millions that they
don't want these trains the rail
more than anybody else so they
say they they have to have a
conductor for the stranger three
miles long the conductor can't
see what's going on three miles
down the track it's all like
it's already been state is all
highly computer I so I'm not
convinced that safety is an
issue that's just.
Smokescreen can you meet with.
And I think we have noted that
the legislature the business
getting involved in labor
contractor you imagine what
would happen if people didn't
like with the guy at the
bargaining table so they come to
the state legislature would we
be inundated we would have time
to do anything else so this sets
a terrible precedent.
this this is should all be taken
care of at the bargaining table
we're not part of the we should
be part of the negotiating team.
It's.
what so.
Again.
You know I've been over lobby.
Hello to take a chill with the
sense of desperation has set in.
I I think I've been more lobby
on this and any other issue this
year and so the I'm a type of
person I want to get a lot of
the the more I got get turned
off I don't.
And I I've changed my mind on
this I voted for the other day
but the more I thought about it
over the weekend I thought you
know I made a bad decision we
shouldn't be.
Should be involved in living
Ghosh ages I'm not convinced
it's a safety issue I'm sorry
voting no.
Senator Tom thank you Senator
Hickey.
Senator Schmedes you want to be
on the list.
One question for okay.
But Senator if you will I know
you're you're you're you're
you're next and that he would he
would just raising is and I
wasn't for it a question thank
you Mr chair and sorry I came in
at the end of the debate
And I I too have been heavily
lobbied on this and you know and
I mean and you hear one side New
Mexico we have the the safety
and and can you hear the other
side about the the.
R. F. A.
R. F. R. A. I'm sorry and the
preemption and so forth
And I just kind of one question
and then that comment is is
there a fear on the part of the
union that eventually like we
hear about trucks is just gonna
get automated and there will be
anybody on these trains.
With one is another one that.
Chairman Senator are there is
currently a pilot program going
with CSX and east coast
railroads the name of the
program is zero to zero meaning
the train will start itself and
go all the way to the point
where the computer tells it to
stop and it is designed to
specifically work with nobody in
the cab of the locomotive.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chair a COVID and then another
comment
three the public Ilan mosque I
did buy a Tesla
may have some buyer's remorse
but I also
Around that part of it but
and I have the whenever we get
it right you're going to be able
to just just get in the car and
say Albertsons you know
magically goddess.
now that I've been driving in a
year I never get in the car and
saying Albertsons
and have a drive and and I fear
the day that that the trucks get
their I just.
I often say we we should believe
in science and and we are I just
came from presenting a
bioscience bill while one
company is going to get rid of
juniper allergies take money out
of the the allergens take him
out of the air from Jimmy will
mention that in your house and
being able to bring us up you
know there's a science is going
to do a lot of stuff for us but
I I'm I'm very fearful if they
get to the point where the
driving trains airplanes without
any any people involved but as I
waited on this and and I I do
want to point out I my mother's
gonna roll over in the grave she
was a state senator Alan knowing
huge you fat I am a huge you
fancy but I I also senator Tom
and you made a very convincing
argument that we can't.
In an era and I've I've
negotiated labor staff as head
of major hospital health plan
organization would have to in it
with the that that's where it
should take place not in the
legislature and I think that
that was a very good insight so
I think of I thank you Senator
common for that inside.
I really support labor price
supports eighty I want people
involved in in the process but I
think and I and as hard as this
and and also maybe didn't do
believe preemption maybe a doubt
I I did see the federal
government it's not a fairy.
It no I mean I mean I mean it
but what role that has to play
out the way they set up the ACA
kill the co ops
and I through the federal
government and one for being
arbitrary and capricious in
their preemption on rules but
here I think that that with the
wisdom and all the thinking that
can come through the F. R. A. if
I have that right and also at
the negotiating table and so as
I sit here and try to way I
think that for me that is a
compelling argument so I just
want to be able to say that and
hopefully we're not going to
have trains without.
All.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator committees and then
Senator McKenna for the second
time thank you Mr Representative
so the the house floor amendment
took out the penalties is that
correct.
How do you how do you feel about
that it was in the floor
amendment it was a house
judiciary says House foreman the
number one.
That's right you're correct
you're correct okay well you are
correct there was a house floor
vote for but how do you how do
you feel about the bill there's
no I mean is there is
enforcement mechanism reserve
what what what's going on with
that that have been there
Senator is that the he said
looking at the F. R. A. Roose.
And we basically very but states
is real clear words that the
secretary of transportation is
the only one allowed to impose
fines and fees that federal and
that's why we said that.
That's backed away from his of
the secretariat that for days if
you can do it the the we don't
need to do that.
Okay.
Well.
I learned a lot about railroads.
I know.
Okay well I I I I'm I'm good
with that I just want to hear
what.
I think.
Senator McKenna for the second
time.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Representative again
I can't help but.
Just to go on the Mike a second
time because I've heard some
colleagues say they've been so
convinced.
that it needs to go back to
bargaining.
And I've been so convinced that
bargaining
for forty years.
On this particular issue is an
utter failure it started when I
was sixteen years old.
And so there come here we're
coming to us to help get relief
and safety to those workers and
there is no way I would say no
to S. B. one oh five to the
humans in this room who work the
railroads in New Mexico.
There's no way I would ever say
no to you.
Forty years utter failure thank
you.
Senator Ingle you're next.
Is it a motion to table and to
non debatable motion.
The secretary will call the roll
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Center my SS Senator McKenna.
Absolutely not Senate committees
yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Tallman yes center if
you know no.
Act three out of five to three
vote your bills tabled thank you
thank you very.
We appreciate the discussion.
It's thank you and would reverse
lunges to do thank you for your
work on the railroads to.
with that we've concluded our
agenda for the day.
