Senator Block.
Here, her boon
Senator Charlie.
And Gallegos
And her nova
Pinto
Scott
And I said, Lopez here and her
hicky.
And our Lopez.
OK, we have a corn present.
And Senator, um, Celia Lopez,
you are here to present but we
do have a committee.
Yes, yes.
Yes, madam Chair, would you like
me to move this substitute?
Sure, if you'd like, please.
OK, Madam Chair, I move a do not
pass on on Senate Bill 103 and a
due pass on Senate Health and
Public Affairs. Thank you.
And if you would proceed on
Senate Bill 10.
Thank you, Madam Chair. As you
know, cause we've been talking
about this a lot in uh interim
committee in the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee, um, personal care
services is a program under.
The Medicaid funded community
benefit that provides critical
services to the aging and to
individuals, individuals with
disabilities.
To the personal care services
program, caregivers can help
people with daily activities
such as bathing, feeding, and
toileting in their home and
community instead of it.
itu tion like a skilled nursing
facility. This is a Medicaid
program for people who have a
nursing facility level of care,
meaning that, meaning that
without these services they
would be eligible for a skilled
nursing placement.
90% of people 65 and older would
prefer to receive care and to
remain in their home, so
personal care services is a
person-centered preferred care.
It is also importantly, less
significantly less expensive
than an institutional setting.
On average in nursing home
placement costs the state over
$9000 a month, whereas on
average personal care services
causes cost the state 3500 a
month.
Here in the home is a very smart
investment for our state.
However,
We know that there is a high
turnover rate and large
workforce shortages in the
caregiver industry, largely due
to low wages.
The current Medicaid
reimbursement rates are barely
enough to cover New Mexico's
current minimum wage, let alone
address the growing shortage of
direct care workers to provide
these essential services. Some
of you may remember that I've
been working on this issue for
for a while, um, in that a few
years ago I passed a a a bill
that would have provided for um
a living wage for anybody who
worked for the state and who had
who contracted with the state,
so the
factors would have been required
to provide a living wage, which
at that time, I believe was
$13.50
that part of the bill was
stripped out in finance, um.
And so we didn't get the
contract workers, but one of the
things I learned from from that
whole experience, um.
I started doing this when I
barely got to the Senate.
With a bit of a a bull in a
china shop. I know that we need
to understand the implications
of these of these the financial
implications of these kinds of
decisions. Yes, we want to
increase the workforce, but we
need to find out where the money
is coming, and here because of
the match, the Medicaid match,
um,
It actually is very doable to do
this.
But we need to better understand
the workforce, and we need to
better understand exactly how
much it costs to adequately
invest in the program.
During the 2023 legislative
session, we passed HB 395, which
required New Mexico's
intellectual developmental
disabilities providers of
Medicaid Home and
community-based services.
To report on their workforce, a
similar data collection efforts
should exist for personal care
services.
So this bill, Senate Bill 103,
mimics HB 395 and requires
personal care service agencies
to report certain data to the
healthcare authority for
services that are provided to
Medicaid members in the
community benefit program by
March 1st, 2026, and annually
thereafter.
HP 103 would require the
healthcare authority to perform
this study to determine the cost
of payment adequacy for personal
care delivery and recommend
reimbursement rates by January
30th, 2030. Payment adequacy
shall address workforce
stability, vacancy reductions, a
wage at at least 150% of the
state minimum wage and ensuring
adequate access for eligible
Medicaid recipients. Finally, SB
103 would establish an advisory
group to meet at least once a
year to advise and provide
recommendations on reimbursement
rates.
And for those recommendations to
be published on the the health
care authority's website.
We know that New Mexico is
rapidly aging, but we don't know
what investments are needed to
support our seniors with a
stable and qualified workforce
to support those needs. SB 103
helps us to understand how we
can address this critical issue.
And here with me, um, Madam
Chair, I have Megan Lorino, who
is a um
The executive director of the
New Mexico Association for Home
and Hospice Care, you probably
recognize her from intercession,
and we also have Stephanie Welch
from the Center on Law and
Poverty who will serve a my as
my experts today.
Uh, with that, madam chair, um,
after.
After comment, I will, we will
stand for. Thank you, Senator.
Did you wish your experts to say
a few words. I think they're
just available for questions.
OK, let's go to the audience.
I'm sorry privilege. I'm sorry.
I didn't introduce my intern,
um, so I have an intern from UNM
here, Adriana Cassau, um, who is
uh learning rapidly, I think.
Sorry. Welcome.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
Senate Bill 103?
If you'd like to make a comment,
please stand in the middle, and
there's a microphone.
For you to introduce yourself
and make a few comments short,
please. Thank you.
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I've
been a nurse for over 45 years,
Master's prepared. I taught
nursing here in New Mexico for
more than 20 years because of
the high nurse turnover rates of
direct care nurses, not only
from New Mexico, they moved, but
from the profession they moved.
I shifted my priorities from
teaching to addressing nurse
retention, nurse turnover is a
problem. Hospitals must be held
accountable for nursing
shortage. They need to public
report nurse turnover. This data
will be.
Uh, we'll be able to see the
problem and this alone may
change the trajectory and retain
nurses in the state, please pass
Senate Bill 103. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Matthewunnos,
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Caregivers Coalition, and
we stand in support of this
bill.
Madam of members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
Disability Rights in New Mexico
and the Disability coalition.
As has been noted, um, our New
Mexico population is aging, um,
I, I feel like I'm an example of
this myself, having been at this
a long time. We have some good
systems in place to provide
services as has been indicated
for people developmental
disabilities for people with
other disabilities and elders
and so on to provide
community-based and home-based
care rather than institutional
care, uh, and New Mexico uses
that those systems, uh, quite
significantly, but it is.
challenge um to staff and
support those services, partly
because we don't pay those folks
very well. So, um, we need more
data about who's out there, what
they're doing, and what they're
being paid, and you all need
this information so that you can
be in a better position to
address these needs and make
sure that we're adequately
supporting a system that really
is the heart of our community
system. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone in opposition?
seen none um from Zoom. We do
have one person, Amy.
I'm sorry, Amy's iPhone.
Mhm
Please
Amy, are you able to um.
Say a few words.
Yes. Can you hear me now? Yes.
OK, perfect. I do apologize
about that. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
My name is Amy Corbin and I'm
with Community Home Care. We
serve approximately 700 clients
on the eastern side of the
state. Each year we are here in
the roundhouse trying to get our
providers rates adjusted to
recognize the cost to provide
care in New Mexico, but each
year we are left further and
further behind. New Mexico is a
rapidly aging state, providing
care in the home is both patient
preferred and is cost-effective,
reducing nursing facility
admission and hospital
readmissions.
This bill would provide the
healthcare authority and the
legislature with the data
necessary to inform what needs
to be invested into this
program, providing much needed
transparency into PCS rates.
Community home care stands in
strong support of SB 103.
Thank you.
And there was no one in
opposition.
OK.
Is one more person.
And Patsy Romero.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh thank you uh for
bringing this legislation
forward. I'm representing the
New Mexico, uh, National
Alliance on Mental illness, and
we stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 103, you know, that
New Mexico's aging population
also carries with it many
individuals who suffer with
mental illness, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, and so
all of
these programs are going to help
those populations and assist
those who have to care for those
individuals. So Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I urge
you to vote yes on Senate Bill
103. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
So with that, um, we will now go
to questions or comments from
committee members. Senator
Scott.
Thank you, ma'am your senator.
An experts
I guess I need some education.
On how these services.
Or contracted.
And
Well, how are they contracted?
I'll turn that over to my uh my
expert Megan Lorena.
Madam Chair Representative Scott
our services are are contracted
with the managed care
organizations who manage the
community benefit for Medicaid.
And Adam chair expert that's a
state agency.
Where's that?
The managed care, Madam Chair
Representative Scott currently
our managed care organizations
are Blue Cross Blue Shield,
United, um, Molina and
Presbyterian, they are, um, the
state healthcare authority has a
contract with the managed care
organizations to contract with
Medicaid providers, so most of
Medicaid services are, are.
Those providers have contracts
with the man. OK. So, Madam
Chair, Senator, and expert.
You would be given.
A request for proposal.
That you
That you fill out and submit.
To provide those services.
Madam Chair Representative
Scott, I, I don't believe that
they respond to an RFP. They,
they are approved by Medicaid or
the personal care service
providers are approved by
Medicaid to be able to provide
that care, and they have to
show, um, you know, certain
eligibility criteria that they
meet and then once they have
that Medicaid, um, approval,
then they are able to contract
directly with the managed care
organizations to provide that
care. OK.
have
expert. What I'm trying to get
to.
Is the market pricing mechanism.
That's in place.
2
Select among these various
providers to provide the
services.
Madam Chair Representative
Scott.
Um, you know, as the executive
director of the association.
My understanding, and we have to
be pretty careful cuz we, you
know, can't be uh be colluding
or anything as an estate
association, um, but I have
general senses of how uh the
negotiations with the managed
care organizations go, and I
have relationships with the
managed care organizations and
I, I, I think that everybody.
Likely agree that their rates
that they reimburse by are
largely set by the state.
Um, one thing that your, your
line of questioning is flagging
and I think it's important to
flag is that, um, unlike most
Medicaid services provided in
this state, personal care
services is not on the fee
schedule. So I could not tell
you the exact, uh, you know,
floor of that reimbursement
rate. I can give you some
numbers that have been made
available publicly, um, but I
can't give you an exact rate,
and that is a
Big driver as to why we feel
like this type of this type of
um.
Study is really important. We
think it would, it would create
a level of transparency as an
association, I come to the
legislature and my members come
to the legislature and try to
talk to y'all about the lack of
investments in our services, but
we don't have real numbers that
we can point to, so it's hard
for you all to know how to
budget appropriately.
I hope that answers your
question. And, and Madam, just,
just
To add to that, when I brought a
bill to to require that the
state and contractors pay um.
What was then called a living
wage. It was stripped out of
very quickly because they said.
No way. Then we, uh,
specifically these, these
providers and the providers for
the disabled, um.
They, they could make it, that,
that if, if, if they were
required to pay that.
They couldn't make it. And I was
surprised by that.
Um, and I would like to see the
data.
It was just based on no data,
they said that.
Um, I have a chair and senator.
Mm
What happens in the
circumstance.
Where nobody bids to provide the
services.
If the reimbursement rates are
insufficient.
Would there not be?
folks unwilling to step up and
do that.
the fish, uh, Madam Chair, I
will turn it over to my expert
who knows this intimately, but
there, that's a problem.
Shortage is a problem.
chair, Senator Scott.
Um, yeah, we have a, a, we, I
don't have great data to provide
to you, that's another data
point we are, uh, the managed
care organizations and
healthcare authority are looking
more closely at right now, but
we do not have enough caregivers
to provide this care and even
with the caregivers that we
have, we have large numbers of,
of um unfilled hours, so you.
Uh, hours of care that have been
authorized but have not been
provided. So, uh, I think that
there is evidence that exactly
what you're suggesting is
happening.
OK.
Oh
Madam Chair and Senator.
Let me describe how this
would operate
In the private sector.
In the state or somebody.
Requesting these services would
go out into the open market.
And request
According to a given set of
specifications.
These
These services
And the company providing the
services would
But
Calculate what they thought it
would take to hire the people.
To bring them on board.
And the overhead charges and
Perhaps profit markup.
And then submit that as a bid to
provide the services that would
be.
That would then either be
accepted by the requesting
agency.
Or or not accepted, in which
case they would go to somebody
else.
Second bidder if you.
If you will.
So how does this process?
If
From that market-based process
that
I'm describing
Adam Chair, Senator Scott, I
the.
What really there is not an RFP,
but the the rates that are
offered are.
Mm
In theory, they are um
negotiable but in large sums, we
understand it's a come and take
it, so if you are willing to do
the work at the rate, we don't
care about the the about your
the math that you just
described. So this bill is
actually asking that we say.
That we look into what are those
costs exactly as you lined up.
The one thing that this bill
also includes though is an
assumption in that cost study
that are the workforce is paid
at 150% of minimum wage, not
that they will be paid out 150%
of minimum wage, but that they
would be or that they that
that's the cost that will be
determined. And what that will
allow us to do is when we're
asked, you know.
Why can this industry pay
caregivers more money so that we
can have a better stable
workforce so that we can make
sure people are getting that
care provided in the home, we
can point to sort of how what
what investments were lacking in
order to do that.
Um, it doesn't guarantee that
they'll get paid 150%. It just
tells you what that cost is.
That makes sense.
Hm
Madam chair, it does.
Sort of, I guess.
The concern
That I have with
would be that this opens the
door.
To a 50% increase in minimum
wage.
For these
Caregivers
And
And that
That, uh
Masks, if you will.
The market forces.
With regard to
Whether these people would be
You know what they need to apply
for the job.
So
How, how would you address those
concerns, Madam Chair, market
forces are not working because
there's very high turnover and
um and that's.
Fully attributable to the really
small wages.
Um, and
Um, there are shortages, people
who have been authorized for
this service, but they just
can't get that provided.
And so we know, um, or we
strongly believe it's because of
the low wages.
And this will make that all of
that transparent.
So it'll help the market.
With not with information Madam
Chair and senator.
If the folks that are bidding to
provide the services know that
they've got to pay.
$16 an hour to those people.
And they base their costs.
On those
On those labor rates.
And that's the number that goes
into the state agency.
And that's the only number they
get.
Why would they not be, would
they not be willing to pay the
Whatever the bid price is? Well,
remember, um.
Um, I put this, the, the.
The reimbursement rate is set,
there's also Medicaid that goes
into this.
Um, and so what are the
expectation and hope would be is
that we would then adjust the
Medicaid reimbursement rate to
allow this to happen.
Because one of the problems is
this isn't a a market.
Like a full free and and open
market situation cause you've
got the Medicaid rate.
That's that's limiting what's
paid.
Oh, Madam Chair and senator,
this would be a consequence of
federal reimbursements for
Medicaid then?
No, I, well, possibly, but it's,
it's more a consequence of what
the state sets. It's the
Medicaid reimbursement rate.
OK.
Um
Well, I'm still a little bit
confused.
Madam Chair and senator, because
it seems like we might be
attacking this from
From the wrong direction.
If we
If we had
Medicaid reimbursement rates
based on market forces then the
folks bidding to provide these
services.
would have the opportunity to
determine what they need to pay.
In order to
To get the jobs, Madam Chair, I
believe that's kind of a chicken
and egg problem, isn't it?
Um, and what we're finding is
it's
I don't know whether it's the
chicken or the egg, but we're
not finding that people are
taking this work.
Um, and so,
I mean, if, if it were me, I
would just say let's raise the
Medicaid rate rates. Let's,
let's, um, increase the, the
payment rates, and I would
expect based on on economics
that people would apply for the
job and we would get these
covered.
But I've learned in the
legislative process that you
don't just do something like
that. You have to have the
study, you have to have
transparency, you have to have
the justification, and then, uh,
only then would you get the
Medicaid rates changed.
And let's just say I've learned
that the hard way.
And Madam Chair and senator,
Who makes the determination.
With respect to the Medicaid
reimbursement.
We, we do, but yeah.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, the rates
are set by the legislature.
So Madam Chair,
I mean, it's not.
Just the legislature, but all of
this information comes from the
legislative healthcare, I mean
from the healthcare authority
and if they have this study.
Then they will have a
justification to come to us.
To get the adjustment that that
I believe is needed. Again, I
feel like I already know that,
but that's not how things work.
So, Madam Chair and senator, the
fact
That there's an inadequate
supply of these caregivers is
not.
sufficient justification.
To get the rates raised without
a study.
Apparently not, Madam Chair.
OK. Uh,
I think I'll get a little bit of
a grip and I'll be
Pleased to listen to the rest of
the.
You Rene, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, for your
answers.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Pinto.
motion for a pass from Senator
Pinto.
With a second from Senator Serio
Lopez. Yes, thank you. OK. We
still have discussion.
us
We can still do a motion in a
second and then still continue
with discussions. So Senator
Block.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Um
Uh, senator and experts, just,
just a couple of basic questions
here on the bill.
On
On page 2 and the definitions.
Uh, line 11 financial management
agency.
Can you give me an example?
Um, well, let's hold on, let's
talk about the, the contracts
real quick. Um, you don't, you
said that you didn't have to go
out for an RFP, is that, did I
hear you correctly?
Madame Cher, I'm gonna turn that
over to my expert.
OK.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Black,
uh, financial management
agencies, and I honestly am not.
So totally familiar with with
what that is, but I, the way I
understand it, it is folks who
are totally self-directed, so
they have a budget that is
allocated based on things like,
um, do they need durable medical
equipment. Do they need home
modification, how much
caregiving do they need, and
they are the employer on record,
and they are the folks who may
totally manage their care, but
then a financial management
agency is who's over them, I
think.
better.
I think you would recognize it,
uh, I think we refer to it more
as case management, but because
they are the financial managers
of those dollars, that's, that's
the legal definition of those
groups, and I don't represent
those organizations so that's
about I gave you all the
knowledge I have.
And then.
2
The RFP, uh, Senator, no they
there are our providers are not
are not necessarily responding
to an RFP, um, for many until uh
COVID, we actually did, we're
not bringing in new providers,
we had sort of a closed provider
list for quite some time, I
think because we had been able
to fulfill the need more or less
fulfill the needs within the
community. There's always folks
who are not getting the care
that they.
but
And greater amounts and then
with the public health
emergency, um, and a lot of, a
lot of confounding factors. It
was also when minimum wage
started to increase, um, and our
providers who had once been able
to pay over minimum wage have
been squeezed, so that that's
been really hard for them.
So I believe that the state has
opened it up to other providers
and um.
They, if they are able to find
clients and they can get a
secure contract with the managed
care organization. Once they're
they're, then the managed care
organization decides that they
want a contract with them or
not.
OK, so
Madam Chair, the reason I ask
is, as, as a county
commissioner,
We would, we didn't have to go
through the RFP process on
certain things because the state
had this pool.
Of
Of different contractors and
that's, that's where I was
going. I, I don't know if it's
similar here where the state has
a pool of contractors.
That meet certain requirements
that they can just pull from.
And, and it sounds like you know
enough just to be dangerous as I
do, and maybe you don't know
that answer, but that's where I
was going with it is there's a
pool.
Um, you know, you have all these
small businesses that are in
this big pool and they can
compete.
And they meet certain
requirements in the state and
just say, you, you got it, you
got it, you got it.
Trying to understand if
That's kind of where you're,
what you're talking about.
Madam Chair, Senator Block are
providers are they're certified.
By the healthcare authority that
they're qualified to provide
that care.
Their contracted with the
managed care organ.
Uh, madam chair, so the managed
care organization because I have
some questions on the uh
definitions here that a private
business?
Madam Chair, Senator Buck, we
have 4 managed care
organizations and they pretty
much run our Medicaid programs.
There are exceptions to that. We
have some waivers, um, that are
exceptions to that, but most of
our Medicaid, uh, services are,
are, are run through managed
care, so United Presbyterian.
OK, thank, uh, Madam Chair, so
those aren't necessarily like
small businesses and in New
Mexico, they could be large
corporations is what you're
telling me like.
United or or Blue Cross,
correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I
would agree that our, our, our
managed care organizations are
large organizations, are my
agencies are everything from
large organizations mom and pop,
Madam Chair, so.
Those
Those managed care businesses
though, they could subcontract
to smaller businesses is, is,
uh, can I assume that or not?
Yeah, well, yes, they, they're
the ones that would employ them.
OK.
Got it. So, Madam Chair, um, the
financial management agency,
that's not, is that United or
Blue Cross or is that another
organization outside of that
because, and I'll, I'll get to
the other question I have here
on the, the word ant.
Madam Chair, Senator B block, I
believe that the NCOs can't do
have case management programs,
but I also believe that other
organizations.
such as think UNM has a case
management program and there are
some agencies that are stan. Oh,
OK. Try to follow along here,
Madam Chair. So the managed care
organization in the san
Management Agency. It could be
the same thing.
That I'm sure Senator Block. I
don't wanna misrepresent this
program.
But I believe so.
OK, so, Madam Chair, I want to
make sure we're.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I, I
don't, I don't know that I can
satisfy your questions on that,
that's OK. I'm trying to
understand how this is working
here, so, um, Madam Chair, uh,
if you, if you can't answer just
not a big deal. It's not a
gutcha, but I'm happy to get
back to you. That would, that
would be phenomenal.
Because
When I look at the bill.
Well, let me, let me say it this
way. A personal care service
provider.
That would be one of those
companies, uh, Blue Cross or
United.
No, Madam Chair, Senator block
the personal care service
agencies, those are the groups
that I rep that I represent. So
those are organizations that
contract with managed care
organizations to go into the
home and provide hands on care.
The folks that they're providing
hands on care to our folks who
have uh nursing facility level
of care, so without us sending
in a caregiver, they would be
eligible to be in a skilled
nursing facility, and we and my
providers provide that
non-medical bathing assistance
with dressing, etc. OK. Madam
Chair, so the
Can I
The managed care organization,
the personal care service
provider is under the managed
care organization.
The contracted out, so that, OK,
so that's where I'm going like
Blue Cross United, they would
contract out to a a small
business here in New Mexico,
theoretically or actually that's
true, that would be fact because
they're doing it today, correct?
OK, now.
Now we're tracking.
All right, fantastic.
So
Let me, let me understand, um,
Madam Chair.
Um, on, if you just go to page 4
line 13, just, just walk me
through this, this year.
So by March 1st of 2026.
And annually thereafter.
Each Medicaid managed care
organization, that's the Blue
Cross, the United Healthcare,
and the other ones you
mentioned, right?
And financial management agency,
which can be apparently is the
same organization, correct?
We, we, we said you think it
might be, but you're gonna
check, right?
So if, if
Do you see any if if those are
two different.
Organizations.
And they have to do this report.
Is it duplication of effort, or
they're gonna be looking at
different facilities, different
workers, so it's not duplication
of effort.
I'm trying to get through that.
It looks like they're doing the
same thing.
A chair Senator block, yes, I,
my understanding and, and our
other bill sponsor,
unfortunately is family
caregiving today in another
state, so it's not able to
address these questions that
That
You're asking, but my,
my, you see where I'm going
though, right?
Well, my, my understanding is
that both are managed care are
managed care organizations can
serve as but they also can
contract with other
organizations to provide the
financial management services.
Perfect. Exactly. So, Madam
Chair, um,
What was your first name again?
My name is Megan. Megan.
So, Megan, if, if they are two
different organizations.
They're both going to be
required to do a report is the
report gonna be the same thing?
Because you're asking both
organizations to look at the
total number of full-time
direct, part-time, highest and
lowest and average hourly wage.
Percentage of eligible Medicaid
and then
And then the uh
This aggregated demographic
information, so
That, that might be a
duplication of effort that maybe
it needs to be worded different
differently or something, um,
uh, you know I'll, I'll leave
that up to.
Senator Sudil Lopez to figure
that out because I know you
will. Um.
That, that kind of concerns me
right there because I think
we're giving a burden
potentially.
With two organizations doing the
same report.
Required from the state on the
same information.
Madam Chair, uh, as my
understanding, and this is from
presentations over the years
about this about this problem my
understanding is that the
authority, the health care
authority will it says um shell
in a form and manner, so they
will tell them exactly how they
should submit this data and
they're responsible for making
sure that there's not
duplication. My understanding of
why you're, you're doing both of
them or why we're including both
of those, um.
Is
I if if.
One of them might have the data
in some areas that another one
might have the data in another
area.
So the the financial management
company might know the cost.
Or uh hourly hourly wages and
the managed care organization
might have the number, so it
would be between both of them
they've got to get whatever it
is the data that the health care
authority is is requiring. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So basically,
Senator, it'd be kind of a
hybrid report is what you're
talking about.
that both the organizations that
have might have different data,
provide the data. OK, alright,
thanks for walking me through
that because I'm read that last
night. I'm like, I don't know
what the hell she's.
So
Appreciate it.
I think we
Getting through it, so, um.
Madam Chair, on page 5.
Um, line 3, section 3, the
percentage of eligible Medicaid
recipients enrolled.
In a self-directed community
benefit program who are unable
to receive services due to a
shortage of direct workers. Are,
are you looking for a ratio, um,
trying to understand.
What, what are you trying to
pull uh there to to see.
So let's say there's um.
1000
Um, 1000.
People enrolled
And 300 of them.
are unable to receive services
due to a shortage, then that
would be 30%. People eligible
are not receiving, I would
assume that the percentage is
also going to include the
numbers because we've got.
We've got numbers, uh, other
places.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So you're pulling
that data together, that, that's
a big number that could be.
You you're looking for the
aggregate total of
Having the bean counters pull
all this stuff together and spit
out some data, OK, um, on
section 4.
Uh, line 7 there.
Um
You know, now you're also
looking at the workforce here if
I read this bill correctly.
So you have.
The direct care workers.
Is there some, and are you
looking for, because it doesn't
say, do you want full and
part-time direct care workers in
here because you, you broke it
out earlier but not here.
Well, this one is just about um
demographics of who's who's
doing the work.
Um, you know, how old are they,
what gender are they, what race
and ethnicity. I have some sus
give us the data. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator,
right, but I, I think it should
be explicit because it doesn't
specifically say.
Um
Full time or part.
Am I missing it there,
so we will have that, we will
have that information about
who's part time and who's not
who's full time. Where? Uh, in,
let's see, see.
C1B.
And see what page 3, see 1 A and
B.
So we will have the total.
Of who we will know how many
people are full time, how many
people are part time, and this
was overall, um, and so you're
suggesting we should know, I
mean, I guess it might be
interesting to notice if.
Uh, all of or more.
Part time workers were female
and more so it might be
interesting, but I, I think the
intent was just overall.
OK. All right. No, I, I, thank
you, Madam Chair. I
I see what you're, you're
talking about there, but that
is.
But that's from the personal
care service provider, I guess
that's gonna be funneled up to
Blue Cross Blue Shield, and then
is that how I read that?
It, it, yeah, it matches also in
B.
On page 3.
Right, that's where I'm.
Oh, OK. Yeah, that, that's what
I'm saying, so Madam chair,
senator.
On B on page 3.
Personal care service provider,
the subcontractor to the big
boys is providing that that data
and then.
On page 5.
It's gonna be the big boys.
Or their financial management
people are the same people
depending on who, who we're
talking about are going to take
that data from the subs and send
it up. Well, it'd be interesting
to see if there are differences.
Well, yeah, I would assume
there's not, yeah.
Thank you. OK, uh, almost there,
Madam Chair.
So
Help, help me just understand
the dates here. By July 1st,
2026, and annually thereafter.
So it sounds like we're not
sunsetting this anytime soon. Is
that, is that correct? We're
gonna keep doing this data for
For, for as long as we think we
need to do it, uh, Madam Chair,
the reason, uh there is no
sunset is because this is not a
one time thing, this is so that
we can keep.
Um, keep understanding this data
in the in the in the future
because one of the things that
when I came here is I was
shocked at how little data we
have.
Um, and so this would provide
this data.
So we can look at it in 5 years,
in 10 years, 15 years to see how
we're doing OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator. So
really you're looking for long
term trend analysis is what
you're what you're telling me,
OK.
Got it.
Um
Going back on page 5 there, um,
again, subsection 4.
The Madam Chair, Senator, the
disaggregated demographic
information on these direct care
workers full and part-time.
Providing personal care
services, and you're talking
about age, gender, race, and
ethnicity. You know, you talked
earlier about the average wages
of the low to high in the
average. What, why wouldn't we
include in there to get a better
idea of the workforce, some of
the education or research that
those workers have.
Madam Chair, Senator Black, so
if you look on page 4.
That uh that includes that full
and part time and the highest,
lowest, and average hourly, so
that.
No, I,
I think his question Madam
Chair,
I think his question is why
would we want to know their
educational level? Why wouldn't
you,
why wouldn't you?
Madam Chair, Senator, and, uh,
Megan.
Uh, these workers have certain
educational, some might have
higher ed than other, they might
have certain certifications that
help them get higher pay, so why
wouldn't we want to know?
Really some specifics about our
workforce instead of just, I
mean,
age, gender, race, ethnicity.
Oh, OK, fine.
But that doesn't tell me the
skill sets of these people.
That's, that's where I'm going
with this, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, thanks for that
clarification. Sorry,
um, we.
Actually, that was in the
original bill and and the
reason.
He asked, uh, it was actually my
association asked for that to be
excluded. It's because that is
data that's very cumbersome for
for my providers, for the
employers to collect. They
actually to be a direct care
worker, they need to do specific
training related to their job,
but they don't have to have any
specific license or they don't
have. So we wouldn't have.
wouldn't have assurance in in
the data and it would, it's not
part of their employee file or
their application file is not
part of their employee file.
But I'm sure this is this is an
area which does not require a
degree.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Megan. I
understand that.
But
I, I still think there's
certifications from these people
that, you know some of these
people can and can't give uh
medications based on
certification. Some can do
certain things over others.
And, and I just think if we're
looking for long term trend
analysis.
It, it would be really nice to
have the trend analysis of the
employee of our workforce to see
where we're at, um.
We, we can talk about that one
after and maybe talk about it
when it goes on the floor or
something, but
I, I think that's just critical.
The more and Senator, you know
me, I'm a data guy. The more
numbers, the more data I have
that helps me make a better
decision and helps the state
make a better decision on how
we're going to recruit. Um, and
Madam Chair, um.
I agree, we kind of slimmed
down, that's why that we did the
committee substitute and just
was less granular, um, to make
it easier on the people who
provide the data to provide the
data and the people who receive
it to manage it. I actually
don't have any kind of objection
to certifications in education,
um.
I just know that they're
probably they're probably will
be certifications, but um.
Since this is a kind of job that
doesn't require a degree.
We probably won't see a lot
there, but I don't, I don't have
an objection to put it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
Well, it doesn't require a
degree, but you know, do we have
uh high school dropouts? Do we
have GED people? Do we have high
school gra uh graduates.
Um, uh, uh, you know, that'd be
kind of interesting if you want
to add that amendment and add a
D and put education and
certifications. I don't have any
kind of objection to that.
I, I, I would love to do that,
um, right after.
Just got a couple more
quick things before it goes on
to the next, is that what you're
suggesting? Yes, ma'am. Thank
you, manager.
OK, so 2 more quick things here.
Um,
Uh, on, on, on line 20 page 5.
By January 1st, 2030, the
authority, that's, that's the
healthcare authority, is that
what OK, perfect,
uh, Madam Chair, um, Senator
line 23, it said the results of
the study shall be provided, um.
Is is that the studies are
provided by January 1st, 2030 or
sometime after that.
By January 1st, 2030.
Thank you, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. On page
6 F.
Uh, the authorities shall
establish an interested parties
advisory group. OK, let's just
chat about this just for a
minute.
Who, who appoints the HCA, Madam
Chair, will appoint that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. How many, how
many, uh,
How many members are gonna be on
that advisory group, Madam
Chair, that would be up to the
authority.
The healthcare. Um, and I'm sure
Senator, and how long will they
be on that? Uh, are they on it
for two-year terms or, or 4-year
terms? That would be up to the
authority we're not managing
that our idea there is the
healthcare authority is the one
that needs the advice, so they
should select, we did say that
uh it should consist of persons.
Uh, who have an interest in pay
rates, including direct care
workers, eligible Medicaid
recipients and authority staff.
So that, so we would make sure
they didn't exclude those
individuals, but the idea is
it's for their assistance.
And so they should figure out
who they need the assistance
from.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So.
So hearing that, I want to make
sure I understand this, this
advisory group, we don't know
how many people it's going to
be, but it's going to be um
appointed by the director of the
healthcare authority, is, is
that, is that fair?
Yes.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, so
we're gonna have
Either a worker.
On that
On that advisory group.
A person who is on Medicaid, I
assume on that group.
And
Some people from the authority
staff, it sounds like on that
group.
Um, is there
Um, Madam Chair and senator, uh,
Cia Lopez, is there anyone else
that you can think of that may
need to be on that group, Madam
Chair, when you say including
that means that this is the
minimum and including means
included, including but not
limited to in legislative speak.
Um, and so they may think they
need an economist, they may
think that they need.
I don't know.
Uh
A provider, um, they may think
they need a representation from
the HMO from the managed care
provider, but that's up to them
to determine. We just want to
make sure at a minimum they have
these individuals.
And notice they're just, uh,
they're just giving advice.
Um, there's no real, um,
role for them other than to um
make recommendations.
And then the recommendations
will be published.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
where does it say including?
In section on page 6 on line 24.
Oh, there you go. You mean the
one that's spelled I N C L U D I
N G. That one.
Thank you.
OK, um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, uh, Senator and
panel.
I, it sounds like you would be
OK with a friendly amendment uh
regarding that, I'd be more than
happy to.
To, to do it or or let, let you
make that amendment or
something.
Somebody doesn't matter.
Thank you Madam Char,
Madam Chair, would you like that
amendment to be made in this
committee or uh to make the
amendment as it goes, assuming
well.
If this bill goes forward to
make it in the next committee.
Mhm
We can do an amendment, I mean,
not like we won't allow it to
happen. We more than welcome to.
Just how long is it gonna be?
Uh, I believe it's just a
section.
On page 5 line uh 14 insert D
education and certifications and
and.
Madam Chair.
Um, if I can just ask the
senator for a questionnaire.
When, when we, when we do
education.
I think we got to be a little, a
little specific um on that and,
and I'll, I'll defer to you,
but.
I, I think
The
Or categories I can think of.
Or maybe 5 with other is um
No high school.
GED High School.
Um
Some college. I mean, we're
trying to, we're trying to be
specific here, some college and
I, I'll defer to you on the
certifications.
But that's just my idea,
that's true, I think we ought to
work with the drafter and, and
get more, uh, get more details,
so I would propose that I work
with the senator on this
amendment, uh, before it goes to
the next committee.
I'm OK with that, both of you.
You both have worked together
before.
Oh yeah,
yeah, yes, Madam Chair, we've
worked together before, I think.
This will take us probably about
2 hours the way Sanil Lopez is
on this stuff.
Yeah, I appreciate that. Just,
just so we get it right. Yeah,
we're.
Thank you Madam Chair of you to
work on that should this bill
pass committee. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
and panel.
OK, thank you.
Um, other questions or comments
from committee members.
For a 2nd time, Senator Scott.
And Senator and Megan.
Are the organizations that you
represent.
Or profit
Time senators
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
organizations I represent are
both not for profit.
And for profit, we
I represent.
Rod set of organizations and
agencies. We have everything
from small mom and pop for
profit, small nonprofits, larger
nonprofit we have it all.
And
That chair and making to you.
Know what your average margins
are.
With the for-profit
organization.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
OK.
And
I myself this with my colleague
over here on the right because
asking for all that information
for.
Unskilled laborers just beyond.
Anything we would.
On a plate in the in the private
sector.
And I guess the question I have
is.
What do we need all that for?
I mean these are basically.
Unskilled folks that uh.
Now that provide these services.
That, that's all I had.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Senator Scott.
Um, one thing I just wanted to
put out there when we were
talking.
About looking at the 150% rate
of the minimum wage.
In New Mexico, our minimum wage
is $12 an hour.
And if you look at 150%, that's
$18 an hour.
And if you wanna go work at some
of our fast food entities, you
can make more money.
And even for some of these
entities we've heard them during
the interim, and maybe, you
know, a few of you may have
joined us for the Health and
Human Services interim committee
when we have these providers in
front of us.
Um, they, they give us and tell
us the bare bones that they do
operate on.
Um, because it's, it's a mixture
of trying to cover a lot of
different um costs.
But to work for $12 an hour, um.
Eggs a lot.
And even if you do have a
college education, I don't think
you're gonna go work for $12 an
hour.
It just isn't gonna happen, so.
There's, there's a skill set
that we do need for these who
are providing care for our loved
ones.
Um, but it's, it, it also goes
back to what we pay.
And it's a concern and it's not
just now, it's been around for a
while.
So I just wanted to add that in.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
senator, I agree with, um,
Senator Scott, that if we don't
need that information and it
hasn't, it doesn't have a
bearing on.
Uh, employment decision, we
should not be out um.
Internal bias when making those
decisions.
And um placing value on uh lived
experience is also in this
outlay, so.
As you're having conversations,
I wanted to.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pinto. Madam
Chair, members in the best giver
is don't have.
Um
Didn't have the opportunity to
seek all of this, um, knowing
that they were going to be the
person taking care.
Of
loved one at home.
So that little bit of income
too.
That some of it.
In my community.
Because most of the time we, we
don't have the facility.
That urban city, even the one in
Gallup is.
Limited in their capacity to
take on a lot of our elders and
a lot of our, well, not, they
don't want to leave home.
And in some instances, we don't
want them to leave home either.
This is one of the
When did this
I'll be the most humane ways to
Care for them until they are
ready to go on their journey,
they will, they need more.
But that care and.
Assurance and security that your
loved one, you know, that you're
not worried and having to go
check up.
A lot of what I hear too in some
places is that they've walked
away.
And froze.
As there was in areas or that
they wanted to go home.
They knew they were not home.
So they left the facility
because they're they're elderly.
And they wander off and uh.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions? Senator Block for a
2nd time. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Senator, I
I, I
I hate to disagree with the
ranking member, but I, I think
it's important that we get some
trend analysis on the workforce.
Help us make better decisions on
You know, what we're looking for
and um
Help us to recruiting and.
Training and retention
Um
And I understand $12 is not a
lot of money, and, and I don't
think we're going to be seeing
people with 4-year degrees.
Doing this work by any means.
Maybe you might have 1 or 2.
But I think it's important that
we do.
Map out our workforce to see.
Who, who actually is applying
for um and maybe, and I don't
know this industry well, uh,
Senator or Megan, maybe you guys
do better, but.
You know, there is room for
mobility in these companies.
Uh, as well
You know, we all start at the
bottom and work our way up.
But
Understanding the workforce.
We'll help you understand the
problem. I, I hope you agree
with that and I hope we can work
on an amendment to to do that.
So, thank you, Madam Chair I
yield.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Uh, we are in a due pass motion.
From Senator Pinto with a 2nd
from Senator Serio Lopez, and if
you could call the role, please.
Senator Block
I
boon.
Fast
Senator Charley
Gallegos
And Nova, yes.
Pinto
Scott.
Centerio Lopez.
Yes, Senator Hickey, yes.
Senator Boon.
No
And I Lopez, yes.
My vote is 7 to 3. We have a due
pass motion.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Campos, I don't.
OK.
Senator Campos is on his way
from finance.
All the committees are meeting,
so we have Senate Finance, we
have Senate Judiciary, we have
our committee.
So we're all doing the dance.
It's already begun.
So we'll give them a minute to
come.
Oh, there you are.
Come please join us.
Maybe Senator Campos brought us
some money.
Right, OK.
Era Campos, yeah, when you're
ready, please present your bill.
Senator Campos, if you'd like
to.
Begin your presentation, I
noticed you do have an
amendment.
Would you prefer to
Presented first and then we
address your amendment or did
you wanna?
Uh thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, possibly the, the best way
would be to go ahead and uh
Start out with the uh
With the bill and then go to the
amendment if uh if that would be
OK? Sure, that'll be fine. OK.
Thank you.
So, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, in essence, uh,
Senate Bill 113, uh, proposes to
extend the life of 5 of the uh.
Words pursuant to the provisions
of the Sunset Act.
Each of the following boards and
commissions would be extended by
6 years should this bill be
enacted, uh, the Board of
barbers and uh cosmetologists,
board of nursing home
administrators, board of
landscape architects, water
quality control commission and
coal surface Mining Commission,
a specifically Senate Bill 113
amends state law to provide a
new sunset date.
Of July 1st, 2031 for the
following uh boards and
commissions, and I've already
gone through those basically,
uh, but along with that, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
this bill is one that we worked
on through the legislative
finance Committee throughout the
uh uh the interim, and again,
that's basically what the bill
does, and then at your
convenience, uh, Madam Chair,
I'm ready to go and also talk
about the amendment.
Um, Senator Campos, thank you.
Why don't we go ahead and adopt
the amendment because I think
there are some important date
changes on this.
Thank you for purposes of
discussion, I will move.
Um, Amendment number 12 number
is 230.
596.1.
Oh, I, I'll move it to Senate
Bill 113, uh, with a second from
Senator Serio Lopez.
Senator Campos, if you would uh
explain your amendment. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee in
essence, what this does is this
extends uh the.
Life, if you will, of these
particular uh boards and
commissions that I just
described, uh, by another 5
years and in terms of that, uh,
what it does is on page 1 line
19, strike 2031, and insert in
lieu thereof uh 2035.
And then basically, uh, on page
1 line 21, strike 2032 and
insert in lieu thereof.
2036 and on line 22 strike 2032
and insert in lieu thereof 2036.
So as I go down that, uh, the
list there, uh, Madam Chair
members of the committee in
essence with this amendment
would do, it extends again the
life of the uh particular boards
and commissions that we're
talking about and that's what
the amendment would do and uh
Madam Chair, if I may, I also
have an expert.
Uh, I'd ask him to identify
himself and then help me to, uh,
uh, also explain to the
committee, uh, the edification
in terms of why we're looking to
try to uh extend, if you will,
the life of these committees
from uh the original dates that
were proposed to know the
extended dates. So with that,
Madam Chair, uh, at your, uh,
Convenience we're ready to go
ahead and possibly have
additional statements made and
then we're available for
questions on the amendment.
Would you like to say a few
words, please. Um, sure, thank
you. Um, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Robert Loftus. I'm a licensed
landscape architect who is also
the um chair of the New Mexico
Board of Landscape architects.
Um, when we talk about landscape
architecture and licensure we're
talking about uh large scale
public facilities, capital
outlay type projects, plazas,
memorials, uh, athletic
complexes, places where the,
the, the um
public goes to recreate and
things like that and
That work requires a licensed
individual to perform the work.
So there's um examples of RFPs
and things like that from very
small municipalities up to our
bigger cities, universities,
school districts, uh, everyone
in between requiring licensure.
So, uh, every 6 years, the fate
of the landscape architecture
profession, uh, comes up and
it's very disruptive um to the
work that we do, uh, to have to
come and sort of explain and,
and hope that we can continue to
improve the quality of life of
New Mexicans on our projects.
Um, RLD staff, um, are great
folks at RLD. They also um are
very busy and sometimes um
understaffed and we just feel
like this is a um way to reduce
that uh burden on the state
government, reduce the burden on
the profession and space that
out a little bit for us. We
understand the point of sunset
and, and respect that. Um, but
we also um feel like as a
profession that's been licensed
since 19.
78 and has only grown in um the
type of work that we do that um
a little bit longer of a period
is, is, uh, would work just to
manages
to go with the LFC uh sunset
subcommittee, uh, all of these,
uh, particular, uh, groups or
unanimously accepted, if you
will, for a recommendation to
continue to uh go for the next
several years, but along with
this amendment, as I started to
visit with.
Uh, different members of the
different organizations that are
here within the sunset group,
uh.
Part of the indication was,
we're just getting started, uh,
then from there we're up for
another review, uh, and as we
deal with it right now, they're
over 370 boards and commissions,
of which 72 requires Senate
confirmation and again what
we're looking to do with this
amendment is to go from the uh 6
years to 10 years to allow those
boards and commissions to
effectively carry out their
assigned tasks while still
providing oversight to ensure
they remain beneficial to the.
State
And then lastly, Madam Chair,
members of the committee in
terms of that, if there is one
of these organizations that is
not in compliance, of course, as
we deal with that, um,
Then, then, uh, we would also
consider, if you will, uh, the
non-renewal and uh and stop, if
you will, uh, that particular
sanctioning.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Senator, on the
amendment, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in support or in opposition?
Zan, is there any support or
opposition for the amendment?
Did they wish to say you.
OK, this is in support of the
amendment, um, Senate Bill 13,
Abby Feldman.
Hi, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. OK, thank
you. My name is Abby Feldman.
Thank you for your time. I'm a
professional landscape architect
in Santa Fe, and I'm the
secretary for the New Mexico
Association of Landscape
Architecture. I'm in favor of
this bill and the amendment to
extend the duration of the
sunset. This is a huge help to
extend the duration from 6 to 10
years for us as a small
nonprofit run by volunteers.
It's a big strain on us to hire
a lobbyist and have to take
precious time away from
work to make sure our licensure
um board is protected. So, um,
appreciate your time and thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you.
No one in opposition?
OK.
So on the amendment, uh, any
questions or comments from
committee members? See none?
OK, there's a motion then for a
due pass from Senator Pinto, 2nd
from the chair. Is there any
opposition to the amendment?
Senator Scott.
Why don't you go ahead and call
the roll just to make sure.
Center block.
boon
Yes.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos.
And her nova.
Senator Pinto
Center's got
Inner city of Lopez, yes.
or a hickey. Yes. Senor Lopez.
Yes, your bill has been amended,
Senator. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and of course we're
available for questions
regarding the bill itself.
Thank you. So now we'll go back.
To Senate Bill 113 as amended.
Is there anyone else in the
audience who's in support of the
bill as it's been amended.
Yes, would you like to stand and
Identify yourself and say a few
words, please. There's a
microphone here.
Oh, there you go. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Bill Brancard. I'm a public
member of the New Mexico Water
Quality Control Commission and
stand in support of this
legislation as amended, and I'm
also available for any questions
you might have about the
commission.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone in opposition.
Zenon, is there anyone on Zoom?
OK.
Miss Feldman was in favor of
both, so she did make that.
No.
Hey, is there, are there any
questions or comments from
committee members on Senate Bill
113 as amended.
Motion for a due pass from
Senator Pinto with the second
from.
Senator Hickey.
I want to do a second, OK.
If you could, uh, any other
questions or comments, you know,
if you could call the roll
please.
Senator Block
I
Senator boon.
Yes
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Gallegos.
And her novapinto.
The nurse got.
Center Cio Lopez, yes, Senator
Hickey. Yes, Senor Lopez.
Yes.
And by a vote of.
9 to 1, you have a due pass
recommendation, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Bergman.
I know you were here.
And this is for Senate Bill 84.
Sharing a certain CYFD
information.
Um, good afternoon and please
proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I do
have an expert who's on Zoom.
It's Sarah Cracker.
I think this committee is
familiar with this.
Thanks.
I'll do a quick intro and then
I'll let Miss Cracker speak, and
then we also have an amendment.
So Senate Bill 184.
Is addressing
CYFD issues that we've heard a
lot about.
Child abuse and neglect is a
significant social health and
economic problem impacting
families in our communities in
New Mexico we hear often about
CYFD failures not in transparent
reports from agencies from the
agency.
Striving to do better for our
kids, but in media reports about
a child's death.
Or the lawsuit holding the
agency accountable.
Our New Mexico communities in my
constituents are asking for
changes to our child welfare
system to keep our kids safe.
And this legislative body has
already shown strong desire to
make real differences in our
kids, our kids' lives this
session.
The bill before you today will
change the course of CYFD
secrecy, while balancing the
clear need to protect the
personal identifying information
of families and children
consistent with the
long-standing principles of the
child's best interest.
These changes are consistent
with federal requirements for
confidentiality.
SB 84 was drafted on model
legislation, a compilation of
the best of what other states
already have in place.
And if passed, it will represent
a gold standard in child welfare
confidentiality statutes.
This bill also brings existing
statute, the existing statute
into compliance with federal
law, clarifies vague and
ambiguous language and increases
transparency and access.
The Bill is also seeking to make
the confidentiality code
constitutional.
And with that, I'll ask Miss
Cracker to see a few additional
awards.
Thank you. Are you able to hear
me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Sarah Kreka, I am happy to, to
be before you today um in
support of SB 84. I am before
you today as a zealous advocate
on behalf of the children I
represent in foster care
currently, and the ones who have
presented since I began as an
advocate in 2001.
I'm also here as a council in
civil rights lawsuits, both past
and present, on behalf of
children and the estates of
children wrongfully killed under
the agencies's watch.
These are deaths that should not
have occurred, and these stories
deserve to be told so that they
are never repeated.
The secrecy that has long
shrouded our child abuse and
neglect cases has created a
breeding ground for agency
corruption.
Although this confidentiality
statute, which we are asking
this legislative body to amend
today was never intended to
shield the agency from scrutiny
over its wrongdoing.
From scrutiny of its employees'
actions. That is precisely how
it has been used for decades,
including in many of my cases
representing children in
custody. I have been blocked
from visiting my client who was
forced to sleep on the office
floor because of
confidentiality. I have been
refused relevant documentation
in my client's cases, including
employee emails about my
client's case that goes straight
to the heart of agency decision
making about a child's life
because of confidentiality.
The code has been used as a
spear and as a shield with
zealous advocates like me, who
want to get to the bottom of why
the agency is making the
decisions it makes. In many
cases abusing its significant
power.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this was never the
intended purpose of this code.
The sole intended purpose was to
protect our families and
children from the stigma of
system contact. This stigma is
real, and SB 84 continues to
uphold that principle,
protecting families and personal
identifying information in its
provisions. What SB 84 does is
move us away from this outdated
form of child welfare
confidentiality. This code was
drafted and enacted.
in 1993 with relatively few
changes.
This change, this SB 84 will
bring us much closer to national
standards. It was based on model
legislation, it will be the gold
standard in confidentiality and
child welfare cases.
And it promises sunshine on the
inner workings of an agency
where all we are all desperate
to watchdog but cannot because
of the closed system.
If we don't open up and expose
the agency actions.
We will continue to see the same
shocking and gruesome stories in
the news, but they're not
stories.
They are human souls, families
that have been destroyed. How
many times do we hear on the
news about a child death on
CYFD's watch that sounds exactly
like one we've all heard before.
I've been asked by a longtime
print reporter, why their work
could possibly continue to make
a difference when it feels like
they could write the exact same
story today they wrote a decade
ago, only changing the child's
name.
Or an assistant district
attorney who prosecutes the
parents alleged to have murdered
their children or physically
harmed them, who calls me to
ask,
How on earth CYFD could possibly
refuse to share evidence with
her office or block a CYFD
worker from testifying in the
criminal prosecution under the
guise of confidentiality.
Those of us outside the child
welfare system rarely see the
inner workings and therefore
cannot responsibly address
system reform. We can't fix what
we can't see.
And worse, the system is
structured to self-preserve, and
when things go wrong, it's
victims are the abuse and
neglected children who have no
voice.
In the death of James Dunkley
Cruz, a case where I served as
one of plaintiffs counsel in the
civil rights lawsuit against
CYFD. We aim to expose the
agency's role in knowingly
sending him home to the abusers
he named, even though he was 4
years old, and in the 15th open
investigation during his life.
But CYFD under the current
confidentiality code claimed
statutory privilege of the
critical incident review memo.
This is the memo that the agency
creates of its internal
investigation into system
failures.
And that it was specific to the
failures resulting in this 4
year old little boy's death.
This is a, this memo, it occurs
in each and every critical
incident.
And it discusses violations of
agency policy and worker best
practices. The agency refused to
share this memo with the court
or with us after even though the
workers in the case knowingly
wiped the phone and laptop of
all evidence the primary
investigator had collected the
very week they learned of
James's death.
The super supervisor had even
texted on a personal phone, we
are going to be deposed. Proof
that he knew there could be a
lawsuit exposing their mistakes.
In our civil rights lawsuit to
expose what CYFD did wrong, the
agency used the very same
confidentiality code we're
asking you to vote to amend
today, to shield its wrongdoing.
SB 84 makes it much harder for
CYFD to avoid answering to the
public regarding its own
actions.
Which were never
It was never intended to shield.
The provisions at page 17 of SB
84 do just that.
It's important to note that this
practice of shielding the
critical incident review memo in
the Dunkley lawsuit is not an
isolated practice. I've spoken
to other attorneys who primarily
sue CYFDE in wrongful death and
civil rights lawsuits, all of
whom report the agency's regular
practice of refu refusing to
provide critical incident memos
to them or to the families.
I'm happy to provide any member
of this committee with a copy of
my motion to compel production
of the Dunkley Critical Incident
Review, which is public record
and which lays out the numerous
violations of law and ethics,
the agency engaged in in that
case, relying on this
confidentiality code to hide
from public and even the court
scrutiny in a civil rights
lawsuit.
The provisions at page 13 and
15, also increase the
information available to foster
parents and families who are
caring for our children in
foster care, as well as the
parents of accused that are
accused by CYFD of wrongdoing.
I've heard from countless
relative caregivers and parents,
two parents whose children were
removed from their custody,
reached out to me just last
week. They feel retaliated
against by the agency for
challenging agency decisions.
This bill not only forces the
agency to share relevant
information about the child with
the adults providing their care.
It allows those adults who are
so often forced into an
adversarial role with the
agency.
Access to information about the
child and the agency's actions.
With that, I stand for
questions, and I refer back to
the bill sponsor, Senator
Bergmans. Thank you.
Thank you. I.
It does the committee have a
copy of the amendment and can we
move it for discussion?
Um
That's what I was gonna ask, are
you finished with your
presentation? Yes, there was no
signature on the amendments, so
is this your amendment? Yes. OK.
Right.
Thank you.
So for purposes of discussion.
Um, a motion by Senator San
Lopez and the chair will second
it.
If you would like to walk us
through your amendment, please.
Yes, I will give you a quick top
line overview and I'll have Miss
Kraka go through it in more
detail, but basically these
changes came about after we
reviewed.
The bill in more detail with
Senator Duha, who is the lead
sponsor also.
And the drafter, a lot of them
are technical.
And further
Explained or compliment.
The changes that match the
federal requirements.
And I'll let Miss Kracka
elaborate. Miss Kreka.
Thank you. Sorry, I have to wait
to be unmuted. I appreciate
that. Um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, as Senator
Bergman's noted, the changes are
to create consistency across the
code. This is an amendment to
the Children's code, um, so
consistency in terminology. I
think it also made clear that
personal personal identifier
information um is consistent
with the federal law, CAPTA.
So, um, for example, on page 2
of the amendments.
Paragraph 8.
directs that on page 17,
striking lines 13 through 16 and
inserting in lieu thereof.
Near fatality.
And personal identifier
information definitions.
Those would be consistent with
the CATA requirements.
I think the paragraphs 9, 10,
and 11.
Or just to create consistency
throughout using fatality
instead of the word death.
Recommendation at paragraph 12.
Sorry if I'm going too quickly.
Go to page 20.
I will turn there myself,
recommending that at line 7,
We strike the word proceeding
and insert.
Prosecution
Giving clarification there on
the intent.
And then recommendation in
paragraph 14 at page 3 of the
amendment.
directs at page 2013.
To strike the period and in
insert instead language in the
case of a near fatality,
personal identifier information
for the child, parent, guardian,
resource parent, and any, any
other child living in the home.
And with that, I, I had a lot
of.
Fortunately or unfortunately
experienced in in towing this
line under the current version
of the confidentiality code
during the pendency of the civil
rights lawsuit in the Dunkley
matter, because there was so
much publicly available
information, um, because of the
criminal lawsuit, which predated
by
Um, well, the public media
reporting and then the criminal
prosecution, which predated the
civil rights lawsuit. There was
a lot of information in the
public domain already. So I'm,
I'm happy to answer specific
questions regarding
That area of SB 84.
Madam Chair.
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Um, I would like to make note
that.
This is a pretty extensive
amendment.
And what I, my, my style has
been
Maybe not here is the chair of
this committee, but in a
previous committee is to have a
committee substitute.
Um, because this is pretty
extensive to go through.
Um, not out of disrespect to
you, Senator Duha or um Miss
Cracker, but
It makes it a little bit hard to
track.
Um
So, um.
Even to try and go back and
forth at this time and strike
and such, it would be much
cleaner in a committee
substitute.
So, um,
Mm
I mean, we can have a discussion
on it, but it's a bit difficult
to track.
Um, this is a pretty heavy
subject, and I know that.
Um, I'd like for us to be able
to to kind of go through it
clean.
Um, at this point in time, so,
um.
We can have a discussion. I'd
like to go ahead and go to the
audience to take those in favor
and opposition and go go to
those on the web.
But again, my, my suggestion is
that this would be put into a
committee substitute.
So, um, let's at least go
through part of the discussion
on it.
Um, we'll go to the audience.
I'm sorry, is that the end of
your presentation? My apologies.
Yes. OK. Thank you. We'll go to
the audience. Is there anyone
here?
Well
In support of the amendment.
Yes, please. If you'd like to
stand up.
And uh
Introduce yourself and your
statement, please. Thank you.
Thank you, committee chair and
members. My name is Marilyn
Beck. Um, we have been in
support of this bill, again, as
both of the experts stated, um,
the 10th Circuit judicial
Federal Court, um, identified
that a constitutional clause
like ours is likely
unconstitutional. The district
attorney, the AG, there is
actually a similar lawsuit that
has deemed our confidentiality
clause as it exists
unconstitutional. So anything we
can do to bring our
confidentiality clause in the
children's.
code up to amendment, the
confidentiality clause exists to
protect the children and the
families, not the department,
and I stand in strong support of
the amendment and the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support of the amendment.
Anyone in office of.
Oh, OK, all right.
Anyone in opposition to the
amendment.
Online
And again, this is on the
amendment.
And
Miss Endicott Pinones is, are
you?
Testifying in favor of the
amendment.
Um, I can testify as to the
whole, um, as to the whole bill.
I will hold off till then. Thank
you. OK, all right.
We're just on the amendment
right now.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
On Zoom? No? OK.
Um
We'll go and see if there are
any questions from committee
members on the amendment, but
again,
Um
I prefer to have this in the
committee substitute because
it's very hard for us to do the,
the comparison.
And I'm gonna make a decision.
Um, I think I would prefer that
you and Senator Do take this
back and produce a committee
substitute for us.
And we're gonna hold off on this
discussion until our next
committee meeting first on the
agenda.
Because it's just much easier to
track than having to go back and
not being able to.
really clearly see the
differences.
So, I'm gonna ask him if
committee will indulge me.
Um, please take it back and then
have it done in a committee
substitute.
And you'll be first on the
agenda for Wednesday.
But we won't go back.
Um
We'll just, we'll just proceed
from there because we have,
we're not going to adopt the
amendment at this point.
It's just a bit difficult.
So, we'll hold off and then
we'll come back and kind of
start over with the new
committee substitute and proceed
from there. Sure, that sounds
fine. OK. Thank you.
And it's just my style, but it's
much easier.
Um, and then some other
committees you'll find similar
to that, senator. It's just some
of the styles to, to keep clear.
And clean cause even if you go
to the floor with some of these
different amendments and such,
it tracks really hard.
And we do real time amendments,
um, for that, but it's just
cleaner and clearer.
OK, thank you, Senator Hickey.
Adam Chair and Senator, um, and
going back and redoing uh for a
sub.
If there's any possibility that
that could be submitted to the
committee before the next
meeting because it is, it is a
very weighty bill. In other
words, could, could you get it
to us by Wednesday morning or
late Tuesday. It has to be to us
tomorrow. Yeah,
most of the, most of the changes
it does look complicated, most
of them are fairly simple and
are wording changes having two
additional insertions.
So I think the draft will
definitely be able to get it
done
by tomorrow so hard. I mean, but
at least you produce a clean
substitute for us by tomorrow,
OK.
Thank you and I appreciate the
indulgence. Thank you.
So Senate Bill 104.
And I know Senator Trujillo, I
think, is in finance, if I'm
correct.
Senator Sidil Lopez, you are the
co-sponsor. Go ahead.
This will be on Senate Bill 104.
Audiology and speech language
compact.
So Senator Trujillo, as you
know, has been the director of
the of the licensing.
Uh, what is it?
RLD RLD she has been doing that
and um.
What happened this summer is we,
of course, as you know in
legislative Health and Human
Services have been talking a lot
about the shortages we have and
the compacts are necessary, so
Senator Trujillo and I talked
about it. She had been elected
in the primary and had no
opposition in the general, so I
opened the file for her, um, so
that she could work on it, um.
Before she actually got elected,
which simply required one vote
since she had no opposition and
so that's how I kind of got
involved in this, and Senator
Trujillo, um,
Asked me to start this, and I
hope I haven't texted, but I
hope somebody has texted her
this stuff in the finance, she
has a bill that she needs to
vote on, so she's gonna be here
as soon as she can.
Um, so, basically this is a pro
a proposition to enter New
Mexico into the audiology and
speech language pathology
interstate compact.
Um, I will call it the ASLP
compact for um, for reference
and basically uh what we're
trying to do is to allow and and
this is especially important for
deaf and hard of hearing, um,
individuals, but it allows for.
Um, people from other states to
be able to practice in New
Mexico as long as the state has
their licensed in a compact
state and vice versa. People in
New Mexico could practice in a
member of the compact state and
as you can imagine, one of the
things I like about this bill,
it also provides for telehealth.
Um, practice.
Without having to go through so
many hoops, um, and we do have a
shortage of audiologists and
speech language pathologists
just like in many special
specialties. I have
onlinehaliulfis, who is online
and she is the lawyer for the
compact commission as an expert,
and I also have Doctor Michael
Camplin, who is a member of the
board, the um.
Yeah, the licensure board.
Um, and I will turn it over to
Doctor Kaplan to say a few
words.
Uh,
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Doctor
Michael Kaplan. I'm a speech
language pathologist. I'm the
vice chair of the speech
language pathology audiology,
and hearing aid dispensing
practices board, um, we very
much are in favor of this, of
this bill of the interstate
compact, there are currently 34
states and one territory that
have already adopted the
interstate compact. And so what
this would
New Mexico to do as
Senator Lopez mentioned is that
it will allow people in other
states who want to come to New
Mexico either and practice here
with their license, uh, and be
able to get licensed in New
Mexico without having to go
through the whole process
because they're licensed in
their home state, and then it
would also allow uh speech
language pathologists and
audiologists in New Mexico.
their license in their home
state to go to another state or
to provide services.
um
Through telehealth.
Um, all of our surrounding
states with the exception of
Texas are part of this
interstate compact Arizona is
currently has legislation now
that they're trying to pass as
well to join with the interstate
compact.
Um, and so we really want to
encourage this committee to help
us to uh
pass the interstate compact just
to let you know that um
Each language pathologists work
in all areas. They work from
birth through 100. I've done
that. Um.
Um, they work in the schools,
they work in the hospitals, they
work in rehab centers, they work
in medical clinics, and they
work with everything. They work
with Parkinson's, they work with
stroke, they work with head and
neck cancer. They work with
developmental disabilities, so
on and so forth. So, um,
But that
Thank you.
Um, bed and chair, and we have
the attorney and Naholiulus, who
was a lawyer for the compact
commission online. She's gonna
say a few brief words.
Yes, please.
Nahali Calfas.
Thank you so much, um, chair,
members of the committee. I
appreciate your time and the
opportunity to speak for you. I
am, uh, here as the attorney for
the audiology and speech
language pathology Interstate
Compact. I also work with the
Council of State governments.
This is a mutual recognition
model of interstate compacts,
which essentially as um Mr.
Kaplan spelled out, uh, allows
for the recognition of the
privilege to practice in states
so long
as you meet the compact
requirements, um, like many
other interstate compact
commissions. It has very
limited, uh, authority as a
commission, uh, New Mexico
retains the scope of practice
that all those practicing in New
Mexico either by telehealth or
in person must comply with uh
the commission does not have any
authority to craft rules that
would touch New Mexico's uh
licensing boards scope of
practice for
Uh, for audiologist and speech
language pathologist. Um, it
does provide for um an
opportunity for these licensees
to not just practice into New
Mexico, but also practice out of
New Mexico, which can provide a
recruitment and retention tool
for many states. We've heard
that from a number of
legislators in the states that
have enacted, uh, it also
already has a data system build
that is going on. We hope to
operationalize as a compact,
meaning we have to, uh, go live
and start issuing and accepting
privileges in the states that
have onboarded properly into the
data system for public
protection purposes. We will do
that hopefully sometime in
August. Um, the commission
itself has had literally
hundreds of meetings, um, with
regard to their rules committee.
They are uh finance committee,
their executive committee.
They're uh full commission.
they have a meeting, annual
business meeting every year.
They've put out several annual
reports, which you can see
online, uh, the, this
commission, like many other
commissions, has a lot of the
same transparency requirements
that are best practices in
states and administrative
procedures Acts and
administrative Practice Acts, so
you'll see notice and an
opportunity to be heard with
regard to any rulemaking, any
rules that are promulgated in
that narrow field of
implementing and administering
the.
Compact are voted on by the full
compact commission, um, and all
of the commission, uh, members
are seated delegates that are
duly appointed from their state
and sign, sign code of conducts
in order to serve in essentially
bring with them whatever state a
or immunity is afforded to them
by the state of New Mexico. Um,
I wanna be respectful of your
time, so I will stand for any
questions that you may.
have, and I again, I urge this
uh committee to please consider
passage of this bill that we
really hope to bring New Mexico
to the table on.
Thank you very much.
And Senator Trujillo, did you
wish to
Also add some words for the
bill.
Thank you, um, madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee for hearing this
important bill. I do want to
point out just a couple of
things we talked extensively
yesterday about compacts. I
think you all have a pretty good
idea as to what a compact does,
um, what I wanna let you know is
that there's currently 34 states
and um one territory that have
enacted this compact
legislation. The caveat with
that is that it wasn't until
2020 that this.
Compact actually came into
force, and that's because it
required 10 states to become a
member before it could actually
become a functional compact.
It also has not begun to issue
compact licenses, and the reason
is because that the commission
had to get together, remember I
talked yesterday about how long
it takes for that process to
happen. The commission has been
working diligently. They have to
develop a, a, um, a, a data, a
technology that would allow for
the information to be entered
would allow for disciplinary
action to be tracked and kept,
you know, monitored so that the.
Compact states would have access
to it. So their anticipating
that that data system will be
completed the summer of this
year. So it's likely that it
will begin to roll out lice
after year. They also, I looked
at their website again this
afternoon to get an idea as to
what the cost was because when I
looked at it earlier, they
didn't have a cost yet. They
still do not as a commission
have not determined what that.
cost would be for the license.
So there are some unanswered
questions for this, and this is
one of those fairly new compact
that are beginning to roll out
and um with that, Madam Chair, I
think that's enough.
OK. Thank you.
Um, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support.
Of this pleasure?
If you would, um.
You stand in the middle and
identify yourself and your
statement.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Marcus Luhanna. I work
with Think New Mexico. We're a
nonprofit. We sent each of you
the report on how we hope to
address the healthcare shortage.
Uh, the interstate compacts were
one of those uh suggestions. We
feel that uh joining the
contacts would be the most
impactful thing that this
legislature could do this year.
Uh, in order to address our
shortage. We're not saying that
this is a silver bullet. It's
not, there's a lot of facets
that need to go into this. But
with 34 states already in this
compact, we feel that there's no
reason that we should be holding
this one up, um, the states have
the ability to leave at any
point in time. They're not
obligated to stay in and they've
seen that if it's not broke,
don't fix it. They haven't, they
haven't left, so, uh, we feel
that this is not the time to
fall behind the rest of the
pack, and we are strongly in
favor of the adoption of this
compact.
Thank you for your time.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Melissa
Salzar, director of boards and
commissions at the Regulation
and Licensing department. We do
not speak in favor or against
the proposed bill. We wish only
to point out that the operating
budget impact contained in RFIR
was not included in our current
submitted budget. Therefore, if
the bill is passed, ization or
appropriation will need to be
made to allow boards and
commission's division to carry
out the mandate required by the
bill. In addition, if the bill
is passed, we're requesting an
extension until January 1st,
2026 to effectuate the mandate.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sue Griffith. I am a
registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico's speech and hearing
association.
And this telehealth is really
important for our state,
especially when it comes to the
rural areas of our uh counties.
And as a former administrator of
a school.
We lacked speech.
Therapists all across our
district. And so this would be
so helpful for our educators and
for students and families that
are in our schools. So thank
you, we hope that you will
decide to pass this important
bill. Thank.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
See none will go to the zoo. Is
there anyone? Oh, I'm sorry.
Right
Um, we have
Uh, Adrian Gomez.
Good afternoon committee members
and Madam Chair, Adrian Gomez.
Uh, senior vice president of
communications for the
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
and I'm here to testify in
strong support of SB 104, um,
making it easier for licensed
providers and other states to
treat New Mexicans, be it in
person or in telehealth set in a
telehealth setting is a real way
to begin to get to get, to get
more New Mexicans the care they
need and address the lack of
providers here.
While at the same time
encouraging them to practice in.
Perhaps even move to our state.
The state gives up no oversight.
Preserving the regulatory
authority to protect public
health and safety through the
current system of state
licensure.
And, and with SB 104.
Compact, it's specifically
targets the audiology and speech
language pathologists who must
be degreed and licensed. The
chamber is pleased to support
this bill as it aims to bring
more care to New Mexicans, and
we ask you to
We ask you to vote to pass it.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. um, Kelly May
Douglas.
Madam Char, she was the expert
witness.
OK.
I had it was Nahali.
She's just there, uh, Kelly is
just there to answer questions.
Callie's another 10, OK. My
apologies, it wasn't written.
And then, OK, so.
Those, uh, Mr. Gomez was in
favor.
And then we do have one.
Not in favor
And that's uh Mr. Vargas.
Mr. Gomez already said his
testimony.
I was looking for not in favor
and I have Mr. Vargas, Vicente
Vargas.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Vicente
Vargas.
I'm the executive director for
the New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. I did have
my hand raised to support.
Um, uh, this, this, uh, piece of
legislation, so if I may, Madam
Chair, just want to express the
Support of the New Mexico Health
Care Association for this piece
of legislation, um, we represent
nursing facilities, assisted
living facilities, and
intermediate care facilities for
individuals with developmental
disabilities. Um, many of the
clients and residents, uh, in
those, uh, facilities rely on
the on um the care of
audiologists and speech language
therapists. If this bill will
open up the acts.
More access to that care, which
is vitally important, especially
in rural areas, um, that will,
that could take advantage of the
uh telehealth uh aspect of this
piece of legislation. For those
reasons, we uh stand in support
of this piece of legislation and
urge your support as well. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Vargas. My
apologies.
You testified in favor.
So with that, um.
Senator Trujillo, I know there's
a a couple of amendments and
would you like to start with
yours first?
Madam Chair.
Um, someone must have gotten
ahead of me. Yes, let's go ahead
and start with that.
I believe these are the
amendments that were added over
in the house or a similar bill
that is going, and do you have a
copy of this? I do not have it
in front of me.
Could we give her a copy?
And do members have a copy?
OK, you're just being handed
out. Sorry. I'm a little faster.
Just a little faster.
Patients.
Yeah.
So this one has your name on it,
Senator Trujillo, and it's
0.230.
273.1. Correct. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yes, and these are just
technical. All right, so.
Madam Chair, these have been,
these have been vetted and
approved through the national um
uh commission.
OK, so the chair will move for
purposes of discussion.
0.230273.1.
With a second from for purpose
discussion, Senator Hickey.
And
Did you want to just explain a
little bit.
Other than just technical
changes.
Literature here.
Pardon me, I'm sorry. Did you
want to explain a little bit or
is it just?
On, on the, uh, on your
amendment? Yeah, so, um, let's
look at page 3 line 23.
And where it says um.
After the comma.
23 after the comma insert
audiology licensing board.
So speech language pathology,
audiology licensing board, and
so that's what.
Yeah, it was amended to add that
in.
Again, these are, I, I, I think
they're self-explanatory, Madam
Chair, they're really just
technical. There's nothing
substage 8.
Line 9.
So we're striking, seeking
privilege.
The practice and it'll just say
an audiologist shall.
Meat again, it's just a
Technical fix on page 9.
Lines 13.
We're striking licensing board
because it's not called a
licensing board. It is, um, the
commission.
And then again on page 9 lines
23 and 24 were just striking,
seeking privilege to practice. I
appreciate the walkthrough.
Is there anyone in the audience
and support of the amendment.
Anyone in opposition of the
amendment.
Anyone on the web?
No
Neither in for or against.
These are just technical
changes.
For the amendment to Senate Bill
104.
move.
All right, I.
I'm sorry.
Oh
Your seconding?
OK, there's a motion, a formal
motion.
Thank you from Senator Hickey
with a second from Senator
Silvio Lopez.
Call the roll, please.
Senator B block.
Hi
In our boon. Yes, Senator
Charlie.
And our Gallegos.
And nova.
Pinto
The nurse got
Serio Lopez, yes,
Senator Hickey.
Sen Lopez.
Yes
OK, we've adopted that
amendment.
And then we have another
amendment, which is mine.
Do you have a copy?
Of this one?
OK, it's coming.
This one will be similar to the
amendment I proposed yesterday
to the compact yesterday.
qualified immunity.
So I will move for purposes of
discussion.
23
1313.1.
And a second from Senator Pinto
just for purposes of discussion.
And uh I propose this amendment,
senator against similar to
yesterday's conversation about
qualified immunity.
It is state law and um.
I'm again.
We were all here yesterday with
the discussion, so.
Madam Chair, I'm happy to accept
this as a friendly amendment. We
discussed it and uh we said well
let's give judiciary something
to do, but you are um.
Basically doing the work for
them, so thank you Madam Chair,
we accepted as a friendly
amendment. Well, thank you. I
sat on judiciary for 25 years.
So I've been schooled quite
well.
Um, that's obvious. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and we're happy to
accept it as a friendly
amendment.
OK, thank you.
Um, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support of this amendment?
Anyone in opposition?
Anyone on nope, OK.
And uh
Her purposes of discussion, um,
is there, are there any comments
from committee members?
See now.
There's a motion for a due pass.
Um
Thank you, Senator Pinto, with a
second from the chair.
Any comments otherwise? If not,
if you could call the role,
please.
in a block.
boon.
No. Senator Charlie.
Senor Gallegosen Nava.
Pinto.
The nurse got
Center Lopez.
Uh, yes.
Hickey.
And I love it. Yes.
So your bill has been amended
twice, senator.
And with that, um, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members. Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
we're bringing the billboard.
We talked about the compacts the
other day.
Um, one of the things that
occurred to me after.
was
Where the money goes.
So
If the surrounding states or
whoever is a member of the
compact.
Assumption is rendered.
Whatever it costs.
That is we pay.
Or put on record
Uh, yes, madam Chair, uh, if the
insurance covers it, then the
insurance would pay if it's
being privately if if they're
doing it without insurance, they
would pay the provider, so
whoever the provider is would be
paid.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so that state would
reap the income and also the
taxpayer.
And the reason I say you don't
know who's gonna be a member of
this compact.
That, um
For instance, for example,
California has one of the
highest rates.
So if this doctor is in
California.
Rendering the service.
Or someone in New Mexico.
We will pay that higher rate.
Uh, Madam Chair, that's correct
if the insurance would, would
cover it or if the individual
wants to pay it outside of
insurance, but I also want to
note that providers in our state
who provide services to people
out of the state will also um.
Bring in the money to our state.
So it's
I don't know, we'll find out how
how it goes, um, but the idea to
me, one of the the strong points
about this is it really protects
people who need the specialized
service in our state.
Thank you Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
And
So a speech pathologist.
And this is where
Because of the location of my
state.
That
my students
We're not receiving.
In person
If they have an IEP.
And I had a real hard time
accepting that being at have a
speed.
That were students.
And then get essential that we
do everything we can.
Do have um
And it was, I, I, once I heard
that they were.
Um, this was over I was like,
it, it, it just blew my mind
like how.
Are we seeing that we really are
meeting the needs of our
students.
Especially with students I have
IEPs we're saying this is OK for
this to be provided to them.
Over.
Computer screen.
Um, man and share one of the
ideas of this is that.
New Mexico will be a more
attractive state for providers
to come to, um, if we're members
of the compact.
And because we're such a
beautiful state, um, if they're
members of of the compact, it
won't be so hard for them to
travel and some of the other
things that happen, especially
with people who provide services
in schools is they might come
for the the 9 months and then go
somewhere else for the 3 months.
So this is to provide providers
with flexibility and make our
state more attractive.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
I understand the shortage.
Um, and I understand that we're
trying to meet the needs of.
Others.
But this, um, after I thought
about where.
We're gonna put our money.
Um
You know, and knowing that we
have a budget.
these services.
Mm
How quickly will that be
depleted?
In which we don't really
of
Replenish our tax base.
For those that provide these.
But we're paying them out,
paying the time get some, you
know, in that sense.
But for
The qualifications for speech
pathologist.
Because of the location of my
schools.
If the other state does not have
any cultural.
training or any kind of um with
her.
Teacher licensure.
I find it hard to bring some
someone from another state.
Have them come across the state
lines into
One of my schools where my
demographic of my students.
The high
And then they don't really
understand.
The cultural aspects of.
The students they aren't
serving.
And it was, it took a bit for
the speech pathologist.
Um, you kind of get schooled in
that way at a BIE school.
Provide those services to our
students.
They felt like our students were
being very difficult.
But it was really that
understanding of.
A lot of what?
our students go through.
In these areas.
Um
I understand we're trying to
meet.
Something here, but I struggle
with um.
Some of those aspects of
We are paying
And
If we do this,
Um
How are we actually going to
understand, you know, the
shortage, but.
Trying to bring them to New
Mexico, especially if we're not
paying.
Accordingly,
Um
Then it seems like the short
will just um even greater.
Um, but for certain services, I
think they're has to be
exceptions that it has to be in
person, and we must make every
effort to do that.
Thank you, madam.
Um
Madam Chair, I think that that's
an excellent point, and I would
hope that the schools are able
to attract those people and uh
Doctor Kaplan also suggested he
had an answer to the IP question
as well.
I'll turn it over to him.
Madam Chair, um, and Senator
Pinto.
Senator, if you could just move
the microphone so that Doctor
Kaplan can be heard.
and senator,
um.
I, I'm not gonna disagree with
you. I've worked with the Native
American population for many
years. In fact, my doctoral
dissertation is on learning
styles in Native American
students, I should share it with
you.
But what I want to tell you is
that um,
Telehealth doesn't work for all
kids.
We know that speech pathologists
know that as well.
So if you have young kids,
elementary school age, IEP with
specific disabilities,
telehealth does not always work
with them. It doesn't work with
kindergarten kids. It doesn't
work with lower grade kids, it
doesn't work with kids with
specific behavioral or IEP
issues because they don't have
the ability to sit in front of
that screen or
Even 5 minutes, let alone 30
minutes to go through a session.
And so a lot of what happens
when we do telehealth with
younger kids, is that speech
pathologists spend the time
training the caregiver, training
the parents on how to assist
their children when they're at
home until they can get the
services in person. But there
are many IEPs that you'll know
when a child has an IEP
developed that will
say, yes, this child can benefit
from telehealth or no this child
needs actual one on one, and
then it's up to that school
district to make sure that the
speech pathologist is.
And Madam Chairman experience I
had about it was that the.
School district felt that.
They were applying it to all the
schools in their district. They
were not applying it
individually to the students.
And it's
yeah, it was.
So
Yeah, but
I understand. Thank you.
I've been
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair, and we
appreciate highlighting that
problem.
OK, thank you.
This
Other questions?
See no other question.
Senator Hickey.
Just for clarity's sake, um.
The we're, we're on the bill, is
that right?
Or we, OK.
And in the bill,
Um
And
Section 10.
Where we eliminated
believe
In her amendment.
Um
I'm trying, I got so many my
bill.
Right, oh, here's yours.
I'm
Right.
The qualified immunity, page 27.
5
Right. OK, so that takes out
section 10A.
Um
But then it goes on in 10B.
As the commission shall defend
any member, officer, executive
director employees, etc.
Um, and the commission shall
indemnify and hold harmless.
Uh, any member officer executive
director of the commission. I'm
assuming basically that's saying
you've got
Uh, board liability insurance.
Yes, ma'am.
OK.
So that
That as such, then
That does cover them.
So, whereas in the doctor's
bill, they didn't have that.
I mean, they have, I'm sure they
have the officers.
board liability.
as well.
Um, but this is just more
explicit, is that correct?
Madam Chair and senator.
Uh, yes, madam Chair, this is,
this is more explicit, but as I
was trying to explain to you
offline yesterday, they would
probably be covered with a or
have it immunity under our
existing Tort Claims Act.
Um, but, um.
And that's something that will
probably be clarified in
judiciary, um, so I would just
leave that.
OK.
Mm
Thank you very much.
Thank you, man.
No, thank you.
We did the first leg of work for
judiciary now they'll they'll
they'll always do exactly they
they always have something to do
and they'll they'll have that.
Exactly.
OK, are there any other
questions?
See none?
What is the will of the
committee, Madam Chair, I move a
do pass a due pass from Senator
Sadil Lopez with a second from
Senator Hickey.
And if you could call the roll
please.
Senator B block.
No, to explain my vote.
in her boon.
No
Senator Charlie, yes.
Senor Gallego
Yes, Senator Pinto.
Scott
Serio Lopez, yes, a hickey. Yes,
and her Lopez.
Yes.
By a vote of 6 to 3, you have a
Du pass recommendation.
And then a sedator, oh, I'm
sorry.
Senator Block, my apologies.
I wanted to explain your vote,
that's OK. Um.
Listen, um
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
support this, but I wanna see
what comes out of the judiciary
when it gets to the floor to
take a better, a better look at
it, but right now I, I, I just
can't support it with the
amendments, but I'm gonna put my
faith in Senator Cervantes and
the judiciary to fix up some
stuff and, and, um.
And I hope the doc and and you
can come back before the floor
vote and.
Get me back on board.
Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you.
Thank you.
Our next, um,
Bill for consideration, it was
or is Senate Bill 120.
But in speaking with the
sponsor.
Um, he
It's going to take this
particular amendment that was
going to be proposed and also
put it into committee
substitute.
So that will be brought back for
our committee hearing on
Wednesday also.
We have one remaining.
A bill for Senate Bill 118,
Senator Stephanics.
Organ donor license box and
registry.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, this bill.
Originated out of the
legislative Health and Human
Services interim Committee.
And actually it was the
brainchild of Senator RTC Pino.
And I think it's pretty
straightforward.
It, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
It makes identical changes to 44
sections of state law, adding to
application and licensing forms.
A space to indicate if the
person applying or applying to
be licensed.
Wishes to be or is an anatomical
donor.
Of their entire body or part of
their body.
Um, Madam Chair, that we know
that there is a need.
Donners um.
Living
As well as after her death.
And so I would stand for
questions, support, opposition.
Thank you, Senator.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
Senate Bill 118.
Yes, please, and if you would
stand identify yourself and um.
Your statement, please.
Oh, Madam Chair, I'm Melissa
Salazar, director of boards and
commissions with regulation and
licensing.
Um, again, um, we don't speak in
favor against the proposed bill.
We only wish to point out that
the operating budget impact
contained in RFIR was not
included in our current
submitted budget.
Therefore, if the bill is passed
an authorization or
appropriation will need to be
made to allow boards and
commissions to carry out the
mandate required by. Thank you.
Anyone else in support?
Anyone in opposition?
Is there anyone on the web? No.
Neither for or against.
And with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senator Hickey.
Madam Chair and Senator, I
signed on to this bill because
it's just great common sense.
I hope that my colleagues do it.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Senator Stefani for bringing it
forward. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. Any other thing none?
I do
Thank you. There's a motion for
a due passed from Senator Savio
Lopez with the 2nd from Senator
Charlie.
If you could call the roll,
please.
Center block.
Senator Boone
Yes. Charlie, yes, Senator
Gallego, Senator Nova, yes.
Senator Pinto.
The nurse got
Yes.
And I saidio Lopez, yes, Senator
Hickey, and Lopez.
Yes.
You have a Du pass
recommendation, Senator, with
the 9 to 0. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you.
Have a good evening everybody.
We'll see you on Wednesday.
