Maria Supacia gracias.
Um
Before we
Before we begin, I'll ask our
secretary just to take roll and
make sure that we've established
a quorum, please.
Senator Block
Senator Boone, Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos Senator Nava
Senor Pinto Senator Scott.
Serio Lopez.
The hicky here Senor Lopez.
Here, we do have. So thank you
very much. And I appreciate
everybody's indulgence for
considering to wear a mask.
I've had some health issues and
I'm still immunocompromised.
So again, I thank you. And then
I know for committee members,
there's been some questions
about feeding the committee.
Um, this is one session that
we're gonna be a little bit
different than tradition.
Because of my immunocompromised
if we have food in the room,
we're eating and it just makes
it very difficult, um,
otherwise,
If you eat, then I have to leave
the room. And I'm just letting
committee know that's why.
We're not gonna have food this
session. I give a half hour in
between the floor and coming
here. So please have a sandwich
or something.
We'll figure as we move forward,
but
By tradition for the public,
usually we have dinner that's
brought in.
For the committee
Um, because we've been here
since 8 o'clock this morning.
For committees and such, so just
FYI but
This session because of my
health issues, um, we won't have
the traditional food brought in.
When we work um in the evening.
And it's my intent as the chair,
we're gonna work around till
about 8:30 tonight.
There'll be about 3 hours or so
for us to try and get through
the legislation.
I would ask committee members to
please be concise in your
questions.
As I've mentioned before, I
don't want to time anybody.
But if we have to in order to
move through the agenda.
Um, I, I, I will do that as the
prerogative of the chair.
So, just FYI.
Um, questions are good, but
again, please be pointed and
Uh, in your questions that are
being asked, and I just
appreciate the indulgence.
So with that
I'm gonna hand the chair over.
You
Senator Hickey, who serves as
vice chair because I'm
presenting the bill tonight.
Senate Bill 322.
Strip searches and cameras.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam chair, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I will say that these new chairs
are the chairs that we've had in
previous sessions for those of
you who are new, the chairs were
a little bit.
Stiff.
So we're doing good this time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, members of
the committee.
I am here in front of you, along
with my expert witness.
For Senate Bill 322.
And Senate Bill 322.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Has come about because of some.
Concerns, issues, reality of
what's been happening.
Now for one location that I
know, um, for our youth services
center in Bernao County, which
is where um the juveniles.
Juveniles who are taken there if
they've had an infraction of
some sort.
Mr. Chair, um, with the law and
whatever it may be.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I had an opportunity
for a visit, a tour.
Of the Services Center last
summer.
I was there along with um.
Senator Tip Pino, who's now
retired.
Um, along with former county
manager Julie Baca.
And La Placita executive
director, founder, um, Albino
Garcia.
And we were there uh to uh take
a tour of the youth services
center.
And as we took a tour, Mister
Chair.
Uh, information came to light um
about.
Several issues.
And we don't have time to go
into that.
But one of them
Um, is dealing with uh strip
searches that are taking place.
Um, within the youth services
center.
And I know it's not just in
Bernalillo County, Mr. Chair,
but at the other three centers
that we have in the state of New
Mexico.
And the discussion, um,
questions that we asked.
Leo County has a machine. I call
it a machine.
Um, that is supposed to, um.
Be able to kind of like what we
do when we go for to the
airplanes and you go through,
you know, TSA and such.
To see if there's any contraband
or such that the young person
may have the child.
But that machine's broken a lot.
So that's a question and a
concern.
So the other thing, Mr. Chair,
after we took that too as we
were taking the tour, we had a
chance to go see the bathrooms.
And as we walked into the
bathrooms, Mr. Chair, we noticed
there are cameras in there.
There are cameras in the
bathroom, but the children take
showers.
And
A concern, Mr. Chair.
And, you know, of course we have
uh the the males and the females
who take showers.
Uh, you know, they're recorded.
So what happens with that
recording?
Who's watching?
And if that recording is stored,
well, who goes back to look at
it?
So there's a lot of questions,
Mr. Chair, that we had concern
at that time.
And I, I share this because this
is the genesis of the bill that
we have here in front of the
committee today for
consideration.
So Mr. Chair, um,
Essentially what Senate Bill
322.
I, um, I would say putting some
guardrails around how strip
searches can be conducted.
There's accountability, there's
to be a lot of paperwork, yes,
but that's so that we know who
and where and what time.
Any of these strip searches have
been are being.
Uh, taken care of whatever you
want to terminology, Mr. Chair.
And also looking about uh
banning cameras in the showers.
So
One final thing before I turn
this over to my expert witness,
um, Miss Pachicha.
Uh, Mr. Chair because she also
has a little more information to
share and then we'll.
For questions, I talk with my
hands.
Um
Is the uh
I think I'll save that one.
We'll just wait as we get into
it a little bit more, but let me
just turn it over at this point.
Uh, to Miss Jerry Bachicha, and
if she could introduce herself
and then let her add a few words
for the introduction, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. um,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jerry
Pacia and uh thank you for
affording me the opportunity to
testify today, um, I'm here to
speak in support of this
critical legislation which seeks
to raise the standard for
conducting strip searches and
juvenile detention. Um, from
reasonable suspicion to probable
cause, that's the language being
changed in the bill.
Uh, through the bill, um.
My uh background.
Is, um, I have expertise and if
you're wondering about my
expertise, um, I was, I had
oversight.
Of the audits, the annual audits
of all the juvenile detention
centers in the state when I
worked for CYFD, um, for over 2
years and then I had almost 10
years in Burnalio County Youth
Services Center, um, as, uh, uh,
part of the administration
there, uh, where I did, I
actually brought in the Pria
federal standards at the time. I
was the pre coordinator. I
worked with.
the New Mexico Association, the
counties to develop sample
policies and practices for all
the juvenile detention centers
in the state as well as federal
lawyers who had expertise in
that area. Um, we also developed
the training for staff for all
the juvenile detention centers
in the state around Pria, which
is the prison rape Elimination
Act, and we also developed the
training which is part of the
federal law or
The staff or for the youth.
Um, so all of those pieces we
were the first detention center
in the state of New Mexico, the
juvenile detention center that
was certified, um, through the
PRA Federal auditors and have
since been certified again and
um actually Bernalillo County
has led historically led the
state juvenile detention centers
in uh conditions of confinement
improvement.
Um, which is necessary to reduce
crime in the state.
Currently strip searches are a
common practice in New Mexico's
juvenile detention facilities,
including the largest facility
as Senator Lopez said, um, which
is the youth services center,
which is the regional detention.
facility for the state. It
houses, in other words, it
houses youth from all over the
state. There are several rural
juvenile detention centers, um,
that are still are running at
this point as well.
So, um, despite the evidence
that um.
Strip searches are.
Ineffective in identifying
contraband.
Uh, the intrusive nature of
these searches can cause
significant psychological harm
to youth, many of whom have
already experienced trauma
before entering the system. We
are seeing more girls in our
juvenile detention centers and
those girls have a high amount
of um adverse childhood
experiences that include, uh,
sexual assault.
And uh physical assault, um, we
have done studies in our
detention centers around ACEs,
which is adverse childhood
experiences. We have a higher
than national average of the
youth in the detention centers,
uh, ACE scores.
Um, and this creates a lot of
trauma behavior and um it um
affects that youth throughout
their entire life. And um so
it's really important to create
an atmosphere where youth aren't
further traumatized, um, further
traumatized youth continuing the
juvenile justice system, um, can
end up in the adult.
Um, justice system, um, and can,
um.
You know, depend on our systems
for much longer in their lives,
um, our medical systems, our
substance use systems for a lot
longer, um, and the bottom line
is it cost the state more.
Um, rather than trying to
effectively intervene in their
trauma early on.
Um, by requiring um probable
cause this bill ensures that
strip searches occur only when
there is substantial factual
basis to believe a youth
possesses contraband.
Or possesses a legitimate
security threat and only after
less intrusive methods have been
attempted. The standard prevents
arbitrary and unjustified
searches, reducing the risk of
violating constitutional
protections.
Um, implementing a probable
cause requirement will have
several key benefits, one being
that uh the constitutional
protections for youth will be
aligned with the 4th.
Amendment
Um, and, um,
They will have the same due
process considerations as
adults, uh, ensuring searches
are justified and not conducted
indiscriminately. It will reduce
the legal liability for the
juvenile facilities themselves.
Um, it will decrease trauma and
improve rehabilitation outcomes.
And it will also enhance the
trust between the youth and the
facility staff, which makes the
youth more likely to engage in
rehabilitative programming.
This legislation is not about
compromising safety.
It is about ensuring that safety
measures are necessary
justified and implemented in a
way that respects the rights and
well-being of the youth in our
care.
I urged the committee to support
this bill, ensuring that New
Mexico leads the way in
protecting constitutional rights
and the well-being of justice
involved youth.
Thank you and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, do you want to, uh,
conclude with any further
comments, Mr. Chair, we're fine.
We'll stand for questions.
Very good. Uh, we will now go to
the audience, uh, those who are
in support of this bill.
OK, uh, we're going to limit it
to
Uh, we've got quite a few
online, so if you can sort
yourselves out, 5 people,
please.
And as you do.
Uh
Report the bill, uh, be mindful
of uh making your point
poignantly, that is like.
Really in a minute or so.
And um
Uh, that way they'll stick with
us a little bit better. Well,
thank you very much for
volunteering.
And it looks like we have our
group and we can go ahead.
Like you, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Rodrigo Rodriguez. I'm a
currently the director of the
Justice for Youth Community
Collaborative and also the
director of community organizing
for La Placita Institute.
I'm here today to urge you all
to vote yes on SB 322, our
community collaborative is made
up of 28 community organizations
working in and around the
juvenile and adult justice
systems.
Collectively, our organizations
serve more than 30,000 New
Mexicans every month with
re-entry services, mental health
care, job placement, education
resources, and other
opportunities. I also serve as
the co-chair of the conditions
of confinement slash deep end
committee for Bernalo County's
juvenile detention alternatives
initiative.
I'm here to ask you today to
vote yes on 322 to restore
dignity and privacy for our
children in detention.
Our organizations are part of
many national spaces pertaining
to juvenile justice that include
dozens of jurisdictions from all
over the country. No one I have
ever talked to.
Has ever heard of children being
videotaped in the showers as a
best practice. As far as we can
tell, Berne County is the only
jurisdiction in the country who
does it.
Couple that with the gross
overuse of strip searches in our
state's facilities.
And it gives the appearance that
children are being groomed,
sexually abused and exploited
inside of our state's juvenile
detention centers. Young people,
whether accused or convicted of
crimes, still have rights and
are deserving of dignity and
privacy. Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you Mr. Chair and the
committee. My name is Lauren
Gomez. I'm with the Southwest
Organizing Project from the
Youth Justice.
I'm here to uh ask that you
support and say yes to Bill 322,
the practice, I would say of uh
a video cameras.
It is archaic, but it isn't
because it's unheard of across
the nation.
Um, strip searches.
I'm probably one of 3 people
that I've been incarcerated, so
I'm gonna speak as an expert
witness on that.
They're, they're done
arbitrarily and often with
retaliatory measures when we're
speaking with children, we're
speaking about victims.
not only a of crimes, but um.
That they're, uh, then
re-victimize these practices,
and I hope that you'll.
Thank you, sir.
Representatives, my name is
Selina Guerrero. um, I represent
Save the Kids from incarceration
and Mills for Prisoners. This
bill is critical and important
at this time. We are one of the
only Bernalillo County is one of
the only institutions that has
this practice with juveniles.
Um, there's even adult systems
that are not subjecting adults
to this kind of a standard. It
is humiliating for youth to go
through this and thinking about
the vulnerable youth who are
just pubescent post.
incubescent who are having to
experience this by adults.
Everybody should be appalled
that adults are are in are
participating in this act with
youth, with children at these
ages.
This needs to, to end this
practice needs to end. Children
are being harmed through this
practice, and it's absolutely
punitive. They have not
recovered any contraband through
these searches. They are
completely arbitrary. We're
asking you to please support
this bill and end this practice
of harm to our children.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
senators. Uh.
My name is John Shepner. I'm a
lifelong New Mexican. I grew up
in Senator Trujillo's district
here in West Santa Fe.
And I live in San Antoinette
Cuda Lopez's district now. I've
been a lawyer for 35 years,
educated my whole life in New
Mexico of those 35 years, 25 of
them have been in the juvenile
justice system, the last 18.5 as
a hearing officer for the 2nd
judicial district court, where I
was the mental health
commissioner for the whole
county, and I was a juvenile
justice hearing officer, I've
heard thousands and thousands of
juvenile delinquency hearings,
detention hearings, pretrial
conferences, first appearances.
change of plea hearings, bench
trials, warrant hear hearings,
um, probation violation
hearings, treatment court
hearings, uh.
Drug court hearings and so in
all those things, I've had a
chance to talk to a lot of youth
and a lot of parents, one of
the.
One of the things about the
arbitrary nature about strip
searches is
Every time they had in Bernardo
County and every time they had a
meeting with their parents, they
would get strip searched even
though there were two guards
standing next to the parents and
the children. So that's not even
reasonable suspicion. It's not
probable cause. It's just, uh, I
think it was a way to to
minimize the amount of parent
visits, because I had children,
tell me, I don't, I, their
lawyers tell me, well, how come
you haven't talked to your mom
because she, because the child
canceled the visit with the
parents because they didn't want
to go through the indignity of
being strip searched after
talking to their parents.
I'd have moms crying to me in
front of me was as close as I am
to you all during the hearing
saying I haven't seen my child
in 3 months, and that's because
my child would cancel meetings
because of the nature of the
strip searches.
You know, 85% of the girls who
were in our detention center,
had suffered 7 of the adverse
childhood experiences that Ms.
Baica mentioned, and a lot of
them were domestic violence or
sexual abuse. So we have to take
that into consideration in being
able to get their emotional, OK,
and so on cameras, I, I sat on
bunches of committees with
judges from all over the
country, National Council,
Family and general court judges
and model site visits where I
talked to dozens and dozens of
judges. We're the only ones with
cameras.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Kat
Sanchez with Bold Futures. In
2018, our organization worked
tirelessly to carve out capital
outlay spending from er from
Bernalillo County legislators
towards the purchase of wands
for drug detection in Bernalillo
County's juvenile detention
center to limit strip searches
of incarcerated young people. We
collaborated with detention
center officials to explain to
legislators that strip searches
are not only intensely invasive,
but it's also uncomfortable for
detention employees to
performed those searches on
youth.
Strip searches as mentioned, can
traumatize a detainee or further
exacerbate pre-existing
psychological damage from
previous lived experiences.
We have also learned from
individuals as as uh previously
mentioned, um, from individuals
with lived experiences that some
in custody stay away from having
visits from their family or
attorneys because of not wanting
to go through the strip search
process. We urge to do pass for
SB 322.
Thank you very much.
From the audience that was uh
concise and impactful.
And online we have 4 individuals
starting with Laura Lynn.
By Lanta
And Tracy Chavez you're on deck.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Laura Lynn Violanta, and I'm the
co-executive director of New
Mexicoan. We're an organization
that partners with young people
impacted by foster care and
youth justice to lead positive
systems change. All members of
our community, including
children, should be treated with
dignity and respect, please vote
yes on Senate Bill 322. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next is Tracy Chavez
and Brandy Sail on deck. Good
evening, Mister Chair and
committee members. I am Tracy
Chavis, a member of Stronger
Together Never Alone and an
Impacted parent to express my
strong support for SB 322, the
dignity and youth detention
bill. This crucial piece of
legislation aims to limit the
use of stri searches and
prohibit the use of cameras and
showers and bathrooms within
detention facilities. These
measures are essentially
to protect the dignity and
privacy of detained youths
ensuring their basic human
rights are respected as an
impacted parent, my son
experienced the invasive and
humiliating practices, this bill
seeks to address. No child.
I should have to endure such
treatment. I urge you to support
SB 322 and help create a more
humane and respectful
environment for our youth in
detention. Thank you.
Thank you, Tracy, uh, Brandy
Sadil and
Southwest organizing project on
deck.
Brandy
Andy, can you hear us?
Yes, I apologize. Can you hear
me now? Yes.
OK, hi. Good, good evening, Mr.
Chair and members of the
community. My name is Brandy
Sidi.
Um, I am also an impacted
mother. I am speaking as a
member of Stronger Together,
Never alone to express my strong
support for SB 322. My son was
in the youth detention center
and
Experienced this traumatizing,
um,
The negative impact of the
Of the strip searches and I just
wanted to say I'm in strong
support of SB 322.
Thank you, Andy.
And southwest organizing
project.
Hello.
Hello. Yes, I can hear you. My
name is George Luhan. I'm the
executive director of Southwest
Organizing Project, we're a
member of the Community
collaborative that was.
Uh, described
Um, earlier by another speaker
and I really appreciate all the
comments. We are, we totally
support everything that was
shared from the sponsors, think
you're just centerator Lopez and
everyone else and um I think
after hearing that, hearing
about how uh the traumatic toll
it takes on children, hearing
about a little understanding of
the brain science behind why we
treat children the way that we
do and how it's best for the
future. A lot of us, uh, after
hearing that might be thinking
like who could be opposed to
something like SB 322?
Um, it seems like a pretty
obvious thing to pass. And uh I
just think it's a chance to for
some leadership from um our
representatives because
The fact is, not everyone is on
board and um for us in
Bernalillo County, we have our
own sheriff, John Allen in the
news saying that he intends to
make juvenile detention worse
and, uh, actively make it more
traumatic for children.
Um, so it's not, uh, unheard of
that we have leaders in the
county that actually want to
make the juvenile center worse.
Um, so this is a great
opportunity to hear from really
smart and brave leaders like you
all to uh counter that and say
that we intend to build a
brighter future for the kids in
New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, George. We have
anyone in the audience in
opposition.
We have anyone online in
opposition.
Hearing none, uh, Madam Chair,
any comments after the comments?
Oh, OK, we will then go to the
committee.
We have a motion for a due pass
in a second. Yes, question.
Yes, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam
Chair.
Right up that I have here says
that uh
Probable cause.
Is not
Normally the standard.
That is, uh.
That is recognized.
In detention centers.
Rather, it is.
Reasonable suspicion.
Which is
The rest of
In the rest of New Mexico.
Um
Does this mean a
As a search warrant required to
Exercise.
A probable cause search.
Mr. Chairman Mattinger.
I hear the expert see the expert
shaking his head no.
If I could, Mr. Chair, we also
have Mr. Shefner. He's was part
of a team effort, but is here so
Mr. Sheffner, and if you'd like
to.
to
Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott, no,
uh, no warrant would be
necessary, no judicial officer,
it would be a determination by
the people who work in the
facility.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator,
what, uh
But to what extent has
technology.
Sort of eliminated the need for
this.
Legislation, how many script
searches.
With the detention center do.
For example, in the last 6
months,
um, from some data that we
received from Miss Miss
Marcantel, who's the new
director for the youth Services
Center.
Um, there's numbers closer to
700 strip searches that were
done between the the months of.
Uh, June of 24 through October
24.
Just recently.
And apparently, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, if these are
Accomplished
Every time a parent or
Somebody visits the person in
detention.
So there's, there's multiple um
blanket policies.
Uh, especially when there's not
a backup or when the machinery
stops working.
So that could be um.
Any visitation with anybody from
the outside.
Any, uh, any time that a young
person leaves the detention
center, um uh let's say for, um,
uh, same sexual assault exam or
um other reasons that they might
leave the detention center, even
though that there's 2 employees
with them at all times and they
are often.
You know
Handcuffed or in a very, very
secure circumstances where
they're not, they're always in
direct line of sight.
Um, there's also, um, if a
pencil goes missing and um you
know, a classroom, then, um,
potentially that could turn into
a strip search search situation
or um all the youth.
That were involved in the school
at that time, um, I think that I
would like to point out and
thank you for this question
that, um.
Not all detention centers can
even afford this technology.
And I would urge, you know, the
committee in the future to think
about.
Um, making sure that the
detention centers have the
ability to buy this technology.
And this is also a backup for
that technology that.
And, and it protects the
liability of the detention
center because they could be
sued for this overuse and these
blanket policies and um I, you
know, the.
Part of the problem in Bernalio
County in the last 6 months was
that that technology went down.
And so they have to bring that
technology back.
And um they were also.
And, and this is uh in a in a
public report.
Bernalillo County is very
transparent with their data when
when asked and um.
However, the other detention
centers are not as forthcoming
and um.
They, they reported that they
were actually.
Doing the data on hand
handwritten documents rather
than within their system of data
collection that um is exists
within that detention center.
So,
The safeguard for not only the
liability of the detention
center.
And the um.
The well-being of the youth.
Is um the probable cause, and it
just it lifts the standard
enough.
That
It's more likely than not that
this person is more person
specific and it's more, you
know, crime specific.
Um, then the, um.
You know, mere suspicion.
Of a potential thing that might
happen.
Um, I would like to say that.
With those statistics that
Senator Lopez just shared.
Um, there was zero contraband
found in July and there was 190
strip searches.
In August there was 169 strip
searches.
There were 3
Things found 2 pens and a
pencil.
Um, in September 108 strip
searches.
They're um was a note that was
found with another.
Um, um, youth that was detained
their information on it.
And in October, there was 122
strip searches in one pen.
So none of these are objects of
um, you know.
Uh, they're usually something
that can be found through a pat
search.
So arbitrary, you know.
Kind of blanket policies then
default to a strip shirt search
rather than.
Starting with a patch search and
starting, this is not to say
that you can't do a strip
search. It just says that it has
to be considered that the
administrator has to pay it and
then it has to be documented.
And last question, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Senator
I believe it was represented
that the technology.
is out of service.
And why is that and
What are the efforts being made
to
Bring that back up.
Um, as far as I know, um,
they're making every effort to
um they've um.
Um, received money and they're.
Finding new technology, it does
take a couple of months to bring
up that technology. It's um.
You know, it's, it's difficult.
Um, because it's um very
sensitive technology.
And it has a lot.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
So we have a motion in a second.
Do we have any other questions?
Senator Black.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator and
I'm sorry, ma'am. What, what was
your name?
Mr. Chair, a senator, it's
Jerry.
it
Jerry Bachichaba, OK, sorry
about that. No problem.
All right, let's hopefully I
help me out if I butcher that
again, Ms. Paicha. OK. um, Mr.
Chair.
Can I just call you Jerry?
OK
Jerry, let me ask you just a a
question that floors me, um.
Why the hell do we have cameras
in bathrooms. So, that was, um,
like I said, historically ernao
County has been the detention
center that actually um you
know, um, pulls pulls the state
ahead in conditions of
confinement and increases it.
Uh, it was a decision of one
director.
Um
You know, one person, if if the
law doesn't back up the
detention center, then one
person can change, um.
Change policy and procedure and
put that detention center in a
liability position.
Thank you Jerry. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I so there are 4 juvenile
detention centers in New Mexico.
Did I understand that correctly?
Yes, sir. And uh thank you Chair
Jerry, where, where are they?
What besides Albuquerque?
Um, Mr. Chair and um Senator
Block.
Um
The youth services center is the
regional detention center.
There's one in Farmington.
There's one in Grants, Las
Cruces, and.
Yeah, the multiple detention
centers have shut down over the
last couple of years, and I am
now in a nonprofit organization,
so I haven't kept up with the
last couple of shutdowns,
apologies. OK, thank you, Jerry.
Thank you, Mr. Jar.
Um, each of these.
Um, youth detention facilities,
they all have cameras in the
bathrooms and showers.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Senator Block
Uh, they do not. It's youth
services center that does.
The one in Albuquerque. Yes,
sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair. But
who's in charge of that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Block, um,
the administrator right now is
Tamara Mercantal and um it's uh.
You know, the Bernalo County is
in charge of that. The public
safety division.
OK, all right, so that's what
I'm getting at. I thank you, Mr.
Chair. So Jerry, this comes
under Bernalillo County,
correct? Yes. So the person that
you mentioned, what, what was
the name?
Tamara mercantile.
Tamara Mercantile.
Did, did you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Jerry, did you coordinate or
talk to her about this
particular bill?
I did not, but the, um, she
works with a work group of the
collaboration that you heard
from, uh, in the comments today.
OK.
Mr. Chair, Jerry, um,
How long have these cameras been
operating there in the bathrooms
and showers.
Yes, so when we implemented the
PRA.
Um, policies that I spoke of uh
about, um, shortly after that.
Um, the, uh, detention director
at the time, um, added those in,
um, with the addition of other
cameras that we needed in the
detention center because there
were blind spots.
Those cameras were absolutely
necessary for blind spots.
However, um, you know, the.
In the bathrooms and the showers
that can be managed by staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So
I, I would
Can, can I assume I was a
previous county commissioner
Sandoval.
Uh, can I assume the county
manager could say or the county
commission could say, remove all
that crap and and stop and stop
taping and.
Let's have those uh
non-operational now, take him
down.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Block, um, I do
know that there were county
commissioners who did the same
tour that uh Senator Lopez did,
and I do not believe that they
have the power they can put
pressure on that, but um, I am
not an expert in that area, so
I'm going to, um, just leave it
at that.
Thank you. Thank you, Jerry. Uh,
this is kind of disturbing, to
say the least. I mean, who's
Tamara's boss?
I believe it's Chief Perez
and Jerry, is that the, is he
the warden of the detention
center and this comes into that
as well or?
No, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Block, he is the fire chief and
he is in charge of the public
safety division at Burn Leo
County.
OK. All right. Thank you for uh
getting me square on that, Mr.
Chair and Jerry, uh, just a few
other things here on this.
Bill, which I'm gonna support,
by the way, but I, I also
support moving the damn cameras.
That's just dumb.
Kind of sick and disgusting and
perverted, but let me, let me
get away from that for a minute.
Um, on page two of the bill,
Section B, starting on line 10,
we're talking about inspection
of all detention facilities.
And then down by line 16, it
talks about certification.
Subject to revocation, um.
What happens if that detention
center is no longer certified.
Where, where do the juveniles
go?
Mr. Chair, Senator Block, um,
so there's a process and um
everybody gets due process and
that detention certification
process, so for instance, um,
um, in, in my experience with
that process, which I did go
through with the detention
center in the south of New
Mexico, um, we, um, inspect the
facility.
We, um, either certify it or we
don't certify it, um, there is a
corrective action plan. Um, we
put timelines on the corrective
action plan, the county agrees
to it or they don't agree to it
and then they decide whether um
they want to continue as a
detention center or not if they
don't, then we relocate the use
to other facilities. OK?
And uh Mr. Chair and Jerry, uh,
what are the ages of, uh, the,
the kids in there, the minors.
from
10 to 17 is well what is it?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Block,
it's from 12 to 18.
Or I'm sorry, 17.
If they turn 18.
They may or may not stay in
detention, depending on their
prior behavior.
OK.
Thanks, uh, Mr. Chair, Jerry,
all right, so let's talk about,
um,
Page 3 here, uh, dealing with um
cause I'm curious about this.
Um,
Of other states implemented a
A policy or a bill or
Whatever you want to call it.
That which is the standard from
reasonable to probable cause.
Mhm
Um
Mr. Chair
Senator Block of Virginia has
and um there has been
considerations by other states
just for the juvenile side.
But there is not many.
So Mr. Chair, Jerry, you're
telling me.
Senator, Senator Black, you said
a few questions and you've
already had 3. I think that's
you.
Um, so could you do a summary
question. Thank you. Thanks, Mr.
Chair.
Who, who decides?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Jerry, um,
If there's probable cause to do
a strip search.
And then
If
Is there a medical person?
There or our counselor there.
When, when this, when this
occurs.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator Block
and if you look in the bill, uh,
authorization from the detention
facility superintendent or the
superintendents designate.
Oh, OK, Mr. Chair, Jerry, that's
kind of an important point
though. I, is that a medical
person or a counselor or that's,
that's the the superintendent
would be the director.
Of the detention center.
OK, thank you, Jerry thank you
Mr. Chair, yield.
Thank you. Uh, any other
questions, seeing no time can we
round up, uh, folks to come back
in and we will do a roll call
vote, Mr. Chair. They're all out
there waiting.
Right there. Thank you.
Senator of block
I
boon.
Yeah. Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos
And nova and her Pinto.
Senator Scott
Yes.
Center Cio Lopez, yes.
And her hickey. Senator Lopez.
Yes.
We have 10 yeses and 0 noes of
your bill is passed. Thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee.
So Senator Gallegos, you're on
next.
General Gallegos, the floor is
yours.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Uh,
thank you, senators. Uh, I'm
gonna excuse myself as Senator
Momas just comes up.
Um, we're both on this bill, uh,
today I have before you send
bill 173.
In his telecommunicators and
police officers. We have in the
last few years tried to
Uh, get the
Dispatcher to communicators to
be looked at.
Uh, because of the trauma they
go through the PTSD, everything
that they do in their jobs that
affects them.
Uh, we're now in a, in a point
that we're gonna be having uh.
Discussions tomorrow with the
Department of Public Safety to
try to iron out some.
Some, uh, issues that we have,
but today I have Marshall Dean
with me from here in Santa Fe
and Joshua Chilera from Rio
Reba, I'd like them to introduce
themselves and then.
Well we'll uh get them to.
Let's start the conversation for
us, Mr. Chair.
Please introduce yourself.
Good afternoon. Uh, no.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
And my name is Marshall FD and I
serve as the training
coordinator at the Santa Fe
Regional Emergency Communication
Center here in Santa Fe.
Every day across New Mexico,
public safety telecommunicators
stand at the forefront of
history.
When someone dials 911, they're
stepping into one of the most
critical moments of their lives.
Whether it's a mother giving
birth on the way to the
hospital, a terrified bystander
trying to save a choking victim
at a restaurant.
If a family member who's caught
up in a devastating car accident
or someone facing the
unimaginable fear of crime in
progress.
In those moments of chaos and
fear and desperation, one voice.
Cuts through all the uncertainty
and that's the voice of a 911
public safety telecommunicator.
These professionals are not only
simply answering phones. They
are the 1st 1st responder
guiding people through life or
deci decisions and situations.
Staying calm in the face of
crisis as they're hearing it
unfold in their ear.
And ensuring that police fire
and EMS get to where they need
to as fast as possible.
For callers in distress, these
dispatchers are a lifeline, but
despite their critical role that
they play, they are still
classified as clerical workers.
Not as first responders today we
are here present before you to
change that.
We are here to recognize 911
dispatchers for they truly are
public safety.
Professionals who save lives.
And I, we believe it's time to
give him that respect and the
resources and recognition that
they deserve.
And reclassify him as 911.
Dispatchers as first responders.
Madam Chair, members of the
commission, my name is
Joshuauletta.
And I am the executive director
of the Espanola 911 Regional
communication Center.
91 Center handles 6000 square
miles of northern New Mexico all
the way from the northern Santa
Fe County, bordered all the way
to the Colorado border and as
far west as Navajo Lake. Uh,
with that,
We handle about 40,000 911 calls
and 180,000 non-emergency phone
calls in the year. We dispatched
for the law enforcement fire and
EMS of the agency in that whole
area.
I've been a dispatcher for 23
years. I started on the bottom
and I worked my way to the top
and I'm the director.
In that time, we handle
everything from telling somebody
how to deliver babies over the
phone.
Um, I have told a mother how to
do CPR on her baby.
Uh, while they're driving them
into the hospital and it turned
out that that baby overdosed on
cocaine.
I have dealt with telling.
A 16 year old daughter.
How to perform CPR on her dad
that she found on the floor.
And as she walked at the door
and found him unconscious and
not breathing.
This is some of the stuff that
now one dispatchers do every
single day, um, a statistic that
just came out this year is
Per capita
New Mexico 911 handles more 911
calls than any other state in
the nation.
That means that we are handling
more calls.
Her dispatcher than any other
dispatcher in the entire
country.
There's been several studies
that show that not one
dispatchers have a high rate for
PTSD, um.
Back when the dispatcher was
made, they, they didn't know how
to classify dispatchers. They,
they, they were like, well
they're gonna answer phones or
secretaries.
Now that she that the times have
changed. Now they're realizing
that dispatchers are the 1st 1st
responders.
So with that, they're finance a
2017 study showed that
dispatchers are more I have the
highest rate of PTSD than any
other public safety, and it's
not due.
To the type of calls that we
get, it's due to how many calls
we get one after another. When
you have a firefighter, when you
have a law enforcement officer
on scene. They're on scene with
them for 2030, 40 minutes,
whereas the dispatcher 5 minutes
later is handling a different
type of emergency at a different
end of the county.
There's a study in 2022, that
shows that 32% of my own
dispatches develop PTSD due to
repeated exposure of trauma.
They saw 91 centers are
currently have a 30 to 40%
turnover rate. Um, it costs
about $40,000 to train the new
911 dispatcher to sit in the
seat.
We're hoping that with the
passage of this bill, it's gonna
be a recruitment to get 911
dispatchers back into the sheet
into the seat. When I first
started dispatching, the average
lifespan of a dispatcher was 5
years. Now it's cut down to 3
years because of the amount of
stress and trauma that they're
exposed to.
That means that when we hire
somebody, we have 3 years with
them and they're moving on to a
different kind of job.
With this pair, we're hoping
that we can actually retain
those dispatchers to complete
their 20 years.
Uh right now, there was a a
quick study with all the
directors that were here
yesterday, uh, yesterday.
I'm so sorry you're so busy. I,
I was having a hard time in the
audience. I can only imagine
having to sit up there for so
long. We had 25 + 911 directors
and staff from all four corners
of the state that showed up to
support the bill. Unfortunately,
today duty called and they
couldn't come in, so we don't
have the numbers that we did
yesterday, but we still have a
little bit of showing.
They are
We are all over the state.
And we
Really would like this to change
because we want to be
acknowledged as first
responders, not just as
secretaries any longer. Thank
you for your support and
Uh, your vote for do pass on
Bill 173.
So Madam Chair, I appreciate
that I'd left you a few names
that are willing to be on a Zoom
earlier, uh, they were here
yesterday and we'll let you go
through that process and then
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you.
Very much for your presentation.
I'm gonna finish out uh this
bill here. And uh do we have
anyone in the audience, uh, who
would like to support the bill.
OK, if you can sort in 5
individuals.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, or Mr. Chair, if
you're still uh Cherry.
Oh
Carter Bundy with asks me, um,
we represent 911
telecommunicators across the
state. We also represent police
and sheriff's deputies. Um, one
thing that I hope this doesn't
become.
Is pitting workers against each
other.
They all perform heroic
activities.
There is high trauma, high
turnover, high vacancy rates in
911.
When we have better benefits for
911 telecommunicators, that
means that our response times go
lower. And if there are only a
handful of things you do in this
building, lower response times
for 911 should absolutely be one
of them.
Um,
We 100% agree, you may hear from
some police that we shouldn't
water down, any police or other
public safety benefit. And we
agree with that on a financial
basis. So we hope that when this
is implemented, whatever the
right rates are, whatever the
time period is, it's done in
such a way so that parrot is not
hurt at all and maybe even
improves. We do hope that you'll
view 911 telecommunicators as
central to saving lives of not
only regular New Mexicans, but
our very first responders like
police fire and EMT who then
on the scene to help those New
Mexicans. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
your time and dedication. I know
you've been sitting here for
long hours. During this session,
making difficult decisions that
impact our state, and I truly,
truly appreciate your commitment
to public service.
My name is Sabrina Verrala and I
proudly served as a public
safety telecommunicator for 6
years. During that time, I
developed a deep passion for
public safety, not just for
dispatchers, but for the entire
system that keeps our
communities safe.
That passion led me to earn my
bachelor's in organizational
leadership and public safety,
and to stand before you today as
an advocate for those who
continue to serve. I hope you
had the opportunity to review
what I submitted, just a small
glimpse.
of the calls I took in my
career.
Life and death situations,
heart-stopping moments,
desperate cries for help.
This is the reality of being a
dispatcher. Every second
matters, every call could be the
worst day of someone's life. We
depend on a 911 dispatcher to be
in their seat, ready to answer
the call.
And today they're depending on
us.
First, I want to say that I have
the utmost respect for everyone
in public safety, law
enforcement, firefighters, EMTs,
all who
dedicate their lives to
protecting our community. This
is not about taking away from
them. This is about ensuring
That those who stand alongside
them are dispatchers are given
the same recognition, respect,
and security.
We've sat through bills for
housing developments, public
safety, and several recruitment
and retention funds for first
responders.
But more areas to cover means
more boots on the ground and
more boots on the ground means
more seats with headsets are
needed. We can't improve our
public safety system without
strengthening the backbone of
it. 911 dispatchers.
You might see uh.
Uh, wanted to try and keep it to
a 1 minute, 2 minutes and we're
at 2 minutes. So if you can make
a concluding statement, that
would be greatly appreciated.
New Mexico law is clear. Public
safety telecommunicators fall
under Chapter 29 of New Mexico's
statutes law enforcement. Their
role, expectations and
responsibilities align with
those already covered under
para.
Yet they are still being told
that they don't belong.
They deserve the same respect
and benefits and retirement
security as those that they
serve alongside. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, John Lipshuts
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, uh, here representing
over 40,000 workers throughout
the state and I'll keep this
nice and short for the reasons
stated previously, especially by
Mr. Bundy. We urge your support
and thank the sponsor for
bringing this measure forward.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for staying late with
us. My name is Robbie McCormick.
I am the director for the
Bernalillo County Emergency
Communications Center. I started
my career in New Mexico and Eddy
County, uh, the last 3 years,
uh, their 2015 to 2018, I was
the director for the regional
Emergency Dispatch Authority.
Uh, there in Eddy County. I've
been to Tarrant County, Texas,
which is Fort Worth area.
I have been to Cobb County,
which is Metro Atlanta. Both of
those states from 2017 to 2019
have done exactly what we're
asking you to do today.
Which is recognized us as the
1st 1st responder.
The law enforcement officers,
the ambulance.
Drivers and EMTs, the
firefighters do not, cannot see
everything that's happening.
But we hear everything that's
happening.
When you send a firefighter to
academy, they learn how to fight
fires.
When you send a law enforcement
officer to academy.
They learn how to enforce the
law.
When an EMT goes through all of
the they need to do for EMS
Bureau to become a paramedic or
an EMT. They're learning the
medical.
When we go to academy.
We learn fire.
Law
And medical.
Because we have to take all of
those calls.
We have to give pre-arrival
instruction because the response
is still en route.
We are
That voice
That guides people out of
burning buildings.
Help stop the bleeding, give the
birth.
Secure the scene, separate
people.
We are the 1st 1st responders.
We love all of the responders.
But it starts the chain of
response starts.
With us
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chair, City
Committee members. My name is
John Wicker. I'm assistant fire
chief C of Espinola. I stand
before you today on behalf of
the Espional Fire Department and
strong support of Senate Bill
173, emergency dispatchers are
the unseen heroes of public
safety. They're the first voices
people hear in the darkest
moments, guiding them through
life-threatening situations with
calmness, skill, and a wavering
dedication.
Before we as firefighters even
arrive on scene, our dispatchers
have already begun saving lives.
They assess emergencies in real
time. They bear witness to
trauma through every frantic
call experiencing the weight of
tragedy and crisis without ever
physically being there. The toll
it takes on their mental and
emotional well-being is immense.
PT PTSD is not just something
that affects those in the field,
it affects those who will hear
the cries for help who stay on
the line through the chaos.
Who were never get the closure
of seeing the lives they save.
Their resilience and strength
deserves recognition and more
importantly support this bill
acknowledges the vital role that
dispatchers play in emergency
response and provides them with
the recognition they so
desperately deserve.
We owe it to them to stand by
their sides just as they stand
by ours every emergency. For
those reasons, the Espinal Fire
Department fully supports this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we have 10 people
online, uh, but in the interest
of time, I'm uh going to take
all the even numbers that'll be
5 individuals. I will call your
name out.
And uh to the others, I will
note at the end that you wanted
to speak and support, uh, and we
will start with Angela Martinez.
Angela
Good evening. Can you hear me?
Yes.
OK, good evening, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Angela Martinez. I'm the
chair of the 911 affiliate and
the 911 director for Lee County
Communications Authority.
On behalf of all 911
dispatchers, I want to thank you
for hearing us today.
We can all agree that 911
dispatchers do not engage in
high risk incidents out in the
field. However, their role is no
less vital to public safety.
As the director of the 911
Center, I have given out
multiple life saving awards to
dispatchers who have given CPR
instructions over the phone and
have saved a life.
Prior to first responders
arriving on scene.
When traumatic incidents occur,
we attend the same critical
incident debriefings as our
first responders because they
affect us just the same.
Dispatchers serve as the first
point of contact in emergencies
providing officers with critical
information in real time.
Coordinating emergency responses
and making split-second
decisions that directly impact
officers and civilian safety.
The mental and emotional toll of
this work is significant, often
leading to PTSD and burnout
similar to those.
Excuse me, similar to what sworn
officers experience.
Senate Bill 173 seeks to correct
a long-standing oversight in the
classification of 911
dispatchers by recognizing their
role in public safety.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, we ask for your
support of Senate Bill 173 to
reclassify the hardworking, life
saving 911 dispatchers as they
should be.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Nicole Brown, if
you could uh please get online
and speak to us and Bambi Kern,
you will follow, and Albert
Flores, you will follow her.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. Thanks for hearing us
and staying with us tonight.
Uh, I am the director of San
Juan County Communications
Authority, the I'm a one center
here in San Juan, and I'm the
vice chair for the 911 affiliate
and
I feel my obligation as a
director is to take care of my
dispatchers, so they can take
care of of the community. And I
feel like this bill is the best
way that we can take care of
them by ensuring that they're
getting the benefits that they
deserve and that serve them the
best way possible, and I believe
that moving us to these para
plans is the best way to support
them and take care of them so
that they can continue to serve
and take care of our community.
Thank you.
Thank you, Bambi Kern.
If you could get online please
in Albert Flores, you're on
deck.
Thank you.
Chair and senators.
I first want to start by saying
that 911 dispatchers are not the
same as
Fire, police, or EMS.
But I am saying is we are as
important as fire, police and
EMS. My sheriff wanted me to
share a quick note with you and
I'll try and make this quick,
who was writing to express his
strong support for
reclassification of emergency
dispatchers as first responders.
Emergency dispatchers serve as a
critical first point of contact
for individuals in crisis,
providing life saving
instructions, coordinating
emergency services and ensuring
public safety. Despite their
essential role of emergency
response, dispatches are often
classified as clerical or
administrative staff, failing to
recognize the high stress
decision making and life saving
responsibilities they carry.
Dispatchers operate in high
pressure environments where they
must assess situations, provide
immediate medical guidance and
really crucial information to
emergency personnel. Their
ability to remain calm under
pressure, prioritize calls, and
manage multiple emergencies,
situations simultaneously is
vital to the effectiveness of
public safety operations,
reclassifying dispatch.
as first responders would
rightfully acknowledge their
contributions, improve access to
mental health resources and
enhanced training and support
systems tailored to the demands
of their role by recognizing
dispatchers as first responders,
we affirm their importance
within the emergency response
network and ensure they receive
the respect benefits and
protections afforded to other
emergency personnel. I urge you
to support the reclassification
and advocate for the well-being
of those who dedicate their
careers to saving lives from
behind the scenes. Sincerely
share.
Matt Hutchinson.
Thank you.
Thank you, Bambi. Next is Albert
Flores and Lorraine Taran, you
will finish up.
Hello, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Albert
Flores. I am the immediate past
president for New Mexico,
National Emergency Number
Association and the current
Western Regional rep for
International APCO, which is the
Association of Public
Communication Officers, and I am
the deputy director for the Mosa
Valley Regional Dispatch
Authority in Las Cruces, New
Mexico.
As you've heard my colleagues
here saying that there are uh
bad calls that that uh we get
and uh a lot of people are are
struggling to get help, um, for,
for that, and they're calling
911. They're having a bad day.
And right now, we're the ones
who are calling for help. Um, I
am currently attending a 911
wellness summit here in
Portland, Oregon. And I'm
learning some interesting
numbers and, and, uh, in the
summit, they had mentioned that
there's 97% of police and
firefighters who go through
their career and successfully
retire, but there's also 97
% of the public safety
telecommunicators who do not,
and um we're thinking that this
is probably gonna help us get
those individuals attracted to
this job if we do pass this
bill. Um, as mentioned by my
colleagues again, they do the
pre-arrival instructions, uh,
they're helping issues, a lot of
the times before first
responders uh do arrive. I'm
fortunate enough to be in that
low percentage as in the next
few months after 30 years in
this career in New Mexico, I'm
going to be leading part of this
career, um, I, um, over the
years, I
participated in numerous steps
to get this recognition in the
state, and passing this in New
Mexico would be actually a great
parting gift for me, um, but,
um, really this, this, I am in
support of this bill and it does
need to be passed.
Thank you, Mr. Flores. And last
is Lorraine Terran.
Bahrain
Lorraine, are you able to get on
the internet?
OK, I'm gonna arbitrarily pick
Jessica Chavez, you're online.
Uh, you can take Lorraine's
place.
No, Jessica, OK. Um, we will
finish I'm here, Mr. Chair.
I'm sorry about that. I was, I'm
actually working in the dispatch
center today.
OK, if you could uh do about a
minute of comment that would
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Jessica Chavez. I'm a
911 dispatcher with 25, 25 years
of experience, and I support
this bill.
OK
911 dispatchers like field
responders are required to work
24/7, 365 days a year.
Which isn't the case for
clerical or secretarial workers,
as they typically work normal
business hours during weekdays
and get their evenings, weekends
and holidays off.
911 dispatchers worked 12 to 16
hour shifts
multiple days a week and even up
to 45 days in a row without a
day off.
Often this will cause us to miss
out on the family.
Holidays and major life events
due to staffing shortages and
meeting the needs of the sinner.
This also contributes to PTSD.
Low morale and burnout.
Unlike field units, a dispatch
center.
Unlike field units in a dispatch
center, someone must always be
in a dispatcher seat, taking
calls and working the radio.
There's no just making it work
without someone in the
dispatcher dispatch center to do
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
Thank you, and I want to
acknowledge Matthew Gallegos.
Eric Masterson.
Carrie Owens and Summer Valverde
were also online to speak, but
due to time, uh.
We are going to move on. We, I'm
now asking those who oppose this
bill.
to speak up.
Please, uh
At mine and
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Gregory
Hill, uh, executive director of
Perra.
Never fun to be this only person
in opposition, uh, gonna come to
this issue with a different
angle, uh, not saying anything
about the job. These are
extremely critical. Uh, we've
been working with the sponsor
over a number of years, uh, to
try and
Figure out what this population
is. Uh, we have not been able to
properly value um the impact
that this would be. We, we
started off with a list of 200
dispatchers that has now grown
to about 600 dispatchers. I just
saw a recent news article saying
that this would impact over 1000
dispatchers. We don't know uh
what that population actually is
and until we have a
comprehensive list, we can't
properly value that, uh, without
that.
Information we can support it,
uh, but with all the
stakeholders here, I think this
is the most we've seen at a bill
like this. We'd be happy to work
with them through the interim to
get a comprehensive list to
properly value what this would
mean to to PERA and I'd be
available for any questions if
they come up. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, sir.
OK, quickly, any further
comments from the sponsors,
otherwise.
Mister, we appreciate that.
We'll go straight to.
OK, and I'm assuming there's no
one online posing. OK.
So we will go to questions from
the committee, and we have.
Not sure who was first.
Uh, angel, uh, Senator Charlie,
excuse me.
And Senator Lopez.
So Di Lopez.
And uh do we have any others?
OK, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, senators for bringing this
forward. Um.
And I don't have any questions
because I am in very much
support of this.
Um, but I do want to share that
the work that I came from before
working at the intersection of
domestic and sexual violence. We
put on these big summits for
advocates and first responders,
essentially, and I will never
forget a story that a dispatcher
told me.
She was working on the Navajo,
um, reservation and got a 911
call from a from a little girl.
And that little girl witnessed.
Her mom being murdered.
And
The little girl didn't know
where she was. We don't have
addresses out.
And so the dispatchers stayed
with this little girl.
And then the call was over.
And what she shared that I
didn't realize was that.
She doesn't know what happens
after that.
That call is over.
You have no idea. And because of
that conversation that I had
with that dispatcher, we
expanded our advocate, um,
wellness retreat to include
dispatchers so that they could
come and be a part of a um
almost like a group therapy
session to process their trauma,
focus on their healing, um, and
avoid burnout so that we could
keep them in that work and so,
um, chair and and senators, I
just, I really do appreciate
this, um, this bill, um, that's.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Of course, I think you deserve
all of this. Um, however,
Did this come up in iPod cuz
I'm, I sit on that committee and
I don't recall.
This issue being raised at all.
That's the investment of pension
oversight committee.
Mer, Madam Chan, Miss Senator,
I've not been a typo ever with
this. We've run it for 3 years
of maybe 4 years.
And it always comes down to, uh,
with pa uh being here, the issue
is a smaller communities, for
instance, Tatum.
If they have a dispatcher.
They don't have staff that can
get us the raw numbers.
Of how many people they are,
what the costs are, what the
hours are, it takes a lot of
detail. I say I'll give my
experts uh.
Madam Chair and Senator, I
forgot to introduce.
My other half of the team here,
uh, Sara Mo Maestas, who's also
um signer on the bill, uh, but
what's happened in the past is
we've just
We're probably to what we
consider 90% on the numbers of
of who they are and what they do
and their hours associated is
all that's gonna matter on the
cost towards Barra. Uh, I don't
know if you have a
Oh
Madam Chair, uh, actually.
Alright
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Siri
Lopez. So we, we have been
trying to work with Para all the
I want directors have been
working uh with the
representative and we have two
agencies left that have not
submitted this, their numbers.
Um, and we have, we, and we'd be
willing to work with the Per
director. I'm so glad he's here.
I'm actually gonna give him my
card so that way we could get on
top of this. But we found that
out of all the dispatchers in
the state, there's 1,037 uh
dispatchers registered with DPS.
832 of them are currently
employed and there's 519
actually certified dispatchers
to the Department of Public
Safety.
Uh, we have
Almost all those numbers on a
spreadsheet ready for Parrot to
go. And I do know that our
representative has been working
with her and they do have access
to that spreadsheet as well. And
we would like to see those
numbers. One thing to note is
the median of the, of the
dispatchers working right now is
only 5 years.
Um, they've only been 5 years on
the job. So that means that
they've been contributing to the
other municipal plan in Pera for
those 5 years. But if they were
to switch, they're, they're not
gonna retire tomorrow. They
would still have to contribute
for at least 20 more years
before they're eligible for that
retirement.
So, we would like to see the
solvency after that study is
done, but, uh, me myself, I'm
confident that because of that
median, we, we're not gonna,
we're not gonna eat that, that
fun insolvent, but that's only
my guess with my little
knowledge of how er works, but
that's, that's how we, we kind
of see that.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and did
you consult with the New Mexico
State Police Association for
their views on how this impacts
them.
Mon turn and
Mr. Man, Mr. Einer Zedia Lopez,
we actually have a meeting with
them tomorrow at 12:30 in my
office, so, uh, part of what
we're trying to do is get to the
point when we get to finance so
that we'll try to have the
parent thing figured out and
state police, uh, there's some
issues with the way um the bill
is written that they have a
problem they'd rather have um.
Like a memorial instead of a
bill, uh, but we've been doing
this for countless years now and
we're ready to start seeing some
progress, but I'm working with
them, they will be there
tomorrow at 12:30 in my office.
Um, I really appreciate that
because um.
I don't, I
The Constitution, and you know
how I am about the Constitution.
Article 20, Section 22.
states that we are not to
Basically mess with the
retirement plans unless we fund
them adequately.
And in order to do that, we have
to have a report from the from.
From Pera about what this is
going to do.
And I won't, I will not vote for
a pension plan that's not fully
funded, that's irresponsible or
not not fully funded. I don't
mean that. That's, that doesn't
have a plan in finance for how
this is going to be funded.
Um, because, and, and so to me,
the concern is what does this do
to the overall.
Pension fund, if you don't know
how many people are going to
come into it.
EERA has not
Analyzed it and the state police
that the frontline workers, uh,
haven't been told what it means
to them. I just feel like it's
not quite ready.
Um, because I think all those
things need to happen, and if
you go to IPAC, basically that's
what we tell you. We get
everybody together and we,
that's the whole point of IPO.
I, it was one of those
committees I was assigned to. I
didn't know I enjoy so much, um,
because I do like pension plans
and I like.
Learning how they all work
together, and I think it's very,
very important in our state to
make sure that we continue uh to
have defined benefit plans.
Um, but in order to do that, we
need to be responsible.
And so I'm not sure how I'm
going to vote today on this, I
think I'll wait to hear the
discussion, but I absolutely
agree that you are frontline
workers.
And that you need to have
You know, consideration and
benefits. I also think that the
police officers who have been
paying into this fund for many
years, need to know what it's
gonna do.
The fund.
That they've been paying for,
and then I think.
Unless we have an analysis of
what it's going to be and how
it's gonna be funded.
I think it's an unconstitutional
vote to support this.
Um, because all of those things
need to happen to satisfy the
well, not all of them, but at
least the analysis and the
funding needs to happen so that
we can satisfy the
constitutional requirement.
Um, but thank you so much for
the service.
Um, most of all, and thank you
so much for working on this for,
for your members and, and for
your people, um, but I, I think
you should go through those
steps.
Before you, um,
Well, you should go through
those steps, and that that's a
responsible thing to do.
So I really appreciate, like I
said, your work and your being
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, senators and um.
Experts, um.
I'm going to support the bill
100%. I want to let you know
that.
Um
This is one of the toughest jobs
in the state.
I sat dispatching Rio Rancho.
And if any of you have not sat
dispatched yet, please do it
just for a couple hours and you
will see the task.
Saturation that these.
Men and women do, it is
incredible because the
information that they are giving
the police officer.
When I was there was, was
critical to uh to mission
success and to life.
And looking up.
How quick they can look up the
the data on the particular
person on the NCIS uh as well to
give that officer as much
information as possible. I mean,
and they're, they're, they're
doing so many different things
and how they can do that job for
25, 30 years.
Unbelievable. So please, if you
haven't sat with your dispatch.
Go do it even if it's for 2
hours and take a look. It's
impressive and um I don't think
we're taking care of them enough
because if they're only lasting
5 years. By the way, they're not
working 12 hour shifts either.
Um, and the manning is just it,
Manning's awful.
So, uh, I'm more than happy to
support this. I think it's a
great thing to do, to say thank
you and take care of them
because they are really the
first in, in a way, uh first
contact I should say uh to the
situation and they're there to
do the command and control,
which is just pivotal and they
uh
In a um dynamic environment.
So thank you to our dispatchers
out here, very much appreciate
it and uh you have my full
support. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Black. Do we have any
other comments or questions?
Have a motion for a pass and a
2nd.
Uh, with the secretary, please
call the roll.
In block.
Hi.
Yes.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senor
Gallego, yes ma'am. Nova, yes.
Pinto.
Senator Scott
Yeah
Center Serio Lopez.
Yes, and to explain my vote.
And Hickey.
Yes. And Lopez, yes.
We have a vote of 9 to 1, so the
bill passes, and to explain her
vote, Senator Cedillo Lopez.
I'm voting on this bill to to
move it forward. I may not vote
for it on the floor if we, if
you don't have the funding out
of finance for it, the analysis
out of the PERA and um some
analysis from the Department of
Public Safety about what it
means to them without those
things, I think it's
irresponsible.
To vote for it and violates the
Constitution. So I urge you to
get that done before it gets.
Thank you very much again.
Congratulations on passing your
bill. Look forward to it on the
floor.
Thank you, man. Thank you,
senators.
It'll be voided but that
Senator Trujillo, if you join us
in front, Senate Bill 127.
Madam Chair and Bill today, um,
while this bill is uh related to
licensing, I will assure you
that it has nothing to do with
compact.
Um, the, all we're doing is
adding an exemption to the
barbers and cosmetology Act to
exempt makeup artists and hair
stylists who were involved in
the motion picture um
productions New Mexico's film
industry is experienced
significant growth, contributing
to the state's economic and job
creation.
Placing unnecessary restrictions
that go beyond that of other
states, has a negative impact on
current and future film
productions in New Mexico.
Senate Bill 127 seeks to clarify
that film industry makeup
artists.
And hair stylists are not
subject to the licensing
requirements of the barbers and
cosmetology board.
Similar exemptions exist in
other states with robust film
industries such as California
and Georgia.
In fact, no other jurisdiction
requires this licensing. This
bill seeks to align New Mexico's
regulations with industry
standards. The scope of work for
a makeup artist and hairstylist
in the film or television
industry does not include what a
licensed aesthetician or
cosmetologist provides. They
apply makeup and style hair to
create characters.
They apply makeup to enhance an
actor's own features or to
create wounds, bruising, inju
injuries or other special
effects.
They style hair for these
characters.
Senate Bill 127 seeks to
modernize New Mexico's
regulatory regulatory framework
to better accommodate the unique
needs of the film industry.
Balancing economic development.
With maintaining public safety
and Madam Chair, I have with me
an expert witness from the
economic development film
Office, Mr. Steve Graham and
Um, Madam Chair, senators, thank
you for having me. I'm the
director of the New Mexico Film
Office, um, and, uh, we did a
Financial impact uh report on
this, the um
We're not currently exempted,
but uh it's also not currently
enforced, um, the challenge
would be if this exemption does
not happen and enforcement does
happen, there would be a
significant impact on um on film
production in the state, uh,
fiscal year, uh, 24, we did
about $760 million worth of work
uh in the state, um, the
estimate would be that that
would impact uh
Approximately 80 or 90% of that,
that work going forward.
Um,
Because of the the
Uh
The licensing requirements. So
that would be a rather
significant impact to uh.
To the work in the state and the
loss of uh
thousands of jobs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We, I
will note that there is one
incident that I'm aware of where
the cosmetology board did um go
um, begin to take action on
someone who is providing um
these services on set.
Um, and with that we'll stand
for questions and public
comment.
Thank you.
We go to the audience. Is there
anyone here in support of Senate
Bill 127.
If you'd like to stand and.
Introduce yourself and make your
statement, please.
And please keep it as brief as
possible, 2 minutes.
Hello, my name is Tara Day.
Thank you, madam. Chair and
members of the committee and
thank you for your service. Um,
my name again is Tara Day. I am
a native New Mexican. I have
been in the film and television
industry for 30 years. I am a
member of Local 480. I'm also a
member of the local Los Angeles
706. Excuse me, I'm a little
nervous.
Um, I have never been required,
and it is not required to have
an aesthetician's license as a
makeup artist in film. We apply
makeup, we create characters, we
collaborate with producers,
directors, and actors. What our
job is, is exactly that, and
that's the scope of it. So I am
very much in favor of this bill
127, it would impact us
significantly if we implemented
a licensing for makeup artists.
in the film industry in this
state. I have worked in multiple
jurisdictions and globally, and
it is not a requirement in my
profession. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, esteemed
committee members. Uh, my name
is Steven Mullen. I'm the
international alliance
Theatrical Stage Employee
business representative for
local 480 here in New Mexico. We
represent about 2022 crafts
including hair and makeup
artists. Again, I support this
bill because of the uh
Unnecess if there was to avert
any unnecessary or unexpected
impositions in impositions into
our hair and makeup artists that
would not only affect them and
many local residents, but it
could again have a ripple effect
to the whole industry by uh
Uh, postponing or even averting
productions from coming.
Thank you and I hope you support
this bill.
Hello
Good evening, Madam Chair,
Committee. My name is Sheila
Trujillo. I am a also a native
New Mexican. I have been a
makeup artist in the 480 for 20
years. I have worked in
different jurisdictions. I do
have a card in the New York
Union as well, and it's never
been an issue to have a
aesthetician's license to apply
makeup in the film industry. It
would impact us tremendously if
this were to happen, we already
have gone through a lot of
Turmoil in our union and in our
industry in the last 3 years
with strikes and whatnot, but I
do support this bill. Thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in the room
who's in opposition.
See none. Is there anyone?
No one on Zoom.
So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members. Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and thank you
for the bill.
So
Who assumes the liability?
Knowing that there's
Chemicals
concert.
Madam Chair, Senator, the, the
movie, the movie that assumes
liability for anybody who's
working on the set, so that
would be the case.
OK, that's all.
Thank you.
Senator Sidia Lopez.
Thank you. I was just curious,
um, people, you know, the
productions that come to Pope
joy and all of that, but they
have a license too.
Um, Madam Chair, the, the
cosmetology uh Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, the barbers and
cosmetology board has indicated
that they believe that they need
to be licensed, um, that's not
the way these are individuals
who for Pope joy are probably
traveling, um, but when you do
movie sets and television
productions on site here in New
Mexico, cuz those are a little
bit different at Pope Joy, um,
you actually are, uh.
They're hiring locals, um, to do
these productions, and so at
this time, um, they haven't
been, um, but an issue did come
up and it did kind of like make
the whole industry feel very
nervous about the possibility
that the board may begin to
require these individuals on a
more.
Frequent basis to be licensed.
This is over 1500 hours of.
Training and, and, ah, you know,
a year or longer, it's a pretty
extensive um when you're not a
cosmetologist or an
aesthetician, and this is just
not the work that they do.
Uh, Madam Chair, I guess I was
wondering whether this is broad
enough like a traveling
production.
Um, you know, the, the issue is
these.
Um, movie productions bring
their own people.
And um, you know, so do
traveling productions.
Um, you know, off Broadway
performances, whatever
traveling.
So that was the only, the opera,
I don't know whether uh
The Santa Fe Opera has to use
locally licensed. It seems a
little bit provincial.
Um
Require that and so that was my
only thought. I don't mean to
hijack your bill or whatever it
just popped into my head.
Um
I, I support the bill. I just
had that question. And if that's
not what you were talking about
or if you.
That's fine. The madam chair,
um, senator, thank you for
bringing that up. I mean, I
actually had the same response
when I originally was um
presented with this bill and I
said, well, what about, um, you
know, uh, 16 year old or 15 year
old eras where coming and
getting made up um we didn't go
that far, um, but I do think
that this could be broadened,
um, at this very moment, this is
an incredibly important um
exemption that I just
feel compelled to make sure that
it gets through.
I, I'm gonna support it. I just
think it is um.
They
and probably could be broadened
like thinking of dance,
sometimes we have dance
competitions.
Um
And often they have like one mom
who's really good at makeup.
do the makeup for all the kids,
you know, just I just think
there's.
Other potential issues if you
have an over aggressive
licensing board.
Um, and this sounds to me like
an over aggressive licensing
board, but I mean.
That it would be if they started
insisting on barber's license
for people who are doing.
Air for traveling production.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. We're actually
gonna kind of talk about this
off after we get out of here
that maybe we can include
theater in that.
Make it a little broader that
would make a, uh, I don't need,
need the.
Amendment to vote for the bill
I'm just suggesting it.
Thank you. Thank you.
We like doing amendments in this
committee, Senator Trujillo.
In case you haven't noticed.
OK, still on the list I have
Senator Block and then Senator
Pinto for a second time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator. Um, just two
quick things on the bill.
You know, we're, we're making an
exception for makeup artists or
hairstylists in uh the motion
picture productions.
Are there other professions that
we don't exempt like.
Food workers or anything like
that. I'm, I'm trying to
understand why we're exempt. Are
we exempting everybody or we
kind of picking and choosing
here.
Yeah, um, Madam Chair, senator,
that's a really good question
because I've actually um been
involved in these exemptions in
the past. So if you look at page
one, you'll see that um person's
licensed um by the law of the
state to practice medicine and
surgery or chiropractic. I'm not
really sure how chiropractic
ended up there, um, but
certainly they're exempt from
the barbers and cosmetology Act.
Commissioned medical or surgical
officers of the United States
Army, Navy or Marine hospital
registered nurses. Senator, can
I stop you there on that one
real quick, um, um, Madam Cheer.
So Senator, here, here's where
I'm offended.
For what you just read.
I'm a retired Air Force officer.
Air Force isn't in there. Come
on.
We get 3 Air Force bases here.
So that that was actually my two
questions was on the exemptions
of food workers or someone else
or other other professions and
just, I mean, what, why was the
Air Force not mentioned because
there's 3 Air Force bases here.
Madam Chair, Senator, you bring
up a good point, and I don't
know the answer to that.
I, I will tell you that the most
recent issue that was before
this body and some of you may
remember, is the person's
providing eyebrow threading
services and um I was in the
house. Senator Scott was in the
house when we had that
discussion on the floor. Um, it
does tend to be um from my
experience, a little more
aggressive board and so as these
issues come up, we try to
address them to make sure that
they stay within the authority
that the legislature has given.
them to ensure, like I said, my
philosophy for licensees has
always been, we have to balance
out economic development and the
public safety here is directly
related to.
sets and movie theaters and
these individuals. Madam Chair,
Senator, I, I really appreciate
the back and forth you and I
have had on some other bills,
uh, as well. So here's what I'm
gonna do for you again.
Uh, I'm gonna support the bill,
Madam Chair.
I know, I think you might have
an amendment. Uh, where's this
go next?
Finance, Madam Chair, it goes to
finance. OK. So Madam Senator,
if you can make an amendment,
Put the air. I, I will, I will
vote for it here, but if the Air
Force is not in there on the
Senate floor. I'm, I'm not
voting for it.
That's, that's fair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
And for if I may just correct,
um, your bill goes to Senate
tax. Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Not finance, so it goes to
Senate tax.
Uh
Senator Pinto, there's a motion
for a due pass with a second
from Senator Charlie.
And if you could call the role,
please.
C
Yes, for now.
Senator Boone.
Yes. Senator Charlie.
And our Gallegos.
Nova.
Senator Pinto
Senator Scott
Yes. Center Cia Lopez, yes, and
Hickey and Lopez.
Yes.
And by a vote of 9 to 0, you
have a DuP pass recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Senator Stephanics.
If you would come forward
please, for Senate Bill 189.
Public assistance programs
eligibility.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
This is Senate Bill 189 public
assistance programs to
eligibility.
And this bill actually addresses
the cliff. I may just to
interrupt, we do have a
committee substitute, that's
right. So how about if we, we'll
just do the, the proper motion.
So
Oh
Yes, we're discussion purposes.
And there's a motion from
Senator Pinto with a second from
Senator Hickey.
And Senator, if you would
present your committee
substitute.
OK
So Madam Chair, the um committee
substitute.
You might think it's silly, uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, but it changes the
title.
And to totally to more correctly
reflect the content of this
bill, and it also takes it back
to the federal poverty level of
85%.
And those are the only two
changes in the committee
substitute from the original
bill.
And I can explain the bill when
you're ready.
OK, if you would please. So
Madam Chair.
Oh, and I wanted to mention that
Senator Pat Woods did a bill
similar to this a couple of
years ago.
So I had him review this bill,
and he just signed on to this
today is one of the top
sponsors.
Um, this afternoon, so I wanted
to let all of our colleagues
know that this is very similar
to something he presented a few
years ago.
Uh, madam chair, son of Bill 189
amends the New Mexico works and
education Works Acts to ensure
more very low income families in
New Mexico.
are successfully able to
transition off public assistance
without experiencing the cliff
effect.
The cliff effect is a condition.
In which low wage jobs.
Don't sufficiently cover the
difference.
Triggered by the loss of
benefits when earnings are high
enough to disqualify families
but not high enough to meet
their basic needs like food,
housing, childcare and access.
To healthcare.
The proposed changes
specifically address the
temporary aid to needy families
or the Tana program.
The federal block grant funded
direct cash assistance program.
For families with children 0 to
18 living under 100% of the
federal poverty line that
currently serves 7,714
households.
For 20,0354 New Mexicans.
That's 5,0698 adults.
And 14,000656 children.
The first change would allow
parents on Tanna.
To pursue their high school
diploma or equivalency.
Or a vocational degree, setting
them up for better paying jobs
upon exit.
Right now they can only be in a
2 or a 4 year higher degree
program, not an option for the
majority of those that are in
the TANF or on TANFF.
The second change would cease
punishing children when parents
are out of compliance.
The family would receive the
children's portion of the
monthly payment while the
sanctioned parent works with a
caseworker to resolve barriers
to success.
Right now, too many families
drop out of the program within 1
to 6 months because they failed
to comply with basic
requirements. In many cases,
experiencing barriers as case
workers can help them resolve
with a little bit more time and
effort.
The 3rd change allows parents to
save more while on the program
setting them to fill in gaps and
expenses once they leave.
And allowing them to stay off
TANF.
Nationally, significantly
raising asset limits shows
promising results for people
leaving and staying off public
assistance.
These 3 common sense changes are
estimated to positively impact.
An estimated additional 15,000
New Mexicans.
That are currently being served
in 10, more than half of them
children who deserve our best
efforts to set them and their
parents on a course of success.
The substitution, as I
mentioned, is a title change
that emphasizes this impact.
It also changes language first
edited to allow income limits to
be set by the department.
To remain what they have been,
so we took it back to 85% of the
federal poverty level, which is,
for example,
$12,804 a year for a pregnant
woman in her last trimester.
And $17,376 a year for a parent
with one child under the age of
18.
With you have a handout, a
colored handout that explains a
little bit more, but with me
today I have Kira Ochoa, who is
one of the deputy secretaries
for the Healthcare Authority,
and she will uh tell you more in
detail about herself and the
program. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee
and thank you to the sponsors,
Senator Stephanics and all the
good sponsors, and I also wanna
appreciate Secretary R Mijo,
who's here, who's been a big
champion of addressing the cliff
effect in our department and our
staff who've worked very hard on
this. Uh, I just want to start
by saying the bill connects to
me on a very personal level and
briefly, um, in 2008, uh, my two
young children and I were on
this program when the recession
hit, uh, we had to, uh, uh, go
for these.
Benefits and uh really,
Uh, between these benefits and a
little help from family members.
Um, I was able to stay housed at
that time and to keep uh.
The children and myself that
when I uh was accepted to
graduate school, I transitioned
to the education works program,
which was very helpful. I was
able to get another better
paying job and I eventually got
off the benefits and uh into a
career in public service.
Basically, I wouldn't be here,
uh, today, and my kids wouldn't
be where they are. They're, I've
got one in college. I've got
another junior applying, taking
the SAT soon and all that good
stuff. Um.
And it's really thanks to the
program. And I think that with
these changes, um, they're gonna
be able to help a lot of other
New Mexicans and um
Thousands of other parents who
might not be in the same
position I was. I had a good
running car, I had a college
degree already, I had a family
who could help me from time to
time.
And um I think most importantly,
it's going to help the
vulnerable children in these
income brackets. So on the first
change, you know, not every
parent can or wants to pursue
pursue a higher education
degree. For many, a GED or a
vocational certificate is really
a better path to a good paying,
satisfying job. So SB 189 will
serve 300 children whose parents
will be able to choose this
option. Some parents, #2, living
in extreme poverty just need
more time to
comply with sanctions. Um, and
in this time, uh, which in this
bill, they can have
Up to 9 months to comply. Right
now, it's only 6.
Their monthly benefit will be
reduced incrementally with each
sanction. uh, their children
continue to receive needed cash
assistance, which really
incentivizes the parents also to
come into compliance and
continue working on their goals.
In this change, SB 189 will
serve an estimated 5,405.
additional chill, additional
children, excuse me.
And 3rd, um, that change about
the savings really allows
parents to save more money as
they prepare to exit TANF,
ensuring that their children
And they don't fall off the
so-called cliff. It's that
catch-22 that Senator Stephanics
mentioned, where it's really
impossible to meet basic needs.
Uh, when you take a minimum wage
job because your earnings are
just high enough to disqualify
you from the benefits, um, but
not high enough to cover the
expenses and the change uh we
propose the number 3 will impact
8,00666 additional children.
Thank you for your consideration
of SB 189.
So Madam Chair, as we mentioned,
Secretary Armijo is in the
audience as well, but um Mrchola
will be our expert on this
program and we'll stand for
support, opposition questions
from the committee.
Thank you very much. We'll go to
the audience. Is there anyone
here in support?
If you'd like to stand up and
say a few words, please.
There's a microphone.
Please identify.
And your statement.
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee I'm
Carrie Armi who I'm the cabinet
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority. I'm really proud of
this bill. Um, we've worked
really hard to try to come up
with um some policy options uh
to address the cliff effect.
Most families who are receiving
assistance, uh, through our
agency really just needed the
help for a little while, and
they're trying to improve their
lives. Unfortunately, we have a
set of statutes that are pretty
old fashioned, and they make it
harder for them to do that. Uh,
so what we're
really trying to do is make it
so that um as they make
progress, uh, and they try to
improve their standing their
income, they're not facing the
edge of a cliff in a way that
would kind of disincentivize
them from doing that, uh,
rather, we're trying to create a
set of stairs. Uh, so rather
than some cliff that you're
looking off the edge of, uh,
really kind of trying to create
a guard rail or guide guide path
off of those benefits, um,
eventually. So thank you for
your support. Um, we hope to
hear it do pass this evening.
Thank you.
Uh, good evening, uh, Madam
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Marco
Gonzalez and I'm with Molina
Healthcare. I want to thank the
sponsor uh for being a champion
for the most needy. I can't
really say it much better than
she can, her witness can, or the
secretary did. Uh, so the only
thing that I would say is to
reflect on really, you know,
the, the numbers that we're
talking about are like 15,000
people in the federal poverty
level numbers are incredibly um,
you know, I mean, for a, uh,
Uh, for a family of size of 2,
the, the numbers are 21,150 and
for a family of 4, it's uh
31,200. Um,
85% of that is, you know,
terribly hard to live on, and,
and when you think about why
we're up here, uh, security net
is something really important.
So this is going to help people
who need it. And uh we
appreciate the sponsor, uh, for
bringing it forward.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition here in the room?
Uh, online, we do have a page.
Hi, good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Paige Knight, Deputy
Policy director with Mexico
Voices for Children, and we
stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 189. Family economic
security is a critical
foundation for healthy child
development, and this
legislation would help improve
financial stability by allowing
families to save more for larger
purchases like a down payment
without being penalized and
without facing a cliff effect.
It
It also allows for more New
Mexicans to be able to pursue
education and training
initiatives, increasing their
prospects for full-time
employment. We know this is
important because educational
mobility is a strong predictor
for families' economic mobility,
making this a positive
investment in New Mexico's
future. We think the sponsors in
the healthcare authority for
this important legislation, and
we urge it due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. And then Shanae.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Shanice Satriana with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and we stand in support
of SB 189. And we would like to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward. Evidence shows
that even modest increases in
annual income for a family,
especially those with very young
children have large impacts on
the long term health and
well-being of those children.
We know that families are
already struggling to make ends
meet, even those with incomes
double and triple the federal
poverty level.
We applaud HCA for responding to
policy solutions proposed by
families and advocates over the
last few years. A study of the
impact of the full family
sanction practice was conducted
in Maryland, and they found that
families that leave TANiff do
distinctions far less far less
well.
And families that leave for
other reasons. They are less
likely to become employed and
even if employed, they have
lower earnings than other
families leaving Tan.
Uh, the thing, the changes
proposed in SB 89 are long
overdue, and we urge the
committee to pass it. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
No one in opposition. Thank you.
So what we'll do now is we'll go
to questions or comments from
committee members.
But first, what I'd like to do
is um.
Say thank you.
Back in 2005, both
representative Gail Chasey and
I.
co-sponsors on the Education
Works program.
So, I'm very familiar with this
program, and part of it was in
response to the changes that
were made under the Clinton
administration.
And when it was implemented here
in New Mexico right there after
9798, we began to understand.
On the reduced amount when you
get a block grant from the
federal government.
It sounds good when it comes in,
but as time progresses, your
your money um dwindles.
So we had to figure out how we
could help our families.
Primarily women and children to
be able to access, um,
The, the town of moneys.
Which had a 6 year limit.
So what we did in New Mexico at
that time, working with other um
advocates and persons in our
community was to do the
education works program, which
mirrored exactly what the
federal program did that we used
um
State General Fund.
At that time.
And for that meant that the
women who would then apply, they
were working on a certificate.
Uh, going to college, finishing
your education, whatever, as
long as it was had an
educational um slant towards it.
And they weren't going to be on
the federal program.
Which meant in case it should be
at a later point in time, God
forbid.
That that they weren't limited
to that 6 year.
period of time.
And I'm just glad to see that
the the program is continuing to
be tweaked because it's so
important, it does, it does make
and I appreciate you sharing
your story, Ms. Ochoa, because
there are many women in our
community where I know this
program has made a difference.
So I just wanted to give that.
A little bit of history lesson
cause I've been here since.
Back in the day.
So
With that, are there any
questions or comments from
committee members?
There's a motion for a due pass
from Senator Pinto with a 2nd
from Senator Savio Lopez.
And if there's any questions or
comments, Senator Scott.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair
Oh
Madam Chair,
Not quite seeing, and I
freely admit
X.
With respect to public
assistance.
Huge issue
I don't say.
How this
Helps to solve.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, um, I'm going to turn
this over to the deputy
secretary, but first I would say
there is more built in um case
workers to actually.
Um
Guide the individual when they
start failing, and I'll turn it
over to the deputy secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Senator Scott for the question,
so.
I think it's a good question.
Um, I mean, sorry, that's.
obnoxious. I mean it that way.
What I mean is, um,
It strengthens the program
itself.
And allows people to have a
bridge when they leave. So the
savings portion is really key,
right? Do we expect people to
save $15,000 in liquid assets,
probably not, but maybe, you
know, you never know what can
happen in somebody's life, and
it incentivizes doing that. So
that savings portion does help
with the cliff when you're
leaving the program, you have a
little more for emergencies, and
you may have, you know, not had
before. That piece is really
key.
Um, the education itself, right?
Getting that vocational degree
or getting your GED does allow
you to do more than get a
minimum wage job potentially,
which in, in that way when you
bridge out, when you transition
out, hopefully get a job that
doesn't keep you beneath where
you need to be and sets you on
that path, potentially even into
a college degree or a higher
education degree in my case, if
that's something that the person
wants.
For those two pieces, the
sanctions piece is really,
really key. We did a lot of
research on other states, um, I
mentioned on the fact sheet that
other states like Illinois, New
York, Vermont.
Washington DC and Michigan have
made similar changes. Um, when
you do that and you are less um
In this case, it's 3 strikes and
you're out, but that can happen
within one month. And when you
think about a person at this
income level, I say I had a good
running car, a lot of people
don't. They can't get to their
appointment, so they missed 3
appointments. Sometimes they
have to meet weekly with a
caseworker, depending on their
situation. They're out.
And when they're out, their
children suffer and they don't
go to good places, um, um, I had
a very useful conversation with
Senator Black about some of the
numbers here and I want to thank
him for um the input because it
really helped me clarify, you
know, they don't go to good
places. It's not like they
graduate from the program or
leave the program because uh
they're in good shape. So just
staying in the program long
enough to a Senator Stefanik
says, really do that intensive
work with our caseworker that
may remove those.
barriers and get them to the
next step.
is in itself and to help them
exit that program, and then the
Off of other benefits programs
as well, potentially in the
future. So that's the way I see
it. It's kind of a twofold.
Approach if that helps.
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary.
Yeah.
No, I'm
Personally aware.
Of a number of sources.
Of people working.
For wages in the
Me
To high teens.
That will not take another hour.
It will not earn an annual.
Stop and
Of more than 1.
Because they start.
To fall off.
Public assistance
I don't see this.
Doing anything to solve that.
OK
In the $15,000 is pretty much
irrelevant to me because how
you, how are you gonna audit
that anyway.
How are you gonna know?
How much?
Money is in the mattress.
Madam chair, Senator, um, we do.
Extensive
Income
Analysis of our customers and
HCA, right? So they have to um
go through our system where
their income, their bank
accounts can be numbers can be
verified there are any earnings
can be verified. Money in the
mattress, I, I can't speak to,
but, um, you know, we have also
a fraud detection agency, you
know, the um office servant of
Inspector General in the HCA.
So, you know, there is a
mechanism to look at all of that
if if there's a suspected.
Problem. Um, but I think the,
the real focus here is
You know, again, that incentive,
like right now, and I'll, again,
um, speak a little bit from my
experience. It wasn't an
uplifting experience to go into
the income support division, um,
and meet with my caseworker as,
as nice as she was. It was a
little demoralizing and it
didn't really feel like the
program was um necessarily
always
Expecting me to succeed, um, so
I think that.
Building in these, these
Incentives for people to keep
participating and participating
toward the goals is really
important.
Madam Chair, Deputy Secretary.
I have I I believe I showed this
document.
To uh
So one of the other senators up
here.
Earlier today
And it was a legislative council
service study.
That outlined.
All of the programs.
That were available to
Of various on households.
Parting from a
Single disabled to.
Family of
OK.
With one minimum.
And that net
Revenue stream the I recalling.
The family of 4.
That revenue stream was
equivalent.
$14,000.
And there's no way to get to
that spot.
With wages
So
No, I think
One of the reasons why our, our
workforce participation rate.
In this
State is so low, is that.
We, we are very generous with.
With public
And
I mean, I've got a
A lot of constituents working
long hours in the oil field.
To make 100 grand a year.
So
So tell me again.
How
This program
Madam, uh, Mister Chair.
And Deputy Secretary, tell me
again how this program.
Works to solve that issue.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
Um
I would say that
These 3 changes or 3 small good
things in the program.
can make more changes. One of
the things I didn't mention in
the answer to the last question
is that we do have a
transitional.
Program to help people
transition off. They get extra
assistance. They get extra, um.
You know, clothing allowance
and, and um things like that
that'll help them get into a
certain kind of job.
Um, so we do think about how to
help them transition off.
Um, I, I mean, I didn't need.
To earn the equivalent of
$100,000 to get off of public
benefits when I did it. I don't,
I think that's a high number.
I'd love to see that study. I'm
not familiar.
Um, but I think, um, you know,
the cliff effect.
Um, this bill doesn't.
Uh, this is not Bill is not
gonna solve the cliff effect.
I'll acknowledge that. I think
there are 3 good elements in the
in the bill that helped get us
closer to what people need.
Um, you know, to really do it.
We have the 2nd lowest TANF
eligible level in the country at
that 85%.
The states that have been really
successful, frankly, in, in
helping people transition off of
public benefit offer twice the
amount, if not more monthly than
Arana program offers, and that
is something to consider, um,
obviously that would require um
a look at the town of block
grant and how it's allocated.
But, you know, those states
where people are earning when I
was on TANF in 2008. It was
like.
And I had 2 children. I got like
$400 something dollars a month.
My rent was $600 a month.
I had an uh graveyard shift
working um from 1 to 5, 20 hours
a week doing online editing from
home, and as I said, I had snap
and I had Medicaid.
Um, and I
I wasn't
Uh, exactly living large, let's
put it that way, you know, so I,
I think that I'm sure.
Depending on how many children
people have and what their
various portraits are in their,
their, um,
You know, their situations,
possibly that's correct. But I
do think that that low tan.
Um, monthly cash allowance and
tributes to our problem here in
New Mexico. Um, most of the
states that see people more
successfully.
Enter and exit the program have
a higher rate, which would be
maybe something that the spotty
would want to look at in the
future.
OK.
Last question, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, how does one
Uh, how does a parent go about
becoming noncompliant.
What are the circumstances that
generate.
Those reductions of benefit.
Madam Cha, Senator Scott, um, I
mentioned, you know, people not
showing up for their
appointments. That's probably
the biggest reason that they are
then seen as noncompliant. Um,
you have to, um, document your
work search if people aren't
able to document their work
search for some reason or didn't
do one, that would be another
reason for them to become um
noncompliant. Often when people
walk in the door and are told
they will be eligible for TANF.
They're set up with an
appointment.
for an assessment. And that's a
really comprehensive first
interview they have with their
caseworker. Um, and they don't,
some people don't complete that
assessment in some cases, um,
that has to do with, um,
The child in uh support services
requirement, they have to comply
with that, um, if they have, you
know, they have to comply with
entering that program and
seeking child support from the
non-custodial parent.
Um, and then, um, that's simply
not completing the work
requirement because there is a
work requirement or, you know,
uh substitution for work.
Uh, for example, um,
Community service, madam deputy
secretary, are these
Requirements consistent across
all of our public assistance
programs.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
no, um.
And that is uh the federal.
Uh
Nature, the nature of the
federal um.
Requirements that come with
Snap, Hana, and Medicaid, for
example. They're, they're
different, some similarities,
but not all the same.
And a promised last question,
Madam Chair.
Is this do anything to promote.
A nuclear family, a mom and a
dad with the kids.
Senator Lopez, um, I'm sorry,
Chair Lopez, Senator Scott.
Uh, in the sense that um
It does not
Uh
What's the word, uh, it doesn't
uh punish people for for for
having being married and having
a parent, uh, another parent in
the house. You, you gotta
increased benefit.
For your family because you're
an increased family size. Um,
and I, I would just say.
Um, in general, it's a more
economically viable to be.
Uh, you know, a married couple,
then not um a two-parent family,
and so, um, I think that
becomes.
to individuals maybe I don't
know. I don't think it, it, that
is one of the goals of state and
federally of the TANF program
and
It's a bit of, to be honest, a
head scratcher to me as to how
the, the program promotes that.
OK
Thank you, sir.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Stephonics, thank you, uh, as
well and um.
Cara.
Thanks for all the time that
we've spent together trying to
Shaped this story
Um, I don't think we're quite
there yet.
I want to just echo a couple of
things, um, or maybe just
Move a little bit more forward
where Senator Scott was talking
about.
In relation to
Uh, these benefits. So, Madam
Chair and uh,
Deputy Secretary
This program doesn't
incentivize.
Um
I think what he was talking
about was what we've seen with
government programs in in the
60s with the Great Society
incentivized.
Fathers or mothers to be out of
the house, so you know it
incentivize single parents, is
that correct? Does not
incentivize that.
Senator Lopez, the chair Lopez
senator block I can you restate
your question. I'm a little
confused. Uh yes, ma'am. So, uh,
Madam Chair, um, Cairo, this,
this doesn't incentivize.
Single parent households. I
think that's where Senator Scott
may have been going.
Is that correct? Chair Lopez,
Senator Block, it does not
incentivize single parent
families now.
OK, so
Um,
Madam Chair
Uh, Deputy Secretary.
How, how long is this program
been going on?
Um, Senator, uh, Chair Lopez,
Senator Block, um, this program
was
First
Launched in 1996.
Um
Prior to that, it was the.
That's, this is, I can't
remember it had a different name
and it was a not a, it was an
entitlement program. It was not
a block grant. So, Madam Chair,
um, thank you.
OK, Madam chair.
Um, deputy secretary, this
I'm not there yet on this bill,
but this kind of reminds me of
In the 90s of Bill Clinton's
Welfare to work, uh, would you
agree with that?
Uh, chair Lopez Center block,
this is exactly that, um, in the
town of program is that it was
his, uh, change from AFDC into
that.
OK. So, um,
Now, Madam Chair and deputy
secretary, if we've had
If we've had this program here
in New it's been in New Mexico
for a long time, you said the
90s or whatever it was.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
correct. OK.
So, here's, here's, here's the
problem where we gotta tell a
bit and we've talked about this.
So, Madam Chair, uh, deputy
secretary.
The problem is the cliff effect.
Prevents parents from leaving
public assistance successfully.
This program.
We help only 15% of eligible
families in New Mexico.
With um tan. OK, got it.
Perfect.
However, only 2% of the parents
transition to work.
That's, that's the problem.
Right there
That number has got to be way
higher.
Uh, for this program to be
successful, why it's only a 2%,
I, I don't know. I mean, things
happen in life. I, I get that.
Um, but it looks like
27% are shut out of the program
for failure to comply, so it
looks like we have over 25% of
the people.
Failed to comply
And we only have roughly 2% of
the people that have
Transition to work.
Now
Madam Chair and Deputy
Secretary, you're, your
solution, and I agree with it
cause I, we helped kind of shape
this together.
is to reduce that effect by
helping more eligible families
compete. I'm sorry, complete the
program.
Long term better paying jobs.
But we haven't been doing that.
The numbers aren't there yet and
it's a complicated issue. And
I, I wanna work with you on this
one. I really want to work with
you and Senator Stefaniks to, to
get this right because
This isn't telling a good story
that you can sell.
To the Senate and the House when
it comes to being fiscally
responsible and showing good
metrics is how we look at that.
In the back
Is, is very, very complicated.
It takes a lot of explanation,
so what I'd like to do to to
make this quick.
Is
If this passes and it goes,
where, where's this go next?
Um,
Madam Cha Senate Finance.
So I'll make a, I'll make a deal
with you.
If, um, Madam Chair and Deputy
Secretary, if this passes,
Um, because I'm not gonna vote
for it tonight.
But if it does pass, I, I wanna
work with you to to.
Tell a better story.
Because these numbers right
here.
It, it ain't working for me.
And um your story, by the way,
is just inspiring and I, I wish
more people would be like you
cause quite frankly, we want to
put this out of business is the
goal so people aren't on this
program.
So
I think
Trying to present this bill.
Because I mean, this is
complicated policy, it's
complicated stuff, but we, you
gotta sell it a little bit
better in the metrics and what
we've done so far and we're not,
we're not there.
And uh I want to help you work.
To get there. So,
Um, I'm about 25% there.
I need, I need your help.
Uh, to work this and because I
would love to take it on.
And uh I'll leave it at that,
but.
I thank Senator Stefaniks for
sponsoring and um.
I want to thank you for coming
by and
You probably spent more time
with me on this committee than
anybody, uh, trying to work
this, so.
I appreciate that a lot, so.
Um, thank you to you and thank
you to the, to the secretary as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
see no other comments if you
could call the role, please.
And of luck.
No, for now
a boon. No.
Senator Charlie, yes.
Senor Gallegos.
And Nova, yes.
Pinto.
Scott
No
Center city of Lopez, yes.
Hickey. Yes.
Senor Lopez. Yes.
I voted 6 to 4, you have a DuP
pass recommendation on to
finance. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
I'll stick around for my next
bill later.
Well, actually, Senator, um,
As I had mentioned previously,
we're we're gaining looking to
ending at 8:30.
Oh, at 8 at 8:30 today? OK. So,
um, we're just gonna proceed
with Senate bill 250.
So your bill will be first on
the list for Wednesday.
OK, so set up uh bill 39 will be
on Wednesday. OK, I'll let our
expert witness know that she's
caretaking.
Thank you. Thank you.
Maestas.
And Senator Nava.
And then just for those of you
in the room also.
And it's kind of become a
tradition for our committee
already.
But you'll do the introduction
of your bill, the Senate Bill
250.
We'll have those who are here in
the room who wish to testify in
favor and opposition, right?
And then, um, we will continue
the conversation on Wednesday,
but at least we can get it
started this evening.
Did you hear me?
You guys listening? OK, just
making sure.
So once again, we're gonna begin
tonight your presentation have
um those in the audience would
like to say yay or nay also on
Zoom.
And then we'll hold off to
finish the actual go on
Wednesday, we'll come back and
just get into the.
The meat of the bill.
OK.
So
Please present. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
I we're very, uh, thrilled to
stand before you to stand in
full support and as a co-sponsor
of Senate Bill 250. I'm very
proud to co-sponsor this with
Senator Momaestas, um, and
Senate Bill 250 does three
things.
It ensures all local and state
jurisdictions do not use local
resources to aid federal
agencies in the enforcement of
immigration laws. Resources
include
But are not limited to public
funds.
Personal time use of property
and equipment. Number 2, this
stops local resources from being
used for the purpose of
identifying, detecting,
apprehending, arresting,
detaining, or prolonging the
detention of a person based on a
suspicion or belief that the
person has entered or is
residing in this in the US in
violation of federal immigration
laws.
And thirdly, it ensures only
people with criminal warrants
are being denied for federal or
being detained for federal
immigration purposes in local
jails.
The bill would require a
criminal warrant or orders from
a federal court for a county to
detain a federal prisoner.
This ensures jails do not use
local funds to detain a person
based on a civil immigration
violation, helping prevent
costly lawsuits when civil
rights violations occur as a
result of unlawful detentions.
1 in 10 New Mexicans is an
immigrant and what and more than
100,000 New Mexico born children
live in immigrant households.
These mixed at as communities
should have the same access to
police, fire, and other public
safety services without the,
without the fear of being turned
over to immigration authorities
and separated from their
families.
State and local agencies that
divert limited local resources
for helping enforce federal
immigration laws, jeopardize
public safety, prevent victims
and witnesses from coming
forward.
And a road trust within the
immigrant community, making it
less likely to participate in
community policing efforts.
To be clear, nothing in this
bill prevents local law, nothing
that's prevents local law
enforcement from doing its job.
It will not limit or prevent law
enforcement officials from
arresting a person who has been
charged with a crime.
If an undocumented person is
arrested for a crime, he or she
will be held accountable by the
justice system.
Multiple federal courts have
ruled the federal government
cannot obligate states or local
governments to use state
resources to help enforce
federal immigration laws, nor
can it deny federal funds on
that basis.
Local tax dollars should serve
local needs.
Immigration enforcement is a
federal responsibility.
Madam Chair, I have 2 experts
with me as well, Marcella Diaz,
executive director of Soma
Pueblo Nido and Gabriela Ibanez
Guzman, the staff attorney at
Somos, and I will defer to my
co-sponsor now.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
This is a public safety bill.
Um
I'd be one of the top, if not
the top public safety bills of
the session devoted to public
safety.
Um, we live in a world of scarce
resources. We have a lot of
small uh sheriff's departments,
municipal police departments.
Every hour that an officer is
detaining someone.
Trying to figure out where they
were born, that's an hour that
they're not policing our
streets.
It's an hour that they're not
filling out reports. It's an
hour that they're not
apprehending street criminals.
That's an hour, um, that they're
not doing what we want them to
do, we cannot have every single
traffic stop, every single, uh
police contact.
We cannot increase the anxiety
of that encounter for.
The officer's sake and for the
person's sake.
Um
We want everyone in this state
to call 911.
We want everyone in the state to
remain at the scene of a car
wreck or whatnot to to give a
statement.
We want every person in this
state.
If there are key witness to.
To be comfortable showing up to
court or going to the DA's
office to give a statement.
And we cannot erode the trust
we've built with with our local
law enforcement community.
So, so this is a common sense
public safety bill. Nothing
prohibits the federal government
from doing what it, what it is
tasked with doing.
Nothing will complicate anything
that the federal government is
tasked with doing.
Uh, if anybody is arrested, if
anybody is in jail, if anybody
is exiting prison, any of that
stuff.
Uh, the federal government will
be privy to that and will act
accordingly.
Um, but we cannot use state
resources.
Uh, state agencies and in
particular state personnel.
Uh, to, to deal with.
A Federal policy.
It has nothing to do with us
building our state.
And making our state being the
best state it needs to be. We
are on a track here in New
Mexico.
A good, good
Direction to build a beautiful
state, and we cannot be
sidetracked with.
Uh
With federal policy that will
just take us backwards.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Did you wish for your
um extra witnesses to stay of
yours.
No.
OK, madam, will yield.
OK.
Oops
So with that, we'll go to the
audience.
And for those who'd like to
stand in support of this
measure.
If you would please stand in the
middle.
I only asked for about 5.
persons to stand, please.
In favor
If you could identify yourself
and then your statement, please.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Eliasar. I have lived in
Santa Fe for 19 years. Uh, I am
a community organizer in Wes
Tomos and Pablo Nido, a
statewide workers and immigrant
rights organization that is
present in 8 counties, 7 of them
being rural, including Eddie Lee
McKinley and San Juan.
It is very important to me that
the state does not invest or
resources in helping us with its
efforts to deport immigrant
workers.
In Santa Fe and Albuquerque, we
have policies that prohibit our
collaboration of the police in
enforcing civil, federal
immigration law in Sandoval
County, at least 2 workers got
picked up by ICE a we could.
A few weeks ago with the
sheriff's support, these workers
got detained for a simple
traffic violation when they were
traveling back home. It happened
to me recently as well. I was
driving through Rio Rancho and.
Rio Rancho and a county police
officer asked me if I was a US
citizen. That question had
nothing to do with the incident.
I had already provided my
registration car insurance and
driver license or police forces
should focus on public safety
and not on racially profile.
racially profiling and
discrimination to assist the
federal government in enforcing
civil immigration immigration
law.
Therefore, I ask I ask the
members of this committee to
support SB 250. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Inez Martinez,
and I'm an immigration attorney
and the director of policy and
coalition building at New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center as one of
New Mexico's only organizations
providing legal services to
immigrant communities in
particular specializing in
serving survivors of crime and
children who have endured
trauma. We stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 250.
Through our work, we know with
certainty that any collaboration
between ICE and the police means
immigrant families.
We live in fear and suffer in
silence, especially children,
youth and children will be
fearful of reporting abuse if
they believe that their family
may be subject to deportation.
We also know that there are
immigrants that qualify for
forms of relief that lead to
legal status and may be at risk
of separation before getting the
necessary legal services.
Local and state law enforcement
agencies have limited resources
and should not be spending
limited funds to aid the
enforcement of civil immigration
laws. We as New Mexicans are
called to take a stance to
ensure the safety of our
community. Please ensure that
the local resources that our
communities have helped generate
in this state, not be used
against us. Thank you.
When senor Presidente neip
companeros
When senor Presidente neip
companerosins Hernandez so you
cemente Mexicana imadre metra
estosos mujove
so ioidosic acids and esta pais
Albuquerque.
Get expresser
Kellyeinmobiles and familiar
junto copiesposo.
Again, in Mexico, a moorguyo and
the gasso mosquejodo todosidos.
There's echo de la immigrante
constant escuchamos amenasa so
portiones maivas Asiano sotros
Losimos mui nes frustrados mucho
temor.
Espositosunto.
The nigua manera estamos de
cuerdo in recursoess mosamosteli
parapoo federal tematica de
mimos nose tilliados in
collaboration the sales.
Go on ice.
Pedimos can not to listen to
Dinerogenteomos partes de la de
Nuevo Mexico no permitamos queen
no famillias gracias.
interpretation.
Uh, good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, this is for
Gerardo, who is reading in the
name of Teresa Hernandez. I am
partly Mexican and my mother
brought us to the United States
when I was very young. I am the
mother of one son and 2
daughters who were born. I am
the mother of 1 son and two
daughters who were born in this
country. Albuquerque has been
our home for more than 30 years,
and I am a member of El Centro.
I want to express that just like
many of you here today, I am
very proud to contribute to the
state's economy through my work.
I currently restore automobile.
Saints in our family business
alongside my husband, and we
take pride in having learned the
culture and language of this
country. Here in New Mexico,
there are many hardworking
people like us who contribute to
the economy with great pride. We
also pay our taxes promptly
every year and want our
resources to be used to improve
our state in every way.
Unfortunately, many of us in the
immigrant community are facing a
serious issue with the new
administration as we constantly
hear threats of mass deportation
against us, we feel very
vulnerable, frustrated, and
deeply afraid. That is why on
behalf of the entire
community, I urge you not to
allow our state's resources to
be used to carry out these
actions. We strongly oppose the
use of local funds funds that we
ourselves contribute to to
support federal immigration
enforcement. We ask that our
funds not be used for
collaborations between other
government agencies and ICE, we
do not want our money to be used
for the deportation or detention
of our people as we are an
integral part of New Mexico's
economy. Let's not allow our
families to be separated. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lena
Weber, the interim policy
director with the ACLU of New
Mexico. We are honored to stand
in support of SB 250 as a
powerful piece of legislation
that would ensure New Mexican
resources go towards the many
pressing issues that we face,
rather than to subsidize the
federal government. The law is
clear that the federal
government cannot compel states
to carry out its policies, that
states have the right under the
10th Amendment to leave that
work to the federal government.
So concerns about
federal preemption should not be
a barrier. In 2022, the Seventh
Circuit upheld a state law
limiting local participation in
immigration enforcement,
reinforcing that states can make
their own decisions about
resource allocation. Similarly,
in 2018, the US Supreme Court
reaffirmed that the federal
government cannot
Previous threats by the federal
government to withhold funding
because of laws like this.
Have been blocked by the courts
because federal law doesn't
require states to carry out
federal immigration enforcement.
Once again, it can't under the
10th Amendment. SB 250 simply
ensures that New Mexico can
focus our time and resources on
caring for our communities
rather than separating them. We
strongly urge you to pass SB
250.
Good evening, round chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Kara and I'm a um fellow
with the Quality New Mexico. I'm
here to express our support for
Een bill 250. Immigrants are an
integral part of New Mexico and
recent federal efforts to to
attack immigrants are an attack
on all of us. We all deserve to
feel safe in our communities
regardless of our immigration
status, whether it's ours or our
family's.
When local enforcement is
charged with enforcing federal
immigration law, immigrants and
local communities become fearful
all law enforcement.
LGBTQ immigrants are especially
at risk for violence in our
communities, and we need to
maintain an environment in which
they feel comfortable reporting
violence and crimes to local law
enforcement. We believe that all
New Mexicans are safer when
local law enforcement are
trusted partners, and community
safety, including among our
immigrant neighbors. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition here in the room?
See none going to Zoom.
I do have.
Matt
I don't want to, what's your
last name, but
Matt, are you there?
Yeah, it's getting more, uh, I
almost said good morning. Good
evening. It's been a long day.
My name is Matt Moraki, a member
of the executive team at EAse
Communitario as a local
nonprofit domestic violence
service provider for Central New
Mexico's Latinan immigrant
communities and last stands in
strong support of SB 250.
Immigrant community members here
in New Mexico, including the
domestic violence survivors whom
we serve need more robust
protections to ensure that no
local or state resources are
used in the enforcement of
federal immigration law.
Domestic violence survivors must
often interface with law
enforcement or local and state
legal systems as they work to
address their domestic violence
situations. However,
perpetrators of violence often
weaponize the systems against
survivors or attempt to get the
survivor arrested or otherwise
detained by
local law enforcement for lack
of immigration status.
This example of system
weaponization is just one way
perpetrators of violence attempt
to silence domestic violence
survivors, but SB 250 will
reduce the ability of local and
state resources from being part
of this weaponization against
survivors of violence. We urge
the committee's support of SB
250 with a due pass. Thank you
so much.
Thank you, Barbara Norris.
Yeah
Hello, here I am.
Um
I, uh, am here to speak for the
Santa Fe chapter of Indivisible,
and in a meeting that we had a
few weeks ago, we discussed SB
250 and we all voted, um, that
we
Fully support this bill. We feel
that um states have uh a
responsibility to stand up for
their people in the face of the
administration's assaults on our
rights.
And number 2,
We support the bill because New
Mexico and other blue states
have to conserve their resources
as Trump threatens to cut off
federal funds. So we urge you to
pass SB 250.
Thank you. Next is Mary Allen
Garcia.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Mary Ellen Garcia,
CEO of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic Violence, and
on behalf of the 32 domestic
violence providers statewide,
along with the city of
Albuquerque domestic violence
and sexual assault commission,
we stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 250. This is not
just a bill about policy. It is
about public safety, trust in
our institutions and ensuring
that all New Mexicans can live
without fear of violence or
retaliation. Senate Bill 250 is
a crucial step towards ensuring
that every New Mexican
regardless of their immigration
status can access emergency
services, report crimes, and
seek assistance without fears.
Our communities are safer when
trust between local agencies and
our immigrant families remains
strong, diverting local
resources to enforce federal
immigration laws, not only
undermines public safety, but
also drains critical funding
from essential services. This
bill reaffirms the public safety
should serve all residents and
uphold our values.
New Mexicans, keeping families
together and strengthening the
bonds between our law
enforcement, our criminal
justice system, and the
communities that they protect.
Again, we stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 250.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Juan Carlos Diaz. Hi, can you
guys hear me?
Yes.
Hello?
Uh, thank you, madam. Uh,
chairman and senators. My name
is Carlos Diaz and I just like
to express my support for SB
250, um, is
It's a good bill to protect the
people of New Mexico, um.
That helps drive um our our
economy and uh I would like to
encourage the senators from Lee.
County to consider that some of
the people that works in the uh
in the oil fields.
All immigrants and because of
the they do, uh, or a state all
the way to Bernalillo, where Mr.
Blo represents people, um, we're
benefiting from the work that
they do. So, this bill has what
some people that oppose
immigration, um, gives, uh, they
won, right, which is uh those
who commit crimes, they will be
held accountable, but those who
help our communities in our
state.
Be better and prosperous is
going to protect them because we
value their work and their
effort. So, that's all I want to
share with you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Sylvia
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee. Um, my name is Sylvia
Uyoa with Denim Cafe, we're a
community organizing nonprofit,
working with communities
throughout southern New Mexico.
We know firsthand that people
are experiencing fear and facing
discrimination in the current
political climate, some of our
families, hardworking,
law-abiding residents who power
our local economy, are staying
blockaded in their homes and
keeping their children out of
school because of this fear. And
just last week, all people were
being turned away from vital
health care services at the.
Ben Archer Health clinics if
they couldn't provide proof of
citizenship, contrary to state
and federal law.
This was her this hurt not only
undocumented residents, but
legal residents and citizens who
don't expect to need a birth
certificate for a doctor's
appointment.
New Mexico must fight back
against this kind of
terrorization. It hurts not only
undocumented people but mixed at
as families and US citizens like
Native Americans and Latinos
who've already been wrongly
questioned and detained by
federal authorities.
SP 250 reflects our New Mexico
values and on behalf of our
members, I strongly urge you to
vote yes on SB 250. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Is there anyone in opposition?
There was no one in opposition.
So senators, as I mentioned
before, this is the opening.
We've had we've heard testimony.
On Wednesday we'll proceed just
on for discussion on the
legislation itself.
I'm
And.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, members. Muss.
Committee members we are
finished for the day and we'll
see you on Wednesday. Thank you.
