Background check.
And madame second very sorry
about this we we thought we get
out earlier
thank you mister chairs that the
aging and log terminal services
department has hundreds of
employees agency volunteers and
programs that helped the aging
and disabled population right
here new mexico now they do
vital work that i've been
requires agency employees and
volunteers to go into vulnerable
individuals living spaces and
requires access to sensitive
information but this bill does
mister chairman is it seeks to
give aging and long term
services department the
authority to conduct a
background checks on staff
potential staff and volunteers
that have access to vulnerable
adults and their personal
information now this bill is
modeled after the authority of c
y f t and e c e c d as each of
these agencies served vulnerable
populations now today I have
with me or this evening I have
the secretary of the new mexico
aging and long term services
department who is here to give
some expert testimony and who
may want to say something about
the bill.
Mister chair members of the
committee thank you senator
this bill is just really about
protecting bottom ball adults
our agency has several different
programs and our staff go into
very intimate situations of
homes we have our ombudsman
program where they go into
facilities and represent
residents we have staff that
have significant access to
private information in our call
centers when people are asking
about specific programs and
insurance that would help them
with their
particular health imperaments so
are gold here is just to make
sure that we're doing our due
diligence as a state agency and
protecting those vulnerable
populations
thank you is there anyone here
in support of this bill
yesterday center.
Mister comma use the mike to
the.
The web name mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you very much for them sector my
name is sent about us i'm with
the new mexico i'm healthcare
association in mexico center for
assisted living our membership
includes sixty four of the sixty
eight nursing facilities in the
state of new mexico and over
eighty assisted living facility
providers
are our members have daily
interactions with the aging long
term services department with
staff and volunteers especially
with the ombudsman's office
we send its part of the bill
given the vulnerable populations
that that that that are live in
these facilities and live in
these in these buildings so
thank you very much and we
appreciate the secretary and the
sponsor.
Anybody else anybody in
opposition.
Anybody on the members of the
committee.
With motion for a dupless
second.
The question senator neighbor
thank you mister chair
mister.
Opera on page three paragraph
fee that runs over to page four
just comment that in light of
what uh the chair of judiciary
said the.
Is the epr exemption also in
epra.
The.
The.
Mr chairman senator would you
mind restating the question.
Yeah sir mr.
The.
Senator earlier today the chair
of judiciary reminder this all
that for exemptions all needed
to be and epra even if there are
some place else and my question
is and page three is these ever
exemption in epra as well as
here or.
Did we forget to do that.
Madam chair members of the
committee sarah jacobs deputy
secretary for aging a long term
services it is in there senator
neighborhood i'm as well book we
put it in this statute as well
so
good
I had a question who pays for
these
up mr chair members of the
committee that would be our
agency
and you have the budget we deal
with all the volunteers and
everything we do.
Senator so the olympics.
The.
The.
Regarding this issue
thank you mister chairman thank
you.
That are hard meal center city
look as the band the box of
doesn't prohibit any agency any
any entity from doing a
background check did merely
doesn't have that question on
the initial application so I
believe that the department
will have the full information
to do the background checks
with everybody applying.
Mr chairman is committee senator
I believe what you're saying is
that with someone applies for a
job with the state will they be
told in advance that they will
have to do a background check
and they won't know that they
will have to pass a background
check and they're off their any
kind of offer would be
contention upon them passing
thank you mister.
Yeah.
The.
Any other discussion.
We have emotion.
The.
In the second.
So could very well call the
role.
The.
Still trying to get her to be.
Well it's let's go ahead with
the what the vote senator hiki
senator hiki votes yes center
masters yes center masters votes
yes center in my curtain so my
catch involves yes center
mechanic.
Yes
yeah a chairman I can't get on
on camera right now but but we
can hear you so how do you vote
okay yes
yes center neighbor center
neighborhoods yes in a
resperious center city a lot
best yes says that your love is
votes yes senator tom man
senator man wells yes that is a
pinoch yes center it is if you
know what's yes.
Regulations on a boat of each of
the affirmative zero and the
negative you have to do past
recommendations thank you mister
chairman it the road i'm running
to another bill thank you okay
we'll go now to who's here
where did I be so to go
dinner yeah.
Stone born.
And somebody's going to do my
stuff is going to do senator
worst we could do that
senator masters is going to do
senator worth bill so we could
go to that.
Oh good you're going to decent
interverse bill great listed
this is senate bill.
The.
Two oh eight automatic license
plate redirect
and is there an amendment.
I think I think there's an
amendment.
The.
Thank you mister term
i'm joined by daniel williams of
the
account you and we have an
amendment where we'd like to
propose can i.
And I discussed the amendment as
well as the bill.
Yeah.
Okay these look like pretty
simple so when we just start
with the explanation of the bill
and then we'll go to the
amendment thank you mister
terman this is a senate bill two
hundred eight
i'm presenting it for a leader
worse essentially
we have the technology now
to read license place you know
that back the all day the
opposite would type it in right
type it into their internal
computer system and it would
come back.
Where the hit so to speak it
would come back whether it was
registered whether it was stolen
with the lights plate master the
vehicle yes no maybe now there's
readers that do that they can
read the license plate and it's
amazing but anyway there's
this this this technology is so
advanced that it not only just
reads it but also maintains it.
For a time to see if our current
did an ordinance that allows law
enforcement to maintain this
information for up to one year
that that makes no sense on so
with this bill does it put a
limit on maintaining that
information at two weeks the
amendment merely inserts of new
mexico.
A state of new mexico state and
mexico state mexico and then it
strikes seven days on page four
line five
strikes seven days and inserts
fourteen days and so that's kind
of the crucks of the amendment
on page four line five
is a striking license plate data
in an automatic license plate
reader system shall be deleted
after fourteen days.
If there is not an alert.
So that's
right now turn over to mr
williams and and do you have a
this is okay with the civilian.
Thank you mister chair yes this
is absolutely okay with us are
we negotiated this
this is this was a request from
the governor's office so we are
very okay with fourteen days
nothing I would add to senator
my assistance introduction of
the bell is that one of the
things that is a concern for us
with the data that's being
collected by these automatic
license plate readers are a l p
r's is that we can don't have
any regulation on how that data
can be shared.
And so why are the concerns is
that these third party vendors
you hold who hold the data
can be sharing its really kind
of without the knowledge of the
lawn first agency and so that's
that's just another thing that
the
bill does but yes these the the
changes in the amendment are
very minimal to us and and we
think as the center said they're
pretty simple
okay so this good emotional need
on the
and
we have emotion to amend it to
adopt the amendment any further
debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
built of the amended and we'll
go to the audience anybody.
Such as it is.
Anybody in the hotel was it yes
marco are you for again well
mister
you're not right in favor for
against you I talked to some of
the issues it's a brand new
issue and I might have been
using like.
The.
Thank you mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is markovin's allice and I am
richard obvious for flock uh
safety and fluck has these kinds
of systems and about twenty
different law fortunate agencies
across the state from donator to
farmington last crucials to
moragos alamos to las vegas we
around show this but you'll
burden the old copy time they're
important it's an important
crime fighting tool and my claim
believes uh that there does need
to be appropriate guard rails
and so that's why we're not
opposed to this bill it is a new
issue it hasn't come before the
legislature during the interim
there hasn't been any discussion
about it and so what we would
like to do is engage in a
constructive conversation with
the proponents and there are
some areas where we would like
to address this
fourteen day a time limit the
standard for flock in many of
these jurisdictions is thirty
days we don't think that's
unreasonable given the
year long that some other
sixties we don't have the
serious albuquerque ourselves
it's somebody else but there are
those kinds of things that we
like to address before we get to
the next committee and I would
just like to say that this is an
important tool we don't should
not in a thirty day session
throw the you know crime
fighting baby out with a
regulatory bathwater
there are numerous headlines
about cases in new mexico that
are very impactful and these are
just some of the headlines and
i'd be happy to share with any
member of the committee the
details of them but these are
how it helped hidnap child
recovered lpr's a recover
missing elderly woman recover
stolen vehicles we land period
arrest alleged terrorism
suspects women want it for
murder arrested in bluefield
espinola fenton of us these are
all the kinds of different areas
where this kind of technology is
helping lawn first so not to
oppose and would like to get
some reasonable conversations
going because it is new i've not
made anybody from the aclu or
the other proponent.
And I would just simply request
that we be heard and i've i've
talked to the sponsor into the
majority leader and so with that
mister chairman we hope there
could be put in place we need
for guard reals that we would
definitely support so with that
I think you miss your chairman
and members of the committee for
here in the south so i'm not
clear this doesn't have
meaningful guard really
the one particular one would be
the thirty day versus the
fourteen day on the standard at
all of these police departments
that I just mentioned across
mexico is thirty days in most of
the other jurisdictions and
probably where some concerns
lies in jurisdictions where it's
a year and that is an issue and
there are a couple of other
issues that are in the bill
relative toward
the the way the data can be
accessed by systems versus by
you know sorts of are categored
categories of crime and the like
but without getting into the
details of all that because i've
never actually had a
conversation with them but we'd
like to carry that on between
now and the next committee
because to judiciary
so you're saying.
The police departments need to
hang on to this data for longer
than fourteen days for longer
than fourteen and the standard
at all of these jurisdictions
that I just mentioned is thirty
so it would be changing things
round I know and have talked to
several other while I have
talked to at least a couple of
long forcement agencies who are
concerned about some of the
restrictions on what they can
and cannot capture but yet in
terms of the the first part is
definitely the thirty day uh
limitation which is standard for
all those different kinds of
uh you know the various police
departments that we talked
about.
Or that I raised okay thank you
marco thank you matcher and
Did you want to address this.
Yes mr chair thank you so much
my name is sarah fitzgerald's
i'm with the greater album
cookie chamber of commerce and
we are in support of this bill
technology has given us some
really powerful crime fighting
tools and recent years and
that's helped us make some
really important progress in
ensuring that crime is met was
swift in certain consequences
this bill will make sure we can
use one really important piece
of their technology to its full
potential we also have some
questions about the wiping of
the state after just seven days
so we do encourage the sponsor
to work closely with our law
enforcement agencies just to
make sure that's a workable
timeline for investigations
thank you.
Thank you miss.
Okay members of the committee
discussion senator were cutting.
Okay
mister and center
I I support this I just want to
have the comment that she
doesn't do as much good to
realize this plate and not be
able to stop the perpetrator
we've got something that's
dangerous maybe this would speak
that up maybe this will give us
a threshold with which we can
pursue you know felds are
fugitives or anything like that
but III do support it but know
that you know especially in
albuquerque we have got such
high vehicles after it becomes
really difficult to appreciate
the perpetrators if we can't
actually chase them so thank
you.
Thank you senator neighborhood
you're next.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you senator for fill in in.
This issue
really.
Raises
some concerns about where do we
go from unlawful searches and
seizures to.
Uh
I guess lawful successors.
Yep
you know I think we as society
are grappling with where that
lines out this this bill kind of
brings that in the focus for me
anyway.
On page two line three.
These are not just reader
systems that are in police cars
but
these are readers that can be
mounted.
Basically one calm and
structures throughout the
community.
And so you know the public.
Would generally not be aware
that these things are even
eighteen images of their their
vehicle frankly of them.
And so I I just
think that we need to have a
discussion regarding that and so
much my my question mister
chaired and senator is.
As a bin any case war that has.
Guided states and addressing.
That issue as to where these
types of devices can be placed.
They're use and uh maybe the
information that's gathered from
before I turn over to mister
williams mister chairman center
night let me kind of give up
over you for the.
Folks keeping score at home
essentially.
Um.
London I think london every
single street corner is build.
Um it's gonna be technology's
going to be more and more part
of our lives there's nothing
that prohibits the government
from taking photographs there's
nothing that prohibits the
government from following you
around from the moment you leave
your house when I see a
government I mean law
enforcement or a cop.
That's why we think it's
reasonable to keep those images
for fourteen days let's say
there's up an alleged could not
be in which the.
A person gets three numbers on a
license plated then they go down
this particular they can check
the cameras on the road identify
the car stuff like that.
But the fourth of minute deals
with seizure when a when a
policeman pulls the car over
there not pulling over the car
necessarily they're seizing the
driver.
The police are not allowed to
question passengers in a vehicle
in its they make I don't know
what the magic words are but
they make a move movements that
give that give card you know
give them.
Yeah they didn't know it's not a
result but it gives them
nor gives a copper reason to
believe that they may be in
danger or that something might
be up anyway the police if the
pip if a car has a bad license
plate on a doesn't up a
registration if the license
plate doesn't match the car
it's it's completely hundreds
and property pull that car over
because the driver of the
vehicle is in violation of the
traffic but anyway I don't in
terms of caselike don't know.
Thank you mister chairs that are
neighbor first thing I stay
people here that I work at the
so you and they assume i'm a
lawyer that is not the case so I
will say that the senator is a
lawyer I am not one I I would
say that the bright and center
for justice has a white paper on
ours that covers in depth
a lot of the current case law so
I was just looking at that there
have been some there's the
supreme court has not dealt with
this yet it did deal a couple of
years ago in a case called
carpenter US on a sort of
similar cell phone location
tracking software
it's not clear how if that's
going to apply to a lprs and
state courts and some appeals
courts have dealt with this
named delta ways as far as how
interest this is from a fourth
from a fourth moment perspective
whether a head on the a l p r
hotlists constitutes probable
cause for for searching vehicle
whether or not it's an invasion
of privacy things like that so
it's really developing area of
love because he as you and the
senator pointed out.
Fifty years ago even thirty
years ago we didn't have these
key phillies and officer city at
the side of the road writing
down a license plates and that.
Is very different than a camera
that can record thousands of
pictures in a minute I believe.
And our collecting.
I'm a lot of this data and
potentially started over a long
time so so the short answer
mister chair senator
neighborhood is that it's at a
it's an emergent area of line we
don't have clear guidance from
the courts yet.
And
mr chairman senator if.
If I recall forty three years
ago when I was in criminal law.
In my first year law school the
state could not play say gps
device on a vehicle.
Without a warn.
But yeah.
With technology.
You don't need the gps anymore.
If as yours example in london.
If you have cameras on every
street corner.
You don't need a gps device
factor you have something better
yet pictures
in real time of where this
vehicle's heading which turned
which person now almost hit the
cross walk you know all the
stuff
so you have a lot more
information that you're
collecting here if you have
sufficient numbers of of these
cameras.
And so you know I I on the one
hand this is great for law
enforcement.
On the other hand I grapple
with.
Where that is because you you
really.
Have.
The.
Big brother watching you have.
Twenty four hours a day.
Or potentially I mean
you're in some time driving
around for twenty four yeah or
or walking or sleeping on the
current whatever you know it's
collecting data all the time and
so I I i'm torn.
Between the the benefits to
police same benefits to
prosecution benefits to society
in that respect but on the other
respect the.
Right of the individual uh
so
and we're not going to we're not
going to have an answer to night
but but I think we all have to
grapple with with that precise
issue and this is putting the
spot right on it
with respect to section three of
the bill that's page two line
seventeen following I understand
this incorrectly
you can use the technology.
Automatically to check certain
things and they are enumerated
and some paragraphs won through
seven.
But then subs and paragraph b.
You have to manually enter
the information
to do some other things
and i'm wondering why if we have
the technology and it does all
this why do we have the step
where you have to manually enter
it for this stuff but it is
automatically entered for her
graphic.
Thank you mister chair senator
so.
You're right that's so section a
is about these instantaneous
search.
And that's what the cameras can
do automatically section b is
the manually entering
as as an additional step so if
an officer sees a car and both
and determines that it's one of
these things on registered
registers someone has a felony
unsafe commercial vehicle or
parts illegally they can they
can do the additional step of
manually running at through the
system.
So so mister chairman center
does that involve more than just
identifying okay I have this
license plate at this location
from this camera.
The.
Do they just click a battery and
say we were run it with respect
to that image or do they have to
sit there and type in the
license plate the color of the
car and spend you know several
minutes entering that stuff
manually I I guess i'm grappling
for how much information is the
officer going to have to sit
there
and manually do yes.
The technologies there that you
say here it is just upload it
you know.
Mr chair senator neighborhood
thank you I think it depends on
I will say that i'm not a
hundred percent sure the answer
to your question I think it
depends on that pr system that's
used that have they have
different cability is both on
the hardware side and the
software side and I don't my
understanding is that this is
not an owner's process okay and
mister center is the requirement
uh to have had the manual entry.
Dan so that you have at least
some.
I guess the suspicion that you
need to engage in that
activities so it's just not
automatically done on everything
but that you have an officer if
you sitting there saying I need
more information on this
particular life and plate number
and force them to go through the
thought prices why they may need
that information and then have
it right is that.
Is that kind of what's going on
but I think mr gonzalez says
some ideas about that lease for
his.
I'm any time that the system is
accessed
a case number is required and
also in explanation so that
there's a complete permanent
order to trail ensuring
accountability of transparency
and and again you're correct
senator debt there's no private
individual who's accessing this
information it is the police
officers and of course another
point is that you know for at
least flock no facial
recognition and and also.
They don't sell doubt anybody
and those are two really things
that they are and things that
they're not that we have to be
careful so that we don't get
mixed up it go too far down the
road but I wanted to make those
points and that's what it works
for fluck safety systems but but
flocked even flocked us with
this permits that is taking a
odor group of the driver no
passengers and not the driver
the passenger's only the
license plate
will this this law would remit
some other system that may take
a picture.
And that's why we are in favor
of good guy posts and got guard
rails and and we're happy to
work with the sponsors and and
the advocates on that.
Thank you mister chairman and
senator paragraph four the
three
section three
three
it says commercial vehicle that
is unsafe carrying contraband
we're not registered with the
federal state department of
transportation I can understand
how the image may reflect it's
not registered through this
process.
But how would these images
determine that the vehicles and
safe or carrying contraband.
It seems like I think it goes
back the other way.
Right yes thank you mister
charles
pino is correct so this is when
the officer makes the
determination that the vehicle
is carrying contributions the
officer can then run run the
license plate through the
system.
Camera.
So so the the vehicles already
been determined to abandon safe
or carrying contraband and they
can go back and search track all
the other stuff track it's
history I guess and
mister charles and it are
correct they so they can they
can manually enter the license
plate into the system it going
back in time.
And then a car parked illegally
in an area that is not open to
the public and secured by clear
boundaries would that be private
property.
The.
Thank you mister chair senator I
I believe this was more intended
to cover sort of secured areas
but as it reads it sounds like
it could suggest private
property.
Security areas is in like uhm.
Sensitive sensitive occasion.
So the fact that the cars just
happened we parked on.
The side of a street illegally
double parked parked in a no
parking zone.
That's open to the public so
that wouldn't be so.
III kinda wonder really what
we're getting at here and you
might you might want to give
some thought.
Suspicious.
Parking in areas that we thought
of I close a parking there they.
Planning around
mister chair that's right I
think we can't we might revisit
that language but I believe that
was the intent for for that
particular.
So paragraph the mister chair
make they parked legally and
front of a federal courthouse.
And blew the place up I would
think that you would want to to
get this data on that vehicle
and this would not allow them
so.
I I think maybe you might want
to deal with with that
paragraph.
Illegally illegally park not
open to the public I think has
more of a problem for me than
the illegally part.
And then there secured by.
Boundaries uh III just don't
know what uh what we're trying
to get out there.
And then if we're going down
this road.
I thought seven days was way too
short it's now been amended to
fourteen but i'm wondering why.
Why were were even shortening at
the two weeks I mean if the date
is important we may need to have
it.
Therefore a longer period I
think mister gonzalez suggests
that thirty days
and that you know a month may
send some more reasonable.
Again i'm still having trouble
balancing that if we're going to
do it.
Fourteen days still seems pretty
pretty quick.
Mister chair that's all the
questions I had for now but i'm
gonna have to struggle a while
before this makes it through the
process to see who her I come
out on the comforting cos i'm
not sure I found the line that
i'd like to see so thank you
very much thank you senator
anybody else senator city
thank you
i'm really happy about a fill
that starts put guy rails I am
this kind of technology some
really happy thank you for
bringing it
I had a couple of questions kind
of along those lines of stuff
kind of striking striking the
balance although we might strike
it really
so this on page four c one
starting line seventeen sharing
data with third parties within
the state or outside the state
unless the third parties have
policies that conform to the
requirements of the automated
license plate redirect which is
this
will
or what might be some kind of
agency or interest third party
that would have similar policies
mister charles thursday because
I would imagine other long force
major office so if the other law
enforcement agency had a policy
of thirty days.
Would would that
would there be no data sharing.
Mr.
The time reading it.
Which is call I just want to
know.
Have policies that conform to
the requirements of the act
obviously.
Informed to them.
Thank you mister chair centers
as I believe that that is the
intention here both making sure
that it's been share that this
data has been shared to folks
we're going to protect it in the
same way that our law
enforcement protect debt both in
terms of not retain its for
excessive periods of time but
also in terms of not then
sharing its
chain of sharing where I share
with you you share with someone
else and then it's
also outside the state not I I
think that's really important to
really important guard real
because has you recalled mvd was
sharing data
very inappropriately and so that
I think that that really should
be strengthened and I personally
think like for fourteen days if
they can't figure out why they
need it in fourteen days then.
You know what what difference in
a couple more weeks make if
they're really investigating it
and then this is a little
weirdness I think i'm page five
it says a long force of agency
that uses automatic license
plate reader system shall
promote get ruled concert and
retaining a deleting license
plate data I thought we just
said it was fourteen days so
what what other rules.
So mister chairman service
that's what the executive branch
loves to do this promo gave
rules I would imagine that come
up with the two.
This.
It seemed a little inconsistent
to me cause we the bill
addresses that issue so then
what what additional rules would
you have.
Um and I I think it's important
that if they do during rule to
rules that they're not expanded
which I think is is implicit but
I just was confused like wait a
minute what rules are we talking
about and then
that point.
With that be rules dealing with
the data that they determine is
material
they need to use it.
So so they get keep them.
Then that and they need a
promulgate rules as the how long
ping it's
until the case is completed okay
that makes sense that that does
make sense I just didn't read it
you know just hit me a little
i'd and then on page five.
Um I think this provision of
that this reader system shall
not be used by launforce for
enforcement agency to
intentionally target individual
group community blah blah blah
although I think that that's
really crucial to this bill
however I don't see a
consequence so what's the
consequence if they do this.
I think it would well
see because no that's a great
question I because I was asking
the alternative question why is
it in the bill when it's the
better constitution but I think
to just to put it in the
building besides the no.
Consequence would be they can't
use it in court
that's true for a
constitutional that's that's for
the use of material that is
unconstitutional so you have to
make the constitutional claim I
think this is a little bit
broader cause it goes into
serious medical condition
spouse affiliation
and I don't know the pregnancy
of pregnancy related condition
has been incorporated into.
This.
When you ret.
You know I mean I think I think
there's a little broader I think
it's great that it's a little
broader but this will broader
than the constitution in the
constitutional only allows you
to exclude evidence.
And so would be great if it said
if they did that then it should
be excluded that would be a
consequence or if they did that
I don't you know what I mean
they I just don't see a
consequence
I guess the courts might fashion
a compare consequence but it.
I don't know i'm i'm supporting
the bill i'm just raising this
as a question.
Um.
You know
I always think.
What is the problem with trying
to address and I see this
problem how are we addressing it
is it effective is it is the
second point and i've just
saying you know just throwing
out a great language without a
consequence.
I don't know if that's enough
you know so
but i'm supporting the bill I am
not even suggesting that you fix
it before before judiciary i'm
just throwing this out his.
Okay any other discussion.
What's a move which the will the
committee.
The.
But we did we did as amended you
just need to add it as amended
as a mandate
okay okay secretary will call
the role you're okay yeah I just
was trying to second it yeah I
can do deal open and macage and
but
this will be a bad post
senator
yes then a regular cs center may
ask us that my says votes yes
senator mccartin are my catch
involved is center mechanic yes
that are mechanicals yes in her
neighbor.
Send a neighbor of votes yes
center city yes seems to look as
votes yes senator man sent until
manvotes yes center it's easy to
be no yes senators appear now
votes yes so by a vote of
eighteen year from it is zero
percent.
And until judiciary.
Okay senator if you sort of
followed by senator steinberg.
Thank you mister members of the
committee I hear present senate
bill one seventy eight so the
situation that arises said about
one seventy eight there's only
four pages for lines.
Of amended language and senate
build once update the fund I
think i'm paped through the
bill.
Is so what i'm sixteen let's say
I go through a gas station on
the judge delinquents
and then when I turn
when I become an adult
I am.
I decide first all I got paper
which means i'm no longer
probation and so she was he
false in order so my record.
And that stealing of my record
is properly and because it's
probably them when I decided to
get idea for me to go by two
three ak
platform
guns farms then
when next checks with our state
does the estate agency will see
and they say zero is that we
should block this else he's
looking at my jacket and they're
seeing what I did and I think
there's a good reason to black
this.
But they see the sealing order
and they write back there's no
reason we can tell you
and so next doesn't black the
sale
and so what this does is it it
provides a very very narrow
exception of the ceiling order
the very narrow exception of the
sealing order is that the
ceiling order does not apply
when an inquiry is made to alc
bite mix.
And the underlying of fence that
caused the delinquency had to do
with possession of use of a
firearm.
So if what I did didn't have to
do the position you're so far
they were sponsored no reason we
can tell
to block his health.
If anybody else asked they say
nothing we can take it is only
if next asks there are literally
thousands of these that happen a
year.
And it will just simply allow
them to be able to respond back
without mischairman we have to
stand for questions.
Anybody in the audience here for
this bill.
Anybody on the way do you have
somebody on the
design
sarah fish gerald you're on zoom
what is your comment on this.
The evening mr chair thanks
again a serious fitzer with the
greater albuquerque chamber of
commerce and we are in support
of this bill we know that people
can change and we know that far
too many of new mexico's kids
have very difficult and often
traumatic childhoods but on the
other hand employers should be
informed on what happened in a
job applicants passed when it
comes to records relating to
violent crime they have an
interest in protecting
themselves their employees and
their customers and as the rise
and gun among our youth
continues especially among our
teams who were fast approaching
legal adulthood these kinds of
incidents should show up on a
background check for the collect
collective benefit of everyone
in our community thank you.
Thank you thank you
members of the committee.
Any other discussion
don't look over the editor never
sorry mystery to her.
Is mr chair
senator as you know i'm not
wondering it's particularly in
favor of ceiling records to
begin with.
So uh I may sound a little
different critical here and
arguing uh this bill but.
It just seems a
if we're going to see your all
the records.
Except for this one thing it
seems odd that it doesn't get to
the very point that was made by
the outcookie chamber commerce
and that is violent crime.
This is just simple
i'm laughing or possession of
the firearm
and as you know the.
Ability of a person under
eighteen years of age to utilize
a firearm is fairly limited
so any other possession about
firearm would be among awful use
would it not
at the sherman and said I would
you I apologize I was.
Distracted by the measure of the
courts appalled dressing for not
having somebody here tonight
that's why the soap got budget
please well mister chairman
center of the question is with
respect to.
Teenagers are young people under
the age of eighteen
there ability to lawfully have
possession of a firearm is
fairly limited it's not
unfettered.
And so a lot of
use their mere possession of a
firearm unless it fits with him
one of those exceptions that
would be
one of the things that would
categorize them in this even if
they had really know intention
to to do anything.
And it doesn't deal with the
issue raised by the albuquerque
chamber commerce which was
violent crime.
And so we're casting this net to
single out unlawful user
possession of a firearm.
But we're not casting the net to
do what what the album chamber
was advocate for
and so I I i'm a little
concerned that that because we
restrict
juveniles.
With their lawful use of a
firearm hunting
you know with with a parent
at the range yeah
high school or otc things of
that nature those are specific
reception.
But any other use is generally
prohibited
so so I think we're were
the same way in something out
and we're going to say that's
going to follow you forever even
though the violent crime we're
going to get the eraser out on
that we're gonna get our race
are out on everything else but
if you have a firearm there
maybe you're just
you know
have it
forgot about it you're something
that's going to follow you
even after your eighteen years
ago so I just point that out
generally do not like records
mean sealed it off but uh to
unsee this for for just some
narrow purpose and it really
does it go to commission of the
firearm and that in connection
with their crime
mir near possession of the times
would be the cry so do you
understand what what my concern
is miss and center i've heard so
so first walt let's let's that's
very quickly impact that so so
there there are three separate
premiums right one is possession
one is used one is ownership.
Um
and and a fourth is purchase
right if you're if you're under
the age of eighteen you cannot
purchase on
however you can on
europe
you can use under many
circumstances and you can
possess under many circumstances
so mere possession mirror use
does that necessarily create a
delinquent
this would only be this would
only go to something where you
have been a judge to be
delivered.
This would only go to something
where you were a judge to be the
link when and a formal
proceeding had taken place man
informal.
And so whereas so many of the
juvenile are proceedings and
have been being adjudicated and
an informal matter
the the the lesser once I should
say where where were people
where it which which are more of
a regulatory.
Nature tend to be a adjudicated
and more of an informal map
there's there's no the the first
that is not does not have a
record to have sealed.
If it is a judiciated important
so so that's only impact those
those proceedings that that rise
to the level of the children's
court
dealing with them and they
formal men
and where someone was a judge
delinquent.
And and then where there were
there were the record there were
sealed on state once they were
not paid.
And so and so
well I while I hear the concern
that you're raising the the the
kinds of situations that you are
they shall bring up on our our
situations which for which first
well I don't believe someone
would be
what would enter into the
children's court process and if
they did it as the kind of
product that kind of situation
unless the person had
extensively already had multiple
contacts with the children's
course or process where they
would be informally was
again that that's that's why
concern.
You know the
I know why you're bringing it
but it just uh
it's difficult to see a person
who could be doing real harm.
You know.
Because of if they used a knife
instead of a firearm.
That would be sealed
but if they had a.
They got the fight had a gun on
their possession but never used
it.
They would probably
face their consequences of this
bill.
It's it's.
Thank you mister chair thank you
sir senator city
thank you mister chair thank you
for bringing this bill the way I
see this bill is this bill just
complies kind of like we did
with the domestic violence and
and domestic violence and
going to fill whatever that was
it this is just complying and
bring us in line with federal
law because the bipartisan safer
communities act in twenty twenty
two
address juvenile records and it
said that a firearms transfer
provision to include present but
previously for a potentially
disqualifying records of the
juvenile so so that I mean to me
this is just complying with what
federal law requires an in
allows.
The aoc to disclose correct so I
I think that it's
it's just.
Helping the state to bring it in
line with federal law.
And and and mister
I will say senator neighbor.
If it would if it would get your
vote on the spell because I
would like for to be by person.
There would be nice if you
wanted to attempt
to strike use or I would i'm
sorry or possession.
So that would be unlawful use of
a firearm.
I would I would consider I would
consider that friendly but it
would be up to the committee.
You might lose my okay
but it would like said it would
it would be up to the committee.
Mister
and center
I I wish we could tie to a
violent act.
Using connection where they
violent act
because they're they're using
the weapon unlawful.
Uhm here and that would
I mean I would argue that that
should not be sealed in any
but
I do have some concerns with the
breadth otherwise.
That's a really the committee we
have if we have a motion
further sector will call the
rule
senator hickey yes senator he
give out yes senate may
said as well yes so my catch in
center mechanic.
Yes that are making a vote yes
sent senator neighbor.
Senator neighborhood no senator
speriod center city of locus yes
center city look as well yes
sometime on boats yes center
it's easy to know yes that are
to the penalty votes yes so you
have a suburb of load of six to
what six in the in the
affirmative one in the negative
with two excuse you have to do
that thank you members when it
said about two o four is no
we're gonna rule that and it's
going to draw a bigger crowd
have a good night thank you very
much
determined could you refresh our
memory as to which bills are
been taken off oh okay so we've
taken off seventy one.
We've taken off two oh four.
And we've taken off two forty
eight
it still leaves us about five
but we can get them done and if
I take him in the order on this
list
so how senator
will do more your steinborn
rodriguez.
The.
I always have in the senate
finance committee in hassle
where bills don't pass I think
we can go back into senate
finance did you get some food
center is right up there help
you so what is very good.
But they the world is very good
yeah
I think it's a high quarters
mister
mister chairman then a bill one
forty two requires notification
of
of
residential baber house facility
to allow patience your
opportunity to notify the
patient's family that that
patient has been admitted
this is from last year this bill
was her and I think it was
amended in judiciary.
We have a problem in gallop
making the county and maybe in
the population across the us
when a person is intoxicated or
taken into behavior a health
facility that they are not
allowed to notify anyone in
their families no one knows
where they went they just
disappear in so we're just
requesting that they notify or
allow them to notify that their
families where they are
in arizona they were capturing
in them in gallop holiday them
to phoenix and
and then they're disappearing in
no one knows where they're at
they weren't allowing them to do
anything and then when they're
medicaid funds ran out or they
cause the problem they kicked
them out on the street they
weren't
the police when handle on no one
would handle them and so
everybody was looking to where
these people went currently
there's in this morning's news
in arizona
there's a whole hotel for the
people that were taken in in use
for a medicate funds and weren't
allowed to notify their families
where they're at so that's
pretty much when you spilled.
Well let's go it is everybody
here wants to speak to this.
Anybody online in this senator
said this you've moved to pass
secondary by senator tom and how
do how do they show that they
try that I mean it's easy enough
for them to see well we we we we
asked him a reach them and we
sent a postcode but we haven't
heard that do it or what would
prove that they did it.
Well I think if they told the
person once they.
That they have the opportunity
to call them right.
Leave a message.
War notify the family if they're
unable to do that say okay who
do we contact to let them know
where you're at it and do we
have somebody is going to check
up on this.
Currently not that we're gonna.
You're gonna figure that out you
to share you depends where they
come from her steps first this
is a baby step in build a
any other discussion senator may
thank you mister thank you for
responding to that.
To the injustice in your in your
community this.
Have we figured out a way to.
To hold the arizona facilities
accountable
you
medicaid will hold them
accountable because when the
it's fraud basically right it's
basically kidnapping and then
once they can map someone to use
them for a medicaid purpose in
many kid can come back in and
enforce that and see you took
this person unwillingly and then
they use them in medicaid to get
man to keep money and it's going
to keep fraud and that's what
errors on this currently doing
thank you mister chairman
certainly a some remind your
local days that if you're not
being occurred in the mexico
they have just diction over the
whole chiba thank you so new
mexico medicaid was paying in
arizona facility for somebody.
Correct.
The.
Okay.
Any other discussions had a
neighbor
thank you mister chair senator.
The
first page lines nineteen and
twenty it says that the solution
not admitted patient for
treatment.
Without obtaining or providing
evidence that attempted to
obtain.
Uh information contact
information so if somebody comes
and
they are just totally spaced out
and they're needing to be a
better
they can't be embedded because
you can't fulfil the rest of
that and so i'm wondering.
If that's what you really want
to do
I think the word attempted to
rate at what point do they sober
up at what point they do then
they can attempt to get that
information but they can admit
him at all until they attempt to
do something and if somebody's
so strong out that they can't
communicate there there's no way
unless they know the person that
they can notify anybody
and so i'm concerned about
I think those people would be
taken to hospital first if
they're that far out stabilise
stabilising and then figure out
where they weren't if if someone
comes in in there just.
In that shape their probably not
getting admitted to their
facility anyway they're going to
go to hospital calling ambulance
until they can figure.
Well wouldn't wouldn't a
hospital.
Maybe qualify as a residential
behavioral health facility maybe
maybe not I don't know but III
just struggle with the language
there and just pointed out you
may need to look at it I think
you you're right that definition
looked at a hospital
that's my concern.
It's kind of like miranda I
guess you know they have to they
have to give them.
They would probably develop
overtime some method of giving
them a card or something that.
The shows that they've done it.
Okay any other discussion.
Thank you mister chair
I thank you for bringing this
bill I remember reading about
those cases I rediscussing it
last year member you bringing
the bill so i'm i'm really happy
that you brought forward again
so thank you senator
this is
two ports when is the shameless
plug
if we raise the alcohol tax to
go to the alcohol alleviation
fund that would probably that
would generate resources that
could be used for inspection of
these facilities to determine
whether they're complying and
and looking at their records
cause this will require
facilities to start keeping
records of what attempts they
made and and moving forward and
I I think that that's great and
then the other.
The other question I have is on
pec on page two c residential
behavioral health facility has a
definition it means a license
health facility the provides
residential treatment of
patients would be
that's not a hospital is it no
so
it's.
Well I think my colleague is
going to address that but it
just jumped out of me but thank
you again to bring this bill i'm
in strong support senator hickey
thank you mister chairman a
senator does this go to judge
just sharing next okay thank
you.
The.
And.
In this state
I do not believe that we have
any sophisticated artists.
Which actually do have deed tax
facilities and I mean that and
it is a hospital admission it is
billable as such other states
may have that and arizona ma.
Residential treatment center
excuse me
so technically someone could end
up there so that's just for
clarity but the intent here I I
think is clear and I think it we
do need to say that because
technically they're not in they
can't be admitted better and
they are in dts delivering
tremendous and a need to be deep
to action and it's an emergency
admission and it needs to happen
so somewhere in that we need to
figure out how when the
individual is is
potentially not in a detached
situation and I don't know the
legal language for that
then they have to be offered the
opportunity to contact the
family
and then the consequences of
that to the facility so III
would urge my colleagues to pass
this bill and move down and get
some clarification I maybe if it
wasn't so late I could actually
help you with the language a
little bit but i'd be happy to
help and and you just shared
trying to get the right
language.
Did it just that wording is that
very first sentence maybe flip
it around said if you can admit
one say within two days of
admission you have to have made
an effort to contact something
like that there are let you work
on our three days that's it mr
chair center that's it that's a
good top because usually people
are out of details and about
twenty four to forty eight hours
of again I think we can work in
our and and I just want to
little editorial comment
these facilities and arizona
probably pass themselves off as
silver housing potentially with
iop intense about patient
programs and and that is part of
the continuous that I was
complaining about today we don't
have a behavioral health plan
because there has to be rtc for
ninety two hundred and twenty
hundred and eighty days then
they people should go to some
sort of silver housing and then
they should go into some sort of
housing and and that could take
up to a year but
there is no regulation and any
of this and next year we need to
bring back there regulating
these artists cease so no one
can set up that scammer new
mexico and go get folks from
white mountain a patchy and
bring him over here but the
essence of the bill I think it's
clear and this language can be
worked out and and then we need
to address regulating a suburb
living facilities thank you.
Every of secretary will call the
rule
senator hickey yes I know he
give up yes center my stuff yes
sir my establishment yes said my
car center mckenna
yes there can no vote yes sender
neighbor senator neighborhood
yes center communities center
city of best yes center city a
lot as well yes senator man said
I tell my votes yes center city
penalty yes center it is a pinot
six seven.
I have seven to zero vote you
have a duplice in the wolf was
really good.
Help yourself just a more
there's any barbecue senator
companies if you had some of the
barbecue help yourself this
great food in there.
So you stand born center road
senator completely
five minutes each getting sounds
good good evening mister chair
back a moderate good to be with
you
send a bill one forty six mister
chair
seeks to do two things number
one it says that if you're a
county own hospital or what's
called the contracting hospital
meaning hospital that's
contracting with the government
to provide services usually
interesting care of the new have
to do two things number one you
have to accept all plans offered
by the exchange
because we've got smaller
communities that maybe only have
a few hospitals where they are
not accepting all plans for the
exchange so you could actually
have a health insurance plan
probably an affordable one like
center hickeys old company and
literally have your provider not
accept that insurance meaning
you don't have real health care
in your community number two or
at least certain kinds of health
care but you may be the main
provider second thing this bill
does though that's even a little
more.
Aspirational in a way is it says
that if you are
one of those two counter
hospitals approve a contracting
hospital or county on hospital
and you were the only provider
in your community of basically
life saving care or as the bill
describes your helping with a
situation that can be life
threatening.
Then you have to provide an
affordable health
payment option to a consumer who
a you may not accept you don't
accept their insurance or be
doesn't have insurance.
And that's again really narrow
situation
where you are the only provider
in that community of a life
saving treatment.
That's what the bill does mister
chair and i'm really honored to
have my considering who runs an
incredible organization called
care which just raises money to
pay for bills for cancer
patience
on the line who fighting these
battles with hospitals for many
years her name is your ads.
You see your online.
Joy do we have joint
yoli
yelling.
Yes please you miss the.
Go ahead
okay thank you for the
opportunity to speak you can
hear still hear me right yes
I would like to say that the
passage of sp one forty six is
an assessment need to wipe and
safety for new mexico residents
required to purchase health
insurance on the exchange and
they need to access needed at
hospital healthcare services and
they need to access a portable
health care service since in the
work that I have done I have
witnessed denials and delays to
need it health care I have
witnessed premature deaths I
have met children who were left
as orphans because their parent
did not receive the health care
they needed when they needed it
and where they needed it new
mexico residents are taxpayers
we should have every right to
access hospital care in our
communities.
Where we have taxes of grocery
seat sales taxes and property
taxes especially when there's
only one service provider for
example memorial medical centers
radiation department and loss
crucis I stand for questions.
Okay anybody else.
Members of the committee we have
senator master senator
mr determines understand born
mister thank you so much quick
quick glance of the language to
deal with at some point
so
page one lines twenty three
twenty five
you know a hospital shall accept
all health benefit plans.
And then it says.
The hospital shell and then of
course on top of page two lines
one two three
husband will shall provide a
patient with the of an
affordable payment plan.
A
under the following
circumstances then you jumped to
lance ten and the patient's
health benefit plan is not
accepted.
By the county hospital.
Or by the contracting hospital
so.
If this would have gone to law
wouldn't.
They be required and and so what
so how does is this to fill that
gap that window what why that
what why the two senses mister
chair senator sell lines ten and
eleven on page two deal with
somebody's bought a plan outside
the exchange.
Thank you mister.
So did you.
Yeah i'd love the idea
but i'm going to play like
if you have you read the fire
and get all senator and the
particularly the technical
issues os I report to bill does
not require a county hospitals
and contract in asteroles be a
network with each health
insurance carrier offering
qualified dell plans and the
exchange without that
clarification hospital would be
in technical compliance with
this bill is still being out of
network and and and the other
issue is
for to say that I helped plan
has to.
Pay but there's no contract and
you're going to have a contract
cause what are they going to pay
there's note there there's no
the the hospital on the plan
have to come to agreement now I
believe that today not perfectly
but I believe that today we are
meeting the requirements of your
bill if you get to
senator mister chair b on page
two
the cap there the conditions
cancer
serious jeopardy because the
serious impairment to bottom the
function if a patient shows up
to an errander and taller they
have to be and and they are in
and and cannot sustain outside
they have to be admitted.
They had to be cared for now
they can be discharged and is
there any follow up with cancer
not necessarily that's true but
it has under emtalled they do
this today it's the it's when
they get into a discharge
situation where they are stable
then who's going to care for the
patient and when you get outside
of the hospital then you got
doctors in offices like doctor
macinanies new mexico cancer
center so are we obligating them
to provide the care
also I would note that at least
she has a find four people and
gosband pass that
allow that fund to be able to
pay for the care of those
individuals now in my scruces
our health plan and i've
there there's in that scrutiny
three hospitals.
Memorial.
Mountain mountain and three
three crosses the attory right
three crosses holyon
memorial is the started.
Some of while the back is that
correct.
Yeah it's an old hospital that's
privately okay that is now
mountain view is a county
hospital that is being serviced.
Are they privately yeah it's
probably on its contracting
hospital on that's part of the
problem in our community they're
all
contracting hospitals.
The.
That enters into health care
facilities contract with a
county.
So why would those private
hospitals enter into a contract
with the county because mr chair
center their providing initiate
services.
So that's kind of the hook so
that's your hook okay yeah okay.
Okay that that helps
significantly today what happens
in someone in the exchange we
never had contracts with
mount view they they wanted
outrageous amounts of money and
we said known we could never get
through a contract but our
patience would end up in their
er with these kind of things so
we would do what it's called a
single case agreement so we
would arrive at a rate.
That the hospital was enticed to
take because they were going to
get something.
But we would not put up with
their outrageous demands of four
hundred percent of medicare or
five hundred percent we're in
some cases eight hundred percent
of medicare for our patient
facility
and so usually in those
situations in the exchange of
help and they will reach a
single case agreement with the
problem here is that people get
stabilized but then there's no
follow up here.
They are not obligated under
this bill for the follow up care
so.
And and then the the other point
the osi makes is there they
really can't enforce anything
because there there are no
provisions that would go into
regulation here
and they have to have provisions
that will fit in to regulation
and then the third issue is that
what it's paid now in the
surprise billing we did come to
truven.
Payments
as a standard for three years
until enough data was collected
to see where to standard fee was
like in the new health care
authority well over time be able
to give us that kind of
information as they collect the
data around the hospitals about
what should be paid
but as it is I don't think this
is inforceable and I would
highly encourage you to go to
the hit to the hicks
the exchange i'm sorry health
and native
health insurance exchange
behavior insurance exceed right
there's a health information
exchanges
before no things that's
information but I would go to be
well and sit down with them and
I can recommend some consultants
to you who who quit right of
bill that we get towards your
objective it may also carry on
beyond the discharge because
it's really if they don't get
care beyond the discharge then
they're just going to ping pong
back into the hospital sicker
and and not get the care
the and the underpayment plan I
believe in senate bill seventy
one k dollars martin
of nineteen twenty one that we
did
I I believe that I have to go
back and look to have payment
plans but also be exempted a lot
of people from many payment or
being sent to a bill collector
because under a certain
percentage of the poverty level
so
as the girl exists I want to
support it but I can't support
it because it's technically not
doable I mean and I agree it's
very frustrating as you're
consultant said
but again they go into the
hospital they can stay blind and
then they're out.
And
and most hospitals of the people
who don't have insurance will do
a a plan but there may be a way
in going through the
technicalities to
figure out how to use the troven
or whatever to get an amount
that would be there but right
now that's absent this bill so
no one the hospital was
basically I got a contract you
know we don't we're not playing
and so it it needs to get fixed
around us comparison and i'm
sorry i'm just you know I i'd
live to help the health plans
most of my life those are the
technical issues are there
actually.
Plans on the exchange.
That wouldn't have a hospital
they have to have a hospital in
every country.
There were the hospitals exist
within a certain mileage and and
the o s I mister chair does have
definitions and there I I can't
recall all of them about because
not every hospital has account I
mean that if you county has a
hospital that they're there you
know they're I mean essentially
sam faye albuquerque last
cruises raswell of have multiple
hospitals of nature to four and
the
in las crucials we were
contracted with three graces
that three whatever three
crosses i'm sorry I doubt it
three crossed three cross
no it actually they they came
into being and
and I think maybe memorial but
we'd never got a contract so if
the patient shows up at
the other hand the foreign
county has been all.
Then we either do a single case
agreement or there's nothing
well nothing exactly
yeah you see the dilemma mr
chair I do and I read the FIR
and obviously I got a message on
this bill two weeks in the
session but I did get a message
on this bill and the governor's
office has told me they've heard
about other rural areas where
they don't accept.
All the plants on the exchange
and people find themselves
without hair of health care so I
think I can't say better than
doctor hicky they get nothing
and the maybe that's acceptable
to some
but this bill don't say this
mischair this bill does need an
amendment I do need to work with
osi and I do need to work on the
hospital agreement side of
things can I do that yes but i'd
like to I mean it's his first
committee and my commitment to.
To this committee if it passes
the bill is to work with osi
before the next committee and
work out that because there
needs to be a mechanism where
hospitals also get made whole in
an agreement and some sort of
floor where an agreement can be
reached in a minimum wage amount
you can't just say to a hospital
you have to accept you know
something below what's
sustainable so but our size made
some recommendations and I would
like to work with them and I
think it's such an important
idea especially on the e were
going to be giving them lots of
funding yeah that's this is the
other part of the bargain is you
have to accept these insurance
plants from the exchange and
let's try to cover more people.
Okay senator that thank you for
the second time mister
chairman's finished time work
I don't see it as a tech are
they suggesting it's a technical
glitch in the bill because this
mandates it this would make them
do it but but I do agree that
that you could I put a few
paragraphs the hospital shall
contract with you know by by
january one or whatever in other
words we can make them do it.
Thank you mister
phone.
Yeah mister chair
so where they suppose to do in
the meantime the guy because
because in one case I believe
it's memorable medical the only
radiation provider they're told
okay great that's thousands of
dollars you don't you don't we
don't accept your insurance as
thousands dollars which they
don't have you know the only
person who helps pay their bill
if they get care of the old
gears.
She is a saint she that's what
organization that she raises
money and a hundred percent of
it as actually non medical dolls
but she will go and raise the
money.
But he always the wine who is
really inspiration for this
legislation and in fighting for
these people who are not getting
covered they're only resort.
And they're literally told
thousands of dollars which they
don't have and so they did the
lay treatment and as we know if
you have cancer and you delay
treatment what happens
you have you know.
So yes center it's a very sad
situation in this bill would
actually save your product the
only provider providing life
saving treatment then you have
to.
Providing affordable.
In a affordable options for
people and you know a lot of
them will sit here and say we're
we're doing that in which case
what's the issue but some of
them aren't but these are very
profitable.
Company so so you're going to
pull the bill and and work it
over and then well i'd like to
pass it and then work on an
amendment for the next committee
because we have ten days left in
the session and it's it's first
committee but I mean it's your
decision mr chair but I mean
that's the only way the check
the bill has a chance the second
time so we have a motion for
duplice second advice senator
tom and discussion of the of the
motion senator neighbor
incentive
yeah I won't library the points
that have already been made but
i'd also like you to look at
from whose perspective the
affordable payment plan on page
two
line to
I think if you're going to have
language like that foreseen
contractual relationships you
better put some side boards on
it
sarah.
Thank you mister chair and ten
center
I would agree with that the
things have been need to be
defined in here I wanted to try
and make clear to people the yes
people are dying absolutely the
directors that there aren't even
in the doctors and a lot of
places and we're losing him in
the state left and right and
there just isn't going to be
anybody there to do the care but
you're only focusing on
impatient which is inadequate
for your purposes the men and
end and in the life saving I
mean if they if they get to the
hospital and their life is in
threat they must be treated but
then their street and when
they're straightened there is no
requirement to anybody hospital
is not required to pick up out
patient therapy and I I know
that we'd love to pass things
that sound really good but this
is this you
it's more than a technical fix
you've got to figure out how to
do the outpatient which is why
would really like you to work
with the exchange so that we can
figure out how to get the
outpatient done as well as the
impatient and and basically
you're gonna have to get the
health plans in a room and the
exchange in the room in you in
the room and you're going to
have to work through and you can
potentially get a troven but in
other surprise billing took us
weeks and weeks I wasn't in the
senate then but I was
negotiating and the the
hospitals are are gonna oppose
it and I think that the
hospitals will probably find
some legal technicalities where
they don't have to do this
because they're pretty good at
that well how do they get away
from them
party how did they avoid they
don't avoid they have to treat
them and stabilize them like
they don't even do that no they
do eight days if they don't then
the federal government comes
down on him like a hammer nobody
everyone anyone who gets an
emergency room and has an
emergent life threatening
situation is likely have to be
hospitalized.
And then when their
hospitalizers are get stabilized
for whatever it is and then they
have the right to discharge them
but where do they go and that's
the problem I mean this gets
opens up hand doors boxes not
any rural physicians anywhere
anymore transfer treatment and
and mister chair just want to
clarify though in the case of my
mother mountains you hospital
big provider can be they do have
out patient care all the doctors
work for mountains you so it's
not just an emergency room
situation it is out patient car
as well that that that are part
of the hospital they are
providers so this is okay we we
have emotion
I mean we can be
death here.
Uh let's see what I mean my own
view is I I would argue against
passing it out I think it needs
to be reworked but let's see
what we got so the secretary
will call the rule for senator
hickey no senator he give now so
may ask so much does votes yes
so my couch ends and a mechanic.
Yes then a mechanic votes yes
senator neighbor
center neighborhood boards no
senators media's centers that he
will look at yes since the
lobbyist votes yes senator man
sounds our man words yes so it
is a no no
you have by a four to three vote
you have a duplice.
It is explained my vote
explained I I trust you that you
will work on it and also.
They are cold hearted they my
dad when he had cancer after his
back then million dollar policy
ran out they wouldn't take him
without cash up front no credit
they're called.
Mister chairman made went by
suggestion to i'm happy to help
you over the summer to make to
get to some try to get it done
this week but III don't think
you're gonna be able to because
it's so complete but i'd be
happy to summer to help make
this a viable bill that builds a
continue okay that senator
reduces thank you senator
center to rodriguez with senate
bill to sixteen
and this morning this market
russell.
Yeah.
The.
Alright.
Yeah
thank you maybe bend it toward
you that yeah
great thank you very much and we
have an amendment before proceed
mister chairman that it's nice
lady's going to pass out and
that a man is to send a bill to
sixteen and I can just summarise
that
we it was something we were
going to put in there and from
the beginning things went by
well fast in the week we thought
about the do you have
okay
they just hadn't passed it out
yet okay
do you want me to still explain
it
okay thank you and mrperiod
chairman this bill is basically
a mandate the new mexico finance
authority act to add housing
as an eligible entity and
eligible public project that
would be able to apply for low
interest loans that's really
what it does the public project
revolving fund allows for for
loans very low interest loans
and we hear that every year and
in fact we're getting the bill
again this year on the projects
to be able to apply for all the
center used to be able to apply
but housing was not one of them
that is able to apply so we're
making sure that that is added
now so
and so we're allowing them to
become an eligible
public project and then we're
also making non private housing
developers as qualified entities
to borrow long were merely
saying fears of public project
revolving loan and you're
eligible to apply and they will
come to the legislature along
with all other projects that we
have coming to us every year
that's one of the things that
does the other thing the bill
does is
it amands the local government
planning fund to add affordable
housing.
Plants to make it all
symmetrical so that they're they
would now be eligible uses of
the grant's funds and they have
to have
like municipal and local
governments to be able to are to
have plans and and to be able to
access public funds like federal
funds and so on so we're trying
to seem as many pieces that may
be out there loose getting in
the way of more affordable
housing in new mexico and in
doing that it also expounds in
and just broadens the use of the
language in the local government
planning fund to allow for for
funds to be used also for like
flood in the dation matters
remember yes that's the
amendment thank you senator okay
so the amendment changes the
title and adds that in this yeah
let in endanger maps and
archaeological clearances yes mr
chairman and that they're
already eligible and it is the
soil and water conservation
destroy expert we need it to add
the flood in that doesn't have
anything to do with the housing
no it's just another little
additional they get you would
now be able to do exactly yes.
Okay senator masters
determines in her biggest move
the amendment
we have motion to amend any
discussion of the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
build to will go to the first
miss russell you have one say
thing about
thank you mister chairman and
and thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this forward this is a
modest increase of what the
public project revolving fund
can handle currently were able
to fund certain non profits from
the public project revolving
fund adding non profit
developers housing developers is
a modest increase we think
there's maybe a handful of
entities that might apply and we
think they'd apply primarily for
infrastructure in order to
support the projects at the
likely going to get funded from
the mortgage finance authority
so we're find a support more
projects that are able to then
access funding from the mortgage
finance authority adding housing
as an eligible use just also
allows for local governments to
come to us and borrow for
housing projects as well so
that's the primary purpose there
is in the night new mexico
finance authority act our
ability to fund a from the local
government planning fund now
affordable housing plans again
that puts communities in a
position to support affordable
housing and then lastly as the
amendment provides to make an
another modest increase to allow
for flooding and dation maps and
archaeological clearances.
Let's go to the audience is very
been here in support of this
bill yes
please do you want to talk.
Or is it too late to talk about
come up and use the money.
Hey i'm i'm robin palen with the
mortgage finance authority i'm
the one thing that we
consistently hear is that
there's a need for funding for
infrastructure and so we support
this bill and also check for our
technical assistance grants to
create affordable housing and
community we're in support of
this bill
thank you anybody else.
Anybody online.
Mr savadra.
Thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is david's major and I serve as
the director of government
affairs for the new mexico
association of real tours or
organization probably represents
the eight thousand dedicated
real towards bread across the
state operating in all new
mexico's legislative districts
today we stand firmly in support
of senate bill two sixteen and
extend our gratitude to the
sponsor for bringing forth this
piece of legislation as we are
allocately aware the
availability and affordability
of housing have become pressing
issues both nationally and
within new mexico we commend the
provisions outlined in senate
bill to sixteen which promised
to help increase new mexico's
affordable housing inventory
thank you.
Thank you
anybody opposed to this
anybody opposed online members
of the committee senator.
We have emotion any discussion
quick question for the we
earlier we sub bills that would.
A provide two hundred fifty
million dollars to the to the
finance authority for housing
is that independent from this
totally separate
thank you mister chairman so yes
there are a couple of different
initiatives this would provide a
clear sort of path for local
governments to fund housing
there being a an automated few
will through the public project
revolving fund and forest then
support nonprofits development
of infrastructure so there are
jason uses were trying to
broaden the amount of funding
that's available to support
housing across the spectrum so
they're related but they are not
they don't overlap in any way
and this bill doesn't have any
appropriation in it.
But if that.
So right now that anything any
money is spend on
affordable housing plans were in
endangered and studies or
archaeological rethose things it
would be competing with other
things that you already you'd
have to use the money you
already have them
mr chairman yes and I would note
that the house is currently i've
got a bill in front of it the
annual appropriation bill that
moves money from the ppr over to
the local government planning
fund there's an annual bill
that's provided and that's one
of the places that some of the
people of money goes to so there
is typically annually to you to
replenish that fund other things
that are there used for
primarily water and wastewater
preliminary engineering reports
but also metropolitan
redevelopment district plans at
other local economic development
act plans so it's consistent
with the use of the local
economic with the local
government planning
in the other discussion
senator tom.
So it says a.
Bill adds portable housing plans
to qualify to local government
planning for guy assume
that they've had access to other
funds and there's this the first
time mr chairman's senator thank
you for your question the
housing has not been
clearly deleneated as something
that can as an entity that can
actually now draw well actually
through the housing the
affordable housing act that we
have the unicipalities for
example like counties and cities
they are they can donate land
and and buildings and so on and
not violate the anti donation
class and out so they've been
able to do it all way since we
had proved that law many years
ago but it has not said housing
you know specifically on similar
areas and sell
we now we are adding to make
clear affordable housing plans
that can the local governments
have can get grant money for
affordable housing plans also
along with all the other
eligible uses that they can now
have and the reason mister
chairman senator one of the
basic reasons this thought once
they are able to do their plans
they're able to get to apply for
federal funds and leverage this
money because they require to
have plans in order to access
some more funding like federal
sites thank you thank you for
the answer.
Senator that's all I have mister
chair anybody else.
So we have a motion for a due
pass from senator key seconded
by
service into masters and the
secretary will call the role on
that motion for a department
as amended thank you thank you
senator secretary
given
their masters votes yes that are
my catches in a mechanic yes
said mcanna votes yes center
neighbor center neighborhoods
yes
center city a lot best yes
there's a lot of his votes yes
senator man yes they don't tell
me about yes center these if you
know yes that are the sipping of
yes so you have to do press
seven to zero vote you have to
do fast thank you mr chairman's
members of the committee was
late you may have made other
plans for dinner but there is a
thick still some food and their
help yourselves
barbecue senator compos you your
concluding act of the night
said a bill two sixty eight.
Thank you very much mister
chairman members of the
committee senate bill to sixty
eight appropriate seventy
million from the general fund to
the health facility viability
fund for financial assistance
grounds to health facilities the
bill creates the health facility
viability phone for the health
care authority to provide
financial assistant grants to
help facilities that agreed to
continue reestablisher expand
their services and medically
underserved areas of the state
the grounds can be used to
subsidize general operations
operational debt medical
malpractice insurance surcharges
assessments levied by the state
to secure medicaid matching
funds in other needs and
expenses approved by the
department of hca is a required
to promulgate rules to
operate basically the grand
program by specifying criteria
grant terms reporting and
auditing requirements then
establishing accountability and
so with this mister chairman
members of the committee as we
continue to find most of our
rural hospitals I do have
financial issues this would go
ahead and create that fund or
would be able to assist them as
they continue to deal with many
of the dilemmas within their
organizations so without mister
chairman members of the
committee available for a
question thank you thank you
senator anybody in the audience
when I speak on this bill
you just in here because it's
chilly out and it's nice and
work with food
nobody there is members of the
committee question question from
senator
thank you senator campus and
mister chair
the.
This is different from the
what's called the medicaid
direct tax fund right so this is
a fun
if I understand it correctly
that hospitals could use as a
long.
Missed mister chair and course
your your correct but at the
same time they're also a grants
in fact most of them will be the
grants because many of these
hospitals just don't have the
resources to repay that
each two says grant okay thank
you very much for that
clarification my observation is
that
the the direct tax medicate is
certainly going to help and then
it runs and they'll run through
that money pretty quickly so we
are getting to a situation in
the state were working probably
need to look at how to support
our rural hospitals and some
fair equitable rain so i'm flat
you're putting this money aside
just sorry for the gloam in doom
but it's kind of the reality of
the business issues thank you
very much mister true thank you
senator is it just hospitals
just just hospitals yes this
mister.
We were still in in the finance
authority
and mister chair you're correct
there is
another program in the finance
authority but this was going to
be very specific to the rural
hospitals and and senator on the
floor of the senate today but
very wise and knowledgeable
senator pointed out.
That the
world balance in the
text.
Mister
is three billion dollars
and that that fund.
Could be tapped.
The result of tapping that
mister chair members of the
committee
thought about it but there's
other funds and so just trying
to go and do that and then with
a general fund with a resources
that we do have available I
believe that's going to be the
best way right now to go ahead
and set up this particular fun
your decision but will the
committee we have most of the
past we have most first from
senator hickey second from
senator maestas any discussions
and if you're never any
questions
that paragraphs it says nothing
in in the southeast part of the
state can be funded with this
ten cater
secondary call the rules senator
hickey yes
seller to give out yes center
masters yes is not yesterday ten
yes there are mechanic votes yes
center neighbor
center neighborhoods yes
center city a lot best yes
centers that you love his votes
yes senator man
senator man wrote yes center
it's if you know yes senators
have been no votes yes
they bought a seven in the
affirmative and the negative
yeah thank you mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you I cannot tell you how
impressed I am with your staying
power and your
urgency at ten nine thirty of
night after the day we've heard
on the floor so.
Yeah.
Well that you still get barbecue
so don't
we'll call the meeting.
