Of this actually helped every
city county in this party in
school dish against the state so
we partnered on this if you
wouldn't mind him induced
himself before we get sharp
senator companies just very
quickly thank you very much
mister chair members of the
committee it's great to go ahead
and be here before you as we
continue to deal with this piece
of legislation the bottom line
is as we see the growing costs
of architect services for
engineering services if you will
for construction what we're
trying to do is to ensure that
as we do move forward that we
were that we're we're gonna go
ahead and help to keep up if you
will with the cpi if you will
with the cost that are out there
and then as we go along we want
to ensure that if this bill was
to move forward.
What this bill doesn't again.
Into addressing this particular
issue thank you mister chairman
thank you senator so
did you want it when it you
explain what the changes that
you've incorporated did you want
to do that standard well in
mister do you want us just to
move the amendment well if you
explain it then we'll get
senator most you want to move
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
So mister after advice yesterday
on up to legislative council or
two days and so we incorporated
the concerns of having the ppi
adjustment so if you'll fall
along on
eight one online fifteen before
the period we're going to answer
providing for an any old
judgment to limit the total
amount on contract for
procurement of architectural and
engineering service services
construction in purchase orders
under those contracts based on a
change to the producer price
index
then.
Mister
that's the title and so because
we added ppi to it they had to
pick that up within the time
then.
The.
Thank you for that so we had to
go back to the drafting from the
beginning so on page two line
for before the word over we're
going to insert as a just a
pursuing to subject section g of
this section.
Then it goes back on into line
same page two minute seven
before the period we're going to
answered as it just said percent
of the subsection g of this
section.
In the line fourteen same page
before over we're going to
insert as a gesture percent of
subsection eight of this section
and then a lane seventeen same
page before the period we're
going to answered as a just a
pursuant to the subsection age
of the section while I go on a
page three line fifteen before
the word in work and answered as
a justice percent of subjection
g of this section and then
online nineteen before the word
in it's going to inter as a
justice presumably subsection h
of the section
then we're going to the second
part page of the.
It says on page four line eight
or in straight the closing
question more a quotation mark
and then on page four between
lines eight and nine.
We're going to answer the
following in this little bit.
Other hard read this sector g
and a sodius on til I first
twenty twenty five and july
first of each success beer each
of their mouths for multiple
contracts and all renewals a
single contract and any renewals
any one purchase order under
contract and the total amount of
the contracts provide in
subsection a paragraph one such
section d of this section she'll
be adjusted by multiplain each
of the mounts and subseduction a
paragraph one of extraction d of
the section as of july first
twenty twenty four by a fraction
the numerator of which is the
average producer price index by
industry or architectural
engineering and related services
other previous calendar year and
the non nominator of which is
the average producer price index
of the calendar.
It goes on to item age is on
july first twenty twenty five in
july first of each successful
year each of the amounts for
multiple contracts in all
renewals a single contract in
any rurals of anyone purchase
order on a contract and the
total amount.
And paragraph two of subsearch
and d of this session she'll be
adjusted by multiplying each of
the same amounts as subjection
be and paragraph two subsection
d of this section as of july
first twenty twenty four by a
fraction again the numerator
which is the average reducer
price index by commodity for fi.
And by the denominator which is
the average producer price index
of calendar year twenty twenty
three.
Item I
is as used in the section number
one producer price and expert by
industry architectural
engineering and related services
means the producer price index
by industry for our potential
engineering and related services
not seasonally adjusted or its
successor index as published by
the united states department
labor and and and too the
producer price index by
commodity for final demand
construction means producer
price index for the final demand
construction not seasonally
adjusted or successor index as
published by the united states
permanent labor mister that's
those changes if you'll realize
they went throughout the
document and inserted deleted
items and then built subsection
a g h in eye and what that does
mister directly ties in anything
you do in this bill to the ppi
and the ppi they have different
classifications and it instead
of trajectory of materials is
different than architectural and
engineering so they'll use those
numbers to change this bill so I
don't have to pump your before
you're committing in three years
and that would allow the price
to adjust up or down depending
on market driven.
Oh need.
Mostly are great could I give a
quick layman's overview so we
can can I see so yes these bill
increased both individual
project maximums those were the
guard rails and also the total
that a contractor architect or
engineer would receive in
agreement over a multiple year
period.
That none of that change what
what this does in essence is it
goes back to that those ideas
it's sad those limits you saw
yesterday and then integrates
the ppi for each substantial
remember last night the building
you looked at the was the basic
bell began july one.
Those numbers will become
effective all adjustments that
will happen annually beginning
till I would want twenty five
and subsequently either upper
down as the senator said is
something we didn't tell you
yesterday because we weren't
sure exactly how would work the
good news the ppi is divided
into three strands one of the
strands because yesterday as we
talk some of the worry was about
well is architectural and
engineering going to be
overvalued as an example we
looked at the data with with
that with council services and
i'll tell you that that the
architectural in this
engineering is a much less
inclined than the products are
and so that was one of the
concerns the other concerned
that that expression is a
product will vary and this will
be dynamic as they go up as the
senator said if they go down in
the indexes drop the numbers
that you are enabling in the in
your legislation will fall if
that happened so it will rise
and fall with the economy under
the ppi are in and it'll take
both strands that you're trying
to protect and a modified
accordingly and so miss chairman
I know we're happy to answer
questions better I feel good
about the old the definitions
are in their mischairman himself
yes yes that's a last such
because we want to be sure it
was very clear in the bill which
was good draft thanks so we have
questions from the committee now
a senator says the olympics
let's start with you
thank you mister chair I think
this is a really good idea but I
was in a mouth meeting so why
would the numerous with the
numerator I mean the denominator
didn't do numbers of what with
the denominator always be
what it was for twenty twenty
three or shouldn't it be and
this is why I say i'm not a
mouth major shouldn't shouldn't
it be the year before because
aren't you looking at the
increased year or or will you
always be comparing it.
And thank you and and miss
mischairman senator said deal up
as that's a great question I was
a math teacher saw try to decode
a little bit I feel I do feel
good about I do at about this if
you look under unpage two
section nine g it gives you one
of those and it says they had
subsection d starting a one out
of subsection day of this july
one twenty for by a fraction the
numerator of which is the
average producer price index by
industry for architectural
engineering a related services
okay so that's the part which
which would be like two thousand
twenty four correct and then
over twenty three within the
next year what it that this my
understanding is why need help
so the next year it would be the
ppi.
Denominator at twenty twenty
three but i'm wondering and this
is why I need to help shouldn't
that be the year previous case
aren't you looking for the
increase over the year or are
you always looking for.
So that the numerator is going
to be increasing but the
denominator will be fixed and
just explain to me why the
denominators fixed it miss
mister chairman because what we
didn't want to do is is
multiple.
As an average rises it'll it'll
falsely stayed the base the base
where establishing is the base
of putting in this statute with
the numbers of her this year and
they will always be the best so
as it rises and falls over time
the numerator will determine
what that product becomes at the
end of the day up for down off
of.
But why so that's the bottom
line of my question why will the
base.
With with what's going on with
the economy or not I I
and and sold low all treadded
i'll try to give more explicit
because we hold the base
constant the ppi swing will be
chartered against the starting
point of july twenty twenty
three ppi so it'll it'll be a
chart that goes over time rise
up and never the base will still
stay where it stays i'm going
back.
The base is always going to be
what's on page
line three no longer for an
unpage two lane seven will
always be the base whatever
we're going up is going to be
compared to that so most
terminate if you do cpi so often
cpi isn't here over a year cpi's
against the base here when they
began cpi in a moves forward
over time it's it's similar here
were setting a base p p I and
instead we don't care year we
don't care about the changes
going here over here we care
about the changes compared to
the base you're right
that's all we care about that's
all about yes okay they know
interest that makes sense to me
and and mouth to be honest with
you make sense to me if i.
That that was very helpful thank
you thank you that would keep in
moment this is all about this
tells you how how much of a
countr.
Right yeah that's all it really
I I just didn't understand the
way like why so III
think any other questions
that was anybody I think it's
going to turn over.
Thank you
I may have some similar
questions
because if we're using twenty
twenty three data we know the
number.
So why don't we just put in what
the number twenty twenty three
number is.
Chairman the base that we
adjusted reflects the twenty
twenty three.
Starting point.
It isn't exactly what the ppi
gain was over what was in.
Statue previously will we
establish a new basis so that's
the numbers that are there that
are many.
Now the methodology forwards so
we don't have to come back to
you as a committee every couple
of years and make another number
adjustment we're trying to make
this automatic so it'll follow
the indexing.
And so that's so far with the
basis of this of what will be
set for july one twenty twenty
four remember the last time we
did this bill was twenty twenty.
So we have.
Two fiscal years out that we've
laid
so that's the numbers we derive
from the swing over that period
of time to adjust this build a
correct
correct math if you will afford
the future.
The.
So miss germany
fifteen million dollars is a.
No no it's the c p
r.
For twenty twenty three.
And i'm saying if we know the
number today.
We could say the denominator is
that numb.
Think I would take more comfort
if I knew what the number.
Because it's not it's not going
to.
The.
And so i'm asking.
My other cons.
We really look at the
difference.
Twenty.
If I understood
that they were used.
So I think I see your point
mister chairman senator neibert
the idea was to as.
The.
The first as the int.
To raise these numbers.
And that's what the bill with
this thing is trying to have an
automatic adjustment your rears.
Within the ppi.
Strand of d.
For the archite.
The.
Which is much less than.
The product cost its.
Do sat.
Okay.
They felt that they using.
The index value
after you charted.
The.
Was the better w.
They were talking about the s.
What.
Don't know it we won't know it
until july one right of twenty
twenty four.
That's correct so that's why we
can't say it.
Can we.
I mean that so they're using
whatever it is that's the one
we're going to use
I just quote you i.
Final demand prices move down
point.
Statistics.
Already
questions if we.
So miss chairman center I I
think the answer that because
it's a drafting question also.
I don't know how to answer the
wide behind this accepted as we
did the c.
And i'm not addressed by and
then the fraction get back to.
There's a deal open as question
it seems to me if you're worried
about these three types of
embassies architectural in.
That you want to track the.
Difference from.
Twenty twenty three to twenty
twenty f.
The overall index
maybe you
lower higher but the things that
you're interested in or what I
hear that you're interested in
are those three items so why
don't we just doing it.
The.
Yeah because.
You could get whipped the other
way.
Because I think i've confused
about talking about the split of
the ppi when it came to you
yesterday we saw ppi as an
agriculture number which was one
tax.
There are two parts to your
bill.
The original bill one is for for
the services.
And there is a format.
The.
And individual project cost.
Over.
The.
The product part.
And it has those.
When we got to.
We've found that as you this
aggregate to ppi.
That interestingly enough and
have the service side gone
together that covers all three
of ours and it's on a much less
accelerated sca.
The product site is what.
So to be fair to
the state of new mexico the
legislature because one dynamic
effects the other other on the
averag.
Take.
Now the question of why not put
the night the two thous.
Now I can't answer that's we
rely on.
In mister so i'd sent tom a note
asking for the number and he
sent me the graph but he is
asked he they ls economists who
drafted this or a help.
The pattern
saw that we could be fair
whether it's up or down the
weekend but they're i'm waiting
on a head of hard time getting
on the web but so they're again
it's really up to me.
The premise is right is.
I try to get it to judiciary and
have that.
The.
I'm i'm not at all clear it off
with what's gained by putting a
specific number in the principle
still remains
That's what we would use and we
do that with a lot of things in
in drafting they don't say
exactly how m.
To me I it's fine to just put
the basically you're putting the
formula in and then it'll be up
to whoever figures it out next
year.
And then numbers can be decided
the united states
they track they apparently
already decided to be I didn't
know they did.
But we don't know where twenty
four will be it it almost
doesn't matter what we put in if
we put the exact.
Because it won't be the the
division will be carried out
till twenty.
The.
Independent with the committee
would like I don't mind getting.
Are you comfortable with leaving
the senator neighborhood with
with the formula way it is right
I just
find it a bit odd.
Really too different.
The.
The normal way of doing indexes
is just compared the same in the
sea.
Either the increase over the
past year or the dec.
You're doing something different
here.
I don't know whether it's better
worse but but it's different
than just.
Getting the increase based upon
the cost of those peop.
The other I just.
The.
Mister just restate center.
The reason we broke out after
learning.
The.
And and it levels.
Early.
The.
So you're not pulling it would
poll at higher.
Trying to be missed chairman
conservative as we can.
But.
That's probably do in large part
because you're getting closer to
the commodity and when you're
dealing with these.
Oddities.
As we know very well in this
state they go up and down fairly
rapidly yes.
The price.
Other things are going to be.
The.
Roller coaster fashion then then
price of.
Is turned off certain
neighborhood I guess that's what
we're one is captured that b.
But I don't mind clinton turners
economist that.
The.
It seems to me that it is amount
on this to the same thing I mean
we don't gain anything by
putting a specific number
because if you say
the increase.
The first year is going to be
the same with any predict issue
that the both senator city locus
and senator average raising is
why do you keep referring back
to twenty three the remarks to
the same thing because the
increase over
of twenty five over twenty four
we'll give you a figure that you
then apply to the base number
that was used in twenty three so
you're still going to come up
the same I mean it it it's a
wash as far as I can see and
listen totally missing something
that was fairly only thing that
I would add is is go through
time and I don't not have to
look at it you might ha.
Averaging.
And any other questions
you're okay with anybody else
senators.
The.
My what I underst.
Is that this is the this is the
year you care about it you want
to measure
that compared to this year and
you don't want to have these
weird little things going like
that when you if you if you have
a different formula because
because the the if you if you're
constantly changing the
denominator that's going to make
one.
And so that's what I understood
your reason to be as you want to
sort of smooth it out compared
to for arbitrary persons
choosing this year because
that's when you said it and so
that you want the cpi to relate
to this year and to keep that
constant where if you do what I
was.
Comparing here over year it's
going to be it's going to be
more.
Yeah so is is that correct I
just want to
feel like I did understand it
because I thought I understand a
minute ago and just want miss
center city a lot as that's the.
Both for the.
And we're locking.
And then everything out into the
future.
So that these gar.
It's happening as comp.
Thank you mister chair for the
for adulting that second.
Questions from the committee.
Well we have to make a motion.
On the amendment.
I know we we haven't really used
it's not a substitute it's it's
the same bill we're just
adopting the amendment to the
bill and then will vote on the
billism and
I move the amendment to the bill
the adoption
I move the adoption of the.
Seconded by senator mccut you
need you to discussion any more
discussion on the motion to
amend the bill senator neighbor
one quick question does it need
to be a positive number.
Mr chairman we didn't do that
because of.
Are tensionality.
Yeah.
The thirty years if we have a
dismantled work currently in the
market drops on.
The.
Or we'd have the same amount of
work.
The during covered the c.
Construction part and not the
engineering part we want to
recover up or down.
Whatever that material cost is
to the be.
So you work in.
In the first way possible.
If you have a negative number
your multiplying the negative
number.
The.
Mister chairman I see your
method.
We'd probably use th.
I will lo.
Yeah.
Any other in the opposition to
the amendment.
Any opposition seeing none will
consider the bill to have been
amended and I have anybody else
have a question on I have one
quick question on the bill
itself.
To which.
This is applied to all public
projects under under whom under
every university every school
board every public entity county
commission everything it does so
any any the entities are allowed
to go into the copy of extension
agreements in.
General services monitors that
and so
what they do it is france aa
school board could go ahead and
apply and they go through a
camera pr.
Which you're going to do
but then instead of going out.
Vendor on th.
For a faster.
But they're locked in.
What but we need to have access.
Because the the cap.
It moving the cab gives us them
the area that we need but it
applies to all all governments
voluntarily can use yes okay all
right.
Any other discussion.
Let's have a motion on the bill
itself as amended senator
tomorrow moves from the bill as
amend.
The.
Senator hiki center my s
yes senator mccartin
center mechanic yes then at her
neighbor
senator smith
center city and office yes
senator tommin yes center it is
appeal yes.
Very good you ever do fast
thank you thanks for all your
work on this
you're gonna
okay now we go to our grid and
we have four of bills on the
ground the first one is number
forty six forty six.
Well of senator thomas going to
carry it forward he said she
asked him to.
So this is a twenty five million
dollars center.
Yeah.
Bill.
But this bill.
This bill mister your
appropriate twenty five million
do.
Food you know we know mexico
have the highest
rate of food and security in the
united states.
So
what why the five reasons why we
want.
Because they said we have a
very.
Highest percentage of food and
secure folks and united states
one and seven mexicans face
hunger one and five children
experience hunger one and eight
seniors suffer from hunger
number two there are even though
there are two hundred and fifty
retail closely stores in united
states.
State number three
unfortunately over the last sis.
Few years the.
Waste.
Which they sell the.
Number four
after a wave of j.
In the mexic.
The.
They have food banks actually
provide
like a wholesale.
The.
So.
That's that how it's organized
on a.
So
about this because.
But.
Serve a wholesaler.
Yeah.
The.
So thank you
thank mr chair and members of
the committee list of panics.
And I can tell you that ever.
Thank you mister chairman now
thank you
torman they have done a very
good job of describing the
reasons why it's important for
the food banks and the network
that they had of the five
hundred distribution locations
that center stephanics
mentioned.
To get twenty five million
dollars for the coming year and
then to make that recurring.
When the pandemic began there
was a dramatic increase in the
need for food as people became
unemployed they were for load
they lost their capacity the
purchase food
interestingly that the man has
not decreased as the pandemic
emergency has ended a center
tomorrow indicated they're
currently or one in seven new
mexicans that are food in secure
and sometimes experience hunger
the number is the percentage is
higher among children one in
five.
The hunger and food and security
extends to every county every
one of the thirty three counties
in the state.
The good news is that therefore
food distribution points in this
nonprofit network that cover all
thirty three of those counties
no courty is excluded the hungry
and every one of the counties is
serviced by this network but
with the level of contributions
that the network is currently
receiving we cannot continue.
To supply food that will meet
the needs of every hungry person
in the state we need the state's
assistance we want to express
our great appreciation to start
senator stanics to send her
rodriguez who were the sponsors
of this legislation to send a
talmon the search brantley
decided to pop all of whom with
co sponsored and we urge you to
give this your favorable
consideration thank you mister
chairman can you introduce
yourself please yes be happy to
do so my name is scott bunton I
am a member of the board of
directors of the food depot
which is northern new mexico's
food bank and also cherid's
public policy committee thank
you so much.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this measure please
indicate by raising your hands.
Anybody here in opposition to
this.
We have a note that mergers
lorenz citizen of gallopes and
support of us she's on.
Email but she can't get on zoom
to speak so ch.
And mr chairman I believe that
the directors of all of the five
food banks are on zoom if you
have any questions for any of
them I think will I think we
will if we need to will turn to
them as good any members of the
committee with the question.
But so will the community.
Have a motion for a pest from
senator
seconded by senators said the
lopus.
Any discussion secretary will
call the role
senator hickey center in my
assess yes center in my catcher
send then our mechanic yes
center neighbor centerish
meetings center city of office
yes senator tommin.
Congratulations have department.
Thank you
thank you mister
senator compass will hear your
two bills.
I.
Thank you very much mister
chairman members of the
committee in essence senate bill
seventy seven makes an
appropriation for capital
improvement said the epiderian
regional crashes and treatment
center operated by san migo
county and mister chairman is
your well aware
last several years we've been
doing this working to take one
of our state buildings.
Will an opportunity for people
that deal directly with
your abuse and other addictions
in in dealing with that what
we've done as we've worked to
start construction are we still
ne.
Million five hundred in order to
complete the project completion
time were hoping will be within
the year and then from there of
the subsequent bill that I would
be presenting to you I also
would tie in if you will from
the up your would find.
From the attorney general's
office resources there were then
the applied to the programmatic
so I know.
Offer the one point five million
four.
Thank you
anybody in the audience here who
wants to stand or show support
for this bill.
Anybody enough obvious did you
want to say anything you just
want to show support
you please come forward to use
the mike
as it'll be heard to pick up
admit mister chair if I may also
end I realize that.
And wouldn't be able to go ahead
and be the the expert witness
but she can't go and provide
that testimony that are from.
He's been very ins.
Secretary of general services
department we start us
and we stand and strong suppo.
Thank you
members of the committee or
anybody on zoom
and members of the committee any
questions I have one this is a
residential program yes it is a
applied to the the regional area
so you would be a combination.
They day treatment how big is it
how many bits
right now in terms of the
development I i'm not.
There are still trying to
formulate how it's going to go
ahead and be operated.
Question.
Just a couple of
minutes return.
So we're taking a state facility
in and transferring I guess
title and everything to the c.
The.
How how widespread is that.
Sorry I really appreciate that
because.
Quake only.
It's not going to go ahead and
just be limited to the regi.
Mr chair and senator.
We have the state reabilitation.
Some of these serv.
Unfortunately it's our
experience or at least the
communities.
I hope that you all figure out
how we can maximize the
utilization of these types of
this old.
When we go
back our sta.
We're not getti.
Maybe a better job.
Chairman of me very quickly.
Often time.
The.
The senator never just chicken a
couple of comments based on work
we did this summer in the
interim committee we we we were.
We were in less and and we heard
comments in the community of it
and then it turned out that the
state hospital is not.
Certified to do drug and alcohol
treatment which I had never
known i've been the social
worker in the state for forty
five years I thought that's one
of the places you could go to
but they're not certified to do
it so they do not do drug and
our culture the only facilities
in the state that is certified
or turkoise lodge that the state
runs though there's some private
but to stay runs a turkors ledge
and all and your your we have
center in roswell which doesn't
really have any patience for
that most of the time.
And and turkish large operates
at half capacity not because
they don't have a waiting the
civil long waiting list.
They don't have the step they
don't have adequate step and I
think that may be part of it
rose will so.
We're assured by the people in
less biggest than this facility
is built or incidentally the
state hospital is trying to get
certified they want they will
be.
But if this facility is built
it'll serve as a regional
facility for the whole of
northern northern new mexico
I think people anticipating that
it might be available
to fill in the gaps at the
private facilities.
The.
Senator city olives
thank you please forgive me
this.
The.
I can't imagine that yeah
sp one forty seven.
Center my stuff.
Yes my curtain.
Center is media's center city a
lot yes center at all men.
Yes.
You buy a vote of six to zero
you have a due pass moving to
we're going to operate this
facility.
Let me ask her well those that's
going to be anybody here in
support of this measure anybody
opposed as measured let me ask
you on the finance committee.
And thank you doesn't the
finance committee decide how the
opinion settlement money.
Or minister sometimes he's
referred to as a minister of
justice and.
Collaboration between the
branches very wonderful that's
great any other questions from
th.
Senator recurtion not not
really.
Sorry about that that's not your
fault.
The.
I know muffle awful new here in
just going to a shame of splug
really for one of the folks.
This legislative session is to
focus on the family and we've
solved some issues you know with
the
with the twenty five million
dollars to the food bank and
then this
the facility here and the one in
rouse will be spoken about.
But we're talking about the
issues pretty late in the se.
And so if we can you know folks
on the family and people's been
time with their kids and and
teach him to work and do things
like that these problems will
eventually cost all themselves
and so we're kind of stuck.
Right now
coming up the back in trying to
try to solve these things book
but commemorate you for for
trying to do that and and do the
best by your community and bride
service.
And I would also mention they're
there's another facility it's
that's being finance right now
gathering money we give ten
million dollars last year to the
facility
clovers for the eastern plains
and I think they're probably or
need some more money out of us
too so.
Okay members of the committee
what will the committee.
We have motion for a dupassion
senator nibert seconded by
center toll and the secretary
will call the rul.
Yes that are my cutting
then our mechanic yes center
neighborhood
is.
Center city a lot best yes
center comment
center it's a pinoch yes
six.
Again a six to zero vote you
have another duplice internet
good luck.
Eight it's eight eight zero
we miscounted
so members that will go to the
last item on the grid which is
mine and senator tomorrow will
chair.
And we're sending
we are sending up for senators
reventus
so he can be here for the phone
the bill
members of the committee senator
tom acting chairman of senate
bill eighty nine is a build that
it was endorsed by the interim
health and human services
committee it's a bill that we
put together this summer based
on our work going around the
state in farmington we heard
there was a need for more health
care professionals in tell us we
heard there is a need for more
health care provisions in las
vegas we heard there is health
care professionals.
In albert ricky and santa fe in
russo so and in less cruces the
chorus was the same we need to
find a way to not only attract
healthcare profess.
Raise our own grow our own but
to retain them after they're
here and that was the pitch we
were making to the all the
doctors that were here today for
white coat day
let's help us figure out a way
to keep you here in the state so
this bill does four things that
try no five things that tries to
be part of this.
The first is twenty thousand
twenty million excuse me.
Twenty million dollars that
would go through the human
services department of the
healthcare authority to increase
the medicaid reimbursement for
health care so that doctors
would get to get more of twenty
million sounds like a lot but
it's actually going to be
matched with medicaid money so
we're talking about almost in
eighty million dollars increase
in reimbursement this would be
in addition to anything that we
gave last year and and hopefully
they'll be so in an additional
request coming out of house bill
too we want to add onto that we
would like to get our medicaid
reimbursement above the medicare
rate and almost it if we can
reach the commercial rate we
think that makes and here's
what's a different would be a
difference.
Many of our counties that the
the majority of the people who
have any kind of access to
health care or on medicaid they
don't have commercial
or they have known at all but if
if the doctor serving that
county is relying on medicaid is
the reimbursement in medicaid as
low it makes it very hard for
them to maintain their practice
so this is an effort making
working not just in the big
cities rural new mexico
financially feasible for for
physicians the second piece of
the bill is ten million dollars
added to the loan repayment
formed at the higher education
department.
We're trying to reach a point
where if you practice in the
state and you have an
outstanding medical debt you can
apply for and get it.
A way to pay off the portion of
your student loan the loan that
enables you to become a
physician or a nurse
practitioner or a physicians
assisted.
What it is now as we have far
more people asking for the loan
repayment participation then we
have money available and so it
becomes.
When I like to save not much
more than a a lottery ticket you
may get you may get one but
there's no guarantee you put in
your application and not
everybody who puts in the appl.
We'd like to make it such a
guarantee that
people know that if they
relocate to new mexico or if
they stay here they can get
their student loans.
Third section is two million
that would go to the children
youth and families department
they already get some lesser
amount it's matched about fifty
fifty with federal four e funds
in this pays for internship so
the social work students
cancelling students who get
internships through this
program.
Are paid for their work as they
complete their degree they have
to remain with the department
afterwards it becomes an
incentive a car it against
people to work but it also
provides them with the training
as they're in intern so that
when they do get hired they've
got a great background and the
job isn't so totally foreign to
them that they leave right away.
Section four is
several of items it would be
paid directly to the university
of new mexico school of
medicine.
Five million to support new
residents lots.
The.
Three million to compensate the
preceptors that supervise
medical students during their
during their training period so
that the
deep clinics in the hospitals
that take a residence don't have
to dip into their other don't
have to use.
At the time and salary of
physicians on their step to be
preceptors this would help
reimburse them for that.
And ten million to pay the
faculty
at the university in mexico a
school of public health.
We appropriate money for the
fact of the last year at a deep.
Ten million dollars five million
to new mexico state for the
shared school of public health
they've hired the faculty this
would make sure that he they can
continue to pay them because
that was that did not get built
into.
Then finally section five of the
bill.
Is ten million dollars to the
higher education department
to support clinical supervision
they have we we gave them some
money to do this last year.
It's still not going out getting
out the door I understand the.
This is very distressing but we
we still think that this is
needed it's a way to make sure
that people.
Who are working in agencies
they've graduated from a
graduate program psychology or
cancelling your social work
program but they're not licensed
yet because to get licensed
after graduation you have to do
an internship and put in
up to three thousand hours of
supervised work in an agency.
Without this money to pay the
supervision agencies are very
reluctant.
To take on an internet because
it means taking somebody who
would otherwise be earning
revenue for the agency with
their work and putting them to
work supervising entrance who
can't get reimbursed.
So this would pay for the
internship so they could be paid
while they're doing this work.
They would also be able to pay
the supervisor who supervisors
them in those of the components
of this bill.
And with that was.
Appropriation bill.
Anyone support.
Yeah.
Okay
thank you senators my name is
doctor denise console as i'm
from donate a county I currently
practice that presbyterian
health care services I am the
interim chief medical officer at
lincoln county medical center
and at planes regional medical
center
and I am the chair of the board
over the borrell college of
medicine in las crucis I have a
lot of experience working in new
mexico trying to recruit folks
to health care and it is a
challenge this bill really makes
a huge step towards improving
that and it's not just for
physicians it's very important
that we recruit appease and all
i'd health professionals for
myself as the plumber critical
care physician I can't do my job
without respiratory therapists
and without nutritionists and
without physical therapists so
thank you very much for your
support of this bill.
Yeah i'm feel used to them the
executive director of life house
in carl's bed we provide
substance use of no health
services including residential
treatment like was just spoken
of outpatient services I may
care
one of our biggest challenges is
is work forced particularly
around supervision
the best way to build the work
for for us is that interns that
stick with us but we've bear
burn about two hundred and fifty
bucks an hour to provide
supervision cause we lose
productivity on both of them and
we start to pay everyone and so
getting these funds actually
getting them delivered is really
critical for making the work for
situation in the bear house is
the better so we appreciate your
support of this i'm also on a
member of there order for the
new mexican behavior health
providers association and this
is a piece of legislation that
we particular support of an
interested in your support thank
you for your suppo.
They knew mr cheer members the
committee my name is rick mad in
them a family physician did a
career in primary care and
beland.
I speak for the new mexico
medical society as well as new
mexico academy of family physi.
I really appreciate the title of
this or because it talks about
expanding the health care work
force in its bride because we
need bride this is a piece of
the puzzle to try and recruit
and retain.
Future health care providers all
of the elements in this bill I
think are really important
certainly the medicaid payment
is a big piece of the puzzle we
need to get to a business model
it keeps physician practice is
going and right now medicaid
alone is not even close to that
so we appreciate what you did
last year and twenty percent
this year hundred fifty percent
would be great so appreciate
this
as far as the health
professional loan repayment if
you want to attract positions to
stay here from the residencies
or to come after residency they
come with a big burden of debt
so they be very instrument and
appreciate trying to expand
that.
The new physician residency
slides likewise we need more
opportunities to educate
physicians to be able to stay in
practice here and then paying
preceptors I think it's key it
caused people in practice.
Dollars away from their business
model to stay in practice to
be a volunteer preceptor and
reimbursing from that would
encourage more preception which
is fundamental the educational
price so thank you very much.
Mister chair members.
The.
Mr chair members of the
community of my name sterick
scott
my brother law.
Also.
He just got certified here new
mexico
and he's in indiana he
definitely struggles to pay his
bills on top of his debt so I am
very for or cheese you pino
bringing this forward and I
can't think the senator enough.
For looking into this in this
direction and trying to bring in
more doctors trust me I even
like i've waited six months to
see especially as so we
definitely need to bring this in
on all levels from bottom up
doctors all the way down to a
medical assistance so i'm really
looking forward to seeing this
move forward and I really hope
to help in any way I can to move
this forward and testify to that
fact so I really thank you guys
for doing this and thank you.
The.
Thank you mr chair mister chair
the.
Medical society.
And invited
local legislators to that
meeting and this is a very
pointed issue that
struck a nerve with them.
The.
Some of them out.
Yeah.
Be able to get some of this.
So the position has
had had to in essence make up
that ju.
So.
How they determine which doctors
get the
the relief in which di.
Pro rated basis of all those
applied by.
Some doctors and in ross will
are.
Concern that it's not being.
Fashion that they would find.
Determine and and senator
neighborhood that that's a
question we've asked a couple of
times as well
they didn't realize the extent
to which.
The amount of money we we had
appropriated to that fund was so
short of the demand for it until
we heard this summer is it two
years ago they had.
Four hundred and forty requests
were loan repayment and they
were only able to give up less.
Because it just was iran out of
money view and I don't know if
they did it on a basis that was
what we are trying to do did you
just do it by first come for
served in it the ones that
didn't get it stay in the queues
so they would be higher up on
the we never did figure that it
but higher education department
administers that fund and it's
something that I need to get the
answer to before we.
The.
But we did put more money in
last year and so that.
That number was much better than
sure but it still was in
everybody it was it fell short
of the totality that's needed
mr chair mister I do think that
we probably need to understa.
Asking questions and i'm like
you I don't have the answers and
i'd like to at least be able to
supply.
Why
this doctor didn't get it or you
know what the what the process
was
most my second comment.
That.
Social workers and is there.
For money appropriate.
In our universities.
The education.
I closed the idea
when we talk about college for
all of it.
A few years of their time to the
state.
And pay off the loans that way
yeah.
The ten million dollars for
physicians.
Desperate.
Social workers.
Health care profession is in
great demand and we can't feel
th.
Whatever we can do to try to.
Engage.
Right.
And mister chairman and senator
neighbor just to quick comments
about what you just said because
you you're absolutely right on
we have a separate bill that
will I think it may not come to
this committee may go to the
education committee because it's
an appropriation to the higher
red departme.
We had asked them last year to
give us an estimate what would
it cost to make graduate
education.
Master's level graduate
education in the psyche had
trick nursing in
or that would be a doctoral
program in psychiatric nursing
but
counseling psychology and social
work if we made those free wood
with the best mechanism be to
simply extend the opportunity
scholarship to those programs
that the graduate level because
they don't it doesn't extend now
or would there be a separate
scholarship program tell us what
the right way of doing and they
were supposed to come back to
the committee with the report in
november they didn't they they
dropped the ball.
So
we just have put in a bill we
don't know what the the the
actual figure is my thought was
let's put in a bill and then
when they do their fires they'll
tell us that the figure should
have been will get it from one
way or.
We're asking for ten million to
cover graduate free graduate
education in those four fields
with the previous of that the
people remain in the state for
up to the three years after they
get their masters degree that
have to work here in the state
not necessarily with the public
agency but somehow in the state.
The other five million and the
bill would go for the community
colleges and the branch college
is the two year programs which
become the feeder
filling the pipeline into these
more advanced programs so the
programs like community health
worker per counselor a lay dax
drug in alcohol counselor
license telecom and drug abuse
counselor and other similar
programs could begin developed
being developed in all the in
all the community and branch
colleges were they were supposed
to give us an inventory of that
and recommendations increase
those programs so we should we
should get in the far for that
bill and effort it trying to do
exactly what you were
suggesting.
Twenty four the year we're in
right now starting in july.
The money hasn't been spent we
don't know why I mean we had as
you know the health department
didn't get the schooldashbased
health center money out until
the last week I think
this is all across the
government we're just not.
We're just not seeing.
Items that we put into the
budget.
Get out the door and reach the
the grass roots of and one of
those was this one III didn't
realize that until today when
mister houston and david lay
from from another program in
alva cricket said to me well you
know there is already you
appropriate money last year and
that didn't get out the door I
didn't know so one of the
thoughts I have we have in house
bill one the feedbill.
Three additional positions at
lfc.
For our interim committee.
And one of the things i'm
thinking is let's get them hired
and have them start following up
one of their duties would be to
follow up on things that we
think
we've done in
scratched off our lists are too
do list and and and then nothing
happens it just they kind of
vanished into the black hole and
then
you know people come back later
and say what happened we need to
have somebody following up on
that
make sure the money gets out the
door.
Twenty million.
I guess yeah I don't think any
of it got out to draw at least
that's what they told me they
didn't know of any.
The.
Thank you mister chair of
senator mckinner asked a
question that I was wanted to
ask but I would follow up the
little a little bit further is
is that why so is it possible
that that money will be spent
in this in the last six months
of the fiscal year yeah I mean
it it if somebody likes a fire
under them they could very well
get it spent that pass
then it I noticed that the bill
is a non recurring fund.
And so is that because if it
doesn't all get spent in this
year it'll be held over.
Let me not record shall not
revert I don't know what yeah it
is yeah i'm not reverted to the
general is that what it says it
yeah that's where it was so I
don't I don't have the building
for me I have this summary sheet
but III thought it was set up as
funds that could be carried
forward if they're not spent
that is exactly right and so is
that so my question was is the
reason just to ensure that they
are spent even if it's a few
days later or is the reason to
make this fund built or what is
the reason for it to be.
Reverting non reverting that's
what I meant not so yeah so they
did if it doesn't get spent this
year that at least by next year
that it does because the need
will still be there but it's not
to create a fund that would grow
no its not an invest it's not a
like an endowed phone.
And so it's not going to be with
a state investment it'll just be
the treasury it's goes it is
sitting there at that when is
sitting at the
higher education department or
that's reall.
No if you won't.
It's it's like the money in my
checking
it doesn't grow either
even though I get a statement
with state investment funds
actually do grow thank you
mister chair appreciate it I
think this is an excellent idea
I saw by serving on that
committee how incredibly
important this is.
It's a step in th.
Yeah
okay.
Mister chair and mrperiod
thank you very much I shut kind
of share the same sentiments
here in this bill as I as I did
before that we're speaking about
the sequence of problems going
to far down in the sequence of
problems feel like we've you
know with the lack of revamping
medical malpractice have created
a lot of these.
The.
That that is the the real cost
in health care and that new
mexico is really losing that
race and this is I i'm going to
support i'm in a support to be a
I think we're you know we're
down were down the road but.
And where this m.
Loans or anything like that I
think if we created a a medical
environment that was there was
healthy.
They could carry their own
burden and then we were.
Really that's really what we
need.
But have you looked at any
medical malpractice changes.
Discussion right now
doctor day here will mister
chairman intention because it
did come up throughout the
summer because that is the other
one that always comes up as the
g r t for for health care of
services and those are two
things that that there are real
contributors to our the dilemma
over the shortage of physicians
and we we did not get into the
mid mail issue I have to tell
you when we set down.
The.
First of all our interim
committee we we had senator city
a look as you were the only
attorney I think we had in the
committee we we just we just
veered away from that we also
knew that it was not.
And something that wouldn't be
wouldn't have been a waste of
time but we didn't want to take
up time debating something that
really couldn't have been active
on in this session so
no we didn't shortage but that
that is definitely something and
I think that is another one that
we were gonna have.
It's not because we.
Drawing them here and and the
ones that are here they're from
here they want to be here.
In subsequ.
Yeah.
Very happy to sport the bill
appreciate this.
The.
Goods fund.
I was I was in and the airport
and baltimore are moving here.
The.
I think it was edscape one of
the medical.
The.
And
it said top five best places to
practice.
The.
Top five.
And and I thought well that I
like lists you know and I opened
it up and the top five was first
and number one at that time
this.
It was my home town austin
asked and texas.
You know.
I'll be actually said alba I
don't know why they singled out
albuquerque.
And I thought well i'm about to
get on a plane with my wife and
kids to take a job at UNM
in my home town is the best in
the country and where i'm about
to fly to the worst
and this is after I have friends
and family tell me that they
knew physicians that practice
the new mexico and left because
of
malpractice that was the number
one word of mouth in my circle
before I moved here was
malpractice mexico actually has
a reputation in the physician
community out of stay for people
that have had negative
experiences here and so
because this is another any
health care access bill i'm i'm
going to be to draw a little bit
on some kind of topic but
one last story.
From my experiences I used to
have.
A wonderful neurologist that.
And I see a lot of patients with
headache issues and things.
So
she was great she get people and
did a great job wonderful
reputation the community and
earlier this spring I got a some
kind of notice back that she was
no longer in practice here.
And I was.
And I actually I I double check
I I want to kind of I was maybe
she's not the same practice she
still here somewhere else.
And I myself looked up and tried
to find her and on her website.
Would you still hear if anyone's
interested in sandy and
neurology dot com
and she
posted a letter and opened
letter to the governor about why
her practice failed.
And interestingly she opens the
letter saying that she supported
our our governor current
governor.
Who is certainly not the only
one.
Complicit in our problem saying
that but she opened it and said
I voted for you I supported you
but here's the issues and and
she listed him on the very last
paragraph she said my patience
had been adversely affected in
my costs have increased as a
result of your administration
with legalization of canada's
increased malpractice insurance
cost controlled substance
prescribing software impaired
work force and mandated sick
leave.
And so a lot issues there a lot
of parties and issues
unfortunately and and and none
of this should be partisan but
we have a lot of problems but
but certainly I in my opinion
now that was that was what
caused the demise of her
practice.
But in my opinion I think the
top two are the g r.
And you know for those of us
that would maybe argue health
care is a right and i'd ask why
we taxing it so much if it's a
basic right.
And it's perticularly why do we
impose a grt.
We have if we want access to
health care if you want your
love one your family to go get
to see a doctor we've got to get
rid of our g r t and we've got
to go to a standard sales tax
and nobody you know that's not
going to make the papers and
things it's not like exciting
what we see in the news but
that's what we have to do if you
hire an attorney they say i'm in
a charge you five hundred bucks
for this service plus.
Contractor.
Heart you to twenty five hundred
bucks plus your.
Doctors now can't do that.
So etc etc
malpractice
this is a great solution here
but as we as we
just heard we're not we're not
looking at that
which I think is is probably
relevant in a short session.
Um.
The caps are going up we have a
medical legal panel you can get
up unanimous decision on and
then keep suing you.
I just talked to a daughter was
telling me
what what attorneys are doing
now they threaten doctors that
have done nothing wrong with
punitive damages to intimidate
them and we have no recourse for
that it's sick in its sippings
off all the settlement money
from money that should be going
to help sick people.
Because we have failed to reform
medical malpractice in our state
and if you're elization please
keep coming up here it's
extremely effective.
Where you're white coats.
Bring it please bring it.
Because every day I hear with my
patience you know well it's i've
been waiting so long to see you
so long to see you I can't even
refer my own patience to other
specialists etc etc if you as
you can tell mister chair it's
extremely frustrating and
it's very flexible is a fixable
problem where we can still
achieve justice for the very few
that may be harmed but siphoning
off continual settlement money
by threatening punitive damages
and charging astronomical costs
my medical malpractice costs is
twenty five percent or is
limited put it this way it's
it's twenty five percent in
texas twenty five percent of
what.
What we're paying here in other
words four times more expensive
we thought and and and this the
last thing many of us think we
we fixed or did some medmal
reform last year no absolutely
not.
The premiums are still
skyrockening I just had a
physician tell me that her costs
for medical malpractice premiums
went up one thousand eight
hundred percent they actually
thought it was a typo they
called the insurance company the
insurance company thought was a
typo.
Now it wasn't one thousand eight
hundred percent increase
that's after this so called you
know reform effects came out.
So i'm I apologise for the
heated town.
It is in injustice.
Two the sick people people that
need care in a mexico that this
legislature will not reform
admil the way it should be.
We've got to do it we've got to.
Please.
I don't get the shape reform
being in the minority much.
Please.
Next up we have.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you center.
Or disappear just want to take a
moment mister chairman thank you
for your leadership.
In the bill for the folks
listing at home as it's five
five appropriations and it's not
creating any fund.
We create a lot of fun.
This is just gonna fashion
appropriation right is just
putting money in house bill two
correctness chairman
mr determined yes senator into
existing line items and hospital
to thank you and mister center
did you been also section one is
with the health care authority
department and that apartment
does does an existing but that's
one of the.
The governor's.
Mister chairman and senator most
is actually july one it's it
came into existence
what we're going to be dealing
with this year is.
Filling out the filling out what
actually the we have is a
skeleton no flesh it out this
year with what what new services
are going to go in there and
which ones are going to move
thank you mister center choice
easy people so we put it in law
last year but it is.
It it it does july first of of
of twenty three it went into a
facing and that's why they're
they're you know they're in the
budget their referred to his
health care authority not the
human services I see thank you
mister
and then we have a ten million
for for lone repayment.
The.
Two million for educational
stipend programs they receive
matching federal funds.
And then up section four is
actually three appropriations
which chairman is you know the.
They go to you and am there so
there are three sections five
million for new physician
residents lots.
Three million dollars to
compensate perceptors.
That supervisor trained students
what is a perceptor mister
chairman and senator win
resident medical residence sent
out to get clinical experience
in a hospital or in a clinic
some kind of outpatient
practice.
The physicians are overseas them
that that make sure that that if
they have questions or if they
have not certain about how to
conduct themselves that's called
the preceptor and and those free
sectors are taking time away
from there jet revenue
generating activity in order to
do that that's why it makes it a
little more attractive to be a
preceptor of a clinic to accept
it resident than any other voice
thank you mister center t p and
then ten million dollars to pay
faculty at unm college of
population health.
And and these and all the funds
I just mentioned shall revert
because its hospital to it but
we do things right we
institutionalize it and it
becomes part of our governmental
expenditure correct.
Yeah I I don't have the villain
for me I forget how we saw
you've got to build how does it
how is it frame everything mr
chairman everything I mentioned
thus far reverts just like all
of our other.
Does revert I I thought it was
supposed to not reverberate
section section five mister
chairman does.
So it's only five that does
but that's well like I said it's
it's not going away once it's in
house but too.
Or economy keep our tax base
healthy then.
Hopefully that would be and then
and then a course section five
is up
clinical supervision of social
work and counseling students
to give stipends for unpaid
internships
and so so anyway just up.
Notes and I don't know where it
is in the bill but in the notes
it's to increase some.
The health care authority
department.
Increase medicaid reimbursements
and just
in a way as a state can't
increase medicaid reimbursed.
Stuff so it's a large large.
Succeeded in doing that.
Make a tremendous boost because.
Even though there's tremendous
problems that are mentioned and
not m.
Health care and providing health
care for our citizens because
new mexico so small where were
you dealing with much.
Because we can create
institutional change.
Our sister so have challenges in
terms of rural n.
You don't need a hundred and
twelve.
Maybe get a room reserved to do
some some check ups and stuff
with all the wonderful wife
white coats around thank you
mister.
Thank you senator.
Before we.
Senator
mast us
yes center in my car center
mechanic yes senator neighbor
centers yes center city a lot
yes.
Yes.
Great thank you center thank you
all.
You know if you're here for the
firearms bill senators are
ventures as asked that it be
rolled over
so we'll take it up on friday
and in the meantime we'll deal
with senator branch two bills
starting with
it do you go to get
bills eighty seven.
Thank you mister chairman and
committee should be with you
today and
I have just coupled really easy
bills that we should build it
out here really fast
as your message this committee.
We misuse energy
I do enjoy sitting in here
occasionally listening and and
remembering.
You have some great staff and
appreciate them so let's let's
run through eighty seven.
You've seen the second half of
this for several years which is
the return to work partial
but i'd like to really start
with the first part is really
not seen it before
I
met with the attorney general as
I saying i.
The.
It's not cheap secretary boey
sorry.
From your rancher and I always
forget these enough our chief
anymore
appear but this was one of the
things that secretary boei
really felt like it help.
Simply allows if they've got
someone that they're working
with from another state that
they're trying to recruit to
come here as law enforcements
already certified another state
or even with federal government.
They're allowed to buy up to
five years of service just like
we already do for military
service.
Set up in the same way as we do
it for military service so now
if they were military and law
enforcement in another state
they would be all the buy both.
But it doesn't count for
vesting.
Having those extra years one.
Hope that explains that first
half.
And then the other half the bill
is the return to work.
And the reason I want to go
blast on that is because it's a
little more not a little more
controversial or more
complicated this is something
that literally last year I voted
to get.
And the fact I have voted
against return to work for law
enforcement for eleven years now
and now i'm carrying it.
Right.
Umm i.
I really kind of had to come to
jesus meeting with myself.
On this particular issue the
fact that the matter is ten
years ago when we first started
messing with this thing or
eleven years ago I was I I was
told that I was convinced that
it was going to affect the
pipeline.
And if we had returned to work
that the pipeline was going to
be broken.
Um.
But even then we didn't have
enough law enforcement.
So I voted against this for
eleven years.
Because of the pipeline
well at some point you can't
continue to do the same thing
and expect.
We we have a crisis in our state
of a shortest of law forcement
officers
we saw the same crisis in our
state with the shortage of
teachers.
And what we did affects it.
Well we raised a pay which we've
done for law enforcement.
And we allowed.
Teachers to return for thirty
six months.
That's exactly what we're doing
here.
We are.
We we've already raised paying
and now we're gonna let law
enforcement come back.
That will help bridge that gap
hopefully.
So that we can get someone some
officers in the pipeline but I
will tell you if we don't.
Start working on getting
officers in the pipeline.
It'll help immediately and what
help long term unless we start
getting officers in the pipeline
and less to be in a city that
probably the only city in the
state that wants this next
graduate in class graduates will
be fully staffed I don't think
there's another city in the s.
The.
But I go to albuquerque a lot.
The.
And al girky is not fully
staffed out he needs officers.
And hopefully this will allow
them to bring some of the
officers who have retired back.
So that we have enough officers
on this.
The.
Good afternoon true we search
even to mexico state police
mister chairman is that the
committee
stay police stands or in this
case it fits in strong support
of
both portions of this bill
you're before last I
let
tas force that was from a house
memorial looking at recruitment
retention
items several items came out of
that committee
both of these items did
did both of these ideas did come
out of that committee with
return to work obviously which
has been seen several times but
I think has been changed and
crafted over the year to take
into account most of the
concerns that individuals have
had
keeping it limited in scope but
in particular i'm glad to see
this year the addition of the at
a state service credit
that's something that we have
seen we're trying to recruit
more from at a state they know
you have a officer three or four
years
service somewhere else they
don't necessarily want to go
start over somewhere else
even if like a lot of the border
counties say in west texas we
have a lot of will stay police
in particular and a lot of the
jurisdictions over their pay
better than westex but people
don't want to start over however
this would give the ability to
you know by at least can a roll
over their time here in state so
they wouldn't be completely
starting over so we are very
supportive of the senators bill
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee i'm sending up check
out with the administrative
office of the court and I have
been for the last eleven years
begging senator brant to vote
yes on this mm really really
happy to to and thank you very
much for precaring this now.
Our court security chief is here
and he can give you more
information about why this is
important to the courts because
we need security particularly in
our magistrate courts what I
want to tell you about is how it
feels.
To be in a courthouse with no
security when something goes
wrong last week a gentleman
entered a magistrate court not
too far from here
and you can see on the video he
goes through the magnatometer
and it alerts some things going
on but the magnatomator is
unman.
And so there is no one there who
can do.
Anything about that we can ask
our court clerks to go ask him
to turn around or or search him
the german sits down in the
lobby and then begins to have
some sort of medical crisis he
falls forward and our court
clicks rush out to and see if
they can offer him some aid
because or all human beings and
if somebody's in distress
they're going to run out there
to help.
Are clerks very quickly
determined that the men was
overdosing and someone called
the judge and the judge comes
out in his rope to the unsecured
lobby and they began to
administer narcan.
Um which.
Thankfully was successful the
man started to revive they moved
him into the recovery position
and a fully loaded round in the
chamber three eighty.
That's terrifying.
For our courts.
Now
we can't build a police force
for the courts but what we can
do is use a change in return
turn to work legislation to be
able to hire police officers to
come and be court security and
why don't we just hire people
off the streets because the
courts belong to the people.
And we need security who
understands that the courts
belong to the people and
understand that we there are
specific legal proceedings and
special security situations
are retired law enforcement
already has that training and so
i'm here again to ask you to
please consider this for the
help in safety of court clerks
in our matched records across
the state thank you.
Mr jersey members of the
committee my news jim on toyout
I am the court security.
District.
Syntheon mention that we can't
rebuild a four.
It's helping to bring long.
Hi my name is adrian and i'm
with the administrative office
of the courts and I just wanted
to mentioned that we appreciate.
So much that the legislature has
been so generous and providing
funding for security for us in
the past.
Unfortunately we have not been
able to hire people nobody once
the types of jobs that the
security up that require the
security and
we've not used that money in the
past the only people who want
the positions are former long
force.
So we would really appreciate.
Is the term in chris bosano
register lobbyists for the
double curtain police officers
association
i'm speaking here on behalf of
the about the police office
association because I know we
are talking about this state as
a whole interesting park most of
its in counties
want to make sure that you know
the body understands that this
bill does not help recruit and
retain police officers or
bringing police officer in a
street that's what we need
that's where the community needs
police officers right now and
this is what I asked the body to
think about it when somebody
retire and comes double deeping
come back to the office
with started cousin and other
problem and the problem is that
we see as that somebody retired
take exactly the simple
deposition they they left when
they'd retired and then there is
a young police officer that's
trying to have a courier the
police department sees a return
coming back taken the position
in the office there what are
going to do.
I'm gonna leave so they leave
the police department both on
other state with a different
place
they got up and out there
certification they're training
and they don't stay and I impact
another point that I want to
bring it up the body has it was
mentioned in previous testimony
here
you have appropriate funds for
recruitment for retention you
have increased salaries
retirement as well the pension
and we are working on it but
double deepen really it's not
going to help.
With what the community needs
will list office on a street
working there they're just gonna
again retorn work in the office
and that that's not something
that we want there
in albuquerque.
A double dipping bills like this
really deferred the whole
purpose of.
The appropriations that were
allocated to money separately
and counties and we believe that
money separate in counties they
have to you know for get out of
way to budget and priorities
recruiting and retention not
really coming up with
legislation like this because
that doesn't help the community
thank you mister chairman.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee carter
bunny with as me of the first
thing why do thanks senator
brant.
Um we agree with pretty much
everything he said except don't
believe that this bill is the
vehicle to solve the problems as
mister balzano said we agree
with everything the people from
aoc said as well and the state
police chief.
We respect them and we know that
these are real issues I will say
that there is no one who
realizes how serious this is
with all due respect to everyone
else who's testified.
More than our corrections
officers we represent
corrections officers throughout
the state correctional system
and throughout most of the
county's system including mdc
and al kirki and santa fe and
done so
our members of the ones who are
on the front lines when the next
nineteen eighty penitentiary
right happen our members were
the ones who were there when the
juvenile corrections right just
happen on christmas day we take
this incredibly seriously so
seriously in fact that like my
good friend sander brant we have
been talking to about this.
The.
We actually for the first time
in fifteen years since
representative relate was able
to repeal the initial very broad
very similar to this double
dipping that frankly didn't go
well in the two thousand.
I'm for the first time ever both
asked me and AP o a.
Are supporting a double dipping
bill.
We only came to that position
though.
When we were able to get
assurances it's a house bill to
thirty six leader chase he is
carrying it.
Present store will carry it if
it comes to the senate.
We were only able to sign on
though and our corrections
officers were very clear about
this.
If it did if it had a number of
protections one of the top ones
of which.
Is it this should not be for
management.
And my good friend sander brand
wrote and I bed in the new
mexican where he explicitly said
the purpose of this legislation
is to get more front line
officers.
And you heard from court
security the daily there's front
line officers.
The republican party of new
mexico did a press release i'm
on the remailless they're nice
to send it to me that
specifically said we need more
front line officers.
While there are management
positions that are vacant and
every job is valuable.
Double dipping has so many
negative consequences that I
want to touch on bit but on
mister balls and who did the
next job of covering a lot of
that.
That we really have to do it
right and so if if I may they're
just on their eat safeguards
that that I want to briefly
address if I may mister chairman
so the first is to limit it to
frontline public safety.
And that definition can be
changed we've had discussions
about including people who are
not in each b two thirty six but
currently in house bill two
thirty six we have corrections
officers and you've been out
corrections officers both at the
state and county level we have
municipal police and state
please.
And county sheriffs those with
the seven groups currently in it
I can only speak for after me
when I say that we would be
willing to entertain empty and
paramedics fire school resource
offsers dispatch and of course
court security those are people
on the front line and there are
heavy vacancies in all those
areas but there's no such
limitation in this bill and so
what ends up happening and we
lived this is get this is my
opinion this is something we
lived in the two thousand what
happens as people come back even
if you require them to come back
and entry level position
they immediately apply for and
get the management positions.
As mr balzan has said you're not
filling front line officers
unless you make it explicit that
they can only come in and stay
in front line offers now they
can get those management
positions that they want they
just can't keep getting their
salary they are of their
pension.
So if you want front line
officers make a bill for front
line officers that's the first
safeguard that unfortunately is
an in this version of the.
The second thing that's very
important and talk about
unintending consequences.
And and unfortunately governor
richardson's gadrus is sole in
two thousand five did not have
this protection.
You don't want to give an
incentive to people to leave who
are currently working you don't
want to push people out the
door.
So nhb to thirty six it says
december thirty first twenty
twenty three if you're not
retired by that you're not
eligible.
In other words nobody they could
have predicted the future it
might have known there some
bills coming but they didn't
know whether any of these will
pass you already have to be
retired we're not changing
people's behavior in this bill
and most of the iterations that
have come before these chambers
in the last fifteen years.
You can be an active worker
right now with twenty years in
say i'm out the door and i'm
doubling my salary overnight.
At best at best you're
rearranging chairs.
I'm a decture santa tatanic.
That's best case in europe what
you're probably doing is taking
people from from the tough
places like albuquerque which we
agree clearly has the worst
crime and a lot of other real
problems.
People now have a huge incentive
and that of albuquerque I get
that huge pension and now i'm
going to lovely wait or be one
of albuquerque too but that's
that's a harder there's long
crime there.
So that's a second safeguard a
third safeguard is a real sunset
to santa brance credit you have
to enter this program by july
one twenty twenty seven which is
the same and date for getting in
in HB two thirty six but the
difference is there's a page
seventeen on in senate bill
eighty seven line nine retired
membership have no limitation on
the length of time the retired
member can be subsequently
employed a reemployee but re
employed by the fully to public
employer so we're talking about
people like some of the people
you've heard here who will do
this for fifteen twenty thirty
years they are going to be in
management positions forever and
that you can't.
You can't overstate how
crippling that is tomorrow and
to the accident of the very
people who think we agree we
want to be the heart of this
work for schooling forward those
younger in middle age.
Workers who were going to be
here another five ten fifteen
twenty years themselves they're
leaving if there's no operate
mobility and trust me people are
going to come back to the desk
jobs and stay in them for a very
long time again lots of respect
for the dust jobs but now you've
totally blocked entire career
paths for thousands of public
safety workers that was the
third thing that there are to be
a sunset each be two thirty six
as you can do it for thirty six
months so a total of six years
of double dipping we think that
is a long time for employers
with the help of this of this
body in the house and the
governor.
To increase compensation and
engage in real recruiting and
retention we fully agree on
that.
But we do need that kind of
sunset for thing in the last or
very brief so the fourth thing
is that we think there should be
requirement that there be a
vacancy rate of more than ten
percent.
If you allow double dipping for
the places that are at full
staffing or very close to it
then those kids come and through
the academy or even people who
want to move here for whatever
reason like doctors meetings
moved here.
All the sudden the last three or
four spots in the volunteer
county sheriff's office or any
in any office.
In the state or in a
correctional facility.
Are taken by a double dipper who
now under this bill can see
there for another twenty years
in earn essentially twice a
salary we want places for our
kids one of those continues
people both parties say all the
time we want our kids to stay
here we won our young families
to stay here so we certainly
think that making sure we work
ninety percent staffing we feel
pretty good about that it's not
a hundred percent but we do feel
good but you want to keep some
spots open so as people move
through the academy or move into
the state or just decide to take
these jobs they're able to do it
on their other protections that
we think should be included like
if there are layoffs you
shouldn't get rid of the people
who now have eighteen years in
front of them it should be the
people who came back and already
have a pension and they should
be first on the layoff line
shift bidding we reached a
compromise with the association
of counties
you shouldn't bring twenty five
years of seniority back in bump
everybody else he's been working
there tails off to get those day
shifts instead of great of yard
and in swing chiffs if that's
what they want and but in
fairness we did decide that.
We agreed wasn't our initial
position but we did an apoa
agreed that as those double
dippers in their thirty six
months if we have a thirty six
month window as they come in
they would get seniority for
those three years they wouldn't
always themselves be stuck in
necessarily worships
this is important tracking
in the counties I have been very
enthusiastic about being willing
to track double dipping to see
the impact it makes under
vacancy rates to see what jobs
are coming into again it would
be a limited number of jobs in
that other bill and that's the
kind of protection that we hope
you know that we only have front
line positions but we should be
tracking these things so we know
what impact it's having on our
vacancy and staffing in the
final piece to send a branch
credit is something that is in
both of our bills we think it's
very important but center brand
this is the one out of these
eight protections that is
incentive bill eighty seven
having the employee in employer
pay into para because that's a
spot that would have been taken
by a new person with a lesser
retirement benefit I have they
were hired after twenty thirteen
parallel will be held harmless
and possible even have a slight
improvement under either of our
bills who were very grateful to
to send her brant for bring that
that's one out of the eight
protections we are looking for
obviously you have a number of
things you can do here
I would ask because if we do
reach agreement as we discuss
this with side or brand if we do
reach agreement on a lot of
these things and we're going to
have a poa in the counties and
other people involved in this
discussions
I think there's no question that
this is something we can move
through it's something that
you've heard testimony from
people on both sides of the
spill we need two fell these
front line positions you didn't
hear people saying we need to
follow the management positions
you heard about the front line
positions I think this is
something that in both chambers
can move very quickly
this is a body that has heard
this bill before this this
committee it's a committee that
specializes in.
Public policy not the legal
aspects of everything so
you know even as we do have
discussions and and i'm sure the
good senator would would ask
that you move it to judiciary I
would to a form but I think
until we do have at least
agreement in principle on some
of these significant safeguards
and that you either keep it here
or frankly given that there are
other bills that already do have
the another bill that are
hesitant safeguard I think we
focus on that one in see if we
can amend it in the other house
but I would ask that you do not
pass this out of this committee
at this time thank you so much
and i'm available for questions.
The.
Thank you mister senator.
This whole issue arose about a
dozen the sixteen years ago.
Recall watching
larry barker.
News event that he spearheaded
regarding an abuse it took place
here in santa fe with the
department of transportation
I think he may have coin the
term double dipping.
And the reaction to that news
release was swift and we
we I wasn't up here but the
legislature acted quickly and
and basically prohibited
governmental entities from
allowing
people to retire and then come
back to work.
The.
And
I happen to be sitting on a
commission county commission.
That
felt the impact of that law.
Very quick.
The.
It was
the very immediate as to the
impact that that had on our
ability to staff.
Court security personnel as it
turns out.
Among other things and.
For for some of us that don't
reside in in the big city
just having.
Bodies.
Sometime label train bodies but
just having people feel
positioned just is that
difficult thing.
And and so
we have always viewed that
legislation is really high in
our hands and our ability to
fill
much needed positions and.
It's hard to recruit it's hard
to get new officers it's hard to
uh
feel all the positions and and
so I hear I hear some other.
I do think that we.
Can do
ourselves as service
particularly.
According.
Some of this.
What I would call a very sharp
and and
reaction.
And i'll all agree it was an
abuse of the system interplace
but the reaction.
Probably took that penguin too
far and so I applied the efforts
to try to bring it back in and I
haven't looked at maybe any
other legislation but
I would advocate.
Do something to
try to fill positions that are
unfilled.
I set next to a former
commissioner from a county who
has a a lot of money we competed
with them trying to keep the
folks in java's county because
the the pay scale and eddie was
was always a little bit higher
but
it's difficult to to fill these
positions so I applied having
having this legislation to to
consider i'll look forward to
maybe looking at other
legislation but I think that we
we may be out of move it through
the system and how the debate on
the florida maybe decide which
which ones are better be apple
that I from my standpoint and
for my constituents.
Yeah in rural parts of the state
we have to do something and and
I think it's about.
And try to fill positions that
right now are unfilled and we
have people who.
Could feel those pos.
I don't have any specific
questions on the legislation.
Profession for how do you feel
about the outer state.
People being allowed to come in
and buy into.
This first time i've heard about
it certainly on the side of the
state it it holds some promise
because there are
people reversally trained on the
texas side that retire over
there come over and my biggest
experience will be education.
Teachers in the mexico retire
new mexico they go to texas they
retired texas too likewise vice
versa teachers and in texas have
come to name.
Rob both states retirements so I
don't see that being any
different for these types.
And if I neglected to give you a
chance to respond to anything
that basically that carter said
about safeguards it might be
missing from your bill and thank
you mrperiod german I appreciate
that opportunity and and I will
say and and think mister carter
for coming met with him in my
office yesterday and we we walk
through some of those things
you're one of the reasons we
brought this out this way is
because we really want the local
governments to be able to have
the control.
We really want the counties in
the rural areas to be able to
say you know we need to do it
this way in our account every
local government should have
that ability the fact that the
matter is.
Yes this bill is silent on
whether or not an officer can
come back into a manager real
role
but.
The county or the city can say
no we only want return to work
to come back in those roles it
allows them to have the control
over what happens in their area
and what they need in their area
and and I as I am a big
supporter of local control so we
continue to have discussions
and continue try to work on a
way to make it beneficial for
all of us
but.
I said I love the example of the
of the titanic sinking because
right now when it comes to crime
the state is sinking.
And we can continue to just bell
water with little teaspoons
which is what we're been doing
for the last ten years or we can
actually do something to get
people into into the roles of
law enforcement back.
That's where I sit with this is
that we need to do something.
We'll do it through the pipeline
when the pipeline just isn't
fil.
Thank you I think this is a
really difficult issue when
the incident call it to an
incident happen.
Use services
it had so many names over the
years I can't even keep track
but.
You realize there's a problem.
The problem I have is the
solution I think really needs to
be tailored to the problem.
And that would I like about
mister bundy's guard rails is it
really tailors the tailors the
solution to the specific problem
and and doesn't.
The.
And it doesn't kind of give a
benefit to people that have an
intended c.
So my question mister chair is
are you interested are you
willing to make some of the
changes in this bill that are
suggested limited.
The.
Or friend frontline positions
i'm sorry frontline p.
Have a sunset clause so that
we're.
We're hoping to grow this
pipeline and.
Maybe the sense of provision
could be we could renew it if we
haven't grown the pipeline
after.
Whatever the time period is is
is good
thirty six months I think it's
what he said
and then the idea of they can
see rates because one of the
things is.
It's the that's exactly what
we're trying to do is deal with
those.
Add.
Positions where the vacan.
That should be a criteria for
using this for having an agency
use it because
there are some places where you
don't have a problem with
vacancy rates and they use this
it does stop our younger I have
three children and I want them
to stay.
I really want them to stay and
if they don't have the ability
to come into these positions and
to move up.
These opportunities in other
states texas other states are
there and so bottom line is
would you be willing to consider
amending the bill to address the
specifics to make it as nerror
as I think would really work at
miss german sender you know
that's why we're continuing to
talk now again they just came to
me yesterday once the bill was
scheduled.
I have been working with the
governor's office on this bill
and so you know we we had this
the way the governor's office
was willing to accept it.
And so
i've got to pull the governor's
office into that conversation
as.
We're continuing to have those
discussions some of my original
ideas or some of the guard
wheels he put.
At that time when I was working
with the gu.
So there's there's multiple
parties involved.
And so it's difficult for me to
say yes or no
without having those.
I hope you understand that it's
it's more complicated like you
said originally then the surface
would show.
Um so there are some things that
the governor's office has agreed
on the thirty six months and so
that is one of the things we
will be changing.
Able to get that done for this.
So we're going to continue those
discussions I have actually
brought the idea when I first
started working on this bill of
the ten percent
because I actually like that as
well so.
It's kind of weird because i'm I
would then be carrying a bill
that wouldn't do anything for
rear ancient until they.
But i'm also blessed to be in
the city where we.
Thank you and that is it.
Reging the chairs and.
And it's a big decision I think
after you retired to renter.
To re enter the work world and.
To fill a needed position you
know that may be a step too far
you'd renter if you could get a
a nice that jack
and I think again that's where
we.
And we have to decide whether or
not we trust the local
governments we have to decide
whether we.
This german center we can we can
continue to dictate all this
from here but that I think
sooner nibert was right.
We swong the pengulum too far
and now we need to bring it back
into line but I think the local
governments understand that also
and they're not going to allow
that.
Abuse to happen again why would
you bring in an officer.
At the highest position.
If that was in the need.
You know one of the big things
that this does.
That some of the guard reals may
not allow is we need to be able.
To have a deputy chief from rear
anchor.
Go and and become the chief of
police in roswell.
Because roswell needs a chief
right now you don't really have
to do to get a chief that goes
of florida.
Because that was where they
could get someone with the
experience that didn't have the
years to retire.
Or it was an already retired.
Because he could come in and do
that.
And that's one of the things
with not allowing someone that's
retired to come back in is we
don't have the very.
Highest train and top level
people.
Especially in our rural
communities to become cheaps.
And maybe.
And you know there's the
trusting the local governments
which i.
III believe that they're
entitled to suntrust but I also.
Because i'm very familiar.
Without the guard real they have
a hard time voting for it but I
look forward to seeing if the
guard reals are there.
Thank you senator so the low per
senator told me followed by
senator mccatching well thank
you.
My position is.
The.
Thank you senator senator
mccutching.
German senator and I really
don't i've not been.
They get way more calls and I
get
but you know you got to deal
with the messing dog.
With the exception maybe it's
the mare me was the city
council.
That's kind of where i'm going
with this as these guard rails
are.
The.
Today we've got.
The.
We are.
Security that mo.
Officers can can correct me if
i'm.
And I can think of a whole lot
of other places that are not.
We bring and we have this great
we have this great force
here to protect the round house.
I know that our local sheriff.
They send officers to the
schools that's a detail that
could we could give to these old
guys I guess if you want you
know the courthouse is good and
so.
Yeah.
Appreciate you bringing this up.
Yeah.
Where they.
We don't know where we might
need to drag.
The local men and women that are
running the police departments.
Increased security.
In a few months
on come back in uniform and go
down on centur.
Mr chairman if I could just
address his old guy comment.
Which is the the youngest you
can really start as a.
Armed officer now they do have
some programs in.
Aid thing and I think the
actually start counting towards
retirement for that.
Well let's go with the twenty
one your retiring at forty six
i'm not sure that's an old guy.
So
but that's that's okay but I I
just I think we all want to know
that at forty six years old
we're saying you can't
serve.
To protect inner schools in our
court houses.
Unstate police.
Are any of those other areas so
yeah that's and I do III prefer
local control am I willing to
compromise on that is being mr
bundy continue to talk and we
pulled in the governor's office
and yes I am.
Um because they'll I was then
was you right I voted against
this last year.
So this is not something that
i'm like love this idea no I
think we have an emergency and
we got to deal with it
which is why we do have a sunset
of twenty twenty seventh younger
people can enter and we will put
the thirty six month on I will I
will promise you that at least
but they'll probably be other
things that we add in here as
guard reps maybe I can get the
governor now to agree to some of
my original ideas
so but that we we need to fix
this issue we need to get more
officers on our street we need
to deal with the crime in new
mexico so that all of us.
Can feel as safe as I feel in
rear.
The.
And I do feel safe as a great
community but I want all of us
throughout the state fill that
safe by having the officers that
we need so they ca.
Address the.
Apologize old guys in experience
because under under these.
Just a little bit like.
Appreciate it.
I had a couple in anybody else
for the question I had a couple
things it seems to me that of
the safeguards that that mister
bunton.
Bundy brought up that the that
the key one.
Didn't get your reaction to that
one was the issue of the
have it already had had to have
been already retired by the end
of twenty three.
I might even heard of that issue
what's that so that yesterday
was the first time I developed
contemplated that yeah and in
that honestly something I would
not run with will have to get
jackensy if the governor would I
understand what what he's
wanting to do there and it makes
sense
and we may have to revisit that
just like senator city alope
said you know if if we need more
to come back then we can always
change that.
If we need to but i'm really
hoping.
That through everything we're
doing right now through through
all the bills that i've been
working on with the with the
governor's office that you're
going to get.
Because I think they're all came
here.
I'm really hoping that we can
can deal with some of these
issues and get more officers on
the streets my nephew
is a officer with bernelio
county deputy there is one of
the deputies that patrol your
streets is one of the deputies
that responds to the issues
happening in in the east
mountains.
I want to make sure that he.
His biggest frustration.
Hopefully it to discuss zoom is
when he arrests someone.
And takes a man and then one or
two days later he's arresting
the same guy.
That's his biggest issue that's
why he doesn't want to stay
company.
He staying in to get his
retirement at this point.
I want him to get back to the
point where he.
Is he with AP d or with a short
only county
because I have been if you were.
Well they probably know
but they work together a lot
more nephew says he would love
to work for the sheriff's
department
you think some more
relationships right
yet might mind if you started
out at rear anti police
department.
The other issue that that that I
wanted to bring up to you does
your bill in any way restrict
because I I keep look it says
who can people who were in these
front lane level enforcement
positions.
Can come back.
But it doesn't limit what they
come back to right now come back
to school teaching
so library they can do that now
so we have to empty around the
difference if you were tired as
law enforcement you're in
period.
You can go then and become a
teacher because that's erb.
So you can then earn a
retirement from the
reb
so yes they can do that now but
they can't come back as law
enforcement and law enforcement
is under a different because
well you've got two different
retirement PE r a and e r b I
know I know but under PE r there
is several law enforcement has
different
visions i'm not i'm not exactly
that works but but we can ask
the expert yes thank you.
Members so currently you are
correct law enforcement person
can retire from period and go
work for any are being employer
that they can not start accruing
a second pension.
They can only do that if they
stop their pension with period
and started paying into erbie
then we would we have a
reciprocity to agreement that we
can combine the benefits but if
if a law enforcement officer is
receiving their benefit while
working for b they are not
adding to their pensioner
accruing a second pension.
And somebody who retires from
the pirate was a sheriff's
deputy or an apd.
And work for the health
department.
Mister chairman in members
currently no so so that program
ended in two thousand and ten so
anybody that comes that is
retired from period and returns
to period must suspend their
pension.
And your bill wasn't wouldn't
touch that at all I mean it
where does it say what it's
limited to coming back as that
that's what I was looking.
Nobody turns to i'm being blind.
I saw the light.
I'm seeing spots on that you are
glowing yeah.
But I believe the intention and
I am not finding the exact spot
but is for them to return it all
here's your drive.
We don't actually sell it I
couldn't find it
it is it is not in that that may
be another that would definitely
be something we so we're at that
point with which we reach
yesterday or two days ago with
the senator gagas's bill would
you be willing to to tackle a
couple of things before we voted
out of here and sent it on where
does it go judiciary they go to
judiciary I I mean you when i.
Yeah I know.
I would prefer it to move
forward but it's really the will
of the committee
what are the rest I don't think
it's going to be a quick
solution with with it and the
two things would be that
retirement had already had to
have been retired but you say
that when the governor might
want to check on that seems like
a why need to ask the governor
right yeah i'm not I I try not
to speak for the.
Where we've we've got we've
grown close but not that close
feeling a little sibling and be
here
i'm feeling a lot
we can't even get her to answer
her
sorry
so.
The.
What do you think III don't want
to be so what do you think so
mr chair if they're allowed to
work but I I would just say that
i'm concerned with with some of
the.
Side boards because.
In in the situation that i'm
familiar with the my area.
I would hate to see those side
boards be be there because those
might be the.
It's difficult.
They want to to talk and see if
there's some common ground but I
would have some concerns with
with the eight points that mr
bandy rough up or how many
points there are there were
would be several that I just
wouldn't care yeah there were
several that touched in
and
the coverage secretary was on
top of these things where the
chairman isn't just pointed out
to me that you don't go to
judiciary you go to finance.
Finance in this book that this
doesn't go to fine.
This is not supposed to go to
finance will scourge issue i'll
take finance we're on eighty
seven
drossed me i'll take finance
over just this year
so let's fix it here is what
they're ok so let's look on this
issue
so your next come back right we
can excellent and and I really
want to try to work with and
mister banny since you're here
you know maybe we look at
something class a counties are
not because I really think that
allowing the rule counties to
have a little more control to be
able to hire that chief.
Thank you
and maybe senator neighborhood
could meet with you to get some
his.
And I think he has access to the
government
we did get appointed by her this
alright so then we'll move to
your other building in this
other bill you have and when we
just dispose them so miss german
this is the second half of the
first bill.
We do have a committee sub for
this bill which we were going to
hold off on I I think that we're
probably going to end up in the
same situation on this one that
we did the first one and so not
waste the committee's time it
might be best just to go ahead
and wait this as you can see in
the sub if you've gone the
server this already has the
thirty six months and some of
those guide rules but it doesn't
have all the guide.
So I don't have a.
When twenty so we yeah we
haven't gotten it yet but you're
saying basically this is the
same bill except it doesn't have
the originally one twenty three
was just.
Or or eighty seven.
Oh i've got the wrong one.
Well that's where i'm confused
one twenty four is just the
being able to buy.
First because the first time the
I I got myself okay then then
then look let's not even have to
although that happened anyone
had a problem with no it's
allowing the service credit so
that can continue to we just
send it out that would be great
anybody
because I knew that the the
return to work would be the
sticky wicket
so we had we had them dropped
separately so this is exactly
the same as the other one the
first half the first half of the
other one yes just just allowing
them to buy that service okay
I got anybody have an objection
to voting on that as is with the
further discussion.
What's the motion where the will
the committee on it senator tom
and movies would do per second
hopefully okay we can discuss it
said the senator neighborhood
second discussion.
The.
Then it does.
Said you'll offer it well I I
just had a
so my understanding of this is
it's just an out of state
how to see people
well it could be it could if
they came from federal so like
if they were in f b I agent.
These their certified law
enforcement so let's say they
didn't want to be I I don't see
that really happening
but it's really primarily for
being able to recurrent from out
of state so your your people
them in the southern half of the
stake and recruit out of texas
and they turn and buy into their
parent wouldn't would recover
military militaries already in
there so a military right now
and already do that
yes in fact I was able to buy
in.
To our retirement here
using the system you can only
buy five years even though I had
seven years of service and so we
really just.
Matched that.
Good
under under or.
Like this affect the pension
that.
There be an analysis.
I put
and I don't recall that we saw
anything like this maybe we did
maybe I missed it but it would
be great to hear what.
Mister german has to say center
city lopez this did not come
before I park it was discussed
during the assession but in the
bill it does allow us to charge
the full actual cost so this
isn't you know being subsidized
in any way I helped remember
this morning who is going to
look in that purchasing one year
and it was about fifty five
thousand dollars for that one
year so it's a while this will
make that allowable it is very.
All right I just the
constitution requires that so I
wanted to hear it thank you.
So it's been done.
Any other decision to mechanic.
Mr
pardon my absence i'm a little.
Did I might to understand that
this cha.
Mister chairman in center
mechanic are bored will be taken
an official position tomorrow so
right now but looking at the
the.
The full actual cost it does not
have an impact.
We want to be really careful and
make sure it w.
So we we had it r.
So that you can buy in that your
bo.
So if you're comi.
You would pull that out of there
which most funds allow you to
and then move it into this one
but most likely you're gonna
have to come up with some other
money to it is fifty five
thousand.
Anybody else what's the will we
have a we have emotion already
so a secretary will call the
senator hiking.
The.
Remember chairman that the
motion is
on this bill in particular
when twenty four
g
center mechanic yes senator
neighbor
centers meetings center city and
office yes.
The.
Ah yeah.
Yes.
Center to the pin yes you.
That with that we conclude the
student is for the day and we
will tomorrow morning
and you make it to dinner.
That's because we didn't hear
the gun
well I was going to because.
Or there's two dinners tonight
the mining.
Miscolorado.
