Whatever level going to impress
the public with how much work we
get to.
The issue is.
And these bills the the Sanchez
get to say a few words and stuff
explain what it's all about.
We get a head count from the
audience of those anybody here
or against.
And zoom if there is anybody for
against us to in the committee
guess yes if you questions but
if it goes on too long we'll
just pull it off the grid and
then have a regular hearing on
thank.
So the first one on the grid is
senator Burton Senator McKenna
welcome and this is the Senate
bill four oh nine.
The digital trunked radio
commercial.
Communications communications
please.
And senator will turn it over to
you thank you Mr chair and on
three issues that we can I think
it's working okay the the the
stable ones.
Okay okay later on okay thank
you Senator Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
Senate bill four oh nine
and basically what it's doing is
working out a a.
A fair amount of money to
compensate for first responders
police officers firefighters so
that they don't have to pay do
it for their emergency radios
that they use throughout the
entire day and their own
personal there are no these are
these are do it radios at do it
charges a fee every month to use
radios because they are an
agency that is required to make
their own money and so because
it's it's an emergency and there
are it's it's time on radio if
you will Mr Chairman and so the
the amount can go up very
dramatically especially when
you're responding to a situation
where you have maybe swore on
board and you have hours upon
hours and you have to be able to
communicate with the the
different agencies on so forth
so what this bill would do is
a and that allowance from the
state to pay for that so it
doesn't come out of the height
of each one of these agencies
and that's the basic premise of
this that up to do it to decide.
When you just tap this fund
rather than the we have do is
here and we we have secretary
here and I think at my
cosponsored may have a few words
to say as well thank you senator
Byrd Senator McKenna thank you
chairman thank you committee
members and thank you senator
Byrd I learned about this
This issue from chief Masterson
at a Sandoval county meeting
last year and the the stories he
told me about how various first
responders can't talk to each
other real time really alarmed
me
chairman and and and committee
members.
I'm and then I learned that the
states of Colorado Arizona
Delaware Wyoming Indiana Ohio
and Oregon all have their first
responders on one system why is
this so important.
It can be
an example is a law enforcement
officer tell me about maybe two
weeks ago he was transporting a
an inmate to taps.
He had a peer to peer of his was
in another vehicle behind him.
He could build the first officer
could not to relay a message to
his peer he had to wait for a
dispatch so you can see in a
moment of emergency how this can
be so costly.
And I think our supporters will
also share with you chairman and
members of the committee that as
soon as New Mexico gets on the
system we can qualify for
project twenty five which is
federal communicate the federal
communication project for inter
operability but this is one of
the first steps we can do now
there is a change in the budget
from six point five million to
two point four I was at two
point five two point five yes we
have two point you are here at
first I was concerned about that
the chairman and the members but
is explain to me just a few
minutes ago we've got five
thousand users on the system now
and if we need it the executive
is open to adjustments so with
that Mr chairman and committee
members I yield you want to move
the amendment Senator yes I
would move a
Senate amendment.
Two Senate bill four oh nine the
simple pending.
Change Frank.
That me yes it's district.
No that was.
Okay technology.
Right.
All right now we're not.
I wonder if it's my personality.
So that's good okay all right so
we have a simple pen in the just
a correction change of the
number from six point five to
two point five.
Is there a second for the
amendment we get a second.
Senator Sedillo Lopez seconded.
Mr.
Are you see your secretary Mr
chair of Secretary mentally
physically the secretary to
which can use the my guess is it
will pick it up you have to push
a button thank you I am the.
You have to hold them I will.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members I am Peter then toss and
the secretary designate for the
department of information
technology and we find these
Public Service submergence the
radio service
The DTR just that here about is
it means inter operability
there's a project going on to
build this out as the senator
mentioned it is a great force
multiplier when there's a fire
we can bring all sorts of people
to bear on it and they can talk
to each other when I came warden
is out in the Moonies he can
call talk to the Las Vegas
police who may be in the area to
to assist whatever the situation
might be up to we think this is
an important piece for our
emergency first responders we'd
be happy to provide it we were
concerned about the large number
and reverting funds but through
discussions with people
representing the counties the
municipal leaks the we've we've
come to this a number and we
think it will be a great step
forward I'd speak in support of
the bill right thank you before
we go to the audiences Act on
the amendment is there any
opposition to the change in the
bill from six point five to two
point five.
C. seeing none will consider the
bills and then amended thank you
and now let's just get a straw
vote how many in the audience
are here who would support this
bill.
Good is there anybody in
opposition to the bill.
Great and then we have online
three others Andrew Rodriguez
Steven Lopez and Josh Mack all
of whom were supportive of it
and nobody's opposed online
members of the committee any
discussion or we would act.
This is the first bill in our
appropriations grid Senator
Hickey.
As amended Senator Gallegos one
question Mr chair and seconded
by Senator says to do Lopez and
Senator just real quick question
so after twenty twenty four how
are we going to sustain this
call for Mr centers.
The plan is to build into the
budget.
Okay so as the number of radios
goes up time on radio goes up
will of adjust that into the to
the budget of agencies is my
understanding could help okay
though in our and I apologize
that in relation another expert
witness did you I'm sorry I you
add anything yes.
Thank you Mr Charlie really
brief Allison Nichols.
Yeah hold it down there it's a
very Allison Nichols municipal
league thank you so much to the
sponsor senator Byrd Senator
McKenna we think it's really
critical that all our first
responders are able to get on
this statewide interoperable
network and we've heard from
from several of our municipal
police and fire departments that
they would like to be on the
network but the fees really are
barrier there are grants
available or other one time
funding so they can purchase the
radios but it's a lot harder to
build that recurring cost into
their budgets and as the
Senators alluded to you know we
have situations critical
incident situations where first
responders from different
agencies are unable to
communicate and that to spend
valuable time trying to set up
some kind of communication
system before they can respond
and we really don't want that
situation and also we I'll just
reiterate that not only is is
this critical for our first
responders safety but it is also
a federal directive and
requirement from any
communications related requests
so thank you so much for your
consideration right thank you
miss more.
Any other discussion secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente center to
the penal yes.
Six Senator is here with the did
you want to vote on this it's
the first bill in the probation
group with yes.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey let's go to you
next he just got away with maybe
we'll go to your next let's go
to your bill in this group Mr
chairman members and make you a
it was by what six seven by
seven by a seven in the
formative zero in the negative
vote you get to do that.
And I don't see Senators Lopez.
Stefanics Steinborn here.
But I don't have.
We'll just skip over them
briefly give majestic and then.
Senator Hickey we'll go to your
bill next I don't think I have a
bill here today Sir public peace
health see if you will for
twenty million dollars in the
general fund for the proton
emissions
Proton therapy for cancer
patients.
In the probation group.
Just be.
We don't have why is it on the
roofs.
Okay okay well we'll do we'll
holders for another to okay.
I wasn't able to find out if the
great well they're not here
let's to Gonzalez's because he's
not going to be here and I said
I do it for.
And I'll just do it from here.
We need to have less and less
that thank you for that.
They have
direct from sixty two.
Later that okay.
So you you're not you don't want
to hear it ever or you just
gonna delay well.
That may not be presented
principal very briefly Sir okay
right with the five oh one just
briefly.
You don't even have a number for
probably for you know if that's
okay.
Just roll that down rule that
thing that.
Mr chairman and colleagues this
is actually I believe I owe to
is the bill when it is I want
thank you okay five oh one
proposes through the City of
Albuquerque of in this is also
basically the it's going to go
into capital but it's going to
meet a need this really critical
for the state and that's for a
proton beam accelerator
radiation therapy two oh we do
not have one anywhere else in
the state people are leaving the
state all the time to get this
therapy why should we care why
any of us here would in radio
and regular radiation therapy
you burn what's in front of the
tumor and what's in back and
around it was a proton beam
focuses right on the tumor
itself in these the surrounding
tissue alone and that's why it's
such a valuable tool
Various means of putting the
capital together to put it
together it will be a five oh
one see three it will be
available to anybody no matter
what their insurance situation
is kind of what we cover I think
the other day
and we're really be located it
will be located at the New
Mexico cancer center there will
be a separate entity separate
building
and be a five oh one see three
okay this is a great explanation
because it's a some of the the.
Emergency bill what they're
calling emergency bills this
year we haven't processed it yet
so we'll we'll get a an agenda
very soon right thank you and I
guess we have to go to the floor
and to have it moved or
something just.
It's over there and what you've
been waiting for.
Okay okay so we'll we'll get to
it Senator the the but thank you
very much Mr I think right now
good explanation of.
And then the.
Okay so we'll go then to Senator
Gonzales bill would have two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to DFA.
For the mortgage finance
authority to use to find their
the oversight of the you go next
Center suppose where you get up
to this point
For the purpose of of our
state's capital outlay bonding
capacity this dedicated to
affordable housing all of that
is to run through the affordable
housing act this is to pay for
the increase administrative cost
at to MFA for handling those
different processes of the past.
Their second seconded by Senator
Tallman any discussion of.
I think Senator Rodriguez said
the bills money in the in in the
budget for the but just to be
sure.
Any other discussion of it.
Secretary call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes what
Senator Ortiz if you know yes.
Seven five seven zero go to that
one passes now we go to Senator
Stefanics and Senate bill four
nineteen all inclusive adult
daycare at two sites.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it was brought to
my attention that the aging and
long term Services Department
could expand into other
geographic areas of the state
for adult day care if they have
some support in evaluating some
sites determining the viability
and that this small amount of
money could assist to new sites
to open.
So the money goes to the aging
and long term services or if
there is a need a long term
services because.
Okay.
And they they did they tell you
where they're going to be
located now that purpose I I was
told that the purpose is to
evaluate sites in around the
state so if somebody here who is
here from aging they might be
able to answer that question
anybody here for meeting.
Let's let's just get a let's
just get a show of hands from
the Medicaid director of the
good to hear from you.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm a lot of access
the Medicaid medical director so
I'm just a little clarification
if we're talking about adult
daycare or program of all
inclusive care of the elderly
and like this under Human
Services Department is that the
pace program or we used to call
faces cuts of noon that's the
Human Services department so
it's it's got very specific
rules of how it's funded Adam
and a very long time line so if
it's about it the adult day care
that's a completely different I
think question what what what
what your understanding Senator
well the title of the bill is
for all inclusive care for the
elderly but the appropriation
goes to aging a long term
services and since I'm not the
administrator of the department
or the program I couldn't tell
you.
It's good it's a good you raise
a good issues so thank you of I
think at this point we'll just
we'll just let it play out and
see where it goes.
Okay anybody else in the
audience want to speak in
support of this or not speak but
shows support for this bill just
raise your hand.
Anybody opposed.
The anybody at all online for
this bill Senator Sedillo Lopez
which is
San Lucas or just.
She has to.
Our experts in the okay good Sen
seconded from Senator Tallman
any other discussion of this
bill.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey center mass
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Six six six six zero to press
Senator thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I'll
come back when you're ready for
the connect okay Senator Lopez
is part what about Steinborn is
he coming.
This is.
This is an on the of the
appropriations grid
Senator Steinborn.
Nobody knows various finances in
finance.
Welcome didn't come Senator
Lopez is it can't be here but
asked me to put it on who's here
FOR Senator Lopez is just to
build which one.
Excellent pics coming up that's
a that's when even I can do.
Okay go ahead provided to
explain what the Special
Olympics appropriation is fourth
and introduce yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Rudy
Zamora and I'm a parent coach
advocate for Special Olympics
New Mexico.
and what we're doing here with
this is trying to get additional
appropriations.
For Special Olympics New Mexico
to have more control and more.
More items to do with the
Special Olympics New Mexico
Special Olympics New Mexico
serves over three thousand seven
hundred individuals with into
intellectual disabilities.
Across thirty one New Mexico
counties.
We provide year round sports
training.
Competition in eleven sports as
well as virtual health and
fitness programming in twenty
twenty two Special Olympics New
Mexico how seven state game
statewide competitions to
virtual competitions a two FTE
wellness challenges.
People within a ended
intellectual disabilities have
five times higher risk for
diabetes and two times higher
risk to develop heart disease
research shows that physical
activity sports combat these
conditions.
The other portion of the Special
Olympics is the law enforcement
torch run for Special Olympics.
We have seventy five New Mexico
law enforcement agencies
champion acceptance and
inclusion by raising awareness
and funds for Special Olympics.
Special Olympics is not only
sports it's also it's like a
triangle has two of the
questions to it one is inclusive
health and the other one's
unified schools under the fight
under the unified champion
schools program we foster social
inclusion by bringing together
students with and without ID's
or intellectual disabilities on
sports teams and by promoting
youth leadership as of January
twenty twenty three we have
forty three schools in New
Mexico participate in this
program more than four hundred
students with individual does
not.
With the.
Intellectual disabilities and
five hundred and five partner
students participate for schools
are recognized as national
banner schools and relaunch
elementary school is nationally
recognized as an ESPN top five
school for their ongoing
commitment to inclusion and last
year may feel high school in Los
crucis was.
Became the number one special
inclusion school in the nation
they won an award for that.
Special Olympics health is that
their portion of it and in that
we provide health that athletes
free health screenings to
Special Olympics athletes
identified unmet.
A special needs before they
health needs before they can
become emergencies two hundred
eleven total health screenings
and sixty one refers we're
giving a twenty twenty two a
long by eighty one health
professionals and students the
health professions students
volunteer their time at at the
games and and other networks
that we put together and they
give these individuals who have.
May have spurs health needs and
that they're not being met
because they're either in homes
are under caretaker or in a
different type of situation away
from their families do not with
families so then I getting the
proper care and these are
provided free these individuals
the health individuals.
I just donate their time.
Good so the money goes to the
tourism department to the
tourism they contract with you
yes aha that anybody in the
audience here to speak in order
to show support for Special
Olympics funding.
The very here opposed to split
photo we have one person.
Good.
Support.
Well it's building is kind of
like a way.
All right Rudy you persuaded a
lot of people they don't even
know you're going to be here and
other for thank you for anybody
against anybody in the audience
against it you know if there.
Yeah okay.
We have a motion for a due pass
from senators and and senator
guy goes to a second Sir this
will help with your constituents
by our okay.
Secretary called will.
Thank you recruit for your
presentation Q. Center gave us
yes ma'am Senator Hickey Senator
Ingle center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator smitteez Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes.
I go to six is here you have a
due pass from thank you now you
have in the pike you million
binance yes thank you for thank
you guys come up I'll put it on
from here Senator Lopez is not
going to be here so I can put it
on okay even better talking to.
Senator Sedillo Lopez of is
sponsoring this with we're
getting very close Senate
Representative Ferrary very
close.
Good.
This is the Senate bill four
thirty six child inter
disciplinary.
Representation.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee this this bill
appropriates two point five
million from the general fund to
the department of finance to the
DFA for the purpose of
implementing a state wide system
of inter disparity will
representation for children and
families in cases arising under
the children's code has you know
the loss of children the issues
involving children are of
critical importance to our state
and this appropriation would
really serve a gap in legal
services needs in our state.
Into this country and and I have
here to go to answers I don't
know if they would like to see.
Miss Gilliam welcome thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is more use
the hand held Mike just because
as soon will pick you up better.
And you push the button.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I don't think
you're pushing the button
pushing is it not are you sure
you're pushing about pushing
all the right of the right of
you they still have to reject
you do this opposite did that
when it's.
You're not pushing the button
correctly.
Order is it better that okay so
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Beth Kelly
on the new director of the
office of family Representative
representation advocacy which we
refer to as from over it is a
new agency that was created last
year by the legislature will
come up into being on July first
of this year we have funding
through eighty two but with.
Senator Lopez who's been just a
stalwart supporter of Oprah
since the beginning is has
supported this bill to put two
and a half million dollars in to
for for inter disciplinary
representation which means that
the legal team has a family care
navigator and a social work
supervisor on the team to
provide insight and assistance
to the family who as you can
imagine when a child can take it
away from you by CYFD is
terrified that they're gonna
lose their child forever is
probably not so willing to be
candid to the agency that has
taken their child away from them
CYFD and who really need someone
to help them navigate through
this very complex system so the
inter disciplinary team is the
team that is there for that
parent and child to help them
understand this complex system
to help them identify the
services that will make the
difference in their lives that
will keep children safe and it
has been used in other states to
great effect where children have
reduced repeat maltreatment they
have a quicker time to
permanency whether that's return
to the home that's been made
safe or with kinship family
kinship caregivers or adoptive
parents they have more stability
in their placements in foster
care so they have fewer school
changes and the right to
permanency is faster so the
overall traumatic effect of
being in foster care is less so
in states that have this program
they've had reduced costs that
are significant that we hope to
see here in New Mexico that
could be anywhere between three
million and thirteen million
dollars annually so what we're
asking today is to have the two
and a half million dollars so
that we can have this inter
disciplinary team for people in
we're gonna roll this out across
the state gradually but this
would allow up to six hundred
families to have that
interdisciplinary team in the
metro region of Albuquerque and
in the southwest region.
mostly it in Los crucis so with
that I'll turn it back to the
sponsor in Merion did you want
to say anything up.
Not really other than to say
this was created the office was
created as best said in the last
legislative session thanks to
all of you who I believe voted
for it
and at this point it was created
to to do a different type of
representation for children
which is here to for been at the
administrative office of the
courts and so now we need these
funds to actually pull that off
and we otherwise we're going to
be providing a lot of attorneys
like AOC did at a higher quality
I mean there will be
improvements but the two point
five allows us to add the
pyramid navigators in the social
workers who are going to address
the conditions that brought
these families into care in the
first place housing immigration
issues substance abuse we all
know the let me so we feel like
it's really important to in
order to fulfill the mission we
were created to to fulfill that
we have the interdisciplinary
teams and thank you so the
city opened for standing in with
us yet again yeah I know and I I
just want to conclude by saying
this is the model used in lots
of provided an extremely
effective model of having
musical multi disparities but I
I don't think it matters
because the families need more
than just legal services okay
let's go to the audience is here
to speak and or just to show
support for this bill.
Good.
Anybody here opposed to this
bill.
The end of the on line members
of the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Senator for bringing
the bill and for the agency I
have forgotten about this but I
I want to affirm to my
colleagues here the importance
of this bill and I hope I have a
companion bills that really
supports what it is that you're
trying to do
A lot of kids and dysfunction
and families our kids get pulled
out because there's conflict
verbal physical what have you
Act has to do with the fact that
very often and I think some of
us understand it that don't
quite know or aren't really
trained well and handling
conflict and
It's so getting getting some
social support is really
important but with the mental
health parity bill that I hope
will be past and and funded
it will require and I know that
a lot of these folks are going
to have regular insurance but
some of may have market which
comes under it and and the this
law only applies to commercial
insurance in the state although
the old Medicaid regime agreed
to more what we were doing in
their in their MCO contracts and
so so hopefully this to that but
the the key is that insurers
have to cover marriage and
family therapy and they will not
do it in less there is a
diagnostic code out of the
that the manual the statistical
diagnostic manual this allows
anyone who needs that to be able
to get it so
it particularly where there's
insurance and when we get it
built into the Medicaid
requirements that this services
be offered I think they will
they will help.
Fix the situation our move the
situation along I think any of
us I'm not gonna say Hey let's
have a show of hands because we
probably only get one or two but
a lot of us have been through
couples therapy of one sort or
another family therapy and have
found to be very useful it's a
very very valid form of
behavioral health intervention
so I thank you for bringing this
bill and I think this is really
critical thank you so much and
thank you Mr chair thank you
just a question about the chart
of.
So you'd asked for.
Five point three million to be
shifted from AOC over.
But it additional appropriation
of five point seven and if you
got those you'd be able to claim
two point five million in
federal is that forty yes forty
and but you've you've got the
five point three shift over.
I Mr chairman members of the
committee yes we believe that
that has been shipped over in V.
two so that that you didn't get
the five points a did you get
anything else yes we got one
point six million out of it HB
to.
So you've got a little short of
seven million instead of the
eleven million unique.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee what that means in
reality is that a large number
of families will not receive the
benefit of this
interdisciplinary model that has
had the great impact in other
states they will all get
representation legal
representation but not all of
them look at the team that helps
yes and and can you get that can
you get that from other sources.
The fund other agencies no no
the the support of services for
the family.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think the answer
unfortunately is now I think
that families can get some
assistance through care
coordinators NMC owes through
Medicaid but that will get them
medical and mental health care
coordination but it won't get
done the social work services in
in in parenting support services
unless they're part of their
case plan through the agency but
that will be agency directed
rather than family and parent
and child directed services so
it won't they won't have that
sense of support from their own
team and that's the gap we're
trying to fill and will you
seven million still draw down
two point five million of forty
I know Mr chairman it's a it's a
formula and so it in reality it
comes out to about twenty five
percent so for every dollar the
state spends will get about
twenty five cents back you'll
only get about maybe one and a
half million from forty okay
anything else you want to add to
it.
Let's have a motion what's the
will of the committee.
Senator Tallman moved to do yes
seconded by Senator Hickey.
Any other discussion secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Eight five eight to zero vote
you have a do pass thank you a
let's think enough thank you
good luck happy hunting in
finance thank.
Senator Steinborn is apparently
on his way but I'm gonna just
tell you he told me on the floor
they've got this money in the
budget already he was able to
because he's on finance.
He was able to get into the
budget so I think we can we can
just roll that bill.
Well maybe for pro forma list is
vote on it Senator Hickey want
to make a motion I so move Mr.
The path of a motion for a do
pass seconded from.
Senator Tallman.
This bill is five million
dollars just it it adds to the
health professional loan
repayment fund which I think is
in higher ed.
That's right isn't it the
Senator yes it is and I red is
yes and so this just means they
can they can help.
Additional doctors and nurses
pay off their loans by staying
in the state longer.
Okay secretary cultural center
guy angles no no explain my vote
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Just about senator Clemente yes
center to the penal yes Senator
goes to explain is the Mr chair
I just not hearing anything
about it choose to go blindly
it so like a good program
the Senators the regular loan
repayment program we've had a
long so it just but it is adding
five million more to okay still
didn't have good detail so
thank.
So as by a five six by six to
one voted you got to do pass on
that okay now let me give the
ground rules for house bill
seven are the sponsors here.
They worry Senator.
Come on up and sit set up your.
Senator wrote to and little are
you are you also Sanchez Senator
I mean Representative.
Okay.
Okay this is a get your was
start let me go over the ground
rules we're going to handle
this.
We we would like to have for
people in the audience and one
person on zoom speak in favor of
the bill and for people in the
audience and one person on zoom
speak against it and each one
would have two to three minutes.
If you have to assume is that
you only get three total of five
is what it amounts to.
I thought we was six with six
four and two that what I said
originally.
And that okay let's let's let's
do for and to undo for the
audience and to assume okay.
That's fine.
And we have here the organized
testimony against this is
against the Senator Schmedes
this is against again.
Mr chair there is an amendment.
Do the the people
who are for this bill have a
similar list.
Okay then you understood it was
for two also okay.
Thank you.
Okay so this is house bill
seven.
I would like you to present the
bill before the amendment we
sure would Representative
welcome thank you so much
Representative chairman and
senator is wonderful to be here
today these are my experts today
have Aaron Armstrong who's a
lawyer a little rush forth with
ACLU and then Dr Malinga claim
who's a gender affirming health
care practitioner in our state
on H. B. seven the reproductive
and gender affirming health care
freedom Act insurers that we're
not adding fear on top of the
host of reasons people find it
difficult to find this type of
health care in our state the
prohibits public bodies from
discriminating it's individual
seeking or refusing reproductive
or gender from health care
including abortion care I'll
stay with my first pregnancy I
had to station diabetes and I
had to go in twice a week for
twenty minute appointments that
would just we're all just sounds
to make sure everything was
progressing and I would meet
individuals from across northern
New Mexico who traveled an hour
plus for the simple appointments
and it's really important we're
not creating more barriers to
that access because it can be
life saving as we know it out of
ten maternal deaths are
preventable and prenatal health
care can be the bill a lifesaver
in those situations similarly
eight out of ten transgender
individuals will contemplate
suicide in their lives and when
you don't have genders gender
affirming health care that is
associated with nearly a seventy
five percent lower odds of
suicidality especially among
transgender youth so this bill
to be clear does not change
parental consent rules in our
state which are in line with
what we have the eight with with
what the AAP recommends it does
not change how gender affirming
health care is received without
any typically there's nothing
that's permanent that happens to
minors or children can often
times be as simple as using
their preferred proper pronoun
and that can make such a
difference and it is often in
consultation with family this
bill also doesn't change the the
the role in New Mexico that we
understand found families exist
and that sometimes especially
for kids don't feel safe at home
and it well or nanti can be a
trusted individual in fact and
and also
Say it doesn't change the scope
of work for doctors or the
relationships that teachers have
the students or patients have
with their doctors on it should
this pass and be signed into law
individuals will still have
those trusted conversations
beyond our our interference and
they will still face these
complicated issues all one thing
I do want to say that we have
heard some concerns about
reasonable because a mandatory
attorney fees I feel very
comfortable and how the bill is
crafted as it is right now on
how you know the age you cannot
file frivolous claims or
anything like that and then
again mandatory attorney fees
while they are rare in statute
in this case because this is
dignitary harm we don't want to
create another
barrier to people utilizing this
as well so I do open that up to
conversation in this committee
you know in the spirit of you
know collaboration and making
sure we're doing the best for
the state of New Mexico so at
this are at the heart of for me
this bill is about saving lives
for the next generation given
the best we can and with that I
stand for questions.
And did you have you did your
expert witness is going to speak
on the bill I think we're
updating this here for for
questions.
no there's an amendment is it
hopes it are you proposing the
amendment I believe Senator
Sedillo Lopez is going to is.
Chairman of.
Chairman okay
so Senator Sedillo Lopez had to
leave and so she asked if I
could do the amendment have you
seen the amendment yes you all
got and is it you consider
friendly amendment do I do even
though this means elect to go
back for concurrent I did okay.
Sometimes the enemy of the good
is the perfect but go ahead.
Okay so chairman and
representative and subject
matter experts the first one is
the strike.
house Judiciary Committee
amendment seven nine and eleven.
Okay gotcha.
Hey you gonna strike you're
going to knock out that number
seven.
You covered some other place.
I'm.
I'm reading what she left here.
That does seem a little crucial
to me if that's okay with you
all if we strike if we covered
the compact with some of the.
Senate Judiciary Committee House
Judiciary Committee number seven
was.
Nothing in the reproductive and
gender affirming health care
freedom action because food
require any health care provider
or entity to provide care.
You really want to strike that.
Thought not.
Is that what you agree to our
you know those always what was
discussed it was discussed.
That was not discussed Mr wasn't
okay thousand this is
interesting because
that's what she left here.
okay just a moment me just take
a look here.
Thank you.
Okay have a of the chairman
Chairman representative
She has section sections three
B. and C..
Me and see.
He has here strike quote
directly or indirectly and
quote.
And the rationale because it is
already implied in law and
streamlines the sections.
Section three.
Do we.
B. and C..
Will be yes Representative.
That's okay we we we don't
really need to get any more
names and.
We've got all the.
What thank you for a running
tally of how many that that's
good.
This is no longer it's not it's
not I want to let the wrong she
for me then.
She should be here that.
Yeah.
I I think I think we'll just
withdraw this amendment for the
time being if there's no deal
Lopez wants to come in and
explain.
She should be yes yes this
provision.
Yes yes.
Yes she can she can take that
amendment to Judiciary okay I
think it's out here she can go
to do this is what he left for
me yes but thank you.
And if she gets back with before
we finish we'll give a chance to
talk about it is he did not look
like it was a friendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators will proceed with the
bill as is thank you okay well
then let's let's begin this
anything else from the committee
for any other members being
proposed.
Okay let's go to the audience
then let's let's just first of
all take a straw poll how many
here are in support of this
bill.
Okay thank you how many here in
opposition to this bill.
And you have a numbers of the
online supporters and opposers
yes.
Four nine in support of.
Four one so far online nine
opposed and one in support.
Okay.
Okay in support then closes.
Okay so now we'll go to those
who are here to speak in
support.
first Julius Frank.
Julius will be followed by
Alaina dances come on up and use
the Mike please.
And then the.
Gosh Burnett well and soon that
sends them do you have those two
people and.
here's uses only one item in
support.
It's very net.
You gotta get internet yes yes
and it came to yes it's out on
yeah I think that's the only one
we have we don't have anybody
else's of.
See you have you have this
online seasons utilizing sister
Marlene O. K. all right so let's
start with you and then we'll
we'll do for in the in the room
into online.
Okay person is this working it
is okay.
so hello Mr chairman and
senators my name is Julie is
Frank I use he they pronouns and
I'm an intern for the league of
women voters and we support
everyone's right to access
affordable health care.
And gender affirming health care
including access to abortion
services birth control and
gender care we oppose any of
legislation or regulatory
restrictions on birth control
abortion or gender care this
strips people of their personal
autonomy and opens the door to
read more fundamental rights we
encourage you to pass this
important piece of legislation
thank you.
Very good thank you next is a
lot of chances.
Hello again I'm a lot of chances
the Medicaid medical director
Mister chair members of the
committee as standing here in
support of this bill at abortion
services is health care and
gender affirming care is health
care and we already have been
kind of working to move forward
with our gender affirming
policies to be more inclusive
and this care can be lifesaving
thank you very good thank you a
lot of then.
Is this Haley's actors okay.
We're going in order to.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is he was often the staff
attorney at southwest women's
Law Center.
This bill would put into law
requirement that there be no
political interference with New
Mexicans ability to make
extremely intimate and personal
decisions it is imperative that
we respect personal decision
making any knowledge that it's
not our place to decide for
someone else whether they should
get an abortion.
It's better that they make that
decision with their family and
according to their faith.
I have heard the argument that
municipalities should be able to
regulate reproductive health
care because they're closer to
their constituents and better
understand the.
This argument fails to recognize
the constituents themselves are
in the best position to make it
is what's best for themselves.
To do what is best for
themselves and this is why the
south was from Los understand.
Thank you very.
I don't see Cat Sanchez in the
crowd oh **** oh they're good
good.
I've got you done is our fourth
in person speaker cat.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee my name is Cat
Sanchez I am the director who
director of policy at bold
futures we are a reproductive
justice organization led by and
for black indigenous women and
people of color we know that
gaps exist in access to health
care especially in our rural and
frontier areas of the state
myself I'm from southern New
Mexico and can take some folks
months to wait for simple pap
smear when additional barriers
and even discrimination existed
access to the full spectrum of
reproductive or gender affirming
care that's detrimental to our
ability to thrive we continue
this fight for the dignity of
our communities and to ensure
they don't encounter
discrimination at every corner
and quite frankly we shouldn't
have to and yet here we are
urging a do pass thank you very
much cat that online we have
sister Marlene.
Furrowed.
Are you there sister.
Yes I am can you hear me yes we
can hear you.
Okay good evening Mister chair
and members of the committee my
name is Marlene Perot I'm a
member of the sisters of mercy
of the Americas thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
support of HB seven.
V. seven protects access to
reproductive and send and gender
affirming health care and
ensures the New Mexico state law
is every is respected every part
of our state.
Increasingly aware of the
political religious divert
divisiveness that revoking role
versus Wade has he has evolved
in a pluralistic society
reproductive gender justice and
self determination as well as
religious freedom must be
protected and defended in law.
As H. B. seven says all health
care is within the medical
standard of care.
The concrete realities of women
within diverse context of sexual
and domestic violence
subjugation subordination and
oppression are very much related
to women's reproductive freedom.
In November of twenty twenty two
the Catholic church's global
organization for nuns denounced
the culture of silence and
secrecy that prevented them from
speaking out on Tuesday January
thirty first twenty twenty three
pope Francis have admitted that
priests and bishops have
sexually abuse nuns and in one
case they were kept as sex
slaves he further said that the
roots late in society seeing
women as second class.
I speak in solidarity with the
sisters and nuns who have been
raped in war or by the hierarchy
of the church and have sought
reproductive care including
surgical abortions.
We are called to recognize and
defend women as autonomous equal
and moral agents women are
capable of making moral
decisions and assessing the
legislative comprehensive
reproductive health care okay
hold for chronic all the doctors
dealing with ectopic pregnancies
and women diagnosed with cancer
all is within the medical
standard of care without
government interference system
you're running over time if you
could wrap it up please.
Yes R. L. G. B. T. brothers and
sisters equally need laws that
will guarantee gender affirming
comprehensive care as they
struggle to live out their
authentic selves thank you very
much may loves energy eliminate
our hearts as we journey into a
new consciousness thank you
thank you sister and then gauge
Burnett is the second zoom
speaker in support.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is gauge Burnett I'm a graduate
student and president of
students for reproductive rights
here at New Mexico State
University approximately fifty
percent of transgender men
attempt suicide by the age of
twenty five and I am proud and
humbled to be one such transient
demand who has survived to speak
before this committee today.
As much as we would like to
think otherwise discrimination
based on health care access is
not a hypothetical in the state
of New Mexico it's taken me more
than a year to remove all
references to my given or dead
name anymore from the NMAA you
system website I've been asked
invasive questions about my
medical transition by near
strangers on campus but people
who are supposed to be my peers
and my coworkers one person who
at the time did not even know my
name asked outright if I were
planning to get genital surgery
and was upset when I refused to
answer.
University students especially
LGBT plus students need to know
that they are safe as they
navigate birth control STI
testing and hormone therapy
independently and often for the
first time and they need to have
their school and their community
behind them every step.
H. B. seven and specifically
section three of this bill find
this provides this protection
specifically for students
transgender students in New
Mexico have a need and a right
to equal access and education
students who are pregnant or had
an abortion belong in the
classrooms alongside us any
person who is seeking or who has
ever saw or will ever need
medical support along their
journey to live love and
flourish in their bodies
deserves the full support of the
state of New Mexico and its
institutions that every step of
the way and this bill critically
will provide not only lip
service to this idea of the
quality actual enforceable
protections to people like me
who need them the most thank you
very much thank you Mr.
Judy Hendricks and Lisa
Martinez.
So we'll start with you drive
pro.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee am I might
coming through.
Hard to say okay better I think
so okay
I am here today I'm I'm a
physician of internal medicine
at practice for forty years
twenty five of those were
internal medicine fifteen of
those years were in emergency
medicine I'm here to express my
concerns about H. B. seven in
its present form I would like to
to start out with to paint a
scenario something that could
happen in a rural area of seeing
combinations of these events and
I just want to
Read this because these these
things actually happened in in
various ways
this is very concerning for the
northern and southern parts of
New Mexico a fourteen year old
minor asked her physician for an
abortion referral without her
parents knowledge she lives in
northern New Mexico rural area
the frightened adolescent
undergoes the procedure and
travels a long distance to our
home she notices that her
bleeding is increasing some of
the remains of the fetus have
accidentally been left inside
her this bleeding increases
gradually because do I see has
begun which destroys the
coagulation system of the body
she finally tells her parents
and they rushed her to the
nearest emergency room twenty
miles away.
She begins to bleed from every
orifice in her body which do I
see can do the ER nurse and
doctor use almost all the small
hospital supply blood products
to try to keep your blood
pressure up the medevac flight
is delayed because the pilots
are changing shifts and that's
actually happened when the
medevac is only three miles away
her blood pressure drops to zero
and they are unable to revive
her she is pronounced dead the
referring physician abortionist
in state are successfully sued
by the grieving parents for
millions of dollars only the ER
nurse and doctor are vindicated
the costs will rise from these
procedures and lesser done
properly and with properly
precautions which is not present
in the state providers and
teachers will flee to the state.
That respect to protect the
integrity judgment and dignity a
professionals the USA is
currently short of a hundred
thousand primary care providers
and almost a million nurses New
Mexico has one of the more
severe problems in this regard
at one point the New Mexico
National Guard was called up to
staff the public classrooms you
know this happened recently for
abortion clinics are started in
New Mexico first laws should
already be in place governing
the condition of the facilities
the records of the professionals
and hospital should have
agreements with them and the
providers for quick back up care
currently New Mexico does not
regulate abortion up until the
date of birth.
I have stood in front of a Los
crucis abortion clinic ran front
many days in hours at the time
in peaceful protest I only
recall seeing license tags from
New Mexico two times in all this
many day since October I have
seen Texas tags and I've seen
tags from sure wala the Mexican
state of to wobble turn in.
Acceptable standards of care are
not being met in the situations
there were over fifty severe
injuries reported in the
Albuquerque area along which is
a city not a rural area of
course just over the last year
so we do have to do better on
that and this bill does not
provide for that small town
emergency rooms will be
overwhelmed I want to tell you
about a cohort study in twenty
twenty one if it show that four
hundred comments brief that
would be helpful not just go on
yeah okay of four hundred twenty
three thousand confirm to
questions show that there were a
hundred and twenty one thousand
subsequent ER visits thirty in
the thirty days following the of
fourteen point six percent of
the visits were for chemical
abortions half of those were for
us surgical abortions the
chemical abortions had less
problems they clogged up the
emergency rooms people in Hobbs
in other small towns the
emergency rooms won't be able to
over to handle this so they have
an abortion clinic coming
through people that are having
heart attacks people that are
having multiple promise it it
won't go so it it won't be able
to be handled so we need to let
our small towns regulate this
not for the purpose of denying
Care but for the purpose of
giving care to those that need
it most necessary in
inappropriately
manner that gets to the most of
concerning first
I close by asking you to
courageously defend your
constituents regardless of your
party affiliation please do the
just thing and get this bill
fixed where people are cared for
where their
safety is of concern and
parental consent is followed
please see the just thing and
follow science for your
beautifully enchanting and of
our state.
Thank you thank you doctor call
Rosalyn cartoonists.
R. N..
For the purpose of that is that
the US was.
I'm Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Rosalyn car
than us I'm a registered nurse
I married the mother of three
grown children and a teenage
daughter.
Because New Mexico is not
adopted and has completely
ignored regulatory process to
ensure abortion providers meet
the standard of care according
to the American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
and other expert providers for
induction abortion must be
performed in a hospital or a
hospital like setting as a
health care professional I would
not agree to refer a provide
access for any minor to have a
chemical or surgical abortion
knowing the safety and well
being of the patient would be at
risk.
I made an oath when a graduate
nurse I would hold to ethical
principles such as
accountability budget sense
which is to act in the patient's
best interest and fidelity which
is being honest and having
integrity in the care of the
patient to establish trust.
The patient is a minor trust me
and their health care that I
will act in the patient's best
interest I am accountable to the
patient to ensure I follow the
oath I took when committing to
this profession.
How can I refer or provide
access to report reproductive
health care when the process
itself is not up to the standard
for induction abortion must be
performed in a hospital or
hospital like setting.
Women can order the abortion
pill online without confirmation
the pregnancies even in the
uterus risking hemorrhage and
delivery of their baby at home
in their bathroom by themselves
without immediate access to
emergency medical care.
Misoprostol the second pill used
in chemical abortion induces the
delivery of the dead Paetus.
Applications with abortion pill
use has been seen more more
emergency rooms like heavy
bleeding and hemorrhage the need
for emergency surgery or
admission to the hospital for
blood transfusions and
infections caused by retained
products of conception for those
of you who support this bill
please consider the
ramifications are Lev ones mixed
variants.
Complete strangers would be
referring or providing access to
healthcare procedure for your
loved ones without providing
complete the knowledge of
informed consent and no personal
advocate to be there for
guidance.
Rental permission is required to
administer over the counter pain
medication like Tylenol or
ibuprofen that being said please
vote no on house bill seven.
Thank you of this car than us
Judy Hendricks the president of
New Mexico Family action movie.
No.
Hello chairman and members of
the committee my name is Jody
Hendrix I am the executive
director for New Mexico Family
action movie I'm also a licensed
mental health counselor and we
oppose this bill because we
believe there is a very real
violation to parents rights I'd
like to draw your attention to
something that's happening in
New Mexico currently and then
show you how house bill seven
will pass into law something
that directly violates a
parent's right right now in New
Mexico schools educators are
being trained on how to find a
gender support plan to provide
support for gender identity for
students at school Senator
support plans include changing
pronouns changing names changing
how they want to dress at school
being able to determine what
facilities they want to use what
locker rooms what bathrooms they
even are given access to gender
affirming support groups under
house bill seven these gender
support plans will be considered
gender affirming health care
because based on the definition
of the bill gender affirming
health care these gender support
plans provide psychological and
behavioral services that support
the gender identity of a person
so now we have this health care
available in our schools
administered by teachers.
Right now the standard operating
procedure of these gender
support plans is given to the
educators with strict
instructions that they are not
allowed to call the parents.
They're also given instruction
that if they need to call home
for any reason about the
students they are to verify what
the student is referred to at
home so that they do not
accidentally give any gender
identity details or gender
support plan details so that
educators are be instructed to
exclude parents intentionally
and to deceive parents.
House bill seven will pass into
law the protection of these
gender support plans that are
already violating parents rights
now making something protected
under law a direct violation to
parents rights parents have the
right to be involved with these
medical decisions for their
children and now we have health
care gender affirming health
care through these gender
support plans available in our
schools meeting psychological
and behavioral needs offering
these services and the parents
are not allowed to be informed
that is a violation of a
parent's right to make medical
decisions for their children so
we ask you to oppose this bill.
Thank you then we have to photo
Lisa Martinez president of the
New Mexico Alliance for like.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee could be okay thank
you need to keep the button down
here is that the whole the the
top of that I think that the
better.
So I Mr chairman members of
committee many police Martinez
I'm here today representing over
ten thousand individuals who've
signed a petition to stop HB
seven and I just want to state
that we support and affirm the
dignity of every member of the
LBGTQ plus communities including
those who have struggled with
their identity are in terms of
gender but I think it that well
intentioned and ideological
driven bills like this do happen
to have unintended consequences
or perhaps intended consequences
are and that's what here because
we're here to concerns expressed
concerns about what this bill
does to public employees but
especially to our children
earlier this week a member of
this committee stated and I
quote there's a lot of
difference between children and
adults when someone is a child
we should treat them differently
they're not totally mature and I
agree with your words of wisdom
Mr chairman RTZ Pino.
What we do know is that H. B.
seven doesn't factor played a
children in public schools
teachers school nurses and
school personnel as well despite
New Mexico having the lowest
education outcomes in the nation
these policies are seeking to
force our educators to percent
dissipate in affirming dot
gender ideology as well as
directly or indirectly not
restricting denying or
interfering with a child access
to abortions and transgender
procedures school based clinics
are currently administering
copper intrauterine
contraceptive spermicide all
agents plan be a host of other
sexual activity related
procedures without parental
consent HB seven will pave the
way for host of possibly
permanent and semi permanent
transgender procedures to be
offered as well without parental
consent Sanchez and experts have
claimed that this will change
the under the care or current
clinical guidelines at their
current conscience protections
elsewhere in the law and
prohibitions for schools
referring for abortions in
federal law but I want to put
your text attention to section
three D. which wipes out any
other laws that would conflict
with the provisions of this
bill.
What we're venturing into with
the new statutory changes in
this build a situation where
we're creating new standards
standards of care we are
mandating behaviors of doctors
nurses teachers firefighters
police officers even effect yet
employees to not restrict
interfere or deny are indirectly
or directly with whatever that
supposed to mean to someone's
access to reproductive or gender
affirming care sadly similar
models that are enacting gender
firming public policy throughout
Europe and France Sweden Finland
and the UK are feeling and most
importantly they're feeling are
most vulnerable populations our
children with the Sanchez claim
they're trying to protect from
the individuals being
discriminated against but what
we're doing is protecting in
statute a failed model of health
care that are least and most
vulnerable members of society
children will be them with
broken bodies and a life full of
regret and I I think and I pour
you Mr chairman members of the
committee that there is a better
way it I don't believe it's in
this bill that for that reason I
ask you to not support HB sep
thank you thank you miss
Martinez okay then they're two
of of both our doctors
apparently on online
of Dr Quentin bandleader.
Please.
Did you get up are you there Dr
van meter.
Is is known maybe had to get up
doctor Aaron brewer.
She on the.
Erin brewer.
Okay the can you hear us Dr
brewery we're yes I can get.
Your committee members thank you
for your time I'm a former trans
kid I started identifying as a
boy in first grade after a
brutal sexual assault if I know
that you very lockers and
prospects for months with L.
bland no doubt I would have done
anything I could to obtain them
including threatening suicide in
the short term I might have felt
better after medically
transitioning testosterone is a
controlled substance like other
controlled substances and has
high health risks and.
Problems with your well being it
is also active and at available
for abuse testosterone would
have boosted my self confidence
and increase my energy and most
importantly I would have felt
safer despite feeling better in
the short term medical
transitioning would have
profound and damaging it would
reinforce all the mistaken
belief that I had to cause me to
develop gender dysphoria in the
first place it was too dangerous
to be a girl that I wasn't safe
if I had medically transitioned
I would have gotten help I
needed to work through my self
hatred and shame it is a
horrible disservice to encourage
for all of the children to run
away from their feelings to take
drugs that in the short term
might help them feel better but
in the long term will
permanently damage their bodies
it is natural for children to do
what they can to shut down
difficult feelings which is why
we work so hard to stop children
from using drugs and alcohol we
know the encouraging children to
run away from that pain and
struggles is not the solution
even if it makes them feel
better in the short term telling
children that they can't survive
unless they change their parents
with drugs and surgery increases
the likelihood that children
feel themselves in addition it
teaches children to you suicide
as emotional blackmail even
though I was insisting
consistent and persistent about
being a boy I was into play yet
this bill would mean that the
only diagnostic criteria used to
determine if children to get
these interventions is if they
say they have gender dysphoria
it only takes one story like
mine to show that children can
develop gender dysphoria as a
coping mechanism and there are
thousands of stories like mine
we are still suffering from the
consequences of the opioid
epidemic where doctors were told
by pharmaceutical companies to
treating pain with dangerous and
addictive opiates was safe and
effective how many thousand
people died because doctors were
following guidelines for pain
management written for those who
are profiting from the sale of
opioids.
How many people have wrestled
with various addictions after
well meaning doctors prescribe
medications.
They were told were safe and
effective only to find out later
they were misled by
pharmaceutical companies willing
to put dollars ahead of human
life children struggle with
confusion about their identity
and should never be told that
they're inherently flawed
instead they need love and
support as they grapple with
their difficult feelings please
vote no on H. B. seven thank you
very much.
Dr ventilator is not on the line
that we have somebody else who
the the final speaker in
opposition
which would you prefer Judy to
the roster.
Judy Ross.
Yes okay mistrust we can hear
from you know.
I am my name is Judy Ross I've
been a resident of Santa Fe for
eight years and I volunteered at
Canada Santa Fe pregnancy center
for approximately four months to
amazing situations with women
became obvious to me situation
one I talk with women from
fourteen to forty two and
discovered that the oil you
don't know that much about
abortion yes yes not educated
about the pre requisites
possible side effects and what
they will see post procedure
this bill H. B. seven is locally
deficient and that it does not
mandate any informed consent
many don't abortion providers
either by commission or omission
do not provide any education
choice is a hollow words if
women do not have the
information they need to re
evaluate reality I want to live
in a state where the protection
of women this first and the
profits of Planned Parenthood
second please vote no on H. B.
seven the second situation that
I experienced was that abortion
pills have become the source for
sixty percent of abortions
governor Grisham has stated that
she thinks pharmacists should
prescribe abortion pills.
Early abortion pills can be
ordered online with doc without
doctor or parent approval this
bill does not require that a
physician has.
Has to be required to prescribe
the pills which means that.
The highly recommended also
founded STI testing their needed
prior term portion would not be
required putting women at a
significant risk it also means
that parents are cut out of the
decision making I want to live
in a state where families and
the protection of women's health
farmers we will now on eighty
seven.
Thank you miss Russell all right
we'll then we'll go now to the
it did you want to wrap up or
respond anyway sponsor thank you
Mr chairman the senators I I
think we're open to the
conversation of the committee
okay very good members of the
committee questions debate.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
Representative
I have some questions my my
constituents actually last night
you know I I was at a a parent
meeting.
in my district.
And the parents have a big
there's a big concern with you
know being left in the dark and
not knowing what's going on
that's that's what I'm hearing
from my hi folks might my
constituents.
And so I I want to explore that
with you so is this
Is this bill going to require.
Click schools were or people
working in a public school to to
a.
Potentially or even be legally
allowed to propose a parent's
wishes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator I I don't entirely
understand the question for me
Mr chair and representative with
this bill allow.
At the public school workers of
any kind or someone in a public
school to go against up the
parents wishes if it's to
provide gender from care thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator for for the question
again currently I it was talking
to somebody who actually works
to school today and I asked how
do you handle these questions as
they come up with your students
he works at a high school and he
said well I would refer them to
the main guidance counselor who
has a proper procedure how they
handle the different questions
so this would not force any
school worker to do anything
beyond what they've already been
trying to do which is you know
work with this child makes the
child feel safe and then work
with the parents to make sure
the child is safe in the same
ways it always has been they
just can't use this information
to discriminate that it's been
discriminate against that child
in the future for any reason.
Mr chair and representative the
the bill the bill goes beyond
anti discrimination I mean in
page for the the beginning of
the bill.
it says shut discriminate I
understand subsection and
section three but it goes beyond
that subsection B. it says these
folks these workers aids
teachers they shall not restrict
interfered and I in in any way
So
Mr chair and representative you
mention what's already going on
and we've had testimony and and
we've seen the videos of APS
specifically so talking about
gender support plans and so are
are are you.
are you denying that there are
gender support plans that are
not being disclosed to parents
and thank you Mr chairman thank
you and what is your thank you
senator and chairman of what I'm
specifically saying here is that
there is a procedure already in
place with schools handling
situations from the videos that
I saw you know again it goes
back to the idea that.
The children should not be
misgendered on purpose and that
should not be an active effort
to which gender them because we
know that that can result in
increased suicide rates and
suicide so for those reasons we
want to make sure that children
do not feel discrediting ants in
the place where they're supposed
to feel the safest proposed a
learning and build this future
for themselves regardless of
what's going on home or anything
else mmhm.
And so Mr chair and and
Representative
I wanna be careful I don't
misconstrue your position I want
to make sure I understand your
position what what I'm hearing
from you is that even a parent
that is.
Quote unquote misgendering their
child can cause harm so what
what what I'm hearing from you
is yes it is possible that when
there is a difference between
the you know what the what the
child wants to school any
difference between the parents
that that is.
Early permissible under rule but
your bill will statutorily
locking what I call lock in a
teacher whoever else in the
school from being able to
interfere and so that that's why
I'm my parents not might my
parents but my my parents my
district our our concern that
they look at this bill and they
say well.
We we don't like the gender
support plans that are kind of
slide slide rule in school
districts now we don't like that
they're being trained to keep
parents in the dark but now
statutorily even if a teacher
sees something that that that
doesn't feel right they are
statutorily bound not to.
Contact the parents so that
that's a major major concern
with my constituents.
So you know I I I think that.
You know to offer some feedback
on the bill you know there
really needs to be clarifying
language when there is a
conflict between an on
emancipated minor and a parent
we we do that in other areas of
the law like you know for health
care decisions acting when
there's an with medical
decisions there's a lengthy.
statutes to go through that and
and that but this is kind of
written in a very one sided way
we're just says you cannot
restrict at all and so parents
really take a big issue with
this they really took a big
issue with the bill for that
reason.
And
I I'd like to ask you to move on
from the genesis for planned to
go standards of care I did
notice that in your bill.
We
We talked about standards of
care what what does that mean to
you as the sponsor Mr chair and
representative of the medical
standard of care thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator
I'm gonna hands my expert moment
but I will answer for myself
again the standards of care have
evolved over time in various
ways
for example you know I I do have
friends that are a transgender
Division wills and the care they
received when we were young
which is not super long ago I
like to believe is was for
yourself.
What is a privilege not too long
ago.
But it was not too long ago as
change significantly on on that
and so we wanted to match that
because as we know statutes have
to follow we wanted to remain
current and to follow what's
going on currently so the
standard of care that we see
federally regulated that we see
it at both the state and the
federal level are constantly
evolving for the betterment of
our communities you know we walk
you through more standard of
care do if you'd like from
either the gender firming
healthcare provision position or
from through productive
healthcare position as well yeah
and Mr chairman I most my
questions are to be directed to
Jennifer and care
just you know so you know but
so so you what I hear you saying
is is standards of care coming
from governmental bodies such as
with one out there
federal HHS or New Mexico HHS
something like that is that kind
of what you're referring to in
the bill or are you for and
other organizations or thank you
Mr chair then Senator there
there are multiple there's a
uniform act also has some in
there as well on the test and
federally regulated as well
state level as well and happy to
walk through some of the ones
that we've discussed in that are
recognized okay and Mr chair
representative I don't need you
know details answers I'm just
wondering what the you know what
when when you know a judge or a
lawyer looks at this and says
within the medical standard of
care and they're gonna say well
tell me where where can I think
of the Medical Center if your
work can I get some information
and so once again maybe not the
details but do you have some
specific of of what what this
you know the definition and
where where we're going to tell
a judge or somebody Hey here's
the center care right here
here's the list thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator on
the again these are evidence
based on developing pieces and
I'm happy to have very briefly
my experts mention some of the
standards of care that we do
rely on as well as on the gender
firming Health Care side as
well.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair Senator could use in my
and just to clarify real quick
Mr Mr sent it is really just
Jared from care piece with
abortion I mean we had working
for decades I think people are
more more familiar with that so
really gender for me pieces what
I'm asking about the thank you
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator it's open would be good
not to lay on the table again.
so the standard of care I also
posted on the the Senator care
the ones that are most commonly
used are the endocrine society
guidelines from two thousand
seventeen and then there's also
the brand new standards of care
from the world professional
association transgender health
that was released in September
of last year
and then there's also a UCSF
it's a primary care and transfer
care center of excellence
there's a very easy to access
easy to utilize website that's
updated regularly they have a
lot of overlap and then they
have some strengths and enter
into state guidelines has the
strength of really having very
clear crisp print concise
instructions the standard of
care from W. path that was
released in September is an
amazing kind of collection
really an excellent
That kind of this is systematic
review really of what exist in
the literature and then the UCSF
website is kind of more for on
the spot questions but those are
the three most primarily used
standards of care.
So Mister chair representative I
I think it's important for us to
understand what what the city so
there are these multiple
entities of standards of care
we're gonna have red state
standards of care blue state
standards of care we have you
listed three professional
societies you know in in my
experience is a very there
there's a congruence in medicine
as you know on on standards of
care obviously they do change
over time but when there are
what I would consider very solid
standards of care those the
standards of care really I mean
they they will change very
slowly and we have then clinical
practice guidelines that will
maybe change a little quicker or
or you know guidelines that are
put out with levels of evidence
I mean that's not so I have a
concern that when we when we put
this in and here that the.
When you know what we're we
gonna look to if we have all
these different types of
standards of care and I I would
you know encouraging of.
Caution with this bill because
as I'm about to get to we are
we're putting in statute a
particular model of health care
called gender from care and so.
That's the only specific model
that I'm aware of that's gonna
be statute of this bill passes
that we're gonna put in fix in
statute instead of allowing
these professional societies to
develop their own sense of
caring clinical practice
guideline and we're gonna lock
in Jennifer care the model so I
I'd I'd urge caution there.
I want to point out so the W.
path
the W. path guidelines that that
came out let me just say back to
the parent issues this is their
standard of care this is their
words okay this is version eight
so we're on the the latest
version
they actually say.
That
Involvement involving the parent
is optional that's that's the
standard of care they say if
someone else deems it to be
harmful then they don't actually
recommend parental involvement
as as
with with the minor I mean that
that's alarming to me that's
alarming that work with once
again driving a wedge between
the Miner and the parents.
Okay I'm I read this straight
from version version eight thank
all the parents in the system
process unless their involvement
is a term to be harmful well who
gets to determine that someone
is not the parents some with
doesn't have custodial or
guardianship and all of a sudden
there right in their assessment
of what's harmful to the child.
I'm a father eight children I I
I can under I can I have a right
to determine what is going to
benefit my child was gonna be
harmful to my child and now
we're locking in not just in
state statute but in the
standard of care that just came
out with the past couple months
ago that it's permissible to to
lock these people.
to authors on the standards of
care giving great concern one is
Susie Greene who has now been
widely disgraced in the U. K.
for attacking people with same
sex attraction for filing a
lawsuit against LGBT LGBT
organization.
another person that you know I
mean this the the list of of
people on on these on the
standard of care of the the bond
here are many of them are are
activist I mean that's very very
unique and I think I called
those are to see the body of
people many of whom are local
activists that are developing or
stand of care and it shows
because now we're saying Hey
we're gonna allow.
A third party to determine what
is harmful into trump of the
parent's decision to decide
what's harmful so so once again
to really hard because I've I've
heard from my constituents loan
for about about parental
involvement and it's.
This is a huge concern and I
would once again implore you to
look at this bill to if it's I
don't know what your legislative
intent is on that part but I
would you know once again I I
think even if your legislative
intent is to allow parents and
the standards of care won't let
you do that if you're referring
to W. path so I think you're in
a tight spot with with the bill
with the gender for me care
please
Mr chair in.
Representative I have a question
about the the definition of
gender for me health care so if
there is a service of some kind
or for care that's provided that
does not support the gender
identity.
Does that count as gender
funding health care under your
bill.
So the Mr speaker Mr chair.
On body.
Senator I your state is can you
be the question and I apologize
thank you and Mister chair
representative I I keep one to
say Senator thank you for that
we were Law Center built so yes
Mr chair Representative I'm I'm
looking at your on page two and
I have of the equipment and
context so.
on.
Actually not only what do you
have to have you do okay great
great so I'm on the second page
minutes of contact so your
definition of gender from health
care says these services
supplies provided to support
person generate any so if if the
services or supplies do not if
it's some kind of medical care
behavioral care but it is not
supporting the gender identity
does that still count is gender
affirming health care thank you
Mr chair thank you center I we
understand it better
and I believe this is getting
into the question of let me know
if that doesn't totally focusing
on it in this case what we are
very it uses up does not create
an affirmative
in motion motion for individuals
to have to take different action
beyond the scope of work so for
example if you go to who we
always use but I trust because
that's been a couple built the
house but you go to a podiatrist
you're not expected to receive
gender affirming health care you
know from that individual know
what I will say that same regard
is that you know as we know for
minors especially sometimes it
is something as simple as using
their preferred pronouns and
this is this will save the lives
and does save the lives of many
individual seventy five percent
lower odds of suet suicidality
as we see improvement standards
of care are evidence based and
they're not just something
that's that's red state blue
state politically motivated it
is based on on evidence on what
they've seen and gender for me
health care something that's
been practice for for a long
time and it's something that
that we are working on so to
that end again if this is beyond
the scope of somebody's work
already they're not expected to
go beyond that scope of
providing that care thank you
and so Mister chair and
representative will be narrowed
and so this is part of their for
what they do they're they're
therapists and they do gender
counseling they do all you know
the this sort of thing okay so
that would take the podiatrist
off the table but if they're
providing a some kind of service
but that's related to their
gender identity.
But that that therapy session or
whatever else it is is it does
not support their gender
identity so they're saying I
identify as as a as a man let's
just say I mean what whatever
you want to do whatever you know
the.
That if I was meant by that
therapy session or that care
they're receiving the supplies
and services they're receiving
is not supporting that gender
identity with that still follow
under gender for in health care
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I Mexican Hensley expert
on how gender affirming health
center for me health care is
received in terms of their
therapeutic element if you want
to talk a little bit more about
how it's commonly utilized.
And I could cry clarify Mr chair
and representative so you know
they they go to a therapist that
is specializing in.
You know in generate any
services and people with gender
dysphoria people that are just a
General conforming okay they
have all the experience they do
that.
But the the care that's received
for let's say one or two or
three times whatever it is does
not support the gender identity
I just wanna know if you're
gonna classify that service
under licensed professional as
gender from health care not
under your bill I'm thinking it
it does not because it clearly
would not support the gender
identity but I just want to
confirm that with you thank you
Mr chair thank you senator I
guess what I'm having trouble
wrapping my head around is
somebody isn't is a therapist
that specializes in gender
affirming health care but does
not provide that and I'm not
trying to be
trick I'm I'm just really trying
to say and I I apologize yeah
yeah so so Mister Mister chair
representative of so yeah it is
some of the does but let's say
you meet with them four four
three sessions of some kind of a
of therapy of professional
licensed therapy somebody's
license in the state of New
Mexico and that person at least
so far after those three says I
I I'm not offering you anything
that is supporting your gender
identity because you told me you
identify as a man and I have not
provide you anything to affirm
that whatsoever four to support
your gender identity we've
talked about different things
to me that doesn't qualify as
Jenner from health care so far.
Thank you I just place I want to
confirm thank you senator I I
mean I I believe it to two
things we step back percent to
do things again this is specific
about public bodies I just want
to go back to that real quick
that again this is not a you
know patients and doctors have
regulations and and the elements
of that as well it's ensuring
that when individuals to go
before public body or or are you
know requesting services they're
not just committee and so that's
the core of this bill I believe
the question you're asking if
the if if an individual were
denied their preferred pronouns
it in a gender firming session
I'm not sure how that would be
handled I I don't believe that
would be.
Gender from health care yeah
yeah I would not be good for
health care because it does not
gender of from that is not is
not your question those
unemployment public Senator
stand like because it once again
most of Mr chairman most my
questions really for you know
our definitions are very very
important obviously law so I'm
I'm just I'm just wonder what
qualifies and what we want don't
want to restrict from in the
bill and and what doesn't
qualify and so I I have I have a
couple of things I want to
explore on that
Because I don't think I would
apply it right if you know if
they didn't if that in a firm if
they didn't support the person's
gender identities should not
qualifies Jr from health care
there's other ways to deal with
this and and let's let's talk
about one Mr chair and
representative are you familiar
with internalized homophobia.
Thank you Mr chair Senator yes
so let's say it Mr chair
representative someone comes and
they are
the you know been assigned male
at birth okay they say I have a
traction to then.
And the the the therapist that
once again we might either want
to help access to or restore
stop people restricting access
to the services right your bill
they say.
the patient says identify as as
a female on female attracted to
men and the therapist really
says now I I.
I don't believe you are I.
Respectfully in my professional
opinion reject your gender
identity.
And then
this the you know the.
The problem that we're we're
coming with is.
This gender affirming health
care and really it's been this
is why the European experiences
had some so many problems a very
high percentage of the sisters.
When they start to go through
transition because they were
they were put into a gender
affirming health care model.
They were affirmed initially.
Instead of going to someone that
actually rejected their gender
identity they're presenting they
didn't affirm they rejected
their gender identity and then
after awhile they may say well
you have internalized homophobia
actually you are you are
rejecting the fact that you are
indeed a man in Europe you're
attracted to men because of some
stigma of of homosexuality some
like that so the gender the firm
health care model has been very
widely document which is why
Susie green resigned from the
organization the U. K. is the
attacks on the homosexual
community about and there's
there's I'm actually banners
outside the AP's latest meeting
you know that are saying do not
trans you're not trans way again
people do not translate
translate lesbians.
Eighty percent of his sisters
will will eventually identify as
gay or lesbian and when they're
cranked into this gender farming
model.
If this is the only way they can
get fair that's affirming.
There can be pushed into that
into that model in it and it's
kind of like we have to affirm
initially that's what the
standard of care state you're
you're you're from that that
presenting gender identity and
so once again
the the gay lesbian community at
least in the U. K. has really
come out against this because
they feel like they are being
discriminated against and
they're disproportionally
affected not not by what your
trip I think trying to do but
they're disproportionally
affected by this specific health
care model that's called gender
affirming care.
So I I just I I have a concern
about that I mean has that
hasn't come up do you have a
concern that we are mandating
gender from health care and that
we're gonna discriminate gainst
carelessly people that will
eventually maybe have a
presenting gender identity this
this program with our.
Genocide of birth within their
you know I mean you do have a
concern whatsoever about this
healthcare model I I appreciate
that the explanation chairman
and and Senator took me a second
understand kind of where with
the question was I will say that
specifically in our bill it is
they cannot discriminate against
individuals decision to utilize
or refuse reproductive or gender
from health care so it protects
an individual's right at any
stage of it I would like to head
over to expert review to talk
about her experience entry you
know working with individuals in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I just so is your
specific question our.
I guess me as a medical provider
and I concerned that having what
you're calling a model of gender
affirming care that will
discriminate against gay and
lesbian people yes
this is what I would say Mr
chair is a I would use the word
discriminate because that
implies that you are kind of
devaluing somebody they'll be
but that they'll be
disproportionately harmed more
disproportionally affected given
that such a very high amount of
dust of disasters identify as
gay or lesbian on the other side
I think that's a interesting
question that I have never
thought of because it's pretty
hard actually there's diagnostic
criteria that have to be met
that part of the DSM criteria
and for children they have to
meet six out of a criteria and
for adults they have to meet two
other big criteria for more than
six months and then there's a
set of consent criteria that's
both from the W. pass and also
the end of the state guidelines
and so it's actually I mean to
be diagnosed with diabetes for
example all you need is a single
lab so we to be diagnosed with
gender incongruence or gender
dysphoria it's actually quite
this significant process
and the reason I have probably
haven't thought about it is
because one of the papers that
sweet and really used their have
the both of what their argument
was was a paper about the
transitioning and I was a paper
that was published in twenty
twenty one and had a hundred
participants in it
again I think we you know this
well and you know there's a care
evidence involved all the time
in twenty twenty two there is a
paper with authors both Harvard
and Stanford and a participant
rate was twenty eight thousand
people all of whom were gender
gender incongruent or had for
gender non conforming and in
that study what they actually
showed was that thirteen percent
of this huge group of almost
twenty thousand people thirteen
percent decided they were not
interested in taking the
medications anymore
but I think that what they found
was very consistent with what
I've seen in my practice since
two thousand seventeen which is
the biggest reason people
decide.
To stop taking the medications
has nothing to do with regret or
an internal decision and
everything to do with the stigma
so what they found with with
stigma and so of the thirteen
percent of the twenty eight
thousand participant group
almost eighty six percent
reported that they had to stop
taking hormone therapy because
of Family discrimination
religious discrimination or
school discrimination and that's
exactly what I've seen in my
practice I have had two people
decided they don't want to take
hormones anymore and just
because they were forced to make
a decision between their own
identity and being part of their
family and it was a really
heartbreaking situation that
took them each a year to decide
and many admissions to
psychiatric emergency services
because it was such a hard
decision for them and so I think
the the larger newer paper from
here at Harvard and Stanford.
Kind of piecing through the
evidence which is always very
difficult to do I think that is
probably a higher evidence bar
that that paper Matt and it's
also very consistent with my own
experience thank you Mr chair
representative and I I've said
this before I
until it that's a great interest
in this topic but I will avoid
the temptation to make this into
a journal club you know what
we're not set up to be a
scientific body and so I'm I'm
not gonna go too far about let's
let's reference paper although I
think it's important that we
should do some of that but I'm
I'm not gonna go too crazy too
deep on that okay because where
we got to focus on what the
statute does I I do find it
interesting Europe Sweden I got
to live there for six months
when my wife played professional
soccer there was awesome I
interned at a hospital there
super cool had a mandatory
coffee break at ten o'clock
every day this beautiful it was
it was really cool in the suites
are very you know the R. word
tie the first day you know and
I'm a medical students and they
like made fun of me that we
don't wear ties were kind of
more laid back and so we had a
great experience there but it's
interesting that you know
they're there one other very
pristine flagship Medical Center
is a currency institute just
said we're not doing any more of
this outside of the context of
clinical research studies I find
that to be.
Yeah that should give this body
great poss great pause
to do that and then I I would
also say you know we we talk
about being evidence based but I
mean so many in these are not my
words but these are this is this
is the academy Medicine of
friends the board of health in
Sweden the NHS in NHS as you
know they shut down the
Tavistock clinic because of the
Jennifer model because they
found that that this was not
being done you know this model
when you are pushed to affirm
that gender identity
it once again disproportionately
harms certain people there is
this off four thousand percent
increase in teenage girls coming
in they said what's going on why
are for and and they had as I
think fifteen thousand rate that
if they had the biggest really
very very big experience as far
as world wide is this clinic and
and they they look they did a
formal review I'm sure you've
seen it
and they said we're we're not
gonna do this model anymore they
said fundamentally different
service model is needed which is
more in line with other
pediatric provision that's of
that's a direct quote now what I
do find interesting when I think
hopefully is the intent of the
bill it is this is a I'll read
this they say children young
people with gender incongruence
or just for it must receive the
same standards of clinical care
assessment treatment as every
other child I I firmly support
that I think everybody in this
room should support that but
when when friends when the when
the National Academy of medicine
and Francis saying this is an
epidemic like phenomenon it is
primarily a social problem the
they talk about the careless
university banning the use of
portable offers in these kids I
mean they they list a lot of
problems the in the state
psychological support as long as
possible these are in direct
conflict with the standard of
care organizations that you've
listed and so I think and and
they also say all of this is
quote unquote still too rare in
France in the subject.
You know so you know once again
I would I would just I I hope we
can start to look back not it
not individual papers or authors
or groups because you can get an
ideologically minded group of
authors you have three or four
write a paper on either side of
you know they can be super
conservative super progressive
but these are progressive
societies that have done massive
reviews with large groups of
professionals and they have been
saying wow we have harmed a lot
of people the affirming model is
not working we've got a step
back and some of them have even
banned the use of hormone
blockers just flat out bans that
if you enroll in a clinical
trial we're gonna allow that
legally that we will not allow
you legally to enter and just
with with you know someone such
as yourself or some other
provider.
And I think we should say what
what what's so different about
American children and Swedish or
British children or whatever
else they're ahead of us on this
and so I'm I'm just I once again
I'm asking for the extreme
caution and and I'll wrap this
up Mr chair
but the Tavistock experience
they found almost half of their
patients had autism or had signs
of autism and and the standard
of care in W. path very
interesting how they.
They they say that the co
morbidities if the comorbidities
do not get in the way of the
treatment.
They don't say you you have to
assess and have to refer on how
to morbidity back to the issue
for their suicidality or
something else.
That it you know.
Some of the stuff they're not
going to journal club but if we
go more that is as a physician
tell you that is that is sole
concern her thinking I mean that
is like crazy and bizarre this
that's written into a standard
fare let lastly this so just for
my my colleagues really I want
to point out something that the
a slight of hand with the
evidence based stuff so this is
that this is from our federal
alright HHS the first thing that
they say what what what is
gender affirming care they have
their own definition by the
what's different from your bill
for them that's gonna be a
problem but number two they say
why does it matter this this is
our federal government okay they
say research demonstrates that
gender from care improves mental
health and overall well being of
generous children adolescents.
The first thing they say number
one citation in their bill well
that is an intellectually
dishonest statement.
The paper actually read it it's
a it doesn't say that it
improves mental health it says
there is an association between
the two that does not require
causation the the verbiage that
our federal government putting
out his implying causation that
is intellectually dishonest and
that is grounds for removal I
mean this is a journal of the it
could be removed from the
journal I mean that that's a
serious that is
they found that this is
primarily rich white kids okay
this is this is the thank you
can you can look at Natalie
rich white kids and lastly what
I think is important because
they do not.
Find causation and they don't
say so in their conclusion this
the number one study that was
cited by our federal Department
HHS number one study was done by
advertising to teenagers on
Snapchat and Instagram doing
online surveys they did not look
at intent of suicidality they do
not look at means for if it's
active or passive suicidal
ideation they just said have you
had suicidal thoughts in and how
many times that we have I mean
that is the end and then so for
for people to take these
headlines for the media or for
our our a partisan government
which probably partisan either
way right right blue wrong
either way for partisan
government to try to grab onto a
paper that support their
narrative and then word Smith it
but this this is word smithing
this is this is very harmful to
it to conclude
Mr chair Senator I I have a
concern that this is going to
disproportionately affect people
that really are are gay or
lesbian that have internalized
homophobia and if they're put
into the gender from care model
they're gonna they're gonna say
when we got it we got trans you
okay
autistic people.
Teenage girls.
Huge concern over those three
populations and that's been the
European experience and it's not
me saying this this is their
official health bodies and
Senator Lopez I'm gonna say this
is one of the advantages of
nationalized healthcare.
Eleven envision outside health
care as these countries can come
to come together you know with
France and Sweden UK they can
come together and have these
very large studies very quickly
and that's why there had of us
on this is one of the advantages
okay I'll give it to so so there
you go on video but we we we
have to listen to them we've got
to listen to their experience
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you for answer my
questions.
Please yes please by all means
thank you Mr set thank you
senator as well.
confusing on the words I really
appreciate this because I do
think I don't want to look at
this and say well this is a flip
it bill that we put together
without considering all of the
factors and all of the you know
studies and and what the
experience has been you know
what I I will say is you know I
am also a parent as well with
two young daughters who will
also be teens and I will say
that.
If it's as simple as helping is
is adjusting their their
pronouns they prefer to use I'm
on board with that and it's
something that that that in
particular is easy to transition
to to to to to adjust back right
you can use whichever pronouns a
child's comple using that often
times is the beginning of the
therapy that that's needed or
the the support that seated
dinner from health care I will
headed to my experts to talk
about some of the experiences in
Europe as we talk kind of talked
about as well as we're looking
at this bill and what what's
been going to.
Thank you chairperson and
Senator I appreciate that you
mentioned that you are in
agreement with nationalist not.
I support the two of us are one
of the advantages.
I think you look actually at the
French and the Swedish
recommendation are you holding
the button.
Focus you can compose in the
table again I project yep okay
is that better this.
So when you look at the French
and the Swedish statement papers
actually really interesting the
French statement paper actually
aligns very well with my
interpretation of the standard
of care which seems like it's
quite different from yours in my
practice I support therapy I
support psychological
intervention I support taking
time I support making sure that
the diagnosis is accurate and
there are not other Gallegos
diagnoses that would interfere
with an accurate diagnoses
before I allow the family to
make the decision I do not make
the decision for the families
they make that decision for
themselves and for their
children
and so the standard of care we
look at the French statements
it's very much in line with all
of our standards of care
including W. path including and
open society guidelines of two
thousand seventeen except it's
more permissive in that they
allow mastectomy at age fourteen
in France we don't allow that
here we really stick to eighteen
there's no insurance company
there's no surgeon and there's
no referring provider that would
support surgery prior to that
age in case and less there with
some dire thing related to
gender dysphoria being increased
with with best yes you are yes
issue so I I looked at that the
French recommendations and was
surprised to see how in line it
was except for they would allow
for surgery at age fourteen as
we was really interesting to
because it is quite restrictive
but when you look at the number
of papers that they made a
decision from and the quality of
the papers most of the papers
were actually in Swedish
language which means that it
didn't rise to the bar of being
accepted into a journalism and
English language which is still
kind of the lingua franca of the
day
and then there was the paper
about do transitioning was a
paper I mentioned without only a
hundred participants and so the
data they use actually wasn't
the highest evidence and it
almost seems like an interesting
place a case where the state
kind of got in the way big
government kind of got in the
way of a family making a
decision with our provider I'm
using shared decision making so
I'm interested to see and follow
that the recommendations and
what happened and sweet and
because it's.
With seems like an interesting
way to make a decision but I
will also try not to get into
the journal club this is it's
very different and in practice I
think I do follow click more
closely with standards of care
within of inside guidelines and
and with what France is doing
yeah and I would say to the
Senator actually is I have never
started a kid on any kind of
medication for gender dysphoria
without parental involvement and
the reason that is is because
one of the most important things
for children's health now and in
the future is family support
family support use of names and
pronouns and access to
medication if they wanted and
not all kids and idle adults
want that medication so gender
affirmation in those three forms
are the things that save
children's lives according to
lancet journal and multiple
other ones and so I really it's
it's necessary to medical
intervention for me to have
families be involved as a whole
as a unit and and is there
anything in this bill the right
here or check forced to change
that practice.
Not for me not at all now the Mr
chairman thank I'm sorry the Mr
chair representative we're
talking about one person's
practice the bill is going to
apply to all practitioners in
New Mexico that's that's the
issue is we are legislating a
health care model that we have
both agree the standards of care
and the I mean it's like Sweden
says one thing so and so says
another that there's no
congruences also very idea logic
and that was one of the NHS's
concerns as they they found that
there was very little
questioning there's very little
evaluation a court vides they
found such a high artistic right
high you know why is it eighty
percent of teenage girls and
twenty percent boys why is that
there's so many unanswered
questions when not just one
person I understand we're time
out your practice but but the
the log more may not affect your
practice much but it is going to
be at applicable to all of New
Mexico and so when we look at a
large group when we provided a
large group of people we we see
with that European experience
what is what is happening and so
I think just goes to show that
there is no center of care once
again when the politicians
involved we say we're going to
mandate this model of the
affirming care.
We everyone loses out everyone
gets less let you know that that
they get worse care when the
politicians are forcing mas
instead of allowing the
scientific community to do it.
And once again and try some of
this I'll give it one last shot
is if there's a you know you is
more like you a provider says no
I'm not affirming your gender
identity I think you have and
try some of and and the patient
says nope no I am I am a female
and and there's a head body it
does not fit your definition of
the bill.
And so how would how to teach
you know if there is regained
access to therapy that's
protected by hippa how would
they know if they're in
violation of law how the
Attorney General district
attorney know if they're in
violation of life the provider
actually never affirmed the
gender identity because they're
not including yourself they're
not they're not you know the the
the restriction to the access
that's being supposedly blocked
interfered with that's protected
health information
so.
Once again if there is an
impasse with someone who
actually has internalized
homophobia
there there is no way that they
do not meet the definition of
the bill they don't because
their child into a Jennifer and
models for things to that let me
just just and I'm I'm good I'm
good I figure why you're you're
saying that that the definition
wouldn't apply because what it
says is provided to support a
person's gender identity to me
that means and it sounds like in
your practice it means the
search the the exploration of
the attempt to find out what the
person's gender identity is not
that they walk in the door and
say I want to be a girl and you
can then say okay everything
I'll do is in these you help
them figure is that really what
you want that to me it is
consistent with that definition
Mr chair and senator if I may we
are and I I'm glad because
there's two things again going
back to this this bill is about
not being able to discriminate
against the person's decision to
seek or refuse reproductive or
gender affirming health care so
they can decide to go forward or
not but I will point to is on on
the in line
and then Vince on page four
would go line I hear you section
E. two with visions of services
against medical judgment of the
trigger Care a treating
healthcare provider will have to
the standards of care that
essentially what that says is
that.
The public body can not
discriminating and gets
individual who's seeking care
for a medical provider who is
utilizing their medical judgment
so in the case that cases that
you've been providing that that
would be they that individual
could still seek treatment from
a gender affirming health care
provider that does not affirm
their gender in that sense so it
would be.
But as Mr Chairman
representative but that doesn't
fit once again doesn't fit the
definition of what you're trying
to protect access to and it goes
against the model.
Why are you saying this stupid
thing is that it the flight
doesn't because if you're not
support Mister chair if you're
not supporting their gender
identity this model that she is
supporting or gender identity if
they're trying to figure out
what their gender to gender
identity is that supporting
their gender identity well that
is interesting bring that I Mr
chair because that is what is
provided to conversion therapy
are statute of the the search
and exploration but if someone
comes in they have an
affirmative we you know this
model doesn't allow anyone else
to project their perceived
generate any upon you that this
whole thing else let the child
lead you you can't projected on
to somebody so so if they come
in they say this is who I this
is who I am the to they come in
and senator do they say I I
think this is maybe I'm worried
my family is upset what's going
on I would assume that's more
likely what they come in this
thing I want to be a girl Mr
chair and members of the
committee that is exactly what
happens it usually people come
and kind of terrified and
families come in quite terrified
the don't know quite what's
going on how to handle it how to
support their kid and so what I
usually start with is by saying
I'm your medical adviser I am
not going to make any decisions
for you we are following your
lead you are the boss of this
process and I mean by that I
mean the patient and the family
and so I think that there's of
maybe a false assumption maybe
based on not providing this care
or knowing a lot of people who
are gender expansive are
providing care to families that
I am that any provider is
interested in kind of having a
trans now you had you said some
some raised I've never heard
before about like part of my
providing care is making sure
that everybody recognizes that
they have gender conduits that's
not my job my job is to figure
out with them what their gender
is so that they can live in a in
a firm to weigh in as many
spaces as as they possibly can
and that's the joy of my job
there's no joy in my job of
prescribing medications the
joint.
A job is hearing about how
awesome kids feel and how much
more firm they feel when they
get to have agency and when they
get to choose the things with
their families.
Mr chair representative I I
think we're I guess read an
impasse some in
we're we're talking about a
particular health care providers
practice verses the bill I'm I'm
trying to stay on the bill in a
particular practice but if if
the individual never lets go if
they never let go and they say
no I am a manner I in this or
that they never let go.
That that that is not this is
not Jennifer maker you just
can't we can't for the
definition will no no no no it
is if they come in and say I am
if it's if it's somebody that
looks female to you but they say
I want to be a man I am a man
internally I know and then she
will not try to talk them out of
that that's not what they do
they will help them apart but
that that person isn't searching
they're already very clear
about.
It's the search I think that
that we're we're we're what we
don't want to preclude the
search and that's the efforts
being made in this bill I think
the in Mr chair that's the
danger of international from
with the the stigma can be so
strong and someone's community
that they they have a certainty
that uncertainty they go into it
and then they desist and we at
with case after case after case
in Europe of this of this sort
of thing so well I I think it's
an impasse but I I I would urge
the body to urge the committee
to look look into that issue
it's real it's it's happened all
over Europe and it's one of the
major reasons of Europe is
moving away from this model of
health care not not being kind
or treating people with respect
that's not what gender from care
is different care is is
receiving that initial and and
affirming affirming affirming
affirming it's not question
you're trying to project your
own idea upon someone else
people even trying to take
gender dysphoria out of the DSM
so that that's just that's what
it is and it there are certain
cases where will not fit this
definition as written I'm not
saying it won't affect her
practice but I'm I'm talk about
what the bill actually does okay
we have Senator thank you bye it
goes next and then Senator
Hickey and so do a little bit
Senator guy Mr Chairman
representative I'm probably like
everyone this committee with
that thousands emails on this
bill I do want to say that there
is a statewide and I I don't
know how much you follow of when
someone does
Questionnaires there statewide
questionnaire the had a hundred
nineteen.
In favor your bill and nine
hundred forty seven against so
to me there's a large disparity
in what you want to what the
state wants but I do have a
question Mr Harris
Representative shortness out
with the governor's authority
which is already done for
abortion in the repeal and
twenty twenty one what do you
need your bill thank you Mr
chair thank you senator for the
question
the two elements of this and
I'll be clear is that we want to
be very clear on what is
permissible across the state and
make sure that it is evenly
applied because as all of us
know you may live in one county
but C. treatment for health care
in a different place we want to
ensure that bodily autonomy with
your seeking gender affirming
health care or your own
decisions at our secret
productive healthcare are
respected no matter where you
live in that you're not scared
that when you go home you're
going to be discriminated
against at soccer practice
here in the city district and
sector job or that the you know
it's not your job that you the
adopted by a public body I will
say that you know seventy nine
percent of New Mexicans believe
that we can have our own beliefs
on these issues but that we can
trust others to make decisions
with their doctors and so you
know again surveys are are very
very but I have received many
built many calls and letters
from those in favor of this
legislation as well.
Mr Chairman representative I
appreciate that so I understand
on the abortion issue their
separation in state but I think
on gender formation there's more
of a dialogue you know that it's
and up to that child up to the
person to that family so I can
see where I think I think you've
got log rolling on here we have
two different topics in one bill
and I'm actually gonna
congratulate Mr chair and
representative you've got a
house bill before this committee
for I have sinned appeal before
this committee so you're doing
something right I just don't
know why the push but
Mr chair and and.
Representative I've got a
question in your field.
The
one that's.
Color coded.
In my question my first question
is on page two this was not line
the regular bill would have line
twenty four whatever but it's
section C. R..
A four set of prenatal birth
prenatal and postpartum for
Health.
Can you explain to me and and
trying to think abortion just
the abortion please why you
would have prenatal in that I
don't the.
I guess I'm trying to understand
how that's in this bill.
Thank you Mr chair the question.
Agency we're looking at the full
scope of reproductive health
care from of the entirety of the
pregnancy you know having
So you have it you don't want
someone to be discriminated
against because they had a post
partum depression you don't want
to be discriminate against
because they we're seeking
health care for their
reproductive system
you know again abortion care.
And the address we do know from
the examples of states where
they have banned abortion
already very limited and very
small cities I will acknowledge
that we're incidents where they
were unable to have a process
where the the initiated a
medically medically needed
abortions resulted in her
straight hysterectomy for the
for the mother and then they
could no longer have children or
develop the family they wanted
you know having that
availability and and perhaps
aborting a pregnancy earlier on
has allowed for many individuals
are going to have successful
families I myself knew many
individuals I know it's of no of
Google individuals who had an
abortion later in pregnancy and
while those were tragedies for
those families on one hundred
and two nurseries they were
later able to have successful
families and rainbow babies and
what they were very happy to
have a whole full of kids that
help.
It does Mr Senator last year
thank you actually will actually
have in the book but I printed
mine for last night for
reference and reading so sort of
lost in some of the the dialogue
but Mr chairman and
Representative so last year we
found her in the description we
were given last year your.
The medical term used is to
describe the period of time
before mother for mother and
baby from roughly twenty eight
weeks of gestation to twenty
eight days after birth I'm
trying to understand just in the
abortion dialogue or that fits
because I I I thought were.
Taking the child out of the
uterus and I'm I'm trying to
figure out why we need prenatal
care as chairman I think the
Representative the the answer
Senator is on page the two line
twenty one the or those are not
all.
Any of those things is consider
reproductive health for it some
they're not all end it's for.
Here on Mr page to page two of
the bill line twenty one after
treating cancers as a
reproductive system or not and
so that is the this is not a
listing of all things that have
to be present this is a listing
of things that could be present
thank you Mr Chairman
representative I mean
Representative.
I just my my thought is to me
it's confusing because what we
learned last year doesn't
dictate that I was just gonna
pass next on.
Three would someone tried
following the New River have.
In this just problematic and
it's page three area B. in it
says public body shall not
directly or indirectly can I
restrict or interfere with a
person's ability access or
provide reproductive health the
directly or indirectly the the
incorrectly bothers me just
thinking through and I'm not a
doctor he is but I'm on school
board and earlier Mr chairman
and Representative he had some
discussion about what it did to
teachers opting through teachers
counselors principals in nurses
how does your bill affect them
because where I read this right
here indirectly it would.
Would you be able to clarify
that for me thank you Mr chair
thank you senator you know again
throughout statute directly
indirectly is is in there are
more than four times interfering
is in there you know multiple
times as well these are these
are terms that the courts have
determined over and over again
and essentially because there
are you don't want a child to
feel discriminated against you
know for some reason that would
also body would not up you want
them to feel welcome in their
communities do you want to speak
a little bit further Mr chair
Senator to that.
Yeah I mean I'll I'll be brief
Mr chair Senator first
individuals are not liable under
the fact.
And for example in schools and
other public bodies you know if
they are used to navigating the
layered responsibilities of
being in doubt with the public
trust.
And so what this bill says is
that.
You cannot get in the way of
somebody accessing health care.
Mr Chairman representative and
expert witness can you show me
where in the bill it's that
we're not liable.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for that question is
actually the very and it was one
of the amendments you may want
to look at the.
We felt that it was clear before
however we added.
Posted hearing age I.
And you could also see it in the
amendment one percent leases
claims process impacted to this
bill may be brought against
public bodies and entities
acting in the course and scope
of authority public body claims
arising from the acts or
omissions of individual employed
agents of the public body or
entity maybe brought against the
public entity or body but not
against the individual so then.
Mr chair and representative that
takes me my next question then
so a middle school is public
body so they could be liable as
an education facilities that not
correct Mr Representative thank
you Mr chair Senator yes they
could because it is important
our children do not feel
discriminated against in their
place of learning just so Mister
chairman Representative David
even in elementary at that young
of an age there still could be
some liability for the school
thank you Mr chair thank you
etcetera these are issues that a
lot of teachers navigate a lot
teachers are sometimes those
trusted person to so many young
people in our state you know I I
think all of us as parents try
to make sure that they trust us
but but schools are a place
where children should feel free
to learn and so yes they would
have the same liability if they
were found to to discriminate
against a child for those those
reasons as listed thank you for
that I I again I being on school
board very fearful that this
turns Representative you're
gonna charge are superintendents
schools for a an issue with with
the person whatever the reason
whatever their
rationale for are their fence
came across because I think that
also and we're gonna be having a
place our teachers to make sure
they don't have an opinion.
Representative strong state
thing wrong to anything wrong so
Mr chairman and representative
up I've got in in your bill and
I didn't see it now I'm working
on three versions your bills so
far up do we have a religious
exemption anywhere in there.
Please thank you Mr chair thank
you senator so we feel that in
many ways the religious
exemption is already given
through you know get federally
it's it's given that there's
multiple places however we did
not want to limit it just to
religious
exemption we wanted to ensure
that for a variety of reasons if
it was necessary someone would
be exempt from that and so
here
the civil on page four of the
amendments in context you'll see
that it also was very clear on
that with the provisions of
services against the medical
judgment of the person find that
these are not required to the
that medical judgment they have
or also in the no point one if
they do not have a duty already
so we feel that within that
scope
the with the scope of the bill
that that covers the religious
exemptions as well as again if
if you do are trained in this
type of service or again if this
is not your medical judgment in
that sense it we feel like it's
more encompassing I thank you
for that.
Mr Chairman representative was
gonna go to this later because
you push me into a really good
point so in
Lea County of Roosevelt County
Hobbs Eunice and clovers they've
already gone to protect
themselves from this and other
bills using the federal com
staff well sort of contract act
how are you allowing use federal
Mr Chairman representative in
your religious exemption but not
in their of home rule exemption
they have rights and rules that
are already in place the your
bill seeking to eliminate how
does that work in one hand
you've got federal and it's okay
the other hand it's not I need
would you respond that Mr Mr
chair thank you senator I'm
gonna headed to my experts ago
little bit more the Comstock we
can do briefly on that because
again it's I believe it outside
of this piece however when I'm
looking at this I'm looking at
both the protections we have
inside the bill but also federal
protections as well that are
included on this bill comes up
law does not apply to this bill
and I'm happy to add it to my
experts to explain that a little
bit further.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
If you ask a really nuanced
question.
And so these ordinances that
you're discussing you know based
a lot of their.
Language on a federal action
that they have no authority to
enforce.
And so under our state
constitution even home rural
counties are preempted from
regulating in the space and
there are strong constitutional
arguments based on the equal
rights amendment that
you know even home rule
municipalities cannot violate
our state constitution and so
when we when we think about the
impact of this we think about
creating a patchwork of health
care in a state like ours were
already lacking access to health
care particularly in rural
communities.
And so it's critically important
that deregulation of medicine
stays in the you know highest
at the highest level in the
state.
Madam Mr chairman and
Representative expert witness
and and actually the
representative made a statement
that this bill doesn't pull up
ply the contract law so in in in
my question to that is because
you'd made mention that so we
have no authority home rural
counties cities don't have
authority and I know that's
before the Legisla- of the
Attorney General right now
there's a lawsuit but how would
you separate Mr Representative
expert witness the dialogue we
just had where of the it's okay
for religious exemption being
not in your bill but over
shadowing your bill because it's
a federal mandate it it's out
there federally but yet the
federal cops Act act that is
currently in place at the
federal level has no response to
this bill whatsoever how does
those two I'm having a hard time
doing the math on that because I
think if one has value the other
has to you if the a religious
exemption doesn't I have to have
a different discussion with you
but if it does have value than
the Cossack Act should federally
have value also Mr.
Representative please.
But speak up a little bit I'm
setting it is a thank you
I'm getting old and hard of
hearing.
So.
A couple of different things
again you ask a really nuanced
question.
And so when we talk about the
federal you know church
amendments and.
In other areas.
Our.
Religious exemptions for all
sorts of things
those are actively in place we
are not putting them in place in
our state statute.
And and so when we think about
the Comstock Act which
incidentally is currently being
litigated in a couple of
different jurisdictions you know
this idea that this federal law
and again we're not here to
litigate this this federal law
that is has been called into
question by at the last D. O. J.
currently being litigated this
comes back to the authority of
local bodies in under the state
constitution and so under the
state constitution regardless of
the underlying claims or
specious legal arguments
Local bodies simply don't have
the authority to regulate in
this space whether or not it's
based on a federal law or not.
I appreciate that and hi.
I feel I'm not going to get that
try one because I'm just wanting
the reality of of one in federal
statute and being usable the
other one not so we'll let the
courts take care of that but Mr
chairman and senator a
representative
up if I could just get some
clarification doing when you say
the religious exemption.
That's the individual correct.
So this doesn't have anything to
do with the individual
practitioners this this has to
do with.
With the public body making a
ruling.
That would create a
discriminatory environment for
kids.
How would the religious
exemption Mr chair what I was
going for as I didn't see any
kind of exemptions in here for
religious beliefs it even though
you're talking about the
individual she used the the
representative use that it's a
federal exemption I was trying
to find if there is any
protections in here for any kind
of religious exemptions I didn't
see it so I was asking her she
turned it into a federal
discussion that's why I went to
the Comstock Act because they're
both federal discussions once
yes and once no even though
there are overseen by federal
statute somewhere somehow I just
didn't and I was trying to make
that relationship of my bill
doesn't have anything to do with
with the investor should have
said there's not one and then I
would have gone on but she
opened a Pandora's box because
it's a federal issue and that
gave me the latitude to go
towards Mr concert if I made to
clarify sorry I I want to be
clear in section what is this
three D. three E. this is the
exemptions that individuals can
use the language that we use in
to and and beyond we we are
confident that includes
religious exemptions or
otherwise other what other
medical judgment necessary so
when I was explaining I said it
is also protected under the the
federal efforts as well however
we have put it in the bill in
the house Judiciary to address
this concern as well we wanted
to be more inclusive which is
why the language doesn't outline
religion it gives more latitude
to providers that are
considering these things.
Thanks for that that
I still think I've got a problem
with the the two pieces of
federal law federal but I'll go
on so Mr chair and
representative if a mother who
believes that her child is gay
is going to be born again she's
pregnant and she decides to have
an abortion would your bill will
allow that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator you know again in the
state of New Mexico we believe
in a person's decisions that
they can make with their doctors
and that is the law of the land
this bill doesn't change any of
that at this point all this bill
does ensures that you can access
health care no matter where you
are in the state without fear of
being discriminated against Mr
Chairman representative and then
the I thought the transgender
discussion protected all in and
I would think you to that child
so the the discussion you had
with Dr Schmidt is our center Dr
Schmidt is and I guess that's
what caused me to think through
that because you could have a of
a mother maybe they've got it in
their family and they've got
Care transgender that I would
almost think that your bill
would have some kind of
protections for them and you're
saying they don't and Mr
Representative and I'm wondering
if that would be an equal rights
issue and there again I know the
child is not out yet but is our
protections for the child at all
in your bill thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator for
the questions you know I I want
to be really clear about what
we're looking at this bill is
that this bill should be enacted
ensures that individuals may
come forward with their
transgender wills weather on
there being you went with their
sexually active teenagers
whether they're sexually active
seventy year olds regardless of
what that is they cannot be
discriminated against that is an
effort to make a sum more
accepting community and to
reduce any concerns that we're
we're coming across this bill as
it stands does not change the
abortion law abortion care laws
that we have in place what does
insurers that you can access
health care no matter where you
are in the state equally and and
not be conservatively home your
County that you might be under
prosecution of some kind of
disco thank you for that Mr
chairman and Representative and
you answered to me you're saying
that they're not gonna be any
selective
sexually selective abortions
it's not about
Male females not about gay
lesbian is not about transgender
you're talking about just in
your opinion the health issues
is the reason for the abortion
is that right Mr and
Representative thank you
chairman thank you senator you
know again they're they're of a
lot of reasons why someone may
see abortion I can not and we
can think of a thousand
scenarios of what we can but
it's also for the other
scenarios we can't think of that
we're insuring that people have
protection to this health care
and we know that at times you
know when we from the moment you
figure out your pregnant all the
way through pregnancy that is a
very tender period and at you
know from my own experience
pregnancies and giving birth get
complicated and we ought many of
us know the difference between
emergency C. section and
pregnancies plant is
instantaneous and so for that
reason we want to make sure that
any the for the the many in
consultation with our doctors
should they want to console
their families an individual can
make the decision that's best
for their health and help other
family.
Mr Chairman representative I
appreciate that I I understand
emergency C. section piece
but I have a problem with
everything else but Mr Chairman
representative would you allow
the lady from Medicaid to answer
just one question.
Mr chair Senator I believe so
I'm not sure this is.
A line is here could you answer
the question just one question.
I can try sure so Mr chairman
and senator and and I appreciate
earlier in your testimony you
talked about woman's health and
I'm trying to get I'm not a
woman don't play one on TV but
if because I I live with all
girls but I'm trying to
understand women's health beyond
the abortion topic if you had
the clinic the did abortion and
they shut that piece of the
clinic call what other.
jobs to they do for women's
health and and what does
Medicaid pay.
Here Representative Senator I'm
sorry could you just clarify
Senator just just a second it
isn't that the list that you
have there on page two of what
women's reproductive health
services means everything
besides abortion would dismiss
Mr chairman I can read that I
did read that but she'd made a
statement about women's health
I'm trying to see what Medicaid
supplies for what they pay for
those last question what they
pay because Medicaid I I think
there's there's more to women's
health and abortion yeah the of
the Mr I know that I've read
that I'm just trying to make a
statement I think there's more
to that we use a portion as the
total discussion piece on on on
on women's health what I want to
find out from Medicaid is what
other services does she pay for
do we pay for it's not or does
she pay for pregnancy prevention
Mr chair I I think she knows
mentor managing a pregnancy loss
does she pay for prenatal birth
perinatal and postpartum health
does she pay for managing peri
menopause and menopause does she
pay for managing fertility does
she pay for treating cancers of
the reproductive system does she
pay for preventing or treating
sexually transmitted infections
or any of those things you don't
pay for.
We Mr chair representative and
senator yeah we paid for almost
all of that we have limitations
on managing fertility almost
thank you managing almost
magically Felidae thank you
almost Mr chair and young young
lady earlier said that takes
months for a pap smear.
So are the the abortion clinics
not doing pensioners or is it
other location Mr and that'll be
the last question for this
witness.
At so just a to do some
reflecting back so you're asking
if abortion clinics to pap
smears how are you in your
statement earlier you talked
about it takes months to get
taxpayers.
I don't think she said anything
about well I am sorry I put it
down in the wrong name I
apologize late in the back but
so I guess I'm down with ask you
questions since of diverted from
my original topic that thank
you.
If you.
You want to make a statement of
some sort.
Wrapping up.
I wasn't done Sir but if you
want me to well we do have eight
other bills tonight yes and we
would like other members of the
committee to have a chance well
and and I are going on for
thirty minutes Senator
committees went on for forty
minutes if we let everybody
going for that will be here till
one in the morning so I sort of
struggled in my club it up again
according my clock have been
twenty minutes but yes Sir I'll
I'll do that since I understand
that there's tension here I'll
just go to another question for
you so this actually comes up on
page lady from Medicaid was here
but it it there's a study says
United States study examining
hundred seventy three thousand
two hundred seventy nine
lowincome Californian Medicaid
patients the found that met
women who underwent abortions
have nearly double the chance of
dying and the following in the
following two years and had a
hundred fifty four percent
higher risk of death from
suicide.
Then if they gave birth come
morning Mr chair if I may could
Representative tell me if you
guys done any studies to see how
we're actually protecting New
Mexicans thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for the
question again you know we're
looking at national studies on
abortion care as well I think
I've any again causation
correlation is that the
gentleman earlier talked about
as well that that I don't know
the stator for into the study
that I've heard about and what I
have in front of me as well as
the UCSF at turned away study
more than ninety five percent of
people who chose to have an
abortion reported it was the
right decision for them and I
can talk a little more it also
reported that one in three women
will have an abortion which
means that for many of us will
know someone that has an
abortion I think it's really
important that we're that we're
treating these folks they're
making decisions at tender times
with the kindness that they need
making decisions with their
doctor.
But I appreciate that and and it
is dependent on the study shoes
New Mexico California model
because we want to be California
everything they do is something
we want to
inspire to be so just in closing
I would say that I'd be cautious
I looked up to smaller and it's
it's a a a god of demonic god we
have a a group coming to Los
crucis suicide to mystic a type
of the questions in my thing is
I think we need to be cautious
because I think we've allowed
him in our state I don't know
who did but I what all put
believe that they're coming in
for the ten million dollars we
have going towards Los crucis to
open a facility in that I think
we bring in a lot of.
Opportunities for signature type
things and I would just say that
I I hope that they're not
Moloch is the is the god that
they had for child
sacrificed and so that's what
it's in the Bible is steep in
there but the thing is I'm
afraid that we're opening that
up in these abortion bills are
as a sacrifice unto him with
that I will yield.
Making.
Thank you senator Senator Ingle.
I move to table.
There is a motion to table it's
not debatable.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Vegas yes ma'am Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes Senator my is
this.
Senator McKenna no Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez no Senator Tallman.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no so that
motion fails is a real turn.
Two passed we have a motion for
a defense seconded by Senator.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos no ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator my SS yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez no
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes explain my vote Senator
Tallman yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez to explain
her vote I just want to thank
you so much for really
thoughtful patient centered bill
the unfortunately the dog to
Jackson case through all of this
to the states and so I'm very
proud to be part of the state
that wants to offer health care
in just a really sensitive
positive way we've seen a lot of
legislators around the country
going the other way and I'm very
very proud that we're really
valuing the people in our state
and valuing the choices they
make so thank you for bringing
this bill.
Thank you senator thank you
thank you very much what was
sixty three.
Will not go to.
The senators to.
Who's going to function.
Senator Stefanics.
Okay.
Will ever do the start with the
pharmacy at the hospital.
Senator honest about this but.
That was interesting I'm glad I
wasn't needed.
Ringing up Malik I think it's
time.
Question.
Thank you.
Section seven.
To get the.
If you could please leave the
keep the noise down on your way
out we have a lot of work still
to do.
Senate.
Because we have.
More on.
Senator Sanchez sent but I'm
gonna learn from my house
sponsor here.
But on Senate bill house bill
ninety three.
Just a second.
Yes.
Either way what is.
Just one minute to a doctor's.
That left us with
this.
In general.
Okay.
But with their their twenty
programs through.
Ninety three.
We have a.
I've heard.
Okay.
Thank you.
The she does.
Capital.
Yeah.
The disclosure for the on line
this anyone use.
Really quick yes.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
to just go ahead yes please okay
House Bill ninety three as twice
amended is the pharmacy act
board of pharmacy changes and
it's is first to add new
language and update cleanup
language in the act and then of
the definition of custodial care
facility is expanded to indicate
that it will be further defined
by board rule and that it
specifies what it does not need
to clarify in near of the
current confusion around the
term so that said
the two amendments
that were made in the house are
to continue to ensure that all
rules and protocols for the
prescribing of dangerous drug
therapy continue to be approved
by the medical board instead of
just consulting with them and
also it deletes the requirement
that the nursing board be
involved.
That just made it so that it
took longer for any changes to
go through all three boards and
the nursing board quickly you
know said they don't need to go
through them but the medical
board in the of pharmacy board
and then the fourth one is that
expansive pharmacists ability to
dispense prescription drugs to
not exceed a thirty day supply
instead of the current limit of
seventy two hours and that was
done because often times if
there's like an emergency
Description that needs to be
filled that you know some things
like errors
for asthma of the inhalers you
know you can't break it down to
just three days so they would
just have to do that one
prescription for the inhaler and
it also makes it so that people
who are in rural areas that they
don't have to go
you know travel to go to their
pharmacy and then in three days
later come back again so they
would be able to get a supply
enough to make it so that they
until they could get their
prescription
filled for the full amount.
And so with that
we stand for questions or do you
want to say and in addition
there were there any there's no
amendments or anything not at
this point we've already made
the corrections in the house
that we think needed to be done
great Madam we have some expert
witnesses yes it did did you
want to say anything Senator you
know I'm I'm here to back up to
the help Representative and I'm
going to be the Senate from.
Who wants to go first
I'd like to introduce Mr Dale
Tinker who is the
the executive director for the
New Mexico pharmaceutical and
this is
Dr Sharan McCracken and
So either one.
Mr chair us I'll start right
quick mostly I'm gonna let sure
and discuss this because it is
changes to the pharmacy act and
she's the director of the board
of pharmacy and show she's the
expert in that arena she is
Pharm.D and as well as that
chief drug inspector and so she
has been to the police academy
and those kinds of things that
the inspectors have to do so I'm
gonna let her speak you probably
heard enough from me over the
last month or so anyway so thank
you Mr chair right this
McCracken welcome
thank you or Dr McCracken.
Committee chair and so so good
evening Mr chairman members of
the committee
I would I think the button
depressed you have to hold it
down afraid a whole time all day
the whole time.
The better I think so let's see.
What happened with your finger
instead of.
Yes.
At the speaking
that's making nice okay good
evening Mr chairman members of
the committee I would like to
stand for any questions that you
may have a profession that you
the please okay good let's go to
the audience is there anyone in
the audience here in support of
this measure.
Yes did you want to say
something about it.
Okay great anybody opposed to it
here.
Nobody online.
We're not drawing a big audience
tonight thank you very members
of the committee.
I read Mr chairman.
Senator Representative read
through the bills
it's all very logical
Thirty days of maybe a long
time.
But Mr chair.
I don't know if anybody's got
the.
Four to support
Are that large.
Lower prices at their pharmacies
for.
I will be.
For all.
I
asked.
So Mr chair Senator thank you
for the question I am caring
Senate bill fifty one which is
banning copay accumulators and
I'm also caring Senate bill
fourteen which is the governor's
pharmacy bill the governor's
pharmacy bill is based upon Dr
Macanese drug task force that
went on during the interim that
involve many people we went
through tax and of business last
night and it is moving on
it's either going to come.
Here no we're going to Judiciary
next for that particular bill we
did bring the banning the copay
accumulators to here but the
other bill Senate bill fourteen.
Only deals with the pharmacy
benefit managers it increases
the scope of the duties of the
office of the superintendent of
insurance for reporting and it
gets into some other details and
like I said that has gone
through one committee and we'll
see how far it goes.
thank you senator I thank you
for there are.
I am right I think I think
there's some fourteen I've
actually kind of my backpack
and.
Representative but otherwise
there hi.
S. and.
Any discussion Senator guy.
Mr.
Representative center I'm just
going through the bill but I was
trying to find out the page
three line six I am a six seven.
it's talking about CYFD did not
receive funds record from or
through the children youth and
families department is there
reason you're separating from
them Mr.
In center Representative.
That's just a definition of what
a custodial care facilities so
it's not a group of.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you for that question so it is
specifically carving out or
excluded from the definition of
custodial facility.
Particular homes that are
already licensed by CYFD so
specifically its community homes
of foster homes okay are not
included in the definition thank
you Mr chairman and Sir Senator
Representative expert witness
can you tell me what regulations
CYFD does implemented these
facilities.
So the CYFD enforces a separate
statutes and separate rules and
and they currently license fees
for.
That's it thank you.
Senator Schmedes and and
Representative center one
question is on the at the very
end.
says we're going to not allow
PNP to be inferred which I get
that evidence is audit trail
information can you explain what
what that is well that's not
gonna be submitted Brittney
Moore thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator so audit trail
information is the record of
when an individual goes and and
queries and PMP.
Okay thanks.
It is secretary will call the
roll.
For us no matter.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
committee is Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman.
Center to the panel yes.
By seven to one vote you have to
do yes Representative and
Senator thank you thank you Mr
centers about actually just rock
and roll right into your yes we
should health care authority
department thank you and I'm not
sure if Minnesota Debbie
Armstrong as he is Hey she is
the one of the policy advisers
to the governor.
Issues here on behalf of the
executive.
Office.
I will start the introduction
on.
Senate bill sixteen the health
care thirty and we can go from
there so we did take this bill
members of the Senate rules so
some of you did hear it there
and the rest of you didn't and
we're happy to talk about it.
The essence of this bill is that
it would change the HST
Department The Human Services
Department into the health care
thirty.
And it's a bill that would
actually set up the structure to
start the planning for health
care story and praying together
pieces of approximately nine
different
state agencies that could start
coordinating on the purchasing
of of health care for the entire
state and of the bill indicates
that by a date certain there
would be a report to the interim
committees and that by January
one of twenty twenty for a plan
would be laid out by the
executive to the legislature of
how the executive wanted to
proceed I'm gonna turn it over
at this point to miss Debbie
Armstrong thank you thank you
former state representative
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee this is a a
reorganization bill designed to
establish a single unified
department responsible for
health care purchasing
regulation and policy and the to
provide a foundation for more
effective management and
oversight of health care and by
extension the ability to
leverage purchasing power and
coordination to achieve better
health outcomes for New Mexicans
reducing fragmentation and
eliminating the silos that exist
today for users of our health
care system.
The the structure of the of the
bill
renames the department
identifies certain divisions
that would move over from
Department of Health for GST and
then leaves it to the executive
to identify other programs that
might be within other divisions
or departments that would be
suggested to move has to come
back with the plant a transition
plan and and the full
authorizing legislation so this
just gets it started and and
presents the the intent
In in incidently of for as long
as I've been around either in
state government or around the
legislature there's at least
four departments that I know of
that were created in this way by
setting a foundation for further
direction identifying certain
things that we're going to move
and then by executive order
developing the plan and coming
back with an authorizing
statute.
I was responsible for one of
those agencies agencies are
aging long term services yes Sir
over the other ones children you
madam cultural affairs Indian
Affairs and Veterans Affairs.
I'm there may have been some
before that I I just don't know
I'm and then I wanted to say one
other thing and that is for
those of you who have sat on
LHS you may remember back a
couple of years when we had a
presentation from LFC about a
study that they did about the
effectiveness of the I. back
the inter agency collaborative
and
That that aid that group does
not effectively purchase
together as well as the intent
and they concluded that the best
way to address the issue of
rising health care costs is
through consolidation of the
individual agencies into a state
health care purchasing
organization with wider decision
making authority and I think
that that this does that out
without a stand for questions
right.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this bill.
Three anybody here in
opposition.
Anybody online no download does
anybody here want to speak in
support of it just a couple
minutes yep please the area.
Good evening start hearing
things about you don't have can
you hear me yes Mr chair members
of the committee my name is R.
Ellie I am the policy director
of the department of health I'm
here on behalf of Pat Allen who
is the US secretary of the
department of health we stand in
strong support of this measure
SB sixteen will effectively move
to really critical divisions to
this new health care authority
one is DH shy on the other is
DST so for a long time the
department of health is actually
pondered this reorganization
because we are separated from or
Medicaid sort of oversight
organization over HSD so this is
actually really going to improve
efficiency it puts everything in
one shop and it removes the the
inherent conflict that we've
been kind of managing for quite
a long time between the facility
is oversight and the serving and
licensing operations of DH shy
so we are in strong support of
this bill and we would like to
see it passed so thank you so
much for your time thank you
great thank you.
good afternoon or good evening
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Anna Silva
and I am the acting secretary
for the General Services
Department and I stand in
support of this legislation so
every year the General Services
Department request a
supplemental for a growing
deficit and the health benefits
bureau by consolidating the
health benefits bureau under
this new and city it would then
consolidate the services and
increase the leverage for and
volume in the buying power so we
strong stand in strong support
of this legislation thank you
thank you.
Thank you for.
Good evening chairman members of
the committee my name is
Jennifer contentious on the
interim superintendent of
insurance and OSI is here to
strongly support this as you
know many of these organizations
that fall into this area are not
regulated by the OSI by having
the ability to consolidate them
in one place give them the
purchasing and negotiating power
he solve some problems in being
able to provide benefits and
health care access to hundreds
of thousands of New Mexicans
that don't have the same
protections as those that fall
under the regulation of the OSI.
Thank you.
I everyone knows me by this
point of the night a lot of
dances Medicaid medical director
at Mr chair members of the
committee I am speaking on
behalf of Human Services
Department we strongly support
this measure the two groups
coming over developmental
disabled disability supports
division we Medicaid reimburses
for those services so having
them within the department makes
a lot more sense and DH shy that
which does regulation and
licensing Medicaid reimburses
for many of those services
nursing facilities assisted
living facilities so it just
makes a lot more sense that
we're all working in the same
department thank you.
Very good.
Anybody else anybody in
opposition.
Seeing none members of the
committee.
Senator I back.
That.
Well thank you Mr chair and and
thank you Sanchez as I just
didn't want the
All the comments in the evening
to be on the other side of the
room I got to have some I on the
left side of the room and I I
want to assure the sponsors that
I do support this bill but their
number thinks of that questions
that I do have that would be
helpful to help guide those
questions I actually have a
handout that I will briefly go
through
with you on this and and I was
very well off the fifty one page
paper that did send to
representative Armstrong that
before and have shared with that
various people of the governor's
office and numerous other places
and we do have legislation to
reform the I back that's in
another bill on a temper Ising
basis so we can get to something
like this
but
my my first question is is I
mean this is giving a lot of
broad authority to the governor
and but I'm wondering how this
is gonna take an architectural
committee to put together and
how is that committee going to
be determined.
Mr chair and senator if you look
at page three of the bill.
And the executive talks about
all the different entities that
will be involved in the
planning.
It talks about the office of the
secretary of health care thirty
the administrative services
division information technology
etcetera and it talks later all
throughout the bill about the
different state agencies that
also would come to the table to
coordinate.
Of the discussion in the plan
and that's toward the back of
the bill.
And the and as I said that is
right before the section DFA of
course to be very involved
because of the financing but
that comes before the reporting
of the plan to the interim
committees into the legislature.
thank you Senator a Mr chair and
senator I I see there are a
whole lot of departments here
and certainly they have
experience in their department
what I'm not seeing here our
professional consultants who
could really help guide this
such as the bailiff organization
which I've is I think is in one
of the pieces that I handed out
The
and and what I also don't see in
here which which we did in this
paper which was to go to a
number of other states who have
already been there done that
and to keep us from inventing
the square or triangular will we
would like to copy the we all I
think from other states and so
I'm
But I I would like to see as
this gets reported out and as as
it gets to the floor.
What what the executive is
contemplating on bringing in
people who professionally other
than the lucky landing we have a
Mr Allen
but other people from other
organizations other states who
really know how to put this
together.
he's pretty yeah Mr chair
Senator I'm going to defer to my
expert witness thank you Mr
chair and and senator I I I am a
fully agree and don't think
there's anything in here that
for clues getting the expertise
you need to do to particularly
to plan the system this is
simply the start of a reorg in
order to get all of the what we
know are the components that
that need to be together we come
back to the legislature in the
interim and finally with
authorizing statute there may be
some things in here that need to
come out for some reason and
there may be discreet programs
we may not it we may have
misidentified something that
that moves that we haven't
talked about but rather than
put the descriptive in here or
the authorizing language about
what they're going to do in
reforming the healthcare system
we leave that to
to leader this is just the start
of a governmental re ordered on
process thank you very much
Representative
Mr chairman and senator and and
Representative this handout that
I gave to you of this comes from
the milk bank Petersen
foundation who have been
studying health care costs in
states and how they are
just exploding and and it isn't
just for state employees it's
it's for commercial and so forth
and the the first page that I
have here I would really want to
say is the key to all this
working is data and analytics
shine the light and if you look
at the next page colleagues
you'll see how Massachusetts is
shown the light and mass general
the Brigham and how much more
expensive it is and those
facilities than it is in.
The facilities in basically
through their twelve year
process of the connector again
they have perfected the wheel in
Oregon is copying their we all
it's it all comes down to being
able to demonstrate where the
out liars are in cost and then
shining the light on that and
when the light gets shone
actually in Massachusetts
Brigham and mass general have
agreed under a state mandate
through legislation to work on
significantly lowering their
costs and that's how you get to
then of what at the last page
here is what Oregon's plan is
we're our new
secretary of health is coming
from
they actually are on a track as
our Massachusetts match is
already doing it Connecticut
Washington California for
keeping health care costs under
three percent annual increase it
works and the key to it working
the key to all this working is
building and supporting the data
informatics and analysis and
again paying for the talent it
takes to do the drill downs to
do the transparency to then
bring the out liars into play
and and again we can have in
this state we really can have a
lesson three percent annual
increase in health care for
every program putting Medicare
and Medicaid as well as all the
commercial and so that's why I'm
emphasizing this so much and I I
took the liberty of doing my own
and out on your bill I apologize
the other pages basically but we
learned about the I. back invite
needs to be completely
restructure there's probably.
Three four hundred million of
savings in that
If the so I I I'm seeing your
head shake yes which is
wonderful with the other key I
want to point out is that it's
not just the I. back Mr chair we
have to bring in all the
educational institutions we can
build a pool in insurance called
the law of large numbers of
three to four hundred thousand
people that is a phenomenal
negotiating stance to deal with
the out liars who I'm gonna not
name but just talk about what
what happens and so and then
municipalities being able to
join in voluntarily but it's
going to be so much cheaper
they're going to want to join so
you can get forty five hundred
thousand people is one
negotiating pool and the
efficiencies that come with that
are phenomenal so I'm seeing Mr
chairman and the representative
nodding your head I I know she
understands all this but I just
I want to be at record here on
date that we have talked about
it and this is the direction
that that we are moving in so
that point if we let it as they
requested a few years ago
nonprofits slide into the state
employee plan yes good at a net
eighty year and a half thousand
that that's that's Mr chair if
you would read my fifty one page
paper isn't and my consultants
really wrote it I did you know
that you know the old joke right
about why did you give us a
fifty one page report I didn't
have time to write anything for.
Thank you it was the summer.
It's why I missed so many LHS
has meetings because I was doing
this research so
the other the other concern I
have is I don't see the
all payer claims database
written into the bill.
And that that's fundamental but
does Mr Allen knows
it isn't just the claims it's
the payments to and that we're
collecting all that information
analyzing it and then we can do
what but they did Massachusetts
and they're doing in Oregon the
gonna impose penalties on out
liars so I think this is very
exciting I I certainly am
volunteering to offer my
insights are my consultants who
help put all this together it
was very strenuous figuring out
just where the I. back came from
and how they actually exercised
powers that they never had as
you noted to
and that we're we're getting to
correct it and and it's not just
the money the reason that I'm so
passionate about this it's and
and and I your first paragraph
was perfect it's not just about
the money it's about the
accountability for the outcomes
of care and the quality
improvement that this data
driven approach will be able to
drive so that we really have
healthier New Mexicans
commercial Medicare Medicaid but
it's all got to be data driven
and the money needs to be put
aside for it to do it right and
I'm just so pleased that Mr
Allen is here in his one role
and I I would say.
When you've got someone who's
proven they can do it and is so
talented that we you know that's
the kind of person you want to
be in charge of something
ultimately what this looks like
so I know you're talking about
HSD and I know he's got a lot of
work to do in D. O. H. but I
think this is a I mean business
you usually go out when you when
you're hiring a CEO usually go
look for someone who's done it
improving it and we have that
individual now in the department
of health but I hope that you
all as you move forward.
Take his expertise you know I'm
just a little kid on the side
having run health plans and
health systems most of my life
but he has Representative he has
done it in the government
bureaucracy and I mean that in a
positive way thank you Mr
chairman and I'll shut it off at
the thank you anybody else any
other discussion I move it to
pass we have over a subcommittee
with which she said she'd be
right back Senator McKenna said
you be right back I think I may
have offended Senator.
Gallegos he may not come back I
don't know
Quick question for you.
The the insurance the state.
The office of the state
superintendent of insurance is
that going to remain independent
or is it going to be brought
into the store.
So Mr chair there might be a few
functions that could quilt
collaborator be a portion of
this but the superintendent of
insurance is over various types
of insurance not just health
insurance and so there is a role
for the office of superintendent
insurance managed care bureau to
be involved but I think that's
to be fleshed out.
You have anything to do Mr chair
I think another portion that is
kind of buried in there is the
responsibility for the
affordability fund that might be
another one but since it wasn't
a whole
a whole division we didn't
identified in the bill so to
Senator he K. point all claims
all payer claims database is
absolutely critical but since it
wasn't a whole division we
didn't pick it up and move it
it's one of the programs to be
identified and change the
authorise portable Kerr Fund is
where is it it's it OSI without
it is it was a okay good.
Mr chair and we can we can make
a motion and and and then when
she comes in at our vote to it
but go ahead thank you Mr chair
I I I've failed to find one
other piece so the audience
maybe us well hi again I get
down to three percent hello
And this is this is just an
observation but I'm not the one
making it and I'm happy to share
this with you this is the recent
rant Health Care study of every
hospital in the country and how
much money they are charging and
as and they converted percent of
full bill charges in two percent
of Medicaid Medicare and we have
hospitals here in New Mexico who
are at essentially five hundred
percent average payment five
hundred percent of Medicare and
that's where the money's going
to come from to get us down to
three percent so that's where
the transparency I mean again
it's coordinating it there's so
much data there I'll share this
with you this is all public data
every hospital knows it there is
there is a lot of room to get
down to a three percent increase
at the same time as you said
improve the health of New
Mexicans thank you Mr chair for
allowing me that when I say we
know we're back to full
committee we have as a motion
from Senator Sedillo Lopez is
our second.
Senator Tom and seconded it.
Any other discussion good quick
question quick question from
Sierra.
The FIR scissors no
appropriation.
However the V. considerable
costs.
It is difficult to estimate at
this point so what is the status
of providing money so Mr chair
and senator thank you for that
question this first year is
planning of the existing
agencies with the executive so
it's it's absorbed into the
agency budget.
What the
Go into effect until another
year you won't hit the road
running money together for until
we bring back the plan to the
legislature and Mr chair and
senator it's one reason why we
altered decided to alter Human
Services so as not to create a
new department and move
everything and have the expense
of a new department it will be
so you'll still have some
expenses but half of it with
Medicaid is already there and so
it'll be less costly than
creating new department thank
you for the answer and so it's
just too early for Dr thank you
to put it is that the patients.
I would say so and once and less
he wants to volunteer.
Up.
On that point Mr chair if I have
so many more evenings like this
I may put in for that.
The secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center my is
this Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes Senator
to the piano yes.
You have a five two zero do pass
move thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Rodriguez let's take you to
those madam secretary did
Senator Maestas explain what
he's doing here at the as a
building Judiciary.
So he he said I'm ruining her
evening and I said well.
We'll just work around him and
and when he gets back with will
put in your billing
it's
going.
We're not the only tools.
Senator Rodriguez which one you
want to start with thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Just do the yes the Senate bill
three ninety eight and
thankfully that'll be a little
quicker but both are well I'll
leave it at that let me just I'm
happy that you're here now
unfortunately it's so late for
you I feel bad we just got out
of finance to I got Hank Hughes
with me here Mister chairman
members of the committee he is a
county commissioner now he just
retired you you all know I'm
sure Hank Hughes he was with the
coalition to end homelessness
for many years so we're happy to
have him with us Mr chairman
members of the committee this
bill goes to Judiciary next is
it it purports to look at it and
pulled archaic lost truly that
prohibited that the county
commission found recently that
prohibits elected officials of
any kind not only county
commissioners but elected
officials to serve on the public
Housing Authority board this the
this was an old law that in the
fifties I think and it it
applies to housing authorities
but I I think it was a sixty
five okay the totally fifties
but it did not contemplate the
situation for County if housing
authorities now are really the
owners of some of their own
public housing authorities that
they establish and so they're
like departments of the counties
in so we start looking at the
lot to see if in fact it did or
did not allow like a county
commissioner who is they and the
elector official to continue to
serve on the boards on the
boards for different counties
Bernalillo county has this
scenario Santa Fe County has a
scenario in there may be other
counties out there but all we're
trying to do is get it in line
with the statue by removing the
language that is prohibitive for
these elected officials county
commissioners to serve on the
public housing boards that's it
and so
I'm that's a short really
explanation and Hank maybe Mr by
anything Hank.
And yet yet Mr chair thank you
very quickly I'll just add that
the reason Santa Fe County
started looking at this but we
do think it affects other
housing authorities the know it
does is that we want to really
ramp up our commitment to
affordable housing in Santa Fe
County as most of you know
affordable housing is becoming a
big issue across the state and
it's always been a problem in
Santa Fe even more than other
places and so we just want to
make sure that we're both in
sync with the federal
regulations which actually
require us to have
a member of our Housing
Authority board who is a client
as well as to have county
commissioners on the on the
board when we I just learned
this week that there is actually
a whole other part of the law
that says if you just run it as
a city or a county you can do it
that way but you're not allowed
to add anybody and so that
doesn't work anymore under hood
and so what we're trying to do
is is modify the part of the law
that allows us to create a
separate Housing Authority but
have it a mixed mixture of
community members clients and
commissioners and we think that
makes sense to think that'll
make us strong and of course
it's we're going to be applying
for grants and tax credits we
want everything to be in sync so
thank you and I'll answer any
questions also the county
attorney and housing director
with the in the room if we have
detailed questions that that is
there anyone in the audience in
support of this bill who wants
to speak.
Yes please come on up and use
the Mike and.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good evening my name
is Jordan bell and I'm the
director of the Santa Fe County
Housing Authority and I did want
to echo Mr Hughes statements and
also reiterate one of the points
that he brought up in regards to
it not only having this change
help us promote affordable
housing development but also
correct a conflict that that's
been in place so in nineteen
ninety eight Congress taxed the
public housing reform act that
required us to bring a resident
member on to our board
which means that somebody served
by our agency has to sit on the
board the way that the the law
currently stands we would have
to establish a separate entity
in order to make that a
possibility we think that's a
vital service not only to our
board but to our citizens ought
to have that voice and in order
to to keep that up we we with
the structure that we currently
have this this change will allow
for that separate board to be
established and ensure
compliance with that regulation
and with that I might.
My comments.
Members of the committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Well a couple of yep you can go
ahead do you have a question
Senator if I may yes.
Also web page where we can hold
up on the motion to repair
things the discussion going
it'll be brief Mister chairman
Senator so my wife worked for
fusion New Mexico hasn't Tory
but before she was there it was
owned by the city manager she
has Lovington in unison she
manages but back then and if I
read your bill right on section
B. it takes away the possibility
of having someone on commission
as also on the board for the
Housing Authority so now that
back then are are more had a
hard time feelings slots to be
able have of people on the board
Mr Chairman center is that what
I understand now they would be
available to be on the board
even after city commissioners Mr
chairman and and Senator
Gallegos yes what the current
law now since the sixties
prohibits that and it wasn't
discovered until now recently so
they're coming to remove the
probation so that elected
officials for people who are
appointed to the public Housing
Authority boards are not in
violation of the law they've
been serving for many years as
it is so that's all it does to
do I just want to clarify that
because I know that time he had
a really hard time Mr center
finding people not everyone
wants to be on the board and
additional the conversations
were hard to try to find people
so I appreciate that well you
and and the way this is the way
I read this is just cities that
have the prohibition of you as
it is have you extended to
counties as well these Mr
Chairman and can you explain yes
Senator thank you for the
question Mr chairman Center
Vegas and I actually spent a
morning debating that and then
we realize that in in another
part of the law it says the word
city means city or county of our
okay very good and Mr I'm sorry
yeah good.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
did you want to make a motion.
Mr Chairman your point.
just wondering cases each one
regional Housing Authority has
all kinds of different
communities do they qualify if
no there there in Rossell that's
your main office say have
artesian I think they've got
Carlsbad Lovington and Eunice do
they qualify because they're in
multiple counties Mr Chairman
Senator they could be operated
by had maybe there some regional
Housing Authority that are hot
established had owned Lujan had
administered these are county
public housing authorities that
are established yet they are
different thank you for that Mr
to their second to the motion
Senator Tallman seconds it any
other discussion the secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senators metes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes center to the piano
yes.
Congratulations you thank you
thank you Mr chair six zero
votes zero to do pass thank you
very much thing that will take
up your other bills for ninety
five bills yes thank you very
much so it's at four twenty
three yes thank you Mr chairman
have Marquita Russel here with
me most of you not all know
Marquita she's the CEO and
director for the New Mexico
finance authority and down we
have a Bill endorsed by the
committee in the interim Mr
chairman that basically expands
the use of three small NMFA loan
programs for example it is we're
trying to include the operating
at the primary care capital fund
the behavioral health capital
fund and the child care facility
loan funds in this thing to be
able to for the NMFA to be able
to provide working capital
currently what happens is that
with the loans that NMFA
provides and I'll defer to
Marquita because you're the
expert the with the loans that
NMFA provides they can only
build the facilities primary
health care behavioral health
care facilities but there's no
working capital and so the loans
can't be used for that and it's
terrible because what is a
facility going to do without the
in the face out the
administrative part of working
capital for that so basically
all we're trying to do is make
sure that these loans for the
primary care capital fund to
behavioral health capital fund
in child care cap to fund can be
used also for the capital that's
necessary for these for these
ventures that's all we restraint
to do Mr chairman market if you
do want to say in thank this
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'll keep it short
it does two other things that
aligns some of the laws because
that we operate two almost
identical programs but the laws
are different so we're just
conforming them to one another
and of changes our ability to.
recover costs of funds right now
it's currently capped as the
legislature is reduce taken
money back that's limited our
ability to cover costs of the
administration and with that I'd
be happy this is strange that
out it would Mr chairman thank
you.
Okay anything else sent
everybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Anybody opposed to it anybody
online also.
Is there anybody in line at all.
Forty participate okay great
I've I've missed read to the
audience vision.
We have a motion from Senator
Sedillo Lopez second from
Senator Hickey.
have a quick question for you I
have a bill I love this this is
a great idea I have a bill that
would create a funded behavioral
services division to do pretty
much this operating money for
New that for expenditure new
agencies working in rural areas.
Until they can start getting a
flow of of reimbursement cause
us for six months they're
they're of they're seeing people
are trying to work Hey no money
coming in the door from Medicaid
or insurance until they get
certified they won't have any.
So the gentleman years could
could work in the same fashion
right Mr Chairman yes thank you
with that with this adjustment
at this law goes through we can
help provide working capital so
for expanding clinics this is
really critical without it what
they can do is basically I the
facility they've been leasing
exactly.
Okay great it's good to know and
and.
If money does not get funded
which the odds are pretty good
it won't next year we will put
the money into into your office.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator I and us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle center Maestas Senator
McKenna.
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Yes Senator AUMENT yes Senator
is if you know yes.
Six a six zero vote thank you
have any other New Mexico
senator thank you senator and so
I had to wait so long but the
we've got about a year thank you
here too and yeah and just
Senator how to me of we've asked
him to come.
The current.
Will be here any minute and
we'll do his bill next that's a.
Senate bill four eleven so this
is when we're getting a lot of a
lot of emails.
That's what they're all on the
line for.
Almost four.
See that the
yeah they've they're they're
lined up because this.
And then we we also are trying
to get the Senate we're we're
trying to time it's Senator
Pirtle can come in.
On his physical therapist MRI
orders and I don't know about
senator Brent.
He went home so we'll just roll
his bill over.
That's a for twelve no no for
seventeen will rule for
seventeen or.
Mr chair yes while we're waiting
just of of a little interesting
observation of more cata
Worked for my mother a state
senator and Ellen no I back in
the seventies when she was just
beginning a career no kidding
doing the analyst doing
financial analytics we discover
that we are and I meant to point
that out what's your was there
but this is in the small world
categories in this small world
category yeah back in
Springfield Senator how to me of
you're here to present Senate
bill four eleven and to explain
why moving getting so many angry
emails about.
And my expert witnesses should
be covering it at any moment I
sprinted ahead of them that's a
happy to know that I can spread
now and so it sort of four
percent of the bill for eleven
housing and rent changes and so
senators and Mr chairman imagine
being told that you're going to
be picked up from your home and
in some cases of some New
Mexicans you have six days to
find a new place that's the
reality and a number of times in
Rio Arriba county I'm hearing
from constituents who are saying
that they need help because
they're going to be evicted no
one talked a little bit about
this bill our state is in the
best of a housing in security
crisis the crisis started before
the pandemic with the record
increase in homelessness between
twenty eighteen and twenty
nineteen since the onset of the
pandemic things have only gotten
worse.
With rising rents record
inflation and stagnant wage
wages New Mexico families are
struggling now more than ever to
meet their basic needs including
housing now we have to protect
more renting families from being
forced into homelessness
estimates analyses so that it
cost taxpayers thirty thousand
to fifty thousand dollars
annually for each individual
experiencing homelessness nearly
one third of New Mexico families
rent the home and in which they
live but housing is becoming
more and more unaffordable the
current minimum wage is twelve
dollars an hour with the wages
needed to for the basic two
bedroom apartment at seventeen
fifty six an hour and hearing
from residents of Los Alamos
County including teachers who
can no longer afford to live on
the hill New Mexico has been it
has some of the shortest
eviction time frames for non
payment of rent there only ten
other states with time frames
the short or shorter this bill
will increase housing stability
by expanding time frames around
eviction for non payment of rent
giving tenants eleven days
instead of three to get caught
up on grant.
It also gives residents the
right to cure of meaning if they
can pay at any time during the
budget process they can stay the
governor has prioritized housing
this year recognizing that we
need to take a quote historic
action to permanently addressing
the school board of housing in
security now with me Mister
chairman I'm experts body agree
echo director the economic
equality and she's a lawyer with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and Tom pretty mad the
co chair of the housing group
with the New Mexico legal aid
and with that I want to yield to
them if they want to make a few
statements go welcome thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I think
of Senator had a meal covered it
well great synopsis of the bill
but we are here to answer any
questions that that you may have
a good Mr Freeman did you want
to add anything or this year for
questions of Mr Chairman states
okay let's the let's see is
there anyone in the audience
just first we're going to just
do a show of hands anybody in
the audience in favor of this
bill.
Okay
though anybody in the audience
opposed to this bill.
Okay and has a look on zoom
this is what I know for sure.
All the zoom we have to in
support and to oppose if you can
keep your comments brief let's
hear first from those in support
try to do it in in no more than
two minutes please.
Hold.
In.
hello I've never done this
before so I'm really nervous
introduce yourself first my
name's laurel and I'm I'm a
tenant and I've been an
excellent tenant in Washington
state and California before I
came here been here about a year
and a half I've lived in the
same place and for the first
time in my life I'm in the arts
I am terrified
has situation my heat has not
worked since I've lived there.
It and I have tried to get the
landlord to fix it
I've asked him I sent emails and
nothing's happened the first
winter I just figured out how to
deal with that the second winter
I finally got some advice and I
sent to seven day notice about
fixing it and if he wasn't gonna
fix that I checked the a bait
box
he didn't even respond he
completely ignored it so at the
end of that time I baited
actually less than a third which
is the legally allowed amount
and the consequences that last
night I got a notice on my door
that I had three days to pay or
quit and he's also canceled my
lease and given me thirty days
to move out so I'm naturally
very anxious that did not sleep
at all last night and I also
wanted to add that I know the
other tenants in my compound and
they do their own repairs
they're too afraid to ask him to
repair things because we don't
believe in I've talked to them
that we have the kind of rights
that would help us deal with
this kind of situation one of my
tenants is in the seventies he
crawls up on a second story roof
to clean out the gutters another
tenant cannot no longer lives
there also in the seventies
lived for five years with half
of his door missing out to his
patio that there were there were
two there was a door and then
there was the screen door he
also ended up having to park in
the load and unload sound
because crossing the ice to get
from where he's supposed to park
to his front door was so
treacherous he was afraid that
he would slip and fall and part
of our lease includes a breaking
up in clearing ice and snow
which is essentially never done
so
I am I'm begging you to try and
pass this as soon as.
Table we need help we're afraid
and I've I feel like I felt
protected and I felt
I had housing security in
California and Washington where
as you know they have much
stronger protections and here as
I said for the first time I'm
just really afraid I don't know
what I'm gonna do when I get to
the next place I don't know what
it will be like so thank you for
listening I appreciate your time
Mr chair and Senators thank you
lord that anybody else want to
speak Verint.
Thank good afternoon
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Barron
Jones I'm with ACLU of New
Mexico but I'm speaking as a
resident of New Mexico I support
this legislation for the reasons
I'm already stated my my older
brother lives and believe it or
not the Cesar Chavez low income
housing and they objective is
right three hundred dollars
almost like fifty percent or
something and a matter of
minutes so I think we need this
type of legislation to provide
housing for New Mexicans and
things where does he live in
Albuquerque right now because
mmhm yeah in order this is our
job as a jacked up is yeah yeah
I totally should I be going to
the media with it because on the
under the name of Cesar Chavez
that you're really like and I'll
treating the people you're low
income housing that so thank you
all.
Anybody else we have to online
they want to speak in support
will go to them now Kurt Reger
and coral Grecians.
Mr Reger.
Good evening Mr chairman of the
committee this is Kurt rigor the
director of litter affects Mr.
We also expressed position New
Mexico conference of churches
I'm here tonight to state our
strong support press the four
eleven begin by stating again
this year that we believe
housing is a fundamental human
right in support of policy it
supports the creation of formal
housing and in this case
preservation of housing we
believe that are outdated
uniform on a resident relations
act as an example for public
policy that contributes to
housing instability and
potentially homelessness for
individuals and families we
further believe that the uniform
on reserve resident relations
act is heavily weighted in favor
of owners and we believe that as
the four eleven make strides in
level the playing field
apparently like a number of your
colleagues in the legislature I
too have been a landlord having
kept my home as a rental
property for the twelve years I
lived out of state I'll also
I've also been a tent in my
humble opinion the changes
proposed in SB four eleven are
very reasonable for landlords Mr
chair members the committee I
richer support for SD for eleven
and thanks for the opportunity
to speak.
Thank you Mr Reiter how about a
Karl Gershenson.
Also have.
The property.
Hello yes I'm a girl Division
sin I am the director of the
eviction at Princeton University
we are perhaps the leading
research center in in the
country on the issues of
addiction and housing
instability but I'm here today
in my personal capacity like to
offer my expert judgment on the
effects of this legislation will
have on families in New Mexico
according to our data there are
over seventeen thousand
evictions filed in New Mexico on
an average year that's according
to a filing rate of over six
percent or six filings for every
one hundred renter households in
the state.
Look to make it very clear who
these filings impact the most if
you want to know at what point
in the life cycle you're most
likely to experience in
affection it's as a child babies
toddlers.
These children the second most
likely point in your life cycle
is when you're young parents
you're in your twenties
struggling to balance work with
childcare.
We know that evictions have
large number of harmful effects
on families again especially
children including learning loss
anxiety depression worsened
physical health as well as
increased vulnerability to
sexual and physical abuse.
For these reasons a policy that
supports housing stability is
profoundly profoundly.
There are a number proposed
changes to New Mexico housing
loan just before eleven that my
judgment would lower the
eviction filing rate in the
state I would like to provide
written testimony on each of
these changes at a later point
but for now I'd like to focus on
the proposals to eight in the
stages in the eviction process
in New Mexico this bill would
increase the time frame between
notice of action and filing of
objection from three to eleven.
This seemingly minor
intervention has actually been
shown to dramatically reduce
infection rates for example
Camden New Jersey which has no
objection notice prior to filing
has invention filing rate of
sixteen percent well neighboring
Philadelphia very similar
demographically requires ten
days notice Philadelphia has
filing rate of seven point seven
percent I know it's almost a
fifty percent reduction there
are a number of other very small
changes in the bill that we know
will have large effects like
giving families more time to
cure an infection and also
giving them more time to leave
their homes after receiving
adverse judgment we know that a
change like that will make it
much easier for them to find
subsequent housing and avoid
homelessness again I'd like to
find out more testimony on these
changes later but have for
tonight leave it at that thank
you good thank you of.
Mr Gershenson.
No who is in opposition to this
measure you're still in favor
yep please.
One last in favor.
Hello and chairman members of
the committee my name is winter
Torres and I and the director of
the New Mexico eviction
prevention and diversion program
which is funded through the E.
rap funds that the federal you
Representative funds and I just
wanted to explain some how
courts work on the ground here
it's not like everybody thinks
so in a typical case plaintiff
goes down to the courthouse
files a complaint and then the
clock starts running when
services maybe but that is not
how it happened happens in
eviction court here in New
Mexico because our courts are so
understaffed
and so what happens is there's
one particular court where
that case can be filed ten it
may not know and should be in
court in six days which is
actually less than the statute
so the what should be happening
as it should be working just
like any other civil case in
terms of counting the clock but
it takes too much time for the
courts to do that so they
operate on this calendar instead
so.
Thank you thanks for the
information.
Okay those opposed to it who
wants to come up and speak yes
Sir you in the front row
Kommentar.
Chairman Senators my name is
Chuck Sheldon I'm an independent
rental owner and I also manage
show four hundred fifty five
owners they're all small New
Mexican company so these are all
families look.
I for real key concerns with
this bill.
And I understand the the need or
they want to the caring for
having more housing we're short
of housing but what I'll say up
front this bill does the
opposite of trying to find
housing we've already seen.
Harper Lee turned over their
properties to corporate
companies who have no
sensitivity to.
The ten.
The keyboard for the four point
showed like to make.
One.
No the language is vague.
For example under forty seven
dash eight dash fifteen.
He.
You may not assess fees were
reasonable number of guests.
You.
I think the twenty one people
out of the studio.
With the sheriff's having to
move people out.
That's not a reasonable number.
The damage was over ten thousand
dollars.
Section eleven dash one increase
in addiction moratorium all
right does not contain any
requirements that the tenant
proved that they cannot pay the
rent.
Nor can you give that someone.
And if you have a moratorium for
people moving out you may have
family members that need a place
and you can't put them in.
Because media family so if you
have a grandmother you have a
mother in law you can't put him
in one of your places.
You're prohibited from.
Section six the.
Tell the Asian.
So if somebody comes in and says
you know I talked to the utility
company and now you're asking me
to leave and I and I heard the
young lady here speaking about
that and that support we don't
do that Tom knows he knows me
for twenty years something like
that.
You take care of your property.
The object is not to leave have
people leave the object is that
people state so they pay rent
they pay the expenses.
You know rent pays for salaries.
As for the mortgage pays for
utilities and pays for repairs
if you don't get rent.
It's hard to do that.
So we have.
Greater impacts to the courts if
you have this kind of debate
that goes on somebody claims you
had
of retaliation you file to get
your attorney coming back what
is the net result more court
time but also more expenses for
the owners in those we pass on
to the tenants.
It's gonna become expensive.
The entire building clues
significant daylight deadlines
so we're talking about these are
small deadlines.
Currently is twenty days.
We're talking about taking it
out to see seventy five and
ninety days to that somebody.
Right now we've been living with
COVID for the last two and a
half years.
Yes.
We have the emergency plan
as well as to provide rent
assistance two hundred million
dollars a state legislative two
hundred million dollars.
So now we delay evicting
somebody thirty sixty ninety
days because we're waiting on
some form of the wrath.
You Representative was
terminated the first of the
year.
We're still waiting.
They move out.
They always tens of thousands of
dollars.
There's nobody coming along and
saying I'm going to pay you this
amount of money.
So now we're impacted.
There's no assistance arriving.
We're looking at what the
governor's thinking about twenty
five million dollars we already
spent two hundred million.
We can satiate that fund.
Emergency rental assistance
program was well intended but it
taught our people not to pay
rent.
There was a lot of folks that
had jobs that said you can't
evict me I'm not paying.
We're putting ourselves in
jeopardy.
This is not the solution to
having more housing this is not
the solution to be able to say
we're going to have people in
state the property.
For those reasons I recommend
that we do not pass this bill.
Thank you.
Yes yes Sir.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is on the second
I'm the executive director of
the apartment association of New
Mexico we represent about sixty
seven thousand rental units
across the state many my
comments are the same as a Mr
Sheldon's here so I want to
we'll get stuck on here but I
think that you know that we all
want fair laws right we want
laws to protect the residents we
want laws to protect the
homeowners or the property
managers and we you know we want
those fair across the board in
really this law there this bill
swings the pendulum in one
direction and not the other and
you know to trucks point were
more than doubling the eviction
time line you know it's not I
know we keep talking about three
days but three days just to
notice it takes about a month to
get somebody out and we're more
than doubling that the is far as
a retaliation claims go right
now it has to be written a
written complaint this law makes
it that it's an oral complaint
so that it's you get into law or
you get into court and it's a he
said she said if it's all it
takes is an oral complaint I
mean you know we can basically
say anything the other thing too
is that this blocks you know we
were setting up for another
moratorium essentially in this
bill in a box and owner from
regaining their own property you
know it doesn't really describe
what this disaster or emergency
is so you know I think that you
know to trucks point really ours
is that this bill does not solve
any housing issues in New Mexico
this bill does not build any
housing in New Mexico this does
not solve the housing shortage
this does not solve rent
increases what this actually
does is this this will lower
housing inventory by helping
people that sell off their
properties that no longer want
to deal with certain types of
laws and that's not what we knew
just want to see and you know
you increase risks for owners
you increased costs for owners
and you know increased cost is
not what we want to see in New
Mexico and so for those reasons
a lot of other reasons you know
we stand in opposition for this
but you know we are thankful
that there everyone is take.
In a look at housing and you
know we understand that this is
a big topic this year but we do
oppose this bill thank.
A yes yes you keep your remarks.
What.
Chair Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Randi
Valverde I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors we
represent approximately seventy
five hundred realtors across the
state of New Mexico and we stand
in opposition to this bill for
the reasons already outlined and
we would also just point out
that the significant deadline
extensions have been noted by
the administrative off office of
the courts to be confusing and
duplicative and we agree with
that and we also agree with all
of the concerns that they
outlined on page seven of the F.
I. R. thank you.
Yeah.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for now commercial
real estate development
association and we also stand in
opposition to this bill for the
reasons stated we appreciate the
Sanchez at tend to try to
reduce housing and security but
we think this is going to create
a bigger problem thank you.
Okay we have people in
opposition.
That to name serve your.
Gene that.
More the letter.
Please go ahead.
Okay I just click the button my
name is mark Fiedler I am the
property manager in Rio Rancho.
And the I agree with the.
With the
Of the comments made prior but
Representative pile on top of
those I'd like to review just
three short letters written by
clients of mine who were
individual home owners the
usually only one or two of
rental property properties since
they could not come.
Shortly.
Yes Sir yes Sir I have been a
renter throughout my military
career now I I feel proud to be
able to offer affordable housing
for families moving to New
Mexico the current laws in place
to protect the tenant and
landlord are sufficient for the
effective management of private
properties within the state I do
not support giving renters the
power to prolong the process of
eviction and not being held
accountable to pay rent that's
one.
I am writing to inform you of my
disapproval of just before
eleven I own several your
goodness of rental properties in
New Mexico this proposal will
result in making New Mexico less
attractive for future
investments in rental units
reducing future market
availability and therefore
raising rents third short one.
I would like to voice my
opposition to SB four eleven I
am a small landlord pointing to
rental units my wife and I are
retired in these rental houses
are used to supplement our
income throughout the bill the
Sanchez intend to lengthen the
amount of time that attended has
to pay rent to respond to this
summons or even to pay rent due
without penalty after judgment
has been rendered by a court in
the meantime the landlord is
without payment of rent with
which to pay their own bills
after the landlord goes through
a link like the process to the
pandemic judgment if the tenant
then pays the amount due the
judgment disappearance and would
not show any.
Delinquency on the part there is
no cost consequence for the non
payment of rent the subsequent
possible landlord would have no
idea of the
but tend to those poor payment
history I can't afford.
Those who cannot pay their bills
thank you thank you for taking
the time and staying so late.
Thank you then finally we have.
That.
Yes I'm Judy Vance and I've been
a lawyer in the real estate and
property management field for
over forty years.
And I'm also general counsel for
the apartment association.
And.
The current law as I've
experienced for forty years
gives us plenty of opportunities
to resolve cases I don't see how
we're going to avoiding the
objections of the New.
by scratching this out to
another for a for two months
instead of one.
I'm people of good of good will
resolve these cases now I'm Tom
Friedman I've resolved.
Hundreds.
It.
This extending it for everybody
extensive for people of good
will and for people not of good
will it just extends it
completely in every case.
We have worked we'll have more
time we're.
Well as providing services up.
Paying mortgages and not
receiving any income on the
other side of it that just adds
to the cost of providing housing
and the end result is going to
be more expensive housing and
fewer people involved in
housing.
Especially the small.
Owner the owner that doesn't
have a lot of units to spread
this out spread out the loss.
Among.
We saw this a little bit and
started doing a survey of of
providers of housing we started
in twenty twenty one and didn't
twenty twenty one of twenty
twenty two and that's during the
time of the moratorium when you
had a pretty pretty.
A lengthy periods were owners of
property you were required to
provide housing with no
Representative.
In twenty twenty one.
The survey shows nineteen
percent.
Of the housing units in New
Mexico that answered the survey
were provided by small owners of
nineteen or fewer units.
In twenty two twenty two that a
drop to fourteen percent that's
a serious drop and that shows I
think something the what the
danger is here when we start
having you also property up
provide housing at no cost the
cost them.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
And but I would urge that this
bill not pass.
Very good thank you Senator see
the join by of those buses.
Representative did you want to
say anything about the move is
just grateful to be here this
committee thing this bill before
in its current form and so
really grateful to have this
conversation again and did you
want to add anything as far as
some of the issues raised.
Well Mr chairman to an
opposition who stated they
weren't in support of the bill
helped in drafting this bill in
twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty two this bill is the same
bill with a few modifications
that we took from our Senator
enrollment status and that's the
only difference with this bill.
Members of the committee.
Senator.
Mr chair and senator is this.
This bill going I'm sorry where
is this bill going next.
Mr chairman members of the
committee had to Judiciary
faxed.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
senator
Hearing some of the people in
opposition I think that there
there's some points that are
valid and and we you know we do
want to be able to support our
small businesses and families to
get their additional support and
I've just wondering are are you
willing to negotiate some of
these issues as it goes from
here to Judiciary I know you're
saying this is it's a parallel
bill from twenty one
but it just sounds to me is that
there might be some things that
could be negotiated as it goes
to in transition Mister chairman
Senator I'm always willing to
listen to those who might have
some suggestions.
Okay thank you that's all Mr
chair thanks for the love thank
you this is the same it looks to
me like the same bill that
Representative Rubio.
That the okay.
I thought so in reading it and
of and you probably know this
because you've probably heard me
say this a bunch of times I am
this year I didn't bring the the
bill to help victims of sexual
assault and domestic violence
when they needed to get out of
their leases or needed to remove
their abusers that helped leases
and I didn't because
Well first I thought it would be
nice if it rolled into this bill
but then
Representative Rubio said that
it would lose votes doing that
so I thought oh Kate what's
let's just wait to see the.
The housing law because we
really need to update our bill I
mean the current the current law
is really out of date but so I
thought well okay let's just
wait because I can't.
Amended and in a moving target.
with with the remedy for victims
of domestic violence and sexual
assault who need relief and when
when I did that bill that was it
seems to me that that a lot of
well I know the apartment
association with risk yes
supported supported the idea
because they said they want to
help but because it's a contract
they can't really do anything
and so it provided relief so all
of that to say I hope you will
consider that issue
has it moves on I mean I'm have
to give you the old bill or
whatever but that that issue has
been waiting on the sidelines
for an update to the rental.
Through the uniform resident
relations act for quite awhile
and so I mean I I think it's
it's kind of too late to do an
omnibus thing I think but I hope
that that you consider it
because state the victims also
need relief I I voted for
senator Rubio's bill and I'm
gonna vote for your bill
but I do hope that there can be
some movement along the lines
the Senator he talked about
because of it so it is hard to
to listen to the mom and pops
talk about.
About what this means for their
for their families I should also
disclose that I am representing
a woman who has been treated
horribly by her out of state
company that bought the
apartment clump conflicts and
those horror stories I think can
make bad law but it's but they
tend to be.
They were awful to her
they they that part was damage
they never fixed it she couldn't
live in it she finally
of the mold issue finally moved
out and then they they wanted to
take courage and she had all the
records of them trying to get
them to fix it and then they
wanted to keep her deposit
because of all that they never
fixed so it just and they don't
even live here so that nobody
even really checked it out or or
order so those it's those
stories that just really
Are they are disturbing so
anyway I I so all of that I
don't have any questions I I
understood the bill like to
spend a lot of time with the
last version of it
so I appreciate that you brought
it in and I hope we can get
something in place that updates
uniform a resident relations of
all that will be it a good
balance so thank you Mr chair
that's all I have.
If you're good Mr Chairman
center Representative so earlier
in testimony talked about
seventeen thousand evictions
filed.
You know how many were actually
affected.
Fifteen thousand nine.
This debate
I pre COVID and we're getting
back to pre COVID just get back
to the the the the normal thing
Mr chairman Senators
it's pretty darn easy once you
get the court to to to a victim
once once record I'd say it's
for renovations I once the
judges said.
The landlord when ninety five
percent of the time this is the
she civil judge in Berlin county
to know they were ninety nine
percent of the time and I think
that's an accurate thing so
that's a long answer to Mister
chairman Senator Representative
gentleman I think that's a local
issue so my Y. fronts Housing
Authority can I checked with our
own numbers because our judges
overwhelmingly give the tenants
more time and what happens Mr
chair representative then also
instead of being too much out
there three months out when they
leave Mr and center
Representative who pays that
after let's say it's an extended
period you've got let's just use
a hundred dollars a hundred
dollars months you've got three
hundred now the time you get
past your bill it extends that
I I truly believe the landlord
ends up being in a loss I'm just
wondering if you're betting
discussion Mr chair
representative on that.
I have a practice in every
county Mr chair Senators but for
drugs and a lot of counties of
course Bernalillo county is the
biggest county has the most
projections and Dona Ana County
right practice selective.
Keep the but we do have a.
I've been in the counties I
practiced the land.
Fail now COVID is a blip
where with the Supreme Court
state and.
And and the money from the from
from DFA the change things for a
while but this bill is not.
About the future
Days to pay and on the fourth
day under current law judges
will say the land.
Mr Chairman Senator
Representative in general do the
currently to landlords have a
chance to work with the tenant
my thought is if you know
someone who's really struggling
to be able to find the more time
do you see that they would try
to do that on a.
On a tenant that is a long term
tenants but is having
difficulties I'm just wondering
if currently they have that.
Of flexibility Mr chair Senator
Representative.
Thank you chair and Senator
Gallegos for the question I'm
there's always an opportunity
for look for land to work things
out they can try to come to a
mutually acceptable agreement
and ask you know for state or
ask that the hearing be
scheduled until they can come to
an agreement so that's always an
option
what I do want to highlight
though is that you know with
these extended time frames the
person asked for these so right
now with our very tight eviction
time
the statute requires that the
hearing be scheduled within
seven days right and there's no
flexibility for point to
create programs like eviction
prevention or require mediation
and so that the courts have
asked for this visit were
hamstrung we can't we don't have
any flexibility and so with
these extended time frames which
might add would bring us into
line with the majority of the
other states this would give
point the opportunity to
implement those programs that
can help the parties reaches
settlement agreement thank you
for that Mister chairman Senator
representing a kind lady are
those in the city courts
magistrate court where do you go
to file here in northern New
Mexico.
So in in northern New Mexico
typically it's magistrate courts
if I'm correct that's.
Yes and in in Albuquerque it's
the the metro court and and
that's the point here is that
the vast majority of addiction
cases thank you for that Mr
Chairman.
The whole.
Conglomeration etcetera and and
just in talking to my wife
that's were heard from is is
actually with the judge and and
so I can see their side as far
as the judge makes
determination.
They are the losers so I hope to
hear more that'll put me in a
positive side right now on as it
is I did stand against your your
bill but thank you for the
details.
Senator Maestas thank you just
briefly Mr chairman.
Sent out of here Representative
a little thank you thank you for
your advocacy of.
Appreciate meeting with I think
over the summer because it to if
we don't bump the three days
this year that are bad that's
our back.
and we can have the greatest
bill in the world but if it
doesn't get signed into law then
July first those folks still
only up three TV's so just.
so so whether it be up before
think this truck up from last
year because it was a I remember
three hour debate and.
And
Representative Romero held their
own but there was a lot of
points that were made in those
three hours that I don't know I
don't think they were addressed
because this has a lot of
opposition and so you wanna.
You know I'd rather go
Anyway that's my philosophy on
trying to pass bills but with
regards to the the yield there's
a state currently in on page
nineteen have either party feels
aggrieved of the judgment they
can appeal
And under current law the the
can appeal the state of.
If you pay within five days into
an escrow account.
This one says that that an
appeal stays the ruling so you
like lost in court you lost.
You know and and so what's the
policy reason for the person who
lost not to vacate.
The premises of the person who
owns it and wants to re read it.
Mr Freeman.
Chairman Senators
Of the the law says that.
Right during the appeal all the
grant that cruise post judgment
they get the state in the union
so if they're paying post
judgment rant at least it is
stop the bleed.
They're paying all the right the
current grant and with that
dispute that stuff pre judgment
well.
This language does not change.
There are five.
there are two kinds of payments
at the time it's going to make
first when they file the appeal
within five days they have to
pay pro rated the monthly rent
from the date of judgement to
the end of the month so if the
rent is a thousand dollars a
month and the yield fifteenth I
gotta pay half a month's rent of
five days of fun the yield and
then each month after that
they have to pay the monthly
rent if they don't pay the
landlord gives them the the
notice to pay or quit and if
they still don't.
Representative court schedules
a.
Point as did you pay the post
judgment right during the PO if
the ten as a defense for I
didn't have the or something
like that or I did pay years my
receipts the ten I guess the
state the and and and the appeal
continues and if the pandemic
associated Hey I lost my job
then the judge immediately of X.
ten what the bill does is
clarifies.
Of the process before before
there was confusion as to
whether the three day notice and
hearing provision applied to
that first half month's rent and
I think most of them would tend
of course of both sides agreed
that did Mr Vance and I knew
that I did but it wasn't clear
to people who didn't practice
for very much and the second
thing is it's an automatic stay
you file the appeal it stays if
as long as you pay the rent you
don't have to go to court and
file a motion or things like
that because it's just not going
to happen you're not going to
get a hearing in a motion on the
hearing but there were some some
lack of clarity especially among
sheriffs who had execute growth
that we is it state or not they
call the master record job to
call the this is the the
District Court judge I had a
long conversation with a share
of that in Deming over division
who's ready to evict my clients
would fall in the field and then
finally after he called the
called the District Court got
the magistrate court got
different answers and then he
read the law any listen to be
set I think you're right I'm not
going to.
That the W. came made the right
call but I should note.
Clear and this is meant to clear
that up not the substance I
think is the name of except for
the notice period I believe
changes in accordance with the.
But other than that it's just it
makes it clear and I think it'll
be more efficient and involve
less attorney judges share.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
gentleman the
But then you also trump it on
the on the bottom of the page
line twenty one twenty four.
The the person doesn't pay upon
failure the resident or this
court agent to make the first
partial payment within five days
of the filing of a notice of
appeal says partial payment some
I won't go there but it says the
owner may serve and current law
may serve a three day written
notice on the resident and you
bump it to eleven if the person
can't pay what's the.
Policy reason for doing.
Mr Chairman.
Senators that's to be
consistent.
So before the currently under
current law the.
Three days in the in the yield
section and we changes to eleven
across the board that was a
common.
we have many many many zoom
meetings and we negotiated and
we came up with numbers and
that's the number I got thank
you Mr chairman German provides
that the first the the eleven
days is off the bat your dad did
in eleven days you have eleven
days to leave but on the appeal
that's like twenty days down the
road thirty days down the road
like you know.
You know if you can't stay there
you have to make arrangements
so just try not to be eleven
days on the backside but anyway
there's like you to stop like
that there's some good stuff in
here ten ten percent fees as a
cap this bill deal with the
raising of the rent at the end
of a lease period.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you chair and Senator
masters this bill does not
address rate increases at all.
Okay because that's that
That's an issue that I think the
legislature needs to address as
well
because one nation head and the
market.
Demand hit of rents were through
the roof and can in the single
month in a single two or three
month period I.
Mr chairman and senator I agree
if you look at Los Alamos County
that's landlocked and you see
those who aren't working for the
laboratory getting that rate of
pay they're finding it hard to
pay rents because rents do
increase with no cap but I agree
with you and I think if this
bills moves on I would consider
I come.
Emphasizing electronic receipts
and that that landlord shall
have a email address and just
how do we communicate in the
modern world they are.
Because we're doing dealing with
like.
Posted on the door and stuff
like that emailing or hand
delivering so that you do throw
in the magic word emailing but
we got to make sure that the
look that the tenant has a
working email address of the
landlord they're able to
communicate with the landlord
that that they get in the habit
of the mailing back and forth
that way everything's in writing
you know there's a lot of good
stuff we could do.
But some of those leaps are
maybe a little.
They leave a little too much for
it to have smooth sailing thank
you Mr thank you have a kind of
a compromise is set of three to
eleven maybe seven or eight.
Senator thing I mean it well a
compromise between the parties
at all because I'm here the
opposition but I'm just just
just I just Justin change is
hard and and R. and drastic
change no matter how awesome it
is it's hard even harder but we
got it we got about the three
days we have to bump the trees
and Mister chairman Senator the
eleven day period was
specifically agreed upon with
the lab or lobby to take
advantage of the Courts special
accounting rules and we had
initially said fifteen days and
then in conversations came with
the compromise of eleven.
Senator Tallman are you finished
Senator thank you just benefit
from thank you Mr chairman thank
you Center for bringing this
bill forward
If the.
It is the victim for non
payment.
This is land are able to keep
the deposit.
Mister chairman Senator yes.
Thank you for that answers it so
when they say they're going to
lose a whole month payment an
applicant.
You can use the deposit to help
offset their losses the second
and final question Mr chair.
It is my understanding that New
Mexico has some of the weakest
laws protecting tenants.
Is it can you confirm that for
me.
Thank you chair and senator Tom
and yes so when we are talking
about the notice period the
notice required to give an
attendant is behind on rent
there currently only ten other
states with time frames a short
as or shorter The New Mexico's
the majority of states eighteen
of them
have ten eleven days or more
going up to sixty days
and and without getting into too
much of a complicated
explanation ten eleven days is
basically the same in New Mexico
because of the way courts count
days
ten days and under you include
holidays and weekends is that
right exclude sorry exclude
holidays and weekends and eleven
or over you include so it's
basically the same so eighteen
states are ten or eleven days or
more going up to sixty days so
this would bring us in line with
the majority of the other
states.
It's not that the one you
mentioned there's others.
S. specs I don't have I don't
have the data for all these but
I can say that the seven to ten
yes the current seven days
to have a hearing is is very
short and gives tenants very
little time at to find a lawyer.
Okay thank you for that answer
thanks again Center for bringing
this force that that movie do
pass for second to second
Senator McKenna I have a first
because you've already had your
shot let me ask a question
Under current state law than
what laurel described as having
happened to her and she said she
got advice.
So she she.
All of the advice and then
suddenly got eviction.
What was the advice given to her
good advice rid or was there
something did that landlord
violate current New Mexico law
current law not your love the
current one.
Mr Chairman centers I've never
met her and I'm not familiar
with the facts of the case but I
can tell you some generic advice
that we would give to people in
this situation that if there is
an issue where they feel like
they need to give notice to
request repair and then that
they're going to withhold rent
under current state law they
need to expect a non payment
notice and his cell was to come
to court and and and and that's
what's going to happen and also
if for their month to month
tenant they need to expected
thirty day notice to and they're
least because their month to
month.
And and the retaliation claim is
not going to fly retaliation
claims brought are very rare as
affirmative claims I've never
brought one as defense yes but
judges just they don't award
retaliation in the laws week and
this is just the a little bit
tend to clarifying the law to
make it a little bit more so so
she desperately doesn't need
this kind of law to protect your
from what happened in the last.
Sure Senator Geiger here second
comment this turned center
Representative kind lady as just
going to ask you so in your
discussion was centered on
you're going up the eighteen
days given number of ten to
eleven days is that for the
hearing or is that in the in the
she we've got it's a three day
notice would you give a ten to
eleven day time frame and I'm
just trying to clarify what that
was Mr chair representative.
Thank you at chair and senator
Kay goes I was specifically
talking about the notice for
that you get to attend once
their late on rent so currently
the losses once their late on
rent you can give a three day
notice they have three days to
pay their rent before land there
can file the eviction case what
I was saying is that the
majority of states eighteen
states currently have ten or
eleven days for more up to sixty
days.
This turned so Representative
then I understand if you take
the rest of the page in a
cumulative that's how you're
getting that number we currently
are eight one of eighteen states
that has only three days is that
correct.
At.
Chair and senator gray goes no
we are in the minority right now
we are there are only ten other
states that have that are like
us that have
three day notices or or shorter.
Mr Chairman representative
center that's all because this
here in this column has New
Mexico it says at the top three
day notice at the bottom says
eighteen states.
Chair and senator bagels I'm not
familiar with the chart you're
referring to but I can tell you
When you're looking at the these
deadlines.
Among state state and comparing
states you're not comparing
apples to apples so I can give
you an example.
So if you look at Connecticut
for example they have a nine day
notice so they give you a notice
and says you have nine days to
get current on your rent before
the land there confound eviction
but there's a nine day waiting
period before you can get that
notice so really that's eighteen
days and that's sort of across
the board is reviewing the fifty
different states plus the
district of Columbia well the
thing is a little bit different
and so you can't just look at
the date the number of days
straight you have to look at the
broader picture is there a
waiting period is it three days
but is it only business days
and so that's this chart that
I'm looking at that I created
takes that into consideration
madam chair and senator
Representative maybe in the next
committee you might want to
match the this is twenty twenty
three fifty state survey on
vacation hours for non payment
and we're classified as three
day and there's eighteen of
Connecticut being one so with
that are you but I just saw the
discrepancy there thank you.
Thank you I will look into that
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Harris no I'd like to
explain of Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez Senator Lopez
yes center Thomas yes.
In the center Maestas yes native
explained.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Gallegos to explain his
vote Mr Chairman Senator
Representative I like the idea
that you're trying to look for a
need the chair close I think
putting that statewide is not
always a solution thank you have
a general population problem.
It's not statewide thank you for
bringing for thank you senator
Senator
thank you to explain his the.
Thank you Mr chair
Again I I have a lot of empathy
for the people who are in the
business and and and and
particularly from.
the the national corporations
are getting really far removed
from.
the reality of what what people
are facing here and that's one
of the things I fear and I and
as I I did ask you to talk with
folks who who oppose the bill
but it is it is you do that
particularly having some sense
for the local people who are
trying to make a living and so
forth and doing this up that
that that's one observation the
other observation is this.
Also it just dawned on me this
is kind of a mental health bill
I mean moving people out is just
going to exacerbate and we heard
earlier of all the difficulties
and and I've mentioned mention
one more time I'm trying to get
my bill passed mental health
parity and in that requires the
health plans and then have
Medicaid more the the the family
therapy without having to have a
diagnosis there but this can
create unbelievable stress on
the family and so that's the
other piece that really helped
persuade me to vote yes on this
and thank you for the
opportunity to explain Senator
message thank you Mr chairman
Senator economy over
Representative I don't know
appreciate the conversations we
had over the inner and then the
modifications I didn't ask what
they were but the fact that
you're working on it is is the
reason I voted for thank you.
Thank you very much senator and
representative and expert
witnesses thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee last
bill of the night Senator my
Estes with your.
solitary confinement limits
three ninety nine.
For.
Senator Pirtle left so we are
going to hear his senator Brett
left okay here is.
If they don't have the stamina
to stay this late we won't hear
of.
Sunday afternoon that was thirty
one thirty.
Service you've got to notice
senator about.
Thanks for waiting on a.
And what shows.
No because they have.
I know.
Senator welcome thank you Mr
chairman thank you members this
is a Senate bill three ninety
nine which is a modification of
our restrictive housing act as
you recall of restrictive
housing issues came on our radar
screen over a decade ago a study
while back had us ranked second
in the nation in the utilization
of restrictive housing next to
Louisiana the
The bill had up bipartisan
support and passed in was vetoed
by the previous chief executive
this bill was signed in two
thousand nineteen.
and so the of the institution
has had plenty of time to.
To change of cultures
institution to move towards more
modern match management
techniques and I think it's time
to modify the restrictive
housing act we want to thank the
secretary and sorry to ruin the
festivities thank you for
staying so late
we understand there's some
issues we were cognisant of the
staffing issues that deal see
were cognisant of the safety
issues that you'll see we we
know out but stressed this a
bill of this nature has on the
correction officers would
communicate as best we can that
we're gonna listen to all
concerns but
but but we we have to move
forward we have to move forward
because the a bill just as
introduced four years ago
eliminated restrictive housing.
Eliminated that's where we need
to go because restrictive
housing is defined as
essentially up.
on the top of page two.
A confinement of an inmate
locked in a cellar similar
living quarter in a correctional
facility for twenty two or more
hours each day without daily
meaningful insisting you
interactions so we we have to
modernize our facilities so that
that doesn't take place
twenty two hour lockdown with no
daily meaningful sustained human
interaction is not in our
interest because once again Mr
Chairman ninety five percent of
inmates get out so we have a
Senator over to to my expert
witness to introduce himself
where he's from and will up and
we have a.
A proposed amendment that we
think up makes the bill even
better thank you Mr thank you
I'm good at the many of us that
some of it evening Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barron Jones on with ACLU of
New Mexico I am very thank you
all for allowing me to be here
today this anything any
legislation have to do with no
prisons and jails I'm very
honored to work on because on at
the minute that I'm sometimes in
my life that I'm I was on the
wrong end of those places and as
happy to be here with you all
working for change so.
Okay.
Anybody in the audience you
anything else Senator we're
ready to go to the audience yeah
well let's go to that incident
we cannot move you have an
amendment that we can move the
amendment let's move the
amendment before going I think
it's be better okay it reads to
me just like little cleanup of
language not a substantive
change unless I'm missing
something.
Yes is this is your amendment
right correct.
The amendment.
Well he can move and you can
second I'll move the amendment
for does it with the amendment
for adoption or for discussion
purposes for our members up here
so you want to explain the
minute it looks like it's just a
cleanup language but I miss
maybe I'm missing something it's
some cleanup language on on the
lot of page two we wonder strict
restrictive housing for those
twenty one and younger and fifty
five and older.
And then we have some cleanup
language job.
More precise language on the top
of page three
And and we're gonna we're gonna.
We're gonna delete belongs to a
vulnerable population increase.
Including inmates who identify
and replace it with the word
identifies.
And with that will stand for
questions is there any any
discussion of the amendment.
Any any questions or.
Any opposition senator.
Chair Senators why.
Well that's the bill that's the
bill itself bill on yeah just on
the amendment let's deal with
that person will come to the.
And and seeing no opposition to
the amendment.
Will consider the bills have
been amending go to the audience
now let's talk about the bill
itself the amendment didn't make
a lot of big changes anybody
here in support of the bill.
You want to say anything about
it.
Please come up and speak.
Or forever hold your silence.
I've been here too long to be
silent.
I'm Diane make cash thank you
chair and committee it really
breaks my heart to hear about
the prolong months and sometimes
years people that I have known
have spent in segregated housing
many people may be resilient but
that doesn't mean they couldn't
be or haven't been severely
damaged by the practice.
Some of you have heard pieces of
my own sons saga and struggle
with addiction incarceration
over the last five years or so
he's incarcerated again it's not
a good situation at least he's
not totally by himself or he
would be in solitary body is
suffering in becoming depressed
areas with nothing to do know
job always there no REC solitary
would be worse but I'm very
bility keep it together anyway.
Isolation is damaging to the
human psyche and if you think
about that before I met you all
have but the damage that
isolation can cost was well
documented during the pandemic
people kept in solitary
confinement whatever name it
goes by suffer much more it is
damaging and sometimes fatal to
them please.
Thank you thank you Mr Ken.
Yes Sir.
Hi Mr chair Senators thank you
for staying up this late hours
me finance of identity and
community engagement specialist
with a state of New Mexico in my
role I've had an opportunity to
speak with many people who have
been in solitary confinement in
our community and I can say that
it is incredibly damaging I'd
like to emphasize that that this
bill it it it helps individuals
on the inside too not be
tortured throughs extended
solitary confinement but it also
helps our families on the
outside if we're expecting
people to return to their
families and can be a good
sibling father or mother after
having subjected them to
solitary confinement I.
so I would just like to say as a
resident of Albuquerque and a
resident of New Mexico I would
like us to see I would like to
see a stop disorders practice in
our state thank you thank you.
Good evening chairman members of
the committee was the lack of
both with full futures we work
with a lot of women that are
currently and formerly
incarcerated and the stories
that we hear of the impact that
this practice has has left on
their lives and the lives of
their loved ones is tremendous
as women we experience the
system very unique clear very
differently and for those
reasons we ask that you please
support SP three ninety nine
thank you.
Thank you
okay.
Then we'll go to the
Zoom and Ellen finds is you want
to speak yes.
I guess so.
The LA times.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me now yes yes have you
unmuted we can.
Great thank you so much Ellen
pines representing the
disability coalition we advocate
for the interests of people with
disabilities of all types and
job we worked with the band
Representative by Estes now
senator my Estes on the twenty
nineteen bill in which you all
in the legislature took some
very important steps to limit
the use of solitary confinement
in New Mexico and we agree with
the sponsor that it's time to
move forward with additional
protections in this area
solitary confinement is harmful
it's a harmful practice harmful
for those who are absent Jeff
did to it those who enforce it
and it costs more so it's really
something we need to look at
limiting even further and
because I'm speaking on behalf
of people with disabilities I
want to put approach it from
that perspective it's especially
harmful in the area of mental
health the current law passed in
twenty nineteen bars the use of
solitary confinement for those
who have mental illness but the
problem or a another problem
with solitary confinement is
that it can cause mental illness
for people who are subjected to
it so further limitations are
called for I won't go into a lot
of detail but people with other
kinds of disabilities sensory
disabilities communications
disabilities mobility
disabilities are also further
formed by solitary confinement
so we very much support the
efforts to expand the
protections in the law we do
have some questions about the
reporting the changes to the
reporting provisions in the
current law I believe this is
section three of the bill where
would call for reporting
individually identifiable
information and we're not quite
sure what the reason for that is
we don't believe that's
appropriate but perhaps the
sponsor can explain why that's
necessary and there's also a
proposal to remove the
requirement that the report
indicates the reasons that
solitary can.
It was used and we're also a
little concerned about removing
that provision so I look forward
to hearing more on those points
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Elon occurred Reger.
Good evening and Mr chairman
committees as director again
with Lujan advocacy Mr Mexico
I'm here as well to state or
support for SB three ninety nine
well except that there are
differences in correctional
philosophies as bodies of faith
reject the humanization of the
incarcerated to brutalize beans
whatever they meet the well me
we made to the reason we
disagree on extending the
sources of such suffering we
believe that some of its forms
must stop and this includes
widespread long term total
isolation in solitary
confinement long term isolation
has no rebuilt a benefit
whatsoever but is destructive
psychological effects are well
documented indeed amounting to
torture under international law
I urge you tonight to support
yes the three ninety nine thanks
committee for speaking relating
speak.
Thank you occurred okay let's go
to the opponents of the bill is
there anybody who wants to speak
against the bill let's start
with the correction secretary
that will go to this
solicitation of County.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee also
has Senator my S. as mentioned
iteration or a version of this
bill was introduced in twenty
nineteen at that time the bill
that was being introduced would
limit the corrections department
from utilizing restricted
housing for a period of fifteen
days consecutively and it capped
us out forty five days in a year
and at the time because we had
very many concerns about safety
security and are in institutions
and we feel no differently about
this bill right now I will yield
the majority of my time to the
folks that are on the phone and
and ready to speak to of the
members of this committee to
share they will be sharing with
you their experiences many of
them have been involved in
violent incidents we believe
this is a necessary management
tool as long as its use
responsible and when necessary
to ensure that our people who
are working in our prisons and
the folks that we're responsible
for that are incarcerated are in
our prisons are safe and we
believe that imposing these
extreme limits on our managerial
tools that may be necessary at
times up will create severe of
violence and issues in our
prisons we also believe that it
will lead to a severe of
overtime needs and possibly an
increase in staffing needs as
well because the the truth of
the matter is it is used
infrequently very infrequently
at this point in time there are
fewer than two percent of the
people who are incarcerated in
our population in restricted
housing right now and we.
Aim to use it only when it's
absolutely necessary and only
when we're trying to protect
people it sometimes from
themselves sometimes protect
them from harming others and so
with that Mr chair I will you'll
to miss Phillips and the folks
on the on the on the thank you
thank you thank you so madam
secretary.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I really
appreciate this opportunity to
address you today because this
bill is extremely serious for
New Mexico County and we believe
that it will create the
requirements in this bill will
create a very dangerous
environment in our jails both
for staff and for people who are
responsible for
at detaining in two thousand
nineteen we worked with the
sponsor on the what is now the
the the restrictive confinement
Act and that law reflected the
national standard for
limitation on use of restrictive
confinement and and it impose
some reporting requirements and
and things like that and for the
last four years counties have
been complying with that this
bill is that dramatic departure
from national standard and I
want to mention a couple
specific things about the
language of the bill first
it would completely prohibit the
use of restricted confinement
which would now be defined as
anything less than seven hours
about of cell time today it
would prohibit the use for
someone under twenty one and in
Ardell facilities we House
eighteen to twenty one year olds
it would completely prohibit the
use from someone over fifty five
so like a lot of us in the room
here today it would completely
prohibit the use for someone
based on their gender identity
not because of but simply
because they happen to be gay
lesbian transgender again not
because of that but simply
because they had that status it
would prohibit the use for
someone who is pregnant prohibit
the use from someone postpartum
and again without regard to any
of the other classification
considerations that we have to
consider has somebody attacked
an officer did somebody beat up
there their roommate so with
these classifications that would
exempt people from discipline.
Speaker it's a very dangerous
situation and it's not based on
sound
correctional considerations
right so why do people use
restrictive confinement well
disciplined is one if somebody
engages in violence it's a
disciplinary tool if used for
protection you have a law
enforcement officer who's in it
a jail they can't mingle with
the other detainees without
being at risk maybe they're a
witness to a crime maybe they're
a gang member its use for safety
sometimes people request
protective custody and look at
the bill you cannot even request
protective custody.
Under the language of the bill
so somebody who comes in and
says I fear for my safety I
don't want to be in the general
population it would be unlawful
for the county or the state to
to find that that safety under
the language of the bill it's
used for health comment somebody
is infectious with COVID and
under this bill they would be
required to be out of their cell
for at least seven hours a day
and I I I don't want to under
value the effort that counties
put in keeping people safe from
infectious disease active cases
of tuberculosis this bill is
written simply ignores the
practical realities of what we
need to do to keep each other
safe in in the facilities and so
We we think it needs a lot of
work and it should not leave
this committee in these in this
up.
Current state I I want to follow
up on what Ellen pine mentioned
we are mystified by the change
to the reporting where we would
no longer be concerned with why
somebody is placed in
restrictive confinement which to
me is an interesting data point
that we might want to study but
instead we're going to identify
people by name I I I too am
mystified by that and would urge
the committee to question the
Sanchez.
Thank you Josh Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson of
yes we Council eighteen we
represent all of the
correctional officers and
support staff in the state
public of facilities as well as
about a half a dozen or so
detention facilities around the
state including NBC Santa Fe
Santa Fe County Dona ana county
of Valencia County Grant County
we do stand in opposition of
this bill but you know we spoke
to the senator a little bit
about about this bill before we
did support some of the changes
in the changes in twenty
nineteen because we thought some
of those made sense of so we are
willing to come to the table and
discuss these issues and see if
we can't find some middle ground
some compromise we are also
supporting the idea of a little
bit more oversight with your
but if it's a bill that's moving
through the house and we talked
to Mr Jones about that bill so
we we are open to some of these
proposals but I just want to
echo what the sector the cabinet
secretary said said in miss
Phillips we just believe this
bill needs a lot of extra work
and ultimately will make these
facilities less safe for the
staff and for the inmates and
again I think a lot of people
think this is used as punishment
for punitive but in many cases
it truly is to make the facility
safer for the inmate that may be
in danger or may be willing to
up because danger to someone
else so we think this bill needs
a lot more work what you're
going to hear some more
testimony online and you know
one thing I do want to add and I
and I'm very serious about this
we we don't always agree with
management I think you know
we've come and to this committee
and we don't always agree with
management but this is a
situation where management and
the you believe that this bill
is not right needs a lot more
work so we take that seriously
as well and we hope the
committee will recognize that
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Jeff now we do have five people
signed up online.
Yeah I I we can't just do the
late hour I'm going to take to
so I'm gonna here and the names
I have Brian beard and Dominick
Baca will hear those two are
those ones you would you prefer
a different one.
Those are okay.
Rep Brian beard what we start
with you.
Good evening I'm reading beard
I've worked twenty years in
corrections
twelve years of eight been in
management specifically over R.
H. used and it was going to hear
that the one twenty one on page
two was stricken about the
twenty one so that was one of my
concerns are wanting to go
wasn't no that was not stricken
okay so we've so one of the
things is that my concern is is
that an inmate eighteen to
twenty one if they come in on a
violent charge
they're not going to change that
mentality of that violence just
coming into a facility if if the
if it's needed to use alright
you as it's been explained it's
not just to throw him in there
because they're violent but if
they so the violence inside
institution wants to come in it
could be a tool that's needed
same thing with the individual
is over fifty five there's no
difference.
Along with that one of the other
things is is if those inmates
are around other inmates that
fall under that line.
Of being able to be placed in
our right to other inmates are
going to try to convince those
incarcerated people to.
For Max because they're simply
not going to be placed in
restrictive housing.
So I hope that's taking into
consideration the other one was
own wine to a page three with
the an inmate who becomes
vulnerable populations including
inmates who identify as lesbian
gay bisexual transgender queer
Shalabi placed in restrictive
housing
one of the things with that is
it's going to create multiple
inmates in using that to not be
placed in order to.
And I feel that it's also going
to create a backlash on the pre
a aspect of the federal law
three.
German strongly about this issue
of this bill thank you Mr beard
so the the next person speaking
against the bill online will be
Jack right.
Thank.
How about the
bill mass and Gil.
Yeah.
That's a good list is due in
messing up.
S. and go to county officials
Sir can you hear me yes we can
hear you fine.
Yes Sir were totally all the
opposition against with this
bill it so you know it's kind of
weird because.
Do you agree with the aspect of
caring for the human beings that
are coming into your facility
you you want to help them you
want to provide them with the
services that are needed in any
also look at the other aspect of
of the the pendulum.
Meaning you have to security
aspect the associated with it so
you know miss gracious express
the concerned we've had other
people's of expresses concern
for evidence it it would be nice
to be able to sit down and be
able to come to a happy medium
to the your term care those
individuals associated with your
detention facility provide
services that are needed
associated with them as well as.
You know protecting your staff
to the working
with
appreciate the committee and
everyone to allow me to speak.
Thank you Mr massing Gil members
of the committee yes thank thank
you thank you Mr chairman if I
can ask Mister Jones what is the
on page four on page four.
What is the policy reason for
wanting the name and ID number
and then not wanting the the the
reason the reason yeah so thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee on center the reason
is when we when the state
implemented a excuse me pass H.
B. three sixty four twenty
nineteen there was a reporting
requirement that had the the
that did that mandated the
department and or the county
jails I this the reasons for
person be in solitary
confinement and so how the first
report that came out on in the
first quarter of twenty nineteen
do after July first it came out
they they did a really good job
of identifying who was in
solitary confinement and they
did a really good job of listen
the reasons right but if you
look at the report on their
website today for the first
quarter of on twenty twenty
three there's only two reasons
listed and that and that's sort
of the so that the the two
reasons are pending transfer to
another facility in behavioral
health right so as avid because
we would like to be able to
identify who's in solitary
confinement and maybe reach out
to them to find out and learn
what their experience in right
that the names of individuals
and because of the of the New
Mexico corrections department
and and most county jails are
public record right you know you
can use is going type in and get
that type of information so we
believe better reporting will
will sort of help us address the
issues and and folks on I think
on the several years there's
been several years debate
disability rights New Mexico the
ACLU they had on John Podmore
come from England of all visit
these facilities and talk to
folks to see what their
estimates and solitary as more
of a bit just a better way to
get that white people are
solitary because I think even
the state's largest jail M. D.
C. has reverted to the use and
one or two reasons for why there
is solitary confine.
Maybe I think when one senator
my **** worked on that bill last
time you know he'd work with the
avid's at because to draw up on
model legislation a model model
policies they had a pretty you
know unless list of reasons why
but over the years and and has
been years now on those those
reasons have all participate in
there just to reasons and so we
really can't determine why
people and so also in Los also
Mr chairman thank you Mr Jones
up to include the name on the
identification number will know
how long that person has been in
solitary over the course of a
year so it'll say like thirty
seven was spending mail and then
you know Page four thirty seven
was panic mail with we don't
know if it's the same that.
Manson please yes and also and
this is what really gets so this
is what sort of prompted the
need and and and are paying the
need to try to you know fix this
legislation when that when the
NM see the and so when NMC do
specifically when they generate
a report foes in solitary the
law calls for them to to a
report by facility so what
happens now is the aggregate all
the data from all the eleven
prisons right now all the state
operated prisons right aggregate
the data and they assign each
individual a a random number so
Barron Jones is in solitary
confinement the first quarter
and he's in solitary the second
quarter there's two different
identification number so there's
no way to track and an
individual's right and that's
and that's a problem and those
sort outside the spirit of the
twenty nineteen bill M. I. but
budget that I still don't
understand the rationale for
doing away with the reason for
restricted housing I mean I know
you said it was down to just
wanted to but wouldn't you
really like to have some more of
that you know I I Mr chair some
members of the committee at as I
I've sort of given that what
you're saying but they're a
Hipper concerns right and it
does falls into it so we figured
do away with the reasons in week
and and do our independent
research to to see why folks in
solitary confinement.
Also if somebody is.
They could it could put a jacket
or could put a up.
Tell the world that that person
volunteer to be in protective
custody and and and open that
the present world will think
he's an informant just got to.
Okay members of the committee
senator the service Senator
McKenna then Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
chairman Center miosis and
Mister Jones thank you for this
I'm gonna support this bill
and and I've shared with others
how I'm vehemently against.
I'm sorry what is that.
My brain restrictive housing
solitary confinement and I can
think of only two exceptions.
and that would be medical
quarantine and physical
protective custody.
That is an an inmate who is
Being beat up constantly by
others but I think the whole
issue of solitary confinement
even for up to.
you know we're just reducing the
hours but up to fifteen days I I
just think it's cruel it's
inhumane.
so it doesn't go far enough but
I'm still going to protect it
and protect it okay I'm losing
it here.
Still kind of
support it thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez followed
by Senator Gallegos followed by
Tom and followed by Hickey.
I am this Mr president.
We're getting it's nine I know I
know of but I'm waiting to hear
whatever was going to say it's
nine I was trying to edit the
the bill and then I realized
because I was putting in
voluntary
May not be placed in involuntary
and I started with the pregnant
person because they might want
to be alone at that time and not
you know post partum or whatever
and then involuntary for
protective custody because you
have that already
And then involuntary.
Anyway and so I started trying
to edit it maybe and maybe it's
just too late and I and
And I and I also started to try
to edit this thing about about
producing a report and what
would be relevant I started
thinking about the.
The state sentencing commission
I'm really glad that you asked
for ethnicity but you didn't ask
for race.
and so I anyway start adding
this bill and I realize I'm
really too tired to try to
proposes amendments because and
are very high risk of making
mistakes and then I started
thinking well you know the best
people who would help with the
help of this bill would be
corrections right because they
know how it works and I think I
just want to say that this is
part of the United Nations the
United Nations standard minimum
rules for the treatment of
prisoners and they're known as
the Mandela rules and I think
that that's really important for
us as a state to take this take
the U. N..
Standers into account which is I
think what you're what you're
doing so my suggestion would be
to work with corrections and
find out what will work for them
and their policies because I
mean when you talk about a
couple of reasons if somebody
wants protective custody I think
I think we need to.
Two hundred that right I I and
and looking at the at the mount
Mandela rules it that's part of
it so so all of that to say is
is I would recommend that you
work with the department and
come up with a way of achieving
the goal of minimizing the use
of of a solitary confinement
And you know kind of look at
some of the the human rights
standards and work with the
department of achieving your
goal
you know I I I don't know what
to say I mean yes the COVID
isolation perhaps might be
another another area but it
doesn't have to be
Seventeen hours a day without
any rehabilitative programming
because it seems like they could
probably do things with people
in in solitary confinement that
would give them some some kind
of
contact and some kind of
You know not be associate
psychologically devastating but
I'm not an expert in this I was
just trying to go for clarity
and then I realized I I think it
would be better to just work
with the department to achieve
the goal knowing that we
strongly feel that solitary
compared these I don't know if
that's true but I personally
speak for myself strongly feel
that solitary confinement should
be.
At used minimally sparingly if
at all and I think there should
be a report and I wrote a
narrative not the reason not a
check the box reasons but in
narrative what was the story
that led up to this so that you
can analyze the story and see
you know what what the and find
patterns within those stories or
whatever so those would be my by
suggestions I strongly strongly
support the concept of your bill
kind of concerned with what
shape it's in now Senator
Gallegos of of of it and then at
some point.
Mr chair Senator just a if you
don't then I just have a couple
questions for the madam
secretary we just brought up
minimally and sparingly I think
two percent is minimally and
sparingly but Mr center which
allow her to just Center couple
questions.
I I hope no objections but there
was.
Madam secretary would you answer
some questions come up come up
for the Mike.
This so madam secretary and I've
never been incarcerated so
you're gonna have to help me
with this what causes Mr chair
Senator then secretary what
causes them to get into
confinement what types of
situations forces you to have to
do that.
Mr chair and senator thank you
so much for the opportunity in
fact the folks that we had on
the line we're about to tell you
some of the reasons that gets
put into restricted housing I
have sergeant ray and sergeant
right husband and wife they are
from the grants facility and
sergeant ray Breanna she was
working in a housing unit level
three men's institution she was
pregnant at the time and she was
attacked by an inmate who had a
weapon and he stabbed her and
she yelled I'm pregnant I'm
pregnant and he dropped the
weapon other inmates came to her
aid and stopped him from doing
what he was doing while this was
happening to her husband was
working in the control center
and he was unable to leave his
post to run to his wife's Aid
and that is the type of violent
behavior that I'm talking about
we don't put people in
restricted housing because of
small things that take place
it's because there are
legitimate violent dangerous
situations that our officers are
put into or that other inmates
are put into because somebody
has acted out violently against
them.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
center and and secretary that
when you said the two percent
that brought to my mind that
something severe you brought up
another point Mr chair and
senator that it would cost you a
lot as far as facility and
manpower to go ahead and make
these changes how do you propose
there is no money in this how do
you propose doing that if you
don't have some kind allocation
for the legislature Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair and senator I would be
very concerned about it I mean I
do expect that we would see
staff feeling over worked out
some some of the things that was
mentioned by the union I know
that in speaking with miss
Phillips at the county's
Association but they're talking
about the physical structure of
their facilities and how they
just simply don't have enough
hours in the day to be able to
safely get people out of their
cells for those lengths of time
and so we think that we would be
heavily over working our staff
members and we would probably
I'm sure in both of our systems
end up in a situation we were
needing to come in ask for
supplemental funding in order.
Thank you for that matter madam
secretary done on that point
Mister chairman Senator.
Clint harden the space Senator
was here and he left me a note
he's running out of oxygen is
waiting waiting as long as he
could but he looked This Is
unfunded mandate on hoarders can
do the county correction
facility but Mr chairman and
senator I appreciate what you're
doing on the St opposition
because as we have an expert in
the field are experts in the
field and they have a problem
with it I depend on them to give
us good information on how to
run their facility and so I just
wanted to close with that I
thank you for bringing four.
Thank you senator Senator who's
next Tallman.
When when okay Sierra thank you
Mr chairman thank you for
bringing this forward
Did you will.
Is the the and that is the
national association of prison
officials as they have a model
statute dealing with this issue.
No I would say the.
Not to I'm not talking to the
this is because of the secretary
a secretary.
The.
Mr chair and senator and I I
know that was Phillips can also
speak on this but yes the the
standard is twenty two hours a
day is restricted housing.
At in the macros the model
statute yes the it's model
appreciation County of.
Some trade organization that
deals with president Mr chair
good timing yes more can
correctional Association the
correctional leaders and many
other including the bureau of
prisons and the department of
justice thank you for that the
next question
The.
It who are you addressing
this question very directed to
the Senator ocal so did you.
If you just sit down and consult
with the US secretary on this
issue.
Mr chairman Sir Tom no fortune
no advantage has to visit with
the secretary since this since
this bill was introduced.
Okay thank you for that answer
Mr chairman of two more
comments.
it was mentioned that
Comment.
So.
If someone has COVID.
And they're in the.
You put COVID the.
With COVID and solitary
confinement.
How do you hi you separated from
other restricted housing I think
is the term they use.
So as a and twenty four seven so
if they're out how do you
protect them when they're not.
With that in the.
restricted housing.
Mr chair Senator if someone's in
restricted housing housing
because they have an active case
of comment that is symptomatic
our facilities will still
attempt to get them out of their
cells for a couple hours a day
or more but it does involve a
lot of personal protective
equipment and it does involve
keeping them away from other
detainees that they couldn't
factor other staff that they
could in fact so it's labor
intensive in its space intensive
and one of that one of the
issues with this is if the if
the new definition is seven
hours about of cell time we
simply don't have the physical
plant to accommodate that if you
have a ten percent housing unit.
You can get up to about two and
then your fourteen hours and
then what happens to the other
eight.
Thank you for that answer Mr.
Share you know in the ideal
world.
Yeah this is the we would be in
this situation but.
Is so ordered to that we don't
have the proper staff at the
same time you have to protect
the ninety eight percent.
Of the estimates that are and
sanitary confinement.
So.
I think this is a lot more work
and I'm.
Heavily persuaded by the fact
that the union and management
are on the same.
Same of course.
And of the same money so I
would.
And the I realize Senator you
spend a lot of time on this I
hope you don't take this
personal as you seem like a nice
guy.
But I think this is a I
appreciate what you're trying to
do but I think this needs a lot
of work I would take I would
move to table this.
Representative motion for a
table at through non debatable.
Actually the dates debatable if
it was used to cut off debate I
asked the chairman of if I could
amend the bill well here's what
I'm gonna suggest maybe instead
maybe fifty willing to hold off
on your motion
we are we have we so we still
have Senator Hickey and then I
was going to make a suggestion
maybe CENIC use by comprise a
list of all let the to table it
for tonight rather than for us
to try to ram through.
Senator amendments to try to
make this a workable bill in
face of the opposition from the
counties the corrections the
unions I mean you've got a lot
of mountains to climb here in my
thought is put off try to work
something out with them if you
can come back next year with
that with the bill that really
does do what you want and it
doesn't create the kinds of
issues that are I don't think
you got the votes to get out of
here and I have a twenty seconds
and we call it a night maybe.
Okay thank you Mr thank you
senator thank you for the what I
was going to do is sign on page
two.
remove the seventeen hours and
go back to twenty two at the
bottom of page to remove the
twenty one year olds and the
fifty five year old to just go
back to children under eighteen.
On page three removed Karia
graphs State.
and then
and I think that that if it's.
Of.
The practical concerns that
leftism and then there's and
then there's the reporting in
the ninety days.
I think of what we'd like to do
is pass a reporting bills
because the the the last couple
three reports are just not
helpful at all the transparency
is is lacking big time
and just lastly Mr chairman the
definition of restricted housing
is twenty two hours that's the
standard.
But someone could be in in in
locked in their cells for twenty
three hours and it's not meet
the definition of restricted
housing that's the point is that
it's not just the twenty two
hours is that they that there
without daily meaningful and
sustained human interaction so
you could be blocked you could
be in your cell twenty four
consecutive hours and it doesn't
meet the definition restricted
housing if you simply have
contact with a human being and
and and you're not in complete
isolation with regards to
working with the Department
the department will not budge an
inch it illustrious statutory
reforms that even when they're
statutory forms.
They only budget half an inch.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
this is really late I'm seeing
people very tired we could get
into amendments night
I'd I still.
To.
Masturbation is that the this
burden on the corrections.
Institutions in the counties of
and in the state and the lack of
people just don't make it
practical and.
So they may not budging happen
is I would I would highly
recommend that you come back
together and and and and make
some of these changes but I just
also to me there ought to be
some exception clauses around
staffing in person to be able to
to do some of this now I'm
really torn because loneliness
and isolation is a huge driver
of mental health problems
absolutely no question and
particularly you've heard me say
in other venues you know the
onset of symptoms and diagnosis
is of serious mental health is
eleven years and so this this
can rapidly speed up someone who
we haven't initially recognized
so but but I'm I'm just caught
up with the common sense pieces
if it can't be carried out I I
don't want to put them in a
position where they they cannot
carry it out lose more people I
mean in an area where they're
having out of time at least what
I'm reading retaining and
recruiting people and so I
really would hope that you would
agree to take this offline
tonight.
I know it's gonna be hard work
with a minute may feel they may
not bhajan ensure what have you
and but there's gotta be
something on the practicality
they just don't have the staff
to do some of these things that
that's kind of to me gotta be
worked in so I would then I
would recommend that we we
finish for tonight you go back I
know it's hard in top but then
come back with hopefully at
least a little bit closer and
something to do around the
problem staff will continue
working on this issue thank you
Mr willing to make those
amendments that you're guessing
you maybe a lot closer than we
think so
And I hope you come back at
least with at least with the
reporting bill if you can't if
you can get movement so the
reporting will help us because
I'm concerned it's if they don't
have the staffing to do this
it's on us it's our
responsibility to make sure they
have it
so.
Please come back Senator
McKenna.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you Mr Jones.
I feel.
Very strongly about this this is
too important to wait another
year.
and so with that what I would
ask what I for each is the
parties get together and come
back as soon as we can to this
committee like I say it is.
To urgent.
For those that are suffering in
solitary confinement.
For this body to get it right in
a year.
Another twelve months
thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator McCain to
willow if we could roll this
over.
And I would keep the children I
mean it's that you know I would
keep it twenty.
Twenty years.
will say go to that is.
Just to to give you there's a
lot of research about what this
does is they have a Mr chair
thank thank you members.
Thank thank you madam.
