Today with a four built on what
we call our appropriations.
calendar it's a little grid we
get the.
As much attention as we as we
need to do this but it's been
determined that their symbol
appropriations bills.
Senator Campos is not with us
today the sponsor of two of
these but he does have an expert
witness here so I will I will
those two bills on for him.
And we'll start with senator
bill one fifty use programs in
northern New Mexico.
Five hundred thousand dollars to
be appropriated.
To the local government division
of DSA.
For expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty two.
To provide local use programs
for northern New Mexico used.
And then the unencumbered
balance would.
Would revert to the general fund
at the end of the year.
And we have with this
proceeds from
Mr Miller center right to
center.
Senator health health center one
of the federally qualified
health centers and your show in
Las Vegas or enjoyment.
So what are you reading and and
explain with this bill is a.
This year's program would be
thank you chair TV penal and
it's the members of the
committee so yes I Matthew procs
on the medical director and
chief quality officer of its
central family healthy Sir seven
counties.
In the northeast region with
medical dental and behavioral
health care but I also always
like to include my my own taxed
as a provider which is health
programs particularly designed
around primary prevention and so
this bill supports programs like
money and so some of you may
recognize me from the providers
documentary
Award winning winning film about
the rural health care crisis in
America film right in our own
service area which features my
own programs in the US the
salute
Senate bill one fifty provide
support for the continuance and
improvement of existing programs
like simi as twelve years ago I
presented to me as to the LFC as
a pipeline program of along with
Dr delegate Romero and the
office of diversity
hi I plan programs said mia's
establishes youth mentorship via
school health career clubs
workforce development vehicle
clinical rotation
of forward we're college
students they're working through
their there.
Programs and primary prevention
specifically using peer health
education models for topics such
as teen pregnancy suicide and
substance use prevention twelve
years ago I didn't request
funding because there was
something big going on it was
called the UNM project echo and
we all decided we need to focus
on that and we receive support
to U. N. M. project echo now
particularly as a method for
being able to disseminate
programs like seniors the salute
across New Mexico and the glow
so that's an exciting thing I
said tell us see that year that
I wasn't asking for funding but
I just want to LFC to remember
stimulus because it would become
a state and national model and
it has and even this year in the
LFC report on behavioral health
and suicide and the action plan
to me is this a new this
featured in the appendix of that
report.
So.
The time for replication has
come in this pandemic the other
one hundred percent New Mexico
project of the anti aging
institute the mechanism for
replicating successful youth
month mentoring programs like
simi as is now well established
in San Miguel county over the
past year we use the model of
particularly our medical action
team to respond to comment and
the D. O. H. dashboards for
COVID testing and vaccination
and infection rates red to green
where I entire region up here is
is either green or yellow has
proposed creating in with data
that it's been successful
medical and dental is one of
those action teams but youth
mentoring is a thriving action
team and with support of now as
we gear up for the summer to
help education because we cross
sections sectors with those ten
action teams we're gearing up to
help education this summer with
programs health career academy
programs so that we can
educate our new peer health
education curriculum is on COVID
safety which is going to be a
vital for school reentry and so
the time has come now to request
programmatic support.
Thank you thank you doctor
Less you know these issues we we
we we typically.
Limited public comment but is
there is there anyone here who
wanted to speak in support of
this measure very quickly.
Okay I don't see anybody having
shown that.
So let's go to the committee.
And once the will of the
committee are there any
questions for doctor approached.
Mr chair.
Yes.
I'm very aware of all the good
work that the doctor is doing
and all the initiatives in
northern New Mexico so be very
worthwhile and when you're ready
for a motion I will make one.
I just had one quick question if
nobody else does amendments who
is the New Mexico the other
venues other than Las Vegas and
Simi is this alone would be
operating in.
Yes and so and again clear
clearly programs like simi as a
slew there are many successful
you program models but steam is
this it's a new really started
spreading across the northeast
region last year and then last
summer in in COVID we had a
health career academy which is
in partnerships to me is this a
new than you and you know
University of New Mexico office
of diversity equity inclusion
combine forces for health career
academy and we did it online and
our model our curriculum was
substance misuse prevention we
create created that curriculum
and we shared it with farming in
Albuquerque Santa Fe Indian
school and so again now as we're
gearing up for the.
Culum the idea is to create this
comment safety and create your
health educators and COVID
safety that will serve as
ambassadors on campus is and
that this curriculum can be
utilized across all of New
Mexico.
Okay well then let's go to.
There any other questions from
the committee.
Seeing then we'll go to Senator
thanks for motion I would move
to pass on Senate bill one
fifty.
On second seconded by Senator
is.
Hello this is there is there any
further discussion the
We usually do these in motion
for all four.
The past times but I think it's
just more expeditious basis
issues Mr Jones quickly one time
I think okay so the secretary
will call the roll on Senate
bill one fifty.
And Senate bill one fifty center
guy it goes yes.
There are Ingle.
She's done.
Senator McCain yes.
To pass thank you sorry.
Yes.
There's just yes.
Yes there are two.
Yes so we have to pass on what
you need and will your while
you're there the managers to
Senate bill one eighty eight the
second of Senator compass is
built and this is mentorship and
guidance program funding how is
this different from the other
one.
S. thank you chair key Pino so
it really is is it's it's part
of the tapestry in the weaving
of what I describe that those
can vital services they really
work together I described
medical and dental care what we
done for COVID response and and
when I just finished describing
was youth mentoring in the
program of Sydney is this a new
I also have a couple of links I
can share if you like the LFC
report and also a link to the
providers documentary that just
a little clip from the providers
documentary that shows the work
of youth mentoring in our public
schools with that another sector
is parent supports and that's
where this one comes is so
parents supports is also
thriving
a thriving service a vital
service and so Senate bill one
eighty eight is very much the
same we have an action team with
one hundred percent San Miguel
County and and other counties
inTaos this is going on in in
the south and twenty on the
there are several counties but
with parents support for this
bill and CYFD is that this bill
is really yes it's for kids but
how do you do that you support
their parents are in many many
many cases the grandparents that
are raising those children
because they're that the parents
may be incarcerated DC's
whatever may be going on and so
with that we hope that this
provides support to families of
children find that parental
support
again to weave together with all
of those action teams to find a
thriving future for our youth.
This one.
Matt this is a hundred seventy
five thousand.
Appropriated to CYFD.
It is four of mentorship and
guidance programs for at risk
youth it doesn't specify where.
The there is added on going
program raise the new effort is
just getting off the ground so
this is an ongoing program again
now for almost a year of COVID
response we've had a very strong
parent support action team and
some of the strongest members of
that parents support action team
are see why the workers in
creating these programs right
now one of the projects they're
working on it again is there are
many successful program so this
would be open to any program via
the R. F. P. R. procurement
processes but with that you know
what you're looking at is a
right now they're creating an
online parent support system
that can help connect parents
and grandparents to the to
resources to help them through
these difficult times in COVID.
I see that we have somebody from
CYFD here Jenny Santa did you
want to say anything about this
or is there some other.
Bill you're here for.
Mr Chairman.
What I'm with the Human Services
Department and I will okay great
thank you to any is there
anybody here from CYFD.
Committee members.
Any questions or concerns Mr Mr
chair I was just wondering and
it's probably more for my
information than than anything
else it is not specific enough
to make sure that this program
gets funded.
That is because they can make
you because you you know you can
specify who the actual.
And contractor would be in
legislation just.
We have to go out for an RFP I
imagine into little and maybe
they would due sole source
contracts for two or three is
lower level thing cut a point is
sixty thousand or fifty thousand
something like that so it would
be.
It would be put out to bid okay
all right thank you thank you
that's helpful.
I can just clarify I'm sorry
Senators yes please.
so yes so just an example again
is so our son Miguel County
substance abuse prevention
coalition right now we have co
leaders of an Action team Monica
brown Martinez from C. Y. for
the and Desiree Martinez from
the sun we can county substance
abuse prevention coalition they
do amazing programs like the
work with PTA's to create to
have a curriculum about safe
storage of medications
controlled substances in opioids
they do drug take back events
you do a lot of really good of
work in terms of naloxone
distribution a lot of really
good work in terms of parents
support so programs like the sun
again County substance abuse
prevention coalition could
potentially receive this
programmatic support.
Thank you that's very helpful.
You want to make a motion I
would
would you pass on this bill
which is Senate bill one eighty
eight.
Yes.
Yeah.
This.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I see no
you're have a handout as well do
you have a comment sorry no I'll
make a second though okay.
Any other discussion from the
committee.
The secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill one eight eight
Senator growth.
Yes.
During.
Thermacare.
Yes.
The
third Lopez yes.
There's.
Yes.
Yes.
There are no yes.
Legislations.
Well she had a second do that so
this committee.
Thank you.
You're welcome and and and to.
Your Senator Campos only gets is
internet of.
Senate bill one seventy eight
there is Senator Hemphill on
I was looking for and I can see
here I'm here yes chairman yes
go ahead Senator going present
Senate bill one seventy a force.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to be here today and
introduced Senate bill one
seventy eight the substance
abuse treatment these ability
study which will appropriate
fifty thousand dollars of
non recurring funds from the
general fund to the Human
Services department's behavioral
health service division for
expenditure in twenty twenty two
for substance abuse feasibility
study I have money expert
witnesses with me today Dan
Otero he's the chief executive
officer at Hidalgo medical
services and drive our is saga
who is eighty psychiatrist at
HMS are Hidalgo medical services
and the reason I sponsored this
bill is because mental health
challenges and substance abuse
during the pandemic has been on
the rise due to an increase in
stress and isolation that we're
all in during right now because
of this there is an increased
risk of violence injuries
vehicle crashes in all of our
communities and there can also
be an increased risk of long
term health issues and those
with substance use disorders are
more likely to develop COVID
also an experience worse
outcomes in including having a
higher risk of hospitalizations
and mortality rates and for all
of these rest reasons it's
really important that addiction
care not be postponed in order
to avoid all of these
complications that that makes
our communities less safe for us
all I'm a school psychologist
and ICIJ this is my twenty six
year in education and I see
children every day who are
negatively impacted because of
the high rates of substance
abuse and the cost to our
communities is huge it affects
academic achievement and in
students social.
development self regulation
skills and the development of
their pre frontal lobe as well
because of that that increase of
stress hormones it into our and
it creates a cycle of
generational trauma so this bill
will provide funds to conduct a
study to determine the
feasibility of co locating as
stabilisation units and what
that might what model might be
best for our region so thank you
Mr chairman and I'd like to
yield to my experts my first
expert witness stand Tero.
Mr welcome.
Thank you Senator Ortiz Pena Mr
chairman and senator and bill
and committee members of the
pleasure to be here and I do
appreciate we do appreciate the
opportunity I do have nine slide
that I'd like to walk through
and I will do that promptly
tools up please Sir.
So I'll I'll jump right in I
think the main starting point so
the committee is to to share
that this is a need a regional
effort and the current crisis
triage center in behavioural
health system working very
collaboratively together to
include HMS county of grant the
town of Silver City and he
regional Medical Center and
other health care providers in
our community to address
everything that Senator Hemphill
has shared with us and.
It is stated we do have that we
do have a current crisis triage
center that have to be the
services have been temporarily
suspended due to the COVID
pandemic however we have every
intention of opening that
facility back up very soon and I
do want to take a moment to
thank doctor Bowman and be HSD
in HSD for all.
Well the department of health
you to get licensed as one of
the first crisis triage centers
in New Mexico.
Three or four main points about
the rationale in the reason for
doing this these ability study
is just stated to to understand
the ability to bring together
not only a twenty three hour
crisis triage center but for
those individuals that have the
medical necessity and need
further care instead of
releasing them back into the
community.
We we are hoping that the
fourteen day
Stabilised crisis stabilization
unit.
The study demonstrates that is
the right direction to go.
Place to go and stay for longer
two years of care to get those
needed services before the you
turn back into the to society in
normal activities so we do need
to determine if a a present day
was Asian unit is the right
answer for that which model of a
crisis stabilization unit as
well as the business side of
that
the state regulations aren't
fully developed for those longer
term care facilities and how
those come together from a
reimbursement model standpoint
as well as the clinical.
X. of that.
So you can see on that rationale
slide that's right from a study
done by the journal of mental
health in clinical psychology we
know that the individuals that
don't have a place to go to deal
with that are up to behavioral
health issues such as
suicide ideation substance use
disorder treatment and services
general general behavioral
health anytime there's a crisis
they end up in the emergency
room and that's very very
expensive care delivery system
for these individuals and
actually only increases the
acuity of their prices and many
times it'll actually drive and
have a go to go in the state and
the long term inpatient
psychiatric unit
so there's lots of studies out
there that demonstrate these
outpatient or short term prices.
It was Asian units are the right
answer for these individuals
seeking services.
I want to provided just a few
grant I once spent a long time
and this is data that came out
this year
from the Human Services
department and because it's a
regional services that we're
providing you can see that the
behavioral health business
friends IT depression and from a
for one hundred thousand
population I've provided.
Where we rank in relation in our
region where we rank to the rest
of the counties in the state so
you can see that first graph is
behavioural health visits for
those conditions mentioned.
The second graph is New Mexico
drug overdose death rates per
hundred thousand and again I I
show were counties rank.
The third grant is New Mexico
suicide death rates by county
and you can see is very.
That that's a big one for our
region
as as as well as others around
the state of course.
And and then the last one is the
alcohol related deaths by county
with the rankings there.
So we know that there's there's
a an extensive need we we
Phillip every day in our
counties just like everybody
else across the state is still
on that.
we want feasibility study to be
able to take those demographic
data take the medical data line
it up with our population and
make sure we need to be sure it
that we have high level of
confidence that we're going to
that service that fourteen day
Senator that's when we go is the
appropriate model to support and
create better outcomes in the
very near future.
The second to last night is just
just a quick.
description of our current to
casa facility which which is
currently licensed for crisis
triage center up to twenty three
hours as well as the community
mental health center providing
outpatient behavior health
services and the reason I
provided the square footage
you'll see in that grant that
the office square footages four
thousand six hundred fifty that
was designed for about six years
ago and what we want to do this
is feasibility study to
determine if we were to convert
or renovate that area that shows
office space and we believe we
can fit six state budget in
there for efforts for up to
fourteen days stay.
so that feasibility studies
specifically to ensure we have
the right model to support us
with regulatory and licensing
alignment demographic analysis
and then to design and determine
what it would cost specifically
to renovate that facility and
provide a continuum of care that
is currently missing in our
community we do not have
anything from the short term
stay
That step down unit model is
missing in our region so thank
you Chairman RTC piano Committee
and
I'll turn it back to you Sir.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Hemphill did you want to
go next to and Dr the saga
please yes thank you.
Mr chair the C. Pino and
committee members thank you
Senator Hemphill for for this
opportunity I just want to echo
what Mr that was said about that
gap in services and in our
communities you know we
we used to have an inpatient
psychiatric unit we don't
anymore
but even when we had that
service there was this huge gap
where people were either
inpatient psych or outpatient
site and there are so many
people that needed that service
in between that that we we
cannot find at this point and
what a crisis stabilization
center would provide for our
community is a safe and secure
place for people who are and
substance use crises or mental
health crises in the last
restrictive
place less restrictive in a
hospital setting and studies
show that many times patients
are happy with the services and
as Mr that aside less expensive.
And really that's all I have to
hide
Mr that'll cover it at all thank
you thank you thank you very
much drive anything else Senator
Korea handle.
I'm just if we have any public
comment Mr Chairman.
We'll go to the audience for
brief public comment is there
anybody who wanted to speak.
Susan if you want to speak on
this.
Yes there Mr chair.
Can you hear me OK yes okay I'm
sorry Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for this
opportunity to speak before you
today as you know I've been a
long time advocate for
behavioral health services in my
community as well as the state
and I'm speaking today in favor
of Senate bill ones seventy six
I also very much like to thank
the sponsor Senator saya
Hemphill she's a great leader in
our community around health and
social services and I very much
thank you for taking the
opportunity to do this and I
would love this to be the first
bill that passes for you that
would be.
I'm this bill is important as it
advances the current our
community leaders are
undertaking is down Mr Otero
excuse me talked about they've
been working diligently to
better align the behavioral
health services the substance
and mental health substance
abuse and mental health services
within our county I currently
serve as the chair of the county
appointed to Costa substance
abuse center advisory board and
I can guarantee you I have all
the confidence in the world as
well as our community I think I
can speak on behalf of our
community that this money will
be spent effectively
and very efficiently and with
great gratitude so please I
would appreciate your support
for this bill we and by the way
I very much miss being in Santa
Fe missing all of you my friends
up there that spoke earlier be
well and be safe and please
support Senate bill on site said
this is that Senator thank you
very much for your efforts.
Thank you Mr yes I was right
here from you.
Is there anybody else from the
public who wants to speak on
this bill.
Yes hello chair and members of
the committee my name is Erin
Johnson with ACLU of New Mexico
and we support this legislation
and thank the sponsors program
at our substance use disorder
has not played New Mexico for
years now and I see this we see
this as one step sort of moved
away from the from from the the
the cast of of substance use
disorder treatment public health
initiatives and and and you and
our community specially
communities in the north from
prying my work at the ACLU I
work that out at the Rio Grande
sun and Espanol for five six
years and each year we produce
that are a sort of overdose on
the work just let the community
know how on substance use
disorder was making their
communities and hope of
mobilizing people to sort of see
for chance we really appreciate
this effort and see it as a step
toward your in our communities
our livestock thank you.
Thank you Mr Jones.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee chairman what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of this we need so much
more substance abuse treatment
and the ability for this program
that drive at a Dhaka and in a
care spoke about is is huge in
our community I am from Grant
County admitted Fund also
testifying on behalf my cell and
not just the national
association of social workers
today.
But
the programs that HMS has put
together really do serve as
models for the entire state so
the expansion of this as well as
the inclusion of the potential
in the treatment center which
also is also very necessary in
our state thank you very much
home thank you.
J. Santa Fe from and Human
Services did you all want to
speak on this bill are you just
waiting for another one.
I actually don't see it.
Let's go to the committee that.
The members of the committee
with the questions or discussion
on this measure.
When you're ready.
Okay I have a question for you
senator Cory and Dylan if you do
if we could the bill doesn't
doesn't seem to specify Grant
County worried worried I'll go
on your any particular area.
Are you are you comfortable with
that immunity is clear to you
that is going to go to your
region.
I can certainly contact the
secretary and and make sure and
make sure that that money will
be appropriated for this purpose
thank you Mr chairman.
I would also point to the
committee today is the day we're
going to hear several measures
as we already have a design to
to trying to respond to this
state drug and alcohol and
mental health needs and it is
clear that we need some kind of.
Comprehensive planning effort
the that we take care of this
so.
Thank you senator Senator just
to the right promotion we move
Mr chair I would move that do
pass on Senate bill one seventy
eight.
I second seconded by Senator
McKenna thank you.
Yes thank you chairman.
Any other discussion of this
bill.
The secretarial.
One seventy eight Senator guy
goes.
Ghosts.
Yes to pass.
Hello.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes thirteen.
Yes.
So congratulations the Senator
of Korea and William do pass it
is going to have you for this
committee will come back many
many times thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and thank you to my
expert witnesses and to my good
friend Susie Trujillo and Karen
what lock for speaking on behalf
of the bill.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman Europe next to Senate
bill two oh five homeless
veterans reach.
This would appropriate three
hundred thousand from the
general fund to the Veterans
Services Department.
To provide outreach services to
homeless veterans statewide.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee of.
Mr chair you just read the.
Purpose of the.
Of the appropriation
This will of course go to.
The Veterans Services Department
however.
Most of the money will probably
go to the integrated the
veterans center which is located
here in that located in
Albuquerque however they provide
services to veterans across the
entire state.
the veterans integration the US
centers is a well respected
nonprofit have been working with
them for a couple years and they
have a very credible and
outstanding executive director
the greatest.
This Senator is the largest
provider of homeless services
for veterans in New Mexico the
band Business for over fifteen
years and helped over twelve
thousand veterans families.
They are the only organization
New Mexico that provides
multiple housing options.
To end the cycle of homelessness
among.
Veterans.
And the.
They can be easily house a
homeless veteran and their
families to provide a safe and
supportive environment.
To address other issues.
And Mr chair.
There's twelve thousand.
veterans in New Mexico living in
poverty and and that and that
are homeless many of them do not
seek services because I have
been told that are not.
In two thousand nineteen the
state funded zero dollars the
help and veteran homelessness.
And I according to the US
department of housing and urban
development they reported that
New Mexico is one of only four
states where veteran
homelessness increased by
seventeen percent.
So
I have with me up this afternoon
expert witness Bobby Ehrig who
is the executive director of the
integrated.
veterans center.
And I have another gentleman who
may or may not be on.
Board built atop Walt.
So at this point I'd like to.
Give you an opportunity to hear
from doctor well who I believe
is I'm bored thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator Toleman.
The sharing did you want to
speak on this bill please.
yes it can you hear me Mr chair
we certainly can thank you thank
you thank you thank you very
much and committee members Mr
chair again my name is Bobby are
he of intervention integration
centre also noted the neck also
retired disabled veteran of the
U. S. army so I'm here today to
kind of highlight a little more
which senator Clemente talked
about the victim the services
you will we provide but also to
support us in a bill to a five
and how it will help you and
that you're not listed in our
state.
Have been around since two
thousand five we are one of the
first letter nonprofit whose
only mission was to end
homelessness in our state we're
started by a Vietnam veteran who
is trying onerous father but
also saw a short following
services at that time we have
helped over twelve thousand
family in their home miss we're
providing a comprehensive
approach to addressing
homelessness rather than just
providing a bandaid like housing
or rental assistance that many
programs.
each year we support over seven
hundred vector family and
analyst Michael this also
includes an additional eleven
hundred needy families both
economic and our community
directly pantry in home delivery
programs that the vehicle we
always believe in being a you
know a positive part of the
community not just providing
services are better families but
those who are in need and I are
facing struggle the staff.
As mentioned we are one of only
two organizations who have
specific programs focused
joining that the homelessness in
our state.
The biggest committed to
ensuring that homelessness is
brief where and nonrecurring for
nations heroes lead given so
much for our freedoms and now
need our help in their lives.
We work adventure homelessness
by having multiple housing
options in one location I am
usually in tandem with
aggressive case management and
other support services.
Grams were collectively by
nearly providing emergency
housing that takes it a
literally homeless veteran and
their family on the streets and
begin your journey of recovery.
This also includes transitional
housing located in Albuquerque
and is actually the only be a
funded transitional housing
program in the state.
The final component of that is
our rapidly having now many of
you would consider this what
people call permanent housing
this is where we transition
veterans and their families
thank you the community
apartments or rental homes for
long term sustainability.
The three pillars of having
support and improving to
increase long term housing
stability when used together as
a comprehensive solution include
case management support and
other systems as a big has
developed which also allow us to
both the seventy eight percent
of the ability right perimeter
family this is measured for up
to twelve months after acting in
that program and with the
national average of
approximately sixty four sixty
seven percent we are proud of
this statistic in our state.
I think about that that means
three out of every four veterans
that the big supports and the
homeless cycle means that
they're no longer on the street
again you're no longer having
debate and we're showing them
that New Mexico truly cares for
them.
For those you know does mom out
they may fall again our programs
were happy to re enroll them and
work more aggressively on the
struggles that land there
nothing is perfect but we do
have a system in place that
definitely provides results.
something that they could
develop increase in a number
since twenty eighteen is
establishing the need for
different and veterans in our
state by this I mean that we
don't just have people who
served on active duty that the
military came home we assess
citizen soldiers in the National
Guard and reserves as well as
providing services to surviving
spouses also called windows the
veterans that passed because we
do have one of the oldest
veteran population in the
country.
We work with over one hundred
partners throughout the state to
address all issues affecting our
nation's heroes and family
including establishing and have
clinical counseling during this
review pandemic with the loss of
resources of both the federal
government and local community
services.
I would also like to mention
that'll make it small compared
to other nonprofit election
thirty employees I mission
addresses one of the most
critical energy need to New
Mexico that we should all be
concerned with respecting
thanking and ations veterans
during their time in me just
like they did to secure our
freedom for less two hundred
forty five years.
In addition I also want to
mention that the big continues
to bring in over one point one
million dollars to the state and
federal funding there are
multiple housing programs that
address veteran homelessness and
we are proud to trying to
contribute to the success of New
Mexico.
Unfortunately helping end
homelessness is costly and went
to invest directly then provide
the resources to provide all
services needed to end
homelessness for nations heroes
that you're homelessness will
not be reduced as we have seen
with New Mexico being one of
only four states that continues
we have an increase in the last
four years of better homes.
We cannot do this alone our
state the federal government to
solve the problem we need state
support to help us ensure the
veteran homelessness is
recognized as a critical
solvable issue on our state
government and those of you who
support veteran families.
With approval Senate bill two of
five US and resenting noticed on
the Mexican.
Yearly that are veteran families
and want to honor them in their
time of need the primary
question in this bill is small
in comparison to many other
items that are governor is
placed on a budget for the
current year but as the it is
evident in a lack of state
funding since twenty seventeen
prevent their family this bill
would be an enormous improvement
that allows department of
veterans services to meet the
needs of the growing homeless
veteran crisis in our state.
This bill also is not a one off
but something which will
continue at it shows how working
together can help veteran
homelessness interstate and
supported that your family is
the most vulnerable time in the
I thank you for your time and
happy to answer any questions
that may have.
Thank you very much Mr thank.
Senator Tallman anybody else you
want to call on.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
there may.
Be a there are bills hi all do I
W. A. L. D..
I'm.
In the audience.
Okay.
Okay thank you Mr chair
I don't have any additional
comments and you certainly
Okay Willis.
Go to the audience thank you.
Let's go to the committee then.
and
Is there anybody on the
committee with questions.
Senator insurance to the lotus.
Thank you Mr chair this this
seems like a very very important
project and something I'm
totally behind I was just
curious about the coordination
of all of the.
All of the money that is
appropriate for homelessness
I I know that there's been an
effort to have more coordination
among the various nonprofits and
organizations to provide provide
not only I love what you said
about not only the the service
of housing but also case
management and other things that
will
You know with insurance and
insure that homelessness doesn't
occur again but I guess my
bottom line is when when these
appropriations are like this how
much coordination is.
Happens with the other little
little pockets of funds that are
appropriated.
Mr.
Yes yes senator Mr chair so one
of the things when it comes to
addressing veteran homelessness
is that we are intimately
ingrained in a lot of
communities workgroups and
collaborative is that trying to
dress.
Not just homelessness but also
mental health and the likes
the funding that goes
specifically for veterans is not
always readily available much
like other homeless programs
have as well as because you need
a specific which we can carry
specific market of those in need
some organizations and agencies
generally will just refer all
their veterans to us or other
organizations like us this
specifically addressing those
issues but there's considerable
amount of collaborative work
being done throughout the state.
Thank that's excellent I I know
that when we used to work on
homeless issues for victims of
domestic violence if they were
veterans returned to you and so
that that collaboration I think
is extremely important but I I
just wonder every time we
appropriate eight eight this
money.
You know because I hate to run
out of federal money and then
only have homeless only have
domestic violence money or vice
versa you know what I mean so
that we want to make sure that
the money is expended as
efficiently and effectively as
possible so thank you very much
for that.
Thank you senator.
What will the committee on this
bill Senate Bill.
The motion passed from senator
Graham was just a second it
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez before we would just
mentioned Mr Eric and and
senator that the rules committee
this morning.
Recommended to the full Senate
the confirmation of the new
secretary of Veterans Services
she's still in doesn't it into
we confirm our Sonya Smith.
Very impressive the new
secretary events lined up for
the department of thank you for
the information.
And.
We will call the roll.
Senate bill one eighty seven
Senator Gallegos yes.
No this is business to a.
Yes to I.
Wrongful of sorry to I feel I.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Lopez yes
thanks yes.
Sir Tom yes.
Yes.
Thank you senator John you have
to pass the committee thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee Mr chair I got a
jump off right now I got to go
to Judiciary another bill thank
you.
Thank you senator
will lead to the rest of the
agenda.
And accepted.
You know what we need to do is
to let senator serve on to so
we're ready for his bills.
Can you do that Kim or Trevor
somebody.
While we wait for them.
When we go back to will will
will come to Senator Stefanics
will take up your Senate bill
one eighty for the prevention of
congenital syphilis and infants.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
This is not a new idea of this
is bill was brought to me by the
New Mexico department of health.
And of requests that the state
legislature on.
Update the language hello.
Senator Clemente you're not on
mute.
Okay
it the department of health is
requesting that we update the
statute to conform with the
centers for disease control and
one of the reasons that we
should be very concerned about
this issue is that a simplest
passed from mother to a child
can lead to congenital syphilis
and birth defects and infant
death.
And while we had low cases prior
to two thousand seventeen there
has been a sharp increase.
With six cases her.
I think that's one hundred I
have to re read this.
It can in two thousand eighteen
to twenty six in nineteen so our
cases are increasing in the
state of New Mexico so this goes
back to not only testing.
Pregnant women but also about
offering some better of maternal
and child health care and we
have a different bill that deals
with mortality information
around pregnancy but this one is
about reporting to the city
centers for disease control and
I have on the web a couple of
expert witnesses I see area and
showers and I'm not sure if
there are some others.
But they are the expert
witnesses from the department of
health.
Senator Michele as you want to
speak.
Thank you Senator Stefanics Mr
chair members of the committee I
think that the Senator jet and
excellent job describing what
the bill is trying to accomplish
we've seen an incredible spike
in congenital syphilis cases in
the state of New Mexico it was
really on her desk for quite a
few years and over the past
several years it spiked
dramatically we have a quite an
old statute are working statute
that we are hoping to hear what
this bill clean up a little bit
and what we're also hoping to
achieve as
So what we're trying to achieve
this tracking in our our
guidelines for syphilis testing
with recommendations of the CDC
so as those as as those changing
as our rates fluctuate in the
state of New Mexico the
advisable number of tasks will
also change so in that way we
won't have to go back in and
change the statue later I have
two experts from the department
of health to support any
questions that you might have
about the bill Jeanine waters is
here with me and ensure Ganz I
think just having a little bit
of trouble but he might be
calling in the second so I would
like to introduce first Jeanine
waters.
Thank you.
Did you just say Mr chair I see
are secretary of health on
secretary Tracey Collins as well
so I just wanted to recognize
her I just coming on.
Good afternoon thank you so much
for for hearing this bill we I
did a great job of
summarizing it just to let you
know I'm the STD program manager
for the New Mexico department of
health and we are really hoping
that we can get this through so
we can have moms and babies more
protected in the state and I'm
happy to answer any specific
questions you may have an Andrew
I see just got on as well.
So that's all I have for now
thank you thank you miss waters
did you want to say anything
Andrew.
Thank you very much
Mr chair members the committee
we just appreciate your taking
up this very important
legislation we're look at really
hoping that the trend the
content of those listings
around.
Thank you thank you very much.
Anybody else senators to thanks
well I don't know if the
secretary of would like to say a
word on this bill or if she's
here for something else.
Thank you senator Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
here in full support of the bill
and so I appreciate the
opportunity to say a few words
site it's an opportunity to work
with great people and I
appreciate that centers to
phonics thank you.
Thank you madam secretary.
We'll go to the audience is
there anybody in the audience
who wants to speak on this bill.
You use the.
Raise your hand.
Function of the reactions but.
Okay seeing none will go to the
committee.
Mr chair Carrie Robinson.
thank god carries us thank she
has her hand out.
Under good.
Help.
Hello Mr chairman members the
committee Kerry robin prendere I
am the registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico Medical Society
we do support this legislation
and believe that the this fall
the most helpful for our
positions our pregnant mothers
and are the thank you so much.
Thank you Jerry.
Anybody else.
Seeing those to the committee
questions for comments from the
committee.
Is.
Thank you I was looking for my
button
this may be more of more than
you wanted to share but I'm
curious what happens to a baby
that the contracts conduct
congenital syphilis.
I'm going Senator I'm going to
let one of my experts answer
that question.
Thank you Mr chair.
Would be this miss waters or
would you be the one or who is
to explain this answer to us.
I can jump in and informality I
just got my comment shocked
about fifteen minutes ago
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you very much for the
question.
you know congenital syphilis is
considered a US federal public
health event because it's a very
tragic negative outcome that is
entirely preventable
it's possible for stillbirth
it's possible for birth defects
premature babies you know
anything really offer you can
imagine for babies negative
outcomes it's possible it's a
tricky disease that changes
often
and it's very easily per
preventable if the mother is
tested diagnosed and treated so
often one treatment in the
course the pregnancy before
delivery entirely avoidable.
And it's not standard practice
now.
So at and.
Mr chair members the committee
said Senator.
The best practice according to
the centers for disease control
and prevention is testing three
times twice during pregnancy
once a delivery for any place
that's higher prevalence in New
Mexico is not such a place until
about three years ago when our
cases started going up so it's
about bringing up all providers
statewide into best practice and
some of them may not be fully
aware of that so this can
potentially help make it the
standard it's the best practice
but we were very fortunate to
have consenus of let's be a very
rare thing in our state Tel
twenty seventeen.
Thank you Mr chair that that's
helpful thank you senator
anybody else on the committee.
I just want to add Mr chair
members that long term you can
have deformities delays in
development and seizures in
these children.
Thank.
Thank you madam secretary.
Will the committee on this bill.
Okay we have to.
Motions will say the Senator
Stefanics moved in senators so
the low the second and.
Anything else.
This.
Thank I appreciate the
consideration of the committee
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator.
The secretary will call the
roll.
So one eighty four Senator
guided ghost yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle are you there.
Yeah I'm here how both high boat
yes just from what I heard I had
somebody come to the door and I
didn't get to hear all the
testimony but it sounds like a
bill it needs to be we need to
take a look at so.
I'm for it thank you Senator
McKenna.
Yes to pass there's more.
There is a deal Lopez yes.
Thirst vantips yes
Tom and I believe is not there
Senator to see penal yes.
Thank you Senator thanks
yes yes.
So the next will go to.
But we have any of our
presenters here.
Settlement permanent fund.
From Senator serve on tests or
Senator Lopez are they going to
be able to come.
Only has tried to call him and
she cannot reach him already in
the other meeting as soon as she
gets a hold of him he's our.
I want to let him.
Yes we are senators serve on
cases.
Yes meetings going on at the
same time they're going to try
and reach let me know that he's
up in this committee as well but
we don't have contact with the
in the yes Senator Lopez on the
committee to so they're probably
both in their.
And
do you I'll go ahead and do
Senator ko this is bill one
eighty seven.
But
Danny are you the extra
weirdness on one eighty seven Mr
chairman I am This Is RubyAnn
really and I will get your there
excellent.
He told me you were trying that
I hadn't seen you this could.
Okay we'll we'll less than two
Senate bill one eighty seven.
This is a bill that would allow
the legislature to transfer a
hundred percent of the tobacco
master settlement agreement
funds to the tobacco settlement
program fund where it can be
fully appropriated in fiscal
year twenty twenty two.
Two percent of the funds a
specified in the current law we
need to do percent remaining in
the permanent fund.
We assess similar exceptions to
the default fifty fifty formula
and several of the years
recently.
Well this is a hundred percent
of the tobacco settlement funds
would be available for
appropriation rather than half
of them.
so I'm gonna go ahead and let me
explain what this bill does and
and why we're doing it.
Thank you Mr yes yes really yes
please okay thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee so that chair did a
good job of basically
summarizing what the bill would
do I'll add just a little bit
more information for the benefit
of the committee first of all
this bill is being carried on
behalf of the legislative
finance committee and it was
also endorsed by that tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee.
So I wanted to let you know
about that and why are we doing
this
We we get a projection from the
the attorney general's office
about how much we can expect to
come in from the tobacco
settlement.
The the members of the committee
may recall that the master
settlement agreement with all
the tobacco companies that is
where the funding comes from and
based on on the back of sales
across the state.
The New Mexico get anywhere from
about thirty to thirty five
million annually in the spring
from the master settlement
agreement the tobacco fund.
As the chair indicated her
statute those funds go to the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund and half of those funds go
to the tobacco settlement
program funds The revenue in the
programs that is eligible for
legislative appropriation
annually.
However in years when we've had
fiscal austerity shortfalls in
revenue we the legislature has
acted.
House built just like the one
before the committee today you
have all of the money that comes
in annually instead going to the
tobacco settlement program thank
and all of the funding be
eligible for appropriation for
fiscal year twenty to coming up
that we are looking at much less
revenue than we typically get as
I indicated overall we typically
get about thirty to thirty five
million for FY twenty two we're
looking at just about a total of
twelve million so it's
substantially less so in the LFC
budget recommendation we're
recommending that all of the
twelve million dollars be
utilized for appropriation for
the list of programs that are
provided in the attachment to
the FIR and in addition we're
also trying to augment the
remainder of the funding that we
have a shortfall with general
fund where appropriate across
the program.
Is really the explanation of
what's occurring Mr chairman and
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Changes then this call the
The.
This bill would make impossible
the need for the tobacco.
The programs that are in the
health department to to deal
with tobacco growing is taking
money away from them when you
say made available for
appropriation you mean to
appropriate for those health
department programs and fight
smoking.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee yes the the be
approved the bill we need to
build to pass that we can at
least appropriate twelve million
dollars total and that includes
those programs you referenced in
department of health there's
also a programming that goes to
the Indian Affairs Department
the Human Services department
and the UNM health sciences
center however as I indicated we
usually get a much higher amount
so in the current operating
budget there's a total of
seventeen million appropriated
this year for FY twenty two we
would only have a total of
twelve million if this bill
passes if it doesn't pass we
would only have six million so
we have about a five million
dollar shortfall from FY twenty
one to FY twenty two the with
the passage of the bill we still
would need to make up about
another five million in general
fund and as I indicated in the
LFC budget recommendations most
of those funds are made up of
general fund.
Thank you do we have any
indication why that revenue is
declining Committee renting
maybe people and smoking as much
but what what what's your
explanation for Mr Chairman and
fortunately it's not smoking
decline in arbitration so it's
legal work that's being done so
it's a due to the arbitration.
Members of the committee or to
anybody in the audience once
funds that test drive them to
see you.
Yes Mr Chairman RTZ pain you
know it's great to see you and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Damron the professor
that she got a relations officer
and registered lobbyists for you
and and includes the health
Science Center so thank you
again for your time thank you
RubyAnn for a great explanation
of the situation we stand
supported this bill as as ruby
and said we're getting a dire
situation the because the
arbitration please amount of
money are ready as the year so
we would really support this
bill get into twelve or the
seventeen million I just wanna
make sure the committee is aware
of the really good programs at
UNM health sciences that benefit
from this tobacco settlement
fund that we this is one of the
few places through which we get
funding for research from state
appropriations of these funds
from the tobacco settlement
money helps now as of a research
published are poison center I'm
going to allow I do not want of
Mr chair of you to allow that
and and it did here to talk
about.
Of how extremely depended to
poison center is upon these
funds with this
but without this funding we
would not receive a number of
funding for certain research
projects and I just want you
know for every dollar that is
invested in research from the
tobacco settlement fund for the
health Science Center the
fighters aged twenty dollars in
federal funds are very dependent
on this money for seating for
these types of federal grants
with this I as I said the poison
center is highly dependent on
this with both this particular
funding mechanism as well as our
P. S. P. and as you know the R.
P. S. P.'s for cut six percent.
during the special session
understandably but that did her
bit of our programs often
they're the best year and others
especially the poison control
center that dean god would get
speak to with that they're both
right legislative and executive
rex for you in there but I stand
behind would RubyAnn explained
to you just so you health
Science Center you general
stands as strong support this
bill and we think Senator Campos
pregnant for thank you so much
Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir.
Dr damage
anybody else from the audience
once we can support in this.
yes don't Godwin.
Chair with easy no members of
the committee again my name is
Don Godwin I am the dean of the
college of pharmacy at UNM and
the poison center falls under
the umbrella of the college of
pharmacy I'm sure I'm sure most
of you are aware of the New
Mexico drug employees
information center has been
around for a little over forty
years it is a nationally
accredited poison center and the
only poison center in the state
it provides twenty four seven
three sixty five service free
service to the general public
not anywhere in the state of New
Mexico.
We also very important training
health care professionals in
clinical toxicology do a ton of
research in toxicology in a lot
of our research and a lot of
outreach all around the state
and we find a lot of public
education again particularly
targeting children older adults
for poison prevention.
We answer about twenty two
thousand calls in a normal year
about four health wise need
and really that was the center
saves millions of dollars for
the state by preventing
hospitalizations for ER visits
from possible poisonings are
able to be treated at home most
recently for the pandemic.
When governor when the governor
announced a public health
emergency we stood up are COVID
topline in two hours on March
eleventh it has a.
On that line has it.
Almost a hundred and ten
thousand phone calls from across
the state for if we can for the
public of New Mexico really
focusing now most of our calls
we're getting our about vaccine
availability we're signing up
people left and right when they
call to get him
To get a registered vaccine so
when it's available they can get
that.
I'm not sure if you remember but
then those cases of hand
sanitizer with methanol
poisonings on in the state's
early in the summer are poison
center was the first to detect
that reported that to the to the
national poisons centre
Association who is reported that
to the FDA if we were able to
make those.
Comments off the market and put
importation
else as well so I think we say
multiple lives not only New
Mexico around the country so I
was trying to show you the
importance of the of the poison
center Zakho Celestine does bump
up twenty six percent of our
total budget in our communities
the other big cities and you
know the cut right now that it's
this proposed.
In the tobacco settlement funds
puts a.
Here is hard on the policy on
the on the poison center I think
the army to maintain the high
quality an important service.
What
see.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
The Santo Domingo we'll go to
you for questions from the
committee.
Well maybe Mr chairman thank you
and it is a is that RubyAnn the
one I've known for all these
years is that the same RubyAnn.
It sure is.
Kind of what I saw we've been
here a day or two and make you
know.
I
three thank you Mr.
We are anyway hi certainly
support this the this this this.
This this kind of money has been
put to good use by the state and
the Senator there you an image
then just invaluable for all of
the sedition cheering in New
Mexico because you have to have
a centralized center where you
can have the wealth of this
information that's concentrated
and the people that know what
they're doing or all are in the
same place of they can
constantly be in touch with each
other so this is a good use of
the money and not this was not
something that.
I mean this this the this
arbitration on this on these
funds to back to years as Paul
on you know nationwide to a
great extent particularly
smoking but.
The cost of the product is is
going up with tax dollars
considerably so there's a lot
less people a lot fewer people
buying and there used to be but
anyway it's this is a good good
way to use this money and we
need to get this done and I
applaud Senator Campos for
getting this done and not
helping with this and done this
in my years on payments before
so anyway we need to get this
bill on its way and get it
started and make sure we get it
signed thank you.
Mr chair you are muted.
Thank you Senator Ingle will
come back to you for a motion
but here Senator and finances
this.
thank you Mr chair
We have a discussion before
about why the poison center of.
Isn't it well because it's in
our S. P. H. it's a a research
and special projects at the
university and then it's also I
didn't realize it also got money
from the from the tobacco
settlement funds would kind of
patched.
The sources of funding together
for it.
We need to be more stable to
just find out of the General
Fund and and how can we make
that happen.
Not very easily.
Dr Deming might have an idea
about.
I thank you Mr chair and thank
you Senator Sedillo Lopez for
the very good question
I believe that you all are magic
you can do anything so
yes it would be much better for
us if we it is extremophile this
is one of the several state
entities are located within U.
UNM as an office that messed
cater Carrie Tingley hospital
you.
Hundreds of cancer center so yes
it would be very wonderful is a
legislation be interested in
some statutory change that would
allow for a certain amount from
the general fund to go straight
to the state entity The New
Mexico drug question drug
information center that happens
we have.
That would make our budget too
much better I think to be clear
because I think many times what
legislators forced to cut RRPS
they would realize well most of
cutting and cutting the was the
trolls etcetera this is done
when people were drinking hand
sanitizers recalling that some
of the for example we had the
federal level so I appreciate
your question and I believe
there's a past everything was
the statutory changes happy to
work with you during the interim
on that senator to do you know
if you do so interested in
experience approval I am thank
you Mr chair I I think this
makes sense makes sense because
I got I was when I was at the
university I was involved with
these projects and they were
such a Hodge podge of different
kinds of projects some of which
had educational research
components and one
Representative which were
actually like this a state
agency so it just it seems odd
that it's funded that way and
then I have this information
that I got about that some of
the tobacco settlement money was
used to shore up the lottery
with is there any hope of
getting that money back.
From shoring up the lottery or
is that just gone.
Did you want to respond.
Mr Chairman all to to drive
Daymon on that I'm not aware
that and less and less than
senator speaking about cigarette
tax but although Dr damning.
I maybe I maybe Mr chair and
Senator Lopez so for several
years just use the liquor excise
tax to the tune of eighteen
million for several years to
sure up the lottery through the
years as the lottery has not
been able to find one hundred
percent of tuition and tuition
is going up will get more
students a lottery we look for
different ways to supplement the
lottery for good or for bad and
there are a couple of several
years we had eighteen million
the liquor excise tax I I don't
recall right off the things
cigarette excise tax but my
memory could be incorrect on
that but I do know for sure
about the liquor excise tax and
this year they're also request
to shorten the letter Larned
General Fund I have no memory
raising the tobacco settlement
fund going to I I think you're
as you has you talk about a
cigarette a lot of these funds
are still new to me so I think I
may be confused about which
funds sort of the lottery so I
appreciate that well thank you
this this is a obviously very
important source of income and
needs to be done and so I'm
happy to set us to second Center
eagles motion when he's.
Senator Ingle did you want to
comment on the issue of
how to fund.
The poison information center
from the general fund.
I would be real careful before I
with their if we can use these
funds and other funds we can
incorporate but when stuff like
this gets funded in the general
fund it is like fruit hanging
out on the end of the lamb.
And the money gets cut very
easily sometimes so I think
we're we'll we will do better
looking for funds and ways to do
this and of course the lottery
when we didn't put any
government governments on on
have universities can to
tuitions Inc can can raise it
clear through the still while
the students there why I knew
the phone was not going to last
long because it's too big a cash
cow.
And the but anyway we need to
keep this up the best way we can
and if there's all kinds of
little funds around that we can
move around and do things but in
the General if we're my
experience on that my sixteen or
eighteen years on finances you
have to be real careful when you
fund these things of the general
fund because they can be plucked
off so quickly.
And that is just one of those
things that can happen.
And the guy I think we'll do
better if we if we continue to
to look at that as funding
sources that are there.
Already and we'll move move them
around but once this gets in the
general fund it's just that's a
dangerous place for it to be.
Well thank you Mr chair I
certainly defer to to experience
it just seems like a funny way
to run a railroad to have all
these various funds because it's
confusing you know what where
you get these but at least from
my perspective it seems a little
bit like I said I thought the
same I thought we did something
with the cigarette tax in this
group and I just think it's it
really puts a lot of burden on
these agencies to make sure that
these funds are coming in and
coming and testifying every year
and you know in trying to avoid
cuts here but I understand if it
if it would be more vulnerable
in the general fund that's a
very powerful points and I don't
have enough experience to do
that you'll you'll learn after
awhile as sometimes they forget
to to to to say where their
money come from and then and
nobody knows where the money's
going in the funds to go so
there's lots of funds in the
insurance department and law
enforcement departments and all
kinds of these other departments
and these little things these
little funds build up over time
and they're nice little mistakes
and not.
That that chairman we've got he
acts like he's very innocent but
he's not.
He's a little fun hangout Fund
hound.
Aren't you senator Ortiz
shipping L. you were talking
about the.
Finance chairman.
No no I'm talking about you.
Okay Hey.
Over.
He wanted me to make a motion I
move a do pass we're not talking
about in this anymore I just got
the hit from Senator to shipping
now.
This is a good program we need
to keep it going.
And I hope you're ready for a
motion on my to do.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo this you want to
seconded yes yes Sir.
And senator
Discussion or question on the
motion.
No Sir okay.
Any other discussion from the
committee and on Senate bill one
eighty seven.
Thank you really and and Dr
Daman and New England government
thank you.
Mensuration very helpful
information thank you Mr.
Rural.
One eighty seven Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am.
Ingle yes.
So we can.
Yes.
Sure that.
Hello.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Members we've now reached at
that point we heard anything.
The other presenters.
Mr chair it might just indulge
me I just didn't has to quote
our our former governor I didn't
mean to open up a box of
Pandora's.
This.
In which I felt like I was doing
I don't know
this.
It is a recurring issue Senator
rule.
Almost every year those special
programs in dinner done through
you amendment.
It
Ingle said the funding was
general fund in
general fund thank you makes it
easy to go there.
But the special funds.
In two minutes is.
So I'm not sure which is a
better approach.
So we have not.
We heard.
They're probably not going to
get the answer I wonder if we
have a cell phone so we can do a
tax Senator Lopez or survive
this I
really I have to look at their
tax would you want me to text
please.
Whichever one
okay we sure can make.
We have tried to reach them
perhaps another Senator maybe
have better luck than we do.
But we have tried to reach both
Senator saunters and Senator
Lopez.
Through email and through email
and text message.
Wait a few more minutes is
committee will will and tree
will we'll wait a few more
minutes we finish all the rest
of the bills.
I'm I'm I'm saying if not we're
probably going to ensure that
might get them.
Yeah.
I would get my attention.
Those are bills that I think
would be pretty substantive and
would take some time so if we
can.
Just sent through them.
What they are doing.
Presenting over there so
installments Bill.
How many more military like Mr
chairman.
To listen to my lotus.
Well as for to many let's go
home.
The problem is committee meets
at exactly the same time as this
one so.
It's going to be hard to get
into.
Yeah card in many here for our
to our meetings but installment
dealing with his finalists for
executive positions bill over
there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Embrace your broken legs on that
one is.
What
is the.
You may want both want to send
Lopez motor and.
Three oh six weeks three
fifteen.
And then if we don't
From them please you know rolled
over to Monday.
Sounds good to me next week also
I have to bills I think when on
Wednesday went on I can't
remember if it's Monday when say
Representative two bills next we
can Judiciary.
Well I sure you need to be your
lawyer.
The enjoyed over there.
I didn't get placed on that
committee Senator Ingle and I'm
just as happy.
Here are.
What are you some of those might
be your student same right take
some amount on your.
Rate accidents.
That's right that's right they
might they might give you a pop
quiz.
Now I'm sure you'll be treated
in a very just manner just like
tender Commission clean always
providing I'm just so Senator
someone just flashes name flash
on your I am Mr Chairman I'm
with you.
All right good thank you.
So we're here to do you want to
start with Senator Mr chairman I
like to have the collateral
consequences bill and have you
roll over the.
I'm against official today.
I appreciate you the way for my
understand I joined Judiciary
this is a new skill the chart
committee like you don't center
everybody on a billable billable
by zoom is being attacked by a
divided Task again ability.
As.
Very general agreement on that.
Yeah.
Senate bill one eighty three
force.
Thank you etcetera etcetera we
are this many passports asked
many times for it was vetoed by
governor Martinez
this is part of the uniform law
commission work you all of my
was looking for block.
And this bill is a uniform law.
Collateral consequences what the
bill would do is recognize that
when an individual is convicted
of a crime or pleads guilty to a
crime of that there are
collateral we call and referred
to us lateral consequences Clara
consequences may be ability to
apply for certain benefits are
to receive certain benefits
housing and others as a result
of that conviction in the goal
of the bill is to ensure that
when an individual agrees to a
plea agreement or is it
committed a crime that they are
fully advised of what those
collateral crosses expense would
be at that time by the court and
accepted acknowledge those
collateral consequences as a
result of that clear that
conviction.
The challenge for the
legislation comes in part
because we passed so many laws
are books that have these
collateral consequences they're
scattered throughout our star
state statues in various W. old
various laws so what this bill
would do would be to require
that there be a compilation if
you will of all those collateral
consequences so we gather the
ball we we know that are out
there in a consolidated place
and and that an individual can
be well informed of those at the
time of the sentencing and
conviction so that is the normal
I don't want to consequences
bill I don't know whether Jack
burden is on the call hope
perhaps is Jack Burton is a
member of uniform law commission
as you all know routinely
appears as a member of the
unification to answer technical
questions UP so Mister chairman
I can't see whether he's on the
call or not but it is I'd like
to give me a minute to.
Sure.
But I see Senator Lopez to some
good.
Mr Burton are you there.
I don't see him listed in the
chest in senators so all right
all I'm sure I can answer your
questions for the committee but
I hope that well enough explains
the bill and and again here the
goal is just to make sure that
we know as we as we implement
and adopt laws with these
collateral consequences that we
action there's there there
well compiled and and the no at
the time of the sentencing thank
you Mr chairman.
Did you have anybody want to
speak on behalf or.
No Sir we're ready to go.
Liz.
There is any public public
comment.
Mr Mr.
Then dollar from the.
Calling centers office.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chair
members of the committee items
that are on the chief public
defender for New Mexico and we
want to thank the sponsor and
people work on the bill with him
we think this is a important
bill to really address says the
the chairman said a lot of the
problems that have been created
collateral consequences we're
need to support the bill.
Thank you Mr our
there in Jones from the ACLU yes
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee on parents all day so
you've New Mexico a we support
this piece legislation we think
responsible for bringing it the
last two years I had the
pleasure of working with some
hundreds of men and women who
have been incarcerated and and
and this bill was sort of
you know help address some of
the issues that they face after
incarceration also you know a
little bit full disclosure you
know I have my experiences with
young New Mexico criminal legal
system and I think I would have
been much better off back in two
thousand when those troubles for
service if this bill had been
around I thank the sponsors
rains bill and I urge you all to
give the best thank you.
Thank you Mr Jones.
Anybody else want to comment on
this before we go to the
committee.
We'll go to Senator Ingle.
Mr chairman and Senator office
too.
for seems to me like I remember
this bill before we didn't seem
like we had much opposition but
who would who would oppose this.
Who opposes it's a good question
Senator and and in fairness so
we haven't had any opposition
really it was passed previously
by the legislature it was vetoed
by governor Martinez governor
Martinez as you know was a
district attorney and her
feeling was that it was the the
the lawyer's job I think that
was the job of the district
attorney's and public defender's
to properly advise the defendant
and she did not feel that a law
of was would be a necessary
appropriate that was the reason
she gave for retailing at I
think and what governor Martinez
may have overlooked is the point
that I've tried to make your
which is we just have all these
scattered collateral
consequences throughout our
brought our laws and and one of
the principal goals of this law
would be to make us but I'm all
together make a so know what
they are list them organize them
so that a person can be properly
well informed but I I I would
take your points etcetera I I
don't know if anybody's ever
really opposed.
Well I had I couldn't remember
the that's what I was trying to
I was asking of the oil and may
have been some something I
missed it but I don't remember
any anything really any any you
know structured opposition
necessary to their some
sometimes more I had I didn't
exactly have a warm relationship
of time just governor Martinez
so I anyway it's so I certainly
am I'm ready to move it to pass
on this because we've we've
heard this before and and it's
it's something that we need to
unlock your say get this stuff
torrez it's usually usually
recognized angel initially found
so because there are things that
serves these folks need to know
so Mr Chairman I'm ready for it
to move a new passage whenever
you're ready some yield anybody
else Senator Sedillo Lopez
wanted to ask you a question.
Thank you Mr chair centers on
this so what's the consequence
if they're not advised of these
this affects.
Senator Sedillo Lopez there
there is one the the so the you
know there there's not a
a consequence to their the the
court for the public defender
although the court as as you
know senator you know the a plea
of that is not voluntarily and
knowingly made is subject to a
challenge later or the effective
assistance of counsel in making
such a plea and so of the goal
here is to make sure that
there's no later claim that the
the plea was not voluntarily and
knowingly made all all the
different you will allow Mr
Bauer perhaps to answer that
question any more detail you got
I I don't do criminal law
Senator Sedillo Lopez so I I
don't know the consequence other
than the fact that an individual
might challenge their plea.
And I think I think passing this
law avoids that the or
eliminates that possibility.
Mr Miller did you want to add
anything no I I think actually
the Senators completely correct
on that yes there are the
collateral consequences I I
don't think it would prohibit
bear challenging plea if they
felt it was necessary in in the
future but you would obviously
address a lot of other.
Consequences that would that
would prohibit them moving
forward and so many other ways.
I I think it's a great bill with
regard to transparency so that
people can understand what the
implications are when they you
know full implications when they
enter a plea I think that that's
that's very important and I was
just thinking obviously of it
doesn't include federal
consequences like of immigration
status and I know our Supreme
Court in New Mexico
Basically said that the the
course had it had the
responsibility to describe those
consequences so I think this is
very consistent with where the
Supreme Court has gone on this
and when you're ready for a
motion on I'm happy to make well
I guess Senator Ingle wants to
make it wants to make a motion
to.
Anybody else on the committee
was questions.
Senator Ingle.
You unmuted yourself.
Yeah I'm overdue in New Mexico
moved to pass on Senate bill
twenty fours that water was or
one six one eight one eight two
okay.
No.
One one eighty three.
Okay whatever the number is I
know somewhere in that
neighborhood.
I also think it.
Insurers so the lowest.
Any other major questions or.
Thank.
All the role.
Bill one eighty three Senator
Gallegos.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thirty six yes.
You know.
Yes.
Thank you senator syringes you
go into has already three and
we'll rolling wanted to it is
what it is Monday is likely to
be a day you can you we have had
or one eighty two or would you
rather wait until later know
what will be ready Monday the
the only reason I'm asking roll
over today is there is another
bill that has overlapping
implications and I'm trying to
make sure we don't do harm to
one or the other.
We'll see you Monday on the one
eighty two that.
Thank you.
And.
Maybe we'll go to.
Senator lotus is to bills.
And we'll start with the which
one you want to start with
Senator.
Mr chairman thank you go ahead
and start with Senate bill one
ninety one.
Bridges across New Mexico can
you tell us about this bill.
I'm yes Mister chairman.
And bear with me let's see here
as I.
I'm getting better at doing the
looking from one to one screen
to another thank you madam.
So Mr chairman members of the
committee.
In front of you this afternoon
to present Senate bill one
ninety one.
And this is as you mentioned
it's a.
He.
Have bridges across New Mexico
consortium there is a limited
time for this a consortium to
exist and Mr Chairman what I
would like to do if if it be
these into the of course I do
have some expert witnesses with
me who can also give some more
background on how this came to
be I know that
We all have there's many
concerns with regards to
behavioral health care in the
state of New Mexico we all know
the history way back in the day
when things started to unravel
what happened under the prior
governor's administration and
yes some of the concerns that we
would have in the Albuquerque
area with our homeless
population and others I mean
it's not just the homeless but I
know that I was contacted by
miss Connie B. hill.
who has done some wonderful
research with regards to mental
health and she's been advocating
for quite awhile with regards to
you know what we can do to shore
up services and help for many of
in our community who have do
have some mental health service
needs so if I could Mr chairman
of like to I have three persons
that could offer some
information and background the
first to begin with Connie the
hill and then after her we do
have Gabriel Garcia who is also
a counselor a drug counselor and
then Mr on burns Steen who is
set done several hero health
facilities design and
architecture and I know he's
also work with macs which of
course we know some Bernalillo
county so if I could Mr chairman
if miss the hill would begin
thank you for more thank you
senator there is an amendment on
this bill.
Mr chairman if I could please if
before we go to the amendment
could we have kind of lay the
land of of where this bill is
coming from before we go to the
amendment.
Yeah let's do that
Background then we'll take a few
moments I understand the
amendment is very extensive so
so we'll we'll want to share
than background before we get
into it.
So Senator Lopez will go to your
account email to go first
Senator if you could please I
appreciate it.
Fund managers open munition
testament.
Hello.
One can you hear me alright.
Yes you're coming through loud
and clear.
Thank you.
I'm Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
I'm I'm up.
I'm proud to be here today.
And I think Senator Lopez for
her courage to bring this bill
forward.
Some of the members of this
committee know me well
specifically our chairman
Senator Wirth cheesy payments by
Senator he knows that for many
years six or seven at least I've
been very active in the will of
behavioral health because my
background is a graduate from
New Mexico tech biology and the
university of New Mexico medical
school.
In our medical research has
brought me to this place.
My background is medical
researcher I study the effects.
Until illness specifically
schizophrenia and the factors
that causes.
I have also been very active in
terms of.
Researching all of the activity
in the state of New Mexico.
Eckley most recently the Senator
health collaborative.
I want to acknowledge Mr Jason
marks are volunteer attorney for
our nonprofit group greater
Albuquerque business alliance as
a former PRC commissioner and
lobbyists to self test been
instrumental in bringing forward
this bill today as well as I
want to acknowledge Senator.
Gay Kernan on your has been
helpful in our proposing
amendments to the bill.
This bill basically is what we
consider to be.
A side by side basically help to
our existing collaborative I
have been attending the meetings
by invite and have actually
spoken at the collaborative
behavioral health collaborative
meetings myself so I'm very
familiar with the role.
I want to congratulate our
governor Michelle lu Han Grisham
Gresham for pointing Dr bones
from a dog Medical Center as you
know the previous bill that just
passed you Senator how New
Mexico had advisors from the
Hidalgo Medical Center stating
very much the consent concerns
that we have in our bill today.
Our bill today in summary.
Asked to.
Not only on compliment that is
just our existing behavioral
health collaborative.
The means by which we propose to
assist the collaborative are
through what is actually in the
bill that originally created the
collaborative itself.
So statute nine dash seven point
six point four labeled entering
agency behavioral health
purchasing collaborative and
also the original bill which
fourteen years ago created a
collaborative House Bills to
seven one was what our our
attorney Jason marks very
familiar with legislation in our
studied very thoroughly before
proposing additional.
We feel that the the the
proposed consortium bridges
across New Mexico will do just
what it says we will bridge the
gap that the collaborative not
due to any fault of their own
due to the constraints of staff
and physical ability to bring
the whole stick together we
proposed in this bill for a.
And ask of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars to provide
services through a professional
agency which has the criteria to
do the studies to reach out to
the individual communities and
to actually create an entire
comprehensive plan for the state
of New Mexico.
The HSD were proposing as policy
research associates thank
provide technical assistance and
facilitate meeting such as we're
proposing to help jurisdictions
in various parts of the state to
develop their plan.
We feel like we are directly.
In alliance with the existing
collaborative and again Dr
phoned being the expert in the
field was able to get federal
funding for the chip Hidalgo
clinic before he was appointed
by a governor so we do have a
high health consortium Dr Scrase
as well and our new newest
cabinet secretary who are I have
reached out to his doctor doctor
Tracy Collins and we've we've
all come to the conclusion that
what we are proposing will one
hundred percent a system in
their job.
Our proposal is to hire a
professional policy agency such
as policy research associates to
have meetings regional that
means we will be able to reach
communities such as Silver City
the court Espanola Quemado all
of those cities in New Mexico
that are struggling with
behavioral health issues.
We feel the role of behavioral
health has fallen much to the
cities and the counties in New
Mexico I'm very familiar and I'm
part of the behavioral health
committee on in behavioral
health for the county of growing
County and you've had many many
discussions with our county
manager Julie Morgus box office
you're talking.
We consider that the expenditure
of behavioral health funding
through tax bonds has just not
been enough and we need a
statewide regional coalition to
bring together not only the
state agencies but also agencies
that are listed within the
promise again I'm going back to
nine seven six four.
Part of what the original intent
of the collaborative to do was
to actually contract for
operation of one of more
behavioral health entities to
ensure availability of services
throughout the state that is
exactly what we're proposing
because we feel like we need to
reach those communities it's
critically important when
speaking to Senator Stefanics
and her region they're just not
getting the help they need they
need and again it is no negative
reflection on the collaborative
itself.
we intend to reach out to six
regional communities when asked
her Senator Karen's Senator
Kernan suggestion but we use the
transportation regions as our
model for reaching out to the
communities as you know in the
transportation districts there
are six of them we would like
to.
To use those regions to reach
out to all the cities and
counties in New Mexico to help
facilitated meetings.
Our hope is to bring together.
The business sector the
providers the residential
facility experts in the field as
well as people that we may not
think when we think of
behavioral health we want to
hear from the public itself.
As a business business group the
greater Albuquerque business
alliance has reached out to many
businesses and they are
difficult somewhat forgotten
entity when we have homelessness
which brings unfortunately
individuals with mental health
and drug addiction issues on to
our streets it becomes a
criminal element which and
second drug court as you know
the business sector also has a
big negative the fact and some
of our businesses specifically
in our area of town which we are
going Senator Ortiz is do you
participate in this is district
is that we basically have a lot
of negative on criminal
activities such as murders rapes
and those kinds of things
unfortunately we are not in a
position to help those
individuals what we're proposing
is a statewide initiative to
bring back those facilities that
were closed down and to make
clear assessment much as senator
posts Bill was reaching out to
Silvercity would like to do that
statewide.
We'd also like to recognize
another point that was in the
original bill that created the
collaborative stating providers
and state agency representatives
together may not constitute more
than forty nine percent the
council membership.
I have personally attended and
been part of the collaborative
meetings and and they are due to
restrictions again they're all
state agencies and providers
would like to open up the
Pandora's box you're bring
business members and the
community together to build a
complete.
Look at where we have our gaps
and how we can get those
resources I'd like to also make
a shout out to our
congresspeople I have reached
out to our newest congresswoman
Teresa Fernandes ledger from Las
Vegas and all of our congressmen
Congress people are newest ones
is in southern New Mexico and I
can tell you that they are all
very willing and and honestly
anxious to be part of this
consortium we feel like maybe we
are missing out on federal
dollars that we can many times
our communities simply don't
have the resources to write a
large grants as Dr phone did in
his community so with that said
I'd like to also point to an
email that was sent to me by our
attorney Jason marks as you
would allow me to read it and
then I will I will and at that
point if that is our.
Please.
R. and still take just a second.
Mr marks apologizes he could not
be in on this meeting.
Yes then again very instrumental
and
notching the importance of the
collaborative consent that we
just want to go alongside this
is what they're doing.
Sorry I'm having an issue here.
Okay if I could I'll read his
statement.
The behavioral health purchasing
collaborative first week was
created by house bill two seven
one in two thousand and four as
amended by house bill one eighty
one in two thousand and eight
that behavioral health
collaborative brings together
agency has from state agencies
including health HSD CYFD and
NMFA to assess the needs
existing programs and plans for
service expansion.
The B. H. C. D. develops plans
and budgets and presents these
to the legislative interim
committees and regular
committees as appropriate the H.
C. has stakeholder involvement
which we understand to be
primarily from entities
providing services pursuant to
contracts and provider
agreements with the B. H. C.
state agents
the bridges across New Mexico
initiative is intended to bring
together stakeholders for a
local government officials
judicial branch representatives
legislative representatives
businesses and other community
members in regional meetings
which will be professionally
facilitated by behavioral health
consultant engaged by HSD.
The purpose of the bridges
meetings is the development of
regional and statewide plans to
address local behavioral health
and substance abuse New.
The legislation includes
directives to the participants
to look at residential
facilities transitional housing
and prevention programs thus the
bridges consortium is
distinguished from the existing
P. H. C. by its regional
approach and why it's being
centered around the participants
representing communities
intended to be served by
improved delivery of behavioral
health services as opposed to
the agencies and entities that
deliver those services.
And with that said I if if I
could we have gotten all of the
reports from every agency within
the collaborative.
And I would like to say that
most all of them have been very
positive.
The one concern is that we are
actually duplicating the efforts
and and I think with the
statement by turning marks we
can see that we are not
intending to do this effort I'd
like to read these one of the
analysis from the public
education department.
According to the twenty
nineteenth youth risk and
resiliency survey twenty point
five percent of New Mexico high
school students reported having
their first drink of alcohol
before age thirteen compared
with fifteen percent national.
Eighteen point one percent of
New Mexico high school students
reported they first tried
marijuana before age thirteen
compared with five point six
national and unfortunately this
is one that really shocked me
eight point four percent of the
state's high school students
order that they had tried
cocaine compared with ninety
three point one percent national
as a teacher myself in science
and art we PS schools I did not
see programs which is part of
our our initiative to bring
programs drug prevention in
schools I will also point out
the LFC DFA summary and some of
what they said and summary what
will be the consequences of not
enacting this still.
Possible impacts of substance
use on it's been individuals
communities and New Mexico
entities to include loss of life
increase in crime related to
substance use and.
Access needed services I E.
substance use disorder treatment
services medical services
medical health services that is
coming directly from LFC the
NMFA report asked us to look
into supportive housing I will
say that the supporting housing
director Steve Ross one hundred
percent in agreement with our
bill and will be working with us
direction I would love to reach
out to.
Well in summary the democratic
leadership going else to say
that every county in New Mexico
it's less accept Los Alamos is
designated a mental health
professional shortage areas by
the health resources and
services administration.
A mental health professional
shortage is further exactly
exasperated by the lingering
effects of mental health
disruption occurred in twenty
thirteen to twenty nineteen
report from the US department of
health and Human Services office
of the inspector found that nine
thousand five hundred twenty
eight licensed medical health
centers only two thousand six
hundred fifty five provides
services to Medicaid managed
care enrollees and only three
hundred twenty nine of those
providers were independent
licensed Medicaid covers only
about half of New Mexicos
children and youth under twenty
one additionally and national
studies CDC and I'm sorry found
that counties and mostly
non white were less likely to
have.
Hospitals and community
facilities this is exactly what
we're reaching out to you and
I'd like to say also that
unfortunately one two other
statistics that I'm extremely
sad about is the CDC remote most
recent report states that New
Mexico's number one and alcohol
related deaths in our country
the other report that came out
in the Albuquerque journal
states that New Mexico's number
one in growth Oklahoma asper
Senator Tallman concerns for our
veterans we are very much
concerned in our group the
greater Albuquerque business
alliance that we stand up to
this challenging the school is
actually destroying our our
families and our livelihoods in
New Mexico and I thank you very
much for listening to my
testimony and I I will yield to
expert.
You want to say anything.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee appreciate the
opportunity to speak in support
of this bill my name is Ron
bursting and president of studio
southwest architects and over
the years we've developed a
growing portfolio of behavioral
health projects including the
care campus in Albuquerque which
was formally known as maths last
year's annual counts which was
pre COVID of homeless people
indicated that there were about
fifteen hundred people living on
the streets of Albuquerque and
APS study indicated that there
are over three thousand homeless
students in the system this
suggests that the total list
count is much higher than
fifteen hundred.
The homeless count doesn't take
into account people who are
homeless but also living with
friends or family and let's face
it we've all been affected by
this issue whether involves a
family member or if you just
wondering what to do about
helping someone who's
panhandling in the middle of the
street
since our practice covers
judicial projects we've noted
that detention centers in
particular have been greatly
affected by the shortage of
behavioral health facilities and
services and in many cases about
the income a real health
treatment facilities themselves
the fact we currently have one
such project in the construction
Alamogordo which is greatly
expanding the medical and
behavioral health facilities
since that is where
unfortunately people tend to end
up.
You know there are many many
excellent programs and
facilities available in the
state what seems to be missing
is the opportunity to just step
back and assess they picture we
believe that the first step is
to create a statewide master
plan documenting the current
facilities and services as well
as collecting data about the
population in need so we have a
better idea of how many people
are needed anyone time with
services they need and what
facilities they need and this
also will provide an opportunity
to document best practices so
that they may be shared with the
other places in the state then
the second step will be to
identify the gaps in the system
and develop a plan for
addressing those gaps at that
point it will be possible to
propose solutions to close those
gaps in funding and facilities
and I believe this bill provides
the opportunity for doing all
that.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Senator was there anyone else
you you had is it as an expert I
know there was a third name but
I don't see him listed here.
The third person Mr Chairman was
Gabriel Garcia.
I don't see him in the this
being in attendance.
Okay.
It looks.
Ahead I'm sorry.
No we is closing did you want to
setting closing.
Mr Chairman will go ahead and
stand for questions okay I
wondered if there's somebody
here I see Jenny's only is
there.
The from the Human Services
Department.
I'm gonna have a comment on this
bill or any kind of
A statement about it.
Good afternoon.
Committee members this is Jenny
family with that behavior health
services division of the.
Human Services Department and I
I actually first of all I
apologize for talking out of
just one moments earlier today
what are for this bill your eyes
as usual we're not actually
standing in support or in
opposition I'm just here to
answer questions that anyone may
have for us today.
It was indicated this year
division had been contacted in
connection with this.
So are you are you working.
With the bridges across.
New Mexico group on this issue.
Mr chair committee members not
no we're not we did receive
early drafts of the bill and
heard about it before
I could I could say that as is
as is evidenced in the HSD input
to the FIR for the bill are we
remain concerned that this is
essentially duplicative
it's it's duplicative and a
number of ways there are other
routes or stakeholder input
besides just the collaborative I
I don't want to go on at length
we we don't think that without
without going on one side or the
bill I think we do believe that
it largely duplicative of what
we are doing what that
collaborative is doing what
behavioral health planning
council is doing what HSD
properties to
and I do know that the
amendments added a role for that
the collaborative didn't appear
in the original bill at all the
amendment adds a review will for
the for the draft action plan
that's that's good to see
but it's still a very small role
major player I think but again I
should stop there thank you Mr
chair thank you thank you so
much.
Senator let's go to your
amendment and.
It was like everybody or do we
have to pull it up on the screen
No Mr chair it's more pages
without work well
being posted we did send it out
and my analysis I did we did my
analysis to incorporate some of
the highlights of the amendment.
it's this thirty seven different
changes some sum of money for
the.
Senator.
So Senator do you want us to go
through the amendments are my
suggestion was maybe.
come up to the committee said it
would incorporate all those
thirty seven amendments into a
new version of the bill that we
could hear which is right in
front of us.
Mr chairman and I appreciate
that and I apologize too because
the of as we're working in
conjunction with a house bill is
that mirrors what we're talking
about here today they had their
hearing first of their
amendments were adopted which is
what we're trying to do is to
make sure that we are tracking
it with what Representative
bashes bill looks like also in
the house.
And I think it may be hard it
may be better for us to do a a
committee substitute because
even with self going through it
trying to track it does make it
a bit difficult for for the
committee maybe to review.
But I know I can give you if
you'd like just to highlight as
to some of the changes or if
you'd like for us to do a
committee substitute and then
come back at the next meeting
with the a cleaner version sept
you Mr chairman.
Senator we would.
What's your view is it would be
easier for us to deal with we're
just we're everything just read
smoothly Mr Chairman it may be
so
and that is just and with all
even with my own tracking on the
bill itself it does
It is extensive on a I think a
every right to in some areas
that I think would be much
easier for the committee to
follow
And I notice when misty hills
Cauchy's talked about two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
appropriation was put in in the
house no snow Mr chairman still
stays at fifty thousand dollars.
Okay.
I thank you.
Let's go to the committee for
some comments and issues they
agree that it would be better to
do this committee some approach.
What's the sense of the
committee.
Mr chair.
Yes.
Read that amendment and I think.
It would make clear to have a
committee sob
But I you know I would respect
that the Sanchez wishes I just
am afraid.
That as it progresses from us it
could.
You know we're Senator again
right after us.
Probably finance is that right
ten years ago to finance expert.
It does yes yes it goes finance.
I need some.
The committee also.
Yes if you can have the the
committee so.
Impaired.
I don't know but I'm Monday
ninety rushing in but if you
could we will whatever the
committee so I was ready we'll
take a point Senator okay I
appreciate it Mr chairman and I
know that Mr wolf was nodding
his head but yes they they did
up the amount of money in the
house to two hundred fifty
thousand dollars
okay the bill was originally at
fifty.
They they go to appropriations
and house them to go to
appropriations text that is
correct they'll have to go
there.
Okay.
So all right in with the
committee do I hear anything
junction to rolling this over in
anticipation for the committee
seven to be prepared that we can
deal with money is ready by then
or variety and when do not.
I assume will meet on when was
the we do have a floor session
wings you just strikes me but
I'm I think we'll we'll go ahead
and have a committee meeting
after the floor session on
Wednesday.
Mr
Reddy on Monday.
Thank I will submit this Mr
chairman and Miss Vigil I will
make sure that we get a clean
copy so that we can have a I
think a more thorough in
discussions instead of trying to
flip back and forth between the
amendments and the bill itself
so I will commit to get submit
that this evening Mr chairman.
Okay does anybody else on the
committee have any other
comments on this before we
proceed to one ninety two.
K..
Senator will just move on then
to get a new one.
Okay thank you Mr chairman.
Let me switch my screens please.
In Mr chairman I believe that we
do have Mr Grayson.
He is my expert witness.
In.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am here to present
Senate bill one ninety two and
essentially what we are
proposing to do with this is to
require law enforcement agencies
and peace officers you disclose
evidence that is favorable to an
accused in a criminal case
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee this is commonly
referred to as the giclee
amendment.
And I know that Mr Grayson of
course out of the the district
attorney Tauruses office here
Bernalillo county I know can
give a little bit more
background as to the request
that we are making so at this
point Mr chairman if I could I
would like to asked Mr Grayson
if you would give an overview.
Thank you senator yes Mr
president please.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr chair
members of the committee.
This bill is is an outgrowth of
the of the criminal defendants
due process right to receive
from the prosecution all
favorable evidence material to
the defense.
that that right is enshrined as
much as a matter of resources
Maryland and giggly overseas
United States and what it
basically requires is that
they're all the prosecution
provided all favorable evidence
to the defendant and favorable
evidence is evidence that's
exculpatory or that can impeach
some of the prosecution's
witnesses or any of the
prosecution's witnesses.
So that's not only a
constitutional duty the
prosecutors have but it's also
an ethical one and it's in the
rules of professional conduct
for prosecutors at school
introduction Rio eight.
What happens with Brady versus
Maryland is that there is a
there's our prosecution team
concept and so it's not just the
prosecution that is responsible
for to producing this evidence
to the defendant it's also law
enforcement officers who
investigate the crime because
they're part of the prosecution
team.
As the prosecutors who provide
the information directly to the
defense but we as prosecutors
have a duty and as Senator Lopez
mentioned I'm a deputy district
attorney and in Albuquerque New
and the prosecutor and and as
prosecutors we have a duty to
investigate whether any
witnesses any states witnesses
have impeachment material that
must be provided to the defense.
It's a it's a duty that
prosecutors take very seriously
but it's of course a duty that's
dependent on the cooperation of
the witness and law enforcement
witnesses as a whole are very
cooperative with with our
requests for Brady or Giglio
material but as you can imagine
this is an uncomfortable subject
and very few police officers
have what is known is given to
the information in their
personnel files but we have to
ask all law enforcement officers
whether they've been disciplined
for misconduct based on for
example acts of dishonesty.
And because of the the
uncomfortable nature of that
conversation there are some
officers who do not want to
cooperate.
And this bill.
The important function of this
bill is to clarify that this is
a duty on the part of law
enforcement officers just as
much as it is a duty on the part
of prosecutors and so when a
prosecutor asked for this
information this bill would
require that law enforcement
officers respond and provide
that information to the
prosecution so that we can
comply with our constitutional
duty and make sure that the
defendant has a fair trial.
that's the goal of this bill and
so the way that accomplishes
that Mr chair members of the
committee is.
By spelling out that when the
prosecution asked for
impeachment information.
And again this is that the bill
refers to favorable evidence and
that's the term that's used by
the United States Supreme Court
in the Brady context.
So when the prosecution asked
for favorable evidence then
though law enforcement officer
and the officers are employment
agency would have a duty to
respond and providing the
information.
And the other aspect of this
this bill is that it would have
consequences it would have
cheese by imposing.
As part of this duty that if
there's a violation of the
studio could result in it could
have an effect on officers
certification.
Anything else Mister president.
I know Mr chair members of the
committee again that the the
real function of the bill is to
send the message that this is
not an optional.
Basically an optional thing for
officers but is instead part of
the law enforcement duty thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Grayson Senator
anybody else that you want to
call is an expert.
Mr Chairman at this time thank
you.
We do have some public comment
people signed up I have
Barron Jones and invented by our
and Jonathan Ibarra who signed
up to speak on this bill so
let's start with Mister Jones.
Mr chair of the members of the
committee there is also the ACLU
of New Mexico and I just want to
say that we stand in strong
support of this legislation we
see that.
The some accountability in
despair nest in old from
rehearsals process thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Jones I just got a
text by the way before you you
Mr environment
Senator Gallegos is lost is.
His wife I think.
So I think we're down to four
members.
We'll see you Senator Tallman
rejoins Mr Senator Gallegos can
regain his wifi or Senator.
Ingle just will go.
Perhaps perhaps you could call
in we can send the number over
to do that that would be great
if you could do that for.
To send him a phone's release
you can be on by phone.
I think he's done in loving
center you Mr.
Whatever the town is it is an
honor.
Okay let's go then to go and I
see Mr Bauer is still on here so
we'll skip over him thank you
yes are you.
Thank you thank you want to go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you Senator Lopez for
bringing this bill we stand in
support of this legislation as
Mr grace and said there are
already a constitutional
obligations on both prosecutors
and law enforcement agents to
disclose this type of
information prosecutors have
professional liability already
for failing to do so and can be
disciplined and up to being
disbarred for failing to comply
with the Brady requirements but
there is has not really been a
clear a repercussion for law
enforcement and so there's not
much of a disincentive to set on
exculpatory evidence or
impeachment evidence so we think
that this bill goes a long way
to make sure that both parts of
the prosecution team are equally
incentivized to disclose this
information and comply with
their constitutional obligations
thank you so much.
Thank you madam chair this call
is with the office of the public
defender.
What are your next.
Thank you Mr chair a my name is
Jonathan Ibarra I'm also a
public defender and on the board
of the New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association also
a former prosecutor and former
District Court judge I do agree
that this is necessary having
been a prosecutor and not having
access to that information I
always found troubling
especially with officers who I
felt.
Likely had that kind of
information out there but that I
didn't even have access to which
was very unfortunate obviously
and so and certainly on the
defense side doing these cases
and I I just got a complete
disclosure yesterday from the
district attorney's office and
there are there important for
everybody to have that the right
information so we know forts we
do support this bill thank you
very much Mr chair and Senators.
Thank you Mr.
Is there someone else public
comment.
I notice Charlotte mother when
you did you want to make a
public comment.
Thank you Mr chairman at this
moment.
Okay thank you.
Were you here for this bill or
for the other bill.
The other one.
I'm sorry.
Complete action on this bill
I'll come back to you if you can
wait that long when you can make
your comments and in case you
can't join us on Monday.
Anybody else in the public who
are coming on the seeing none
will go to the committee what's
the one of the committee
members.
Anybody on the committee with a
question or comment was the will
of the committee.
Mr chair Sliq goes to Judiciary
I'm assuming after their
committee.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez has their
hand up I could make a motion
but I would like to hear if she
has a COVID first good.
Thank you Senator guide
Committee rejoined as soon so
let's wait because we can't take
final action was a quorum
the Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Alright sorry Mr chair I think
this is a
A good bill and I'm probably
gonna support I'm just curious
if there are specific
circumstances that give rise to
this because as I understand it
they have the obligation ought
will where the prosecutors have
the obligation so this is
putting a consequence on police
officers were failing to
cooperate with with.
Prosecutors that I I guess I
just find the concept of the
bill.
Important if it's in is it
happening but also disturbing
that they're not complying with
the responsibilities.
That Mr chair Mister ray Center
Senator Lopez did you want to
respond Mr chairman if Mr
Grayson could answer place.
Thank you so the locals Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you for your
question and I do want to
emphasize that the vast majority
law enforcement officers to
cooperate with this remember
closely to law enforcement
agencies to make sure we get the
information that must be
disclosed this basically as as
miss Chavez Cook mentioned is
this basically just imposes the
same kind of consequences for
withholding that information on
law enforcement officers that
already exists for prosecutors
and so it it basically evens out
the responsibility within that
prosecution team and make sure
that law enforcement officers
are aware that this is part of
their duty.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I to I guess
I it bothers me that they
weren't aware of that this is
part of their duty because is
there there part of that part of
the team and if so if they.
If they don't find this pin it
affects their certification.
But this will not affect their
if they violate their Brady
obligations they're also
consequences imposed in the case
that is they're subject to
getting dismissed in this this
will not affect any of that is
that correct.
Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee and and Senator
Sedillo Lopez that is correct so
there are already consequences
as a matter of constitutional
law if evidence is suppressed
and it is material to the
defense and favorable to the
defendant and suppressed and not
disclosed before trial in any
conviction could be overturned
and this law would not affect
that in any way.
Thank you I think that's very
important and did we do we know
we put the police are for
whether.
Whether peace officers I notice
nobody's here objecting to it or
supporting it when we're another
do we know where they stand on
it.
Mr Chairman Mr Grayson.
Mr chair and senator CMC Lopez
yes I I'm not aware of the of
the position on this bill we
worked as I mentioned we work
very closely with the New Mexico
state police outreach police
department early county
sheriff's office to ensure full
compliance Bernalillo county
with Brady and Giglio but I do
not know.
In any agencies particular
position on this bill.
Excellent I I'm glad it would be
disappointing to me I think if
they if they.
If they came in a post complying
with their obligations
but it is interesting that
there's a consequence
that I'm I know that Senator
Stefanics is ready to make a
motion and when she does I'm
ready to second it Mr I mean
Senate Mr chair.
I have a quorum.
We have a seven committee.
What we could do is is
As a committee the take a vote
which we would not be a final
mode and then when we resume on
Monday if we don't have a quorum
of the time we conclude today.
We have to take up the issue at
that meeting.
Senator Lopez would you be
offended if I made a no look
back so you can move on.
Your muted.
Okay there we go sorry I have
all right if you if I'm willing
to make a note REC it goes on to
Judiciary from here well that's
the recruit we don't have a
quorum I would feel more
comfortable Mr chair doing that.
One ninety right.
If the substitute motion I'm
happy if they want to do that.
Madam.
Mr chair I think that there's
not gonna be a floor session.
For now until Wednesday is that
correct your the.
It's not gonna be any faster or
slower and will should on the
one ninety one are we going to
have that in time for Monday we
just do both Senator Lopez is
built on Monday.
Okay okay.
This list is holding both over
for Monday I'm sorry senator
with the Senator Tallman is
titled in Judiciary.
Senator Gallegos losses a wifi
and
I'm not sure we're Senators
Mieses today then to Senator
Ingle was with us and probably
There's probably a wind storm or
something Infratel as an option
most.
But any rate the.
In this Mr chair you'll.
I I texted Senator Twellman
in judiciary if we just want to
wait a few minutes to do.
How close he is there or where
it is because you they've.
If it's his bill he's already
been there for almost the one.
Bill so I'm sure there is a lot
of the testimony.
To.
The support person Jenny and she
said he was still in the fray.
The
structure will since since
Senator Lopez asked to come back
for one ninety one this
shouldn't take very long we can
do this one very quickly and
then act on one ninety one as
well on Monday.
Okay I have to go back to
Judiciary anyway you know you're
you're you're so sorry thank
you.
Sorry we were able to to to take
a vote on this.
At least thank you Mr chairman
we had some discussion on it so
I appreciate that you Mr we're
we're we're we're ready to vote
on it so we'll just wait a
motion on Monday and then move
from there okay Senator Sedillo
seja Committee is furniture and.
I just forgot my hand was a okay
sorry the.
Well members.
Late so I was gonna give in this
Muslim New York chances she's
gotten often is curator of
colleges.
So we will conclude the the
