So Mister chair thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I appreciate this up I
was just curious and and I
appreciate all the work you have
done and Greenhalgh was search
strategies that the you've done
a lot to try to get things
corrected but you talk about Dr
Scrase called.
And I appreciate him get on
board so earlier on the year of
is talking to a group of school
superintendents of schools and
he made a case that are COVID
that he's worried about COVID
right not suicide rate wondering
what his changing the thought
process folder please give you
any indication while some
suicides and issue with
employment it was not three
months ago and and I understand
his job was over COVID but
comment caused quite a few quite
a few.
Area I'm just wondering if you
went into detail with you on
that miss.
Thank you senator and now I mean
I don't know what that was three
months ago I do know his point
was that HSD slide the O. H. is
very committed to suicide
prevention and so he was
pointing out to me that was
really smart to move this bill
into the behavioral health
collaborative because those
folks coordinate between those
two agencies so that was his
main point any just wanted to be
could do to be included in the
future and and so he was just
real support of but I'm I'm sure
he's whatever his comments were
months ago I think I think we
can assume that he's changed
released in terms of suicide
it's more on his radar screen
I'm sure based on my
conversation with them.
Question.
Mr chair it does not lost you
for part of that but I'm just
grateful that he's part of the
overall look on this because.
Behavioral health needs to be a
part of this and and we just
need to be able to give people
hope and I think your bill
starts a conversation so I
appreciate well concern well the
question thank you thank you
senator.
Thank you senator Harris.
Senator I had some comments or
suggestions.
We.
Committee you should be
behavioral health subcommittee
of the health and Human Services
interim committee and.
Couple of summers maybe it's
been longer than that making as
many as three separate zero.
We had a presentation on a
program.
What what school system more.
Has a great concept and I
haven't heard more about eighty
cents for a just wanted to like
this for you okay they had the
the program basically.
Two young freshmen who
volunteered to do so.
And gave them.
Club and the club was
Me for yeah actual names like
French the French of Cologne.
And then the club members spent
their freshman year being
trained in.
How to how to initiate
conversations with others who
seem like they were withdrawn or
or lonely.
How to recognize the signs of
somebody who is you know not
able to concentrate in class one
of your fellow students it was
training then and when they were
sophomores the the media and
having some your limited
interaction with other students
in the needs of them and in
their junior and senior years
later Pierre consulars for a.
And.
The start of this because
there's been a whole space or
student suicides three or four
in the school system over on the
very short period of time.
And they just raving about
program and how it is stop that
from happening from continuing.
Anymore.
Would seem to me of model legend
so so that they there was a.
Raining component to there was a
you skills building component to
it and then there was an actual
outreach and and and and they
were trying to reach China
stations or anything they were
just trying to.
To.
Find.
Liz.
Trained listening here.
Sharing and sharing your to
their fellow students and seem
to make a huge difference so
that might be something to at
least explore whether a whether
it'll still hasn't program they
may not now in the year of COVID
because everything is spiritual.
What is and how that might be
replicated in other school
systems I thought that was real
innovation this is a lot of
attention.
And also are chair Mister
chairman that is very much in
line with senator smitteez of
emphasis on the importance of
schools and then again yeah that
sounds like a great program and
then I remember of the sky
Center from from that summer
that that does wonderful work
with suicide prevention in Santa
Fe but but yeah yeah yeah.
So there are a number of those
models that we really ought to
be fostering and and supporting
in various ways the other
comment was going to make is
that you know the city.
Albuquerque and Las crucis is
also doing this from memory
trying to find ways to.
Mental health and suicide.
Dress from the police department
to train to behavioral health
training behavioral staff.
He's telling those community
safety department or and there
is a national line eight eight
number nine eight lines.
If you call it instead of nine
one one.
You don't have a response you
have a.
One of these prices intervention
people respire eighteen of them
To the extent that we can
either.
Train our police officers but
it's very hard to make sure that
every single officer response
very single suicide rate is
going to training.
Or have a separate response team
to suicide threats.
That would be a way to really.
Improve the way we respond to
those.
So that might be another part of
your bill and that is something
to keep in mind thank you.
And then Senator Sedillo Lopez
you have a question or comment.
All were victims.
And I know.
Senator I'm sorry you have to
your to committees going on
sametime the other one right you
turn on.
The New Mexico legislature.
Yes.
So did you want to make a motion
or you have a handout I don't
know what.
I simply wanted to say when
you're ready for a motion I'm
ready to make what we're ready
for a motion Senator I move it
to pass I second.
So is there any further
committee discussion.
Seeing the secretary will call
the roll.
This is a do not pass on Senate
bill one twenty eight and a due
pass from the committee
substitute.
So roll yes ma'am.
Thermacare not yes to pass.
Dollars that yes.
I'm sorry Senator.
Yes.
I quite.
Legislature now has the
opportunity to.
Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
Yes thank you.
For these numbers.
Yes yes you.
Thirty.
Yes.
Congratulations Senator nearly
of us and you've got some some.
Building work in.
You're strengthening your bill
is thank you Mr chair thank you
committee for wonderful and put
thank you.
The committee will now go to
senator smitteez for the next
two bills we're gonna hear
motion is built.
Senate bill two thirty two.
And Senate bill two thirty
eight.
So when we start with
legislation in order senator
will yield to thirty June first.
Right thank you Mr chair
I appreciate it so at three
thirty two what what we're doing
here is
introducing an exemption for
vaccination for reasons of
conscience
what we have now New Mexico is
of course you have a medical
exemption to to vaccination and
then there is also a limited
religious exemption that people
can get.
there are a variety of other
states that that have what's
called date you know non medical
or or or personal exemptions add
to backs in nation some of those
are Oregon Colorado Pennsylvania
Minnesota centric.
and really what I wanted to
point out in the in the brief
presentation of this bill is
really we're just adding that
reasons of conscience exemption
what does that mean well when we
drafted this bill actually asked
the drafter because a couple
other states let me just review
their language
for example Oregon says personal
religious or philosophical the
state of Maine says and oral
philosophical or personal
beliefs and I said do we need to
list things out like that and
the drafters said no this is
just for reasons of conscience
you even compass kind of all of
those those reasons of why why
someone may may object.
for or why parents you know make
may object to to that particular
vaccination so so really want
one my why am I choosing to
sponsor this bill really it's a
you know look personal liberty
is is very very important to me
is very important to my
constituents it's what I I told
my district I would come come up
to the legislature and and fight
for and so there's a lot of
issues for personal liberty that
we can talk about that this has
come up a lot because of for
some of its because a COVID of
people are thinking about
vaccination thing about our
vaccination laws what they're
what's not fair is.
This is also unfairness it's not
only a medical liberty bill but
it's also a fairness bill you
know the there are some secular
for don't affiliate with a
particular religion and yet if
they have some sort of reason
and conscience to object to a
vaccination for their child
they're kind of left out in the
dark well someone that has some
of the religious belief is able
to to you know make an exemption
so it's it's also about fairness
and and how we treat people in
New Mexico so that's all this
bill does
and I'm there's no expert
witness or anything it's just
just me you all know I'm I'm
passionate about health care so
hopefully that was clear it's a
very simple bill it brings us
not only to a medical exemption
and a religious exemption state
but also into a a philosophical
objections to.
Thank you senator Schmidt is now
we have a
large number of people who.
The estimate public comment on
this so I'm gonna send some
parameters we'll we'll deal with
the currents for no more than
fifteen minutes.
Proponents those supporters were
no more than fifteen minutes.
And I'm gonna go down the list
here
if you're if you're here.
Yourself and you can begin
making your testimony.
And then there's still some time
left from the finish the list of
people signing up well good
anybody extra who who didn't
sign under wants to make a
statement.
So the first person I have ever
to speak against this measure
and we're starting to three will
go to eighteen or so is Walter
Jareth.
University of New Mexico school
of medicine.
Thank you very much thank you
all for inviting me in for
service to the state okay brief
and one of the pediatric
infectious disease faculty and
physicians at the university of
New Mexico School medicine
speaking on their behalf we have
a three quick concerns about
this of the one you know we are
now seeing the benefit of
vaccines and we haven't seen
since the polio outbreaks of
nineteen fifties were struggling
I think doing a great job in our
state and folks you guys trying
to get hurt and you try to get
some of the small businesses
open that's right under control
and so the producing legislation
at this critical juncture which
may undermine humanization
process is very concerning
tightening secondly I also worry
that we're going to have the
influx of vaccine preventable
diseases working cough measles
chicken pox data shows that
where you have more lax
legislation the more likely to
have like sections we have more
exemptions you have was axing
preventable diseases one third I
would also point out that most
states do not have these so
called philosophical exemptions
almost three fourths of the
states do not have this more
liberal language and we are now
the majority of states as the
way our legislation is current
which are lastly I would just
say as a physician personally
I've taken care of the children
of the fighters axing
preventable diseases many of
whose parents did not want to
introduce their kids are never
once
after talking to the family
family that didn't change their
mind after that point and really
unfortunately to the value of
vaccines the hard way a lot of
these children can't advocate
for themselves.
Thank you very much.
Thank you doctor next is.
of the New Mexico immunization
coalition should be followed by
heather and.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak today my
name is on a peddler and I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico immunization coalition
we're a statewide public private
partnership which focuses on
education about and promotion of
immunizations I urge you to vote
no on Senate bill two thirty two
this bill would make it easier
for parents to opt out of
immunizations for their children
and we have school and child
care requirements for
immunizations as a way to
protect children and their
communities from vaccine
preventable diseases.
In New Mexico as senator
committees mentioned we have a
law that allows for religious
and medical exemptions to
immunizations this is more
permissive than several states
which only allow for medical
exemptions we believe that
there's no need for reasons of
conscience exemption and that it
will increase our exemption
rates and put our children in
communities at greater risk
several of the states that the
senator mentioned have much
higher rates of exemption then
New Mexico does or again having
as high as seven percent we have
about one percent here
immunizing a large enough
proportion of the population is
critical to prevent outbreaks
and to protect those who can't
be vaccinated and as it
conception rates increase the
community immunity decreases and
leaves us vulnerable and as we
know from Corona virus we need
higher rates of immunity to stop
outbreaks.
Vaccines are extensively tested
there well studied and they're
safe and effective and vaccines
are one of the highest greatest
public health achievements of
the past century the reason why
we don't see more outbreaks of
diseases such as measles and
polio and chicken pox is because
we do a very good job of
vaccinating our children and I
urge you to reject the loosening
of reasons for exemptions from
vaccine thank you very much
thank you Mr.
The next is heather Owens she
will be followed by Dr Karen
Armitage.
This heather and.
Then we'll go to the Karen
Armitage.
Thank you she will be followed
by Larry Sandler.
Dr Armitage's interior will go
to a doctor Schadler.
And he will be followed by we K.
Sims.
We'll go to until we take K.
sent.
Followed by.
Three.
Okay we'll go to hearing three
followed by Denver the
department of health.
Thank you Mr chair Senator my
name is Erica three I'm a
resident physician at the
university of New Mexico in the
department of pediatrics and I
would also like to voice my
concerns for this bill in the
Senate our next nation loss of
this time.
Later the points have doctors
don't forty
and this panel or what nations
are without a doubt the probably
the most important advances
medical science
for the past immunity in around
for several hundred years now at
this point and.
Enabling more people to opt out
of vaccinations will invariably
endanger their children as well
as the other children within our
community and this is
demonstrated time and time again
in areas that have low
vaccination rates
in the past twenty years it's
predicted that the measles
vaccine has probably prevented
something on the order of twenty
million tax alone and untold
billions of dollars and health
care savings as well so I think
that validating some of these
somewhat unfounded concerns over
vaccine safety and efficacy
would be a mistake in a step
backwards for our state at this
critical moment in our dances
and ACSI technology thank you
very much.
Thank you.
so we'll go next to Denver the
health department followed by
actually Garcia of the Public
Education Department.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee and I'm the infectious
disease bureau chief and I used
to be immunization program
manager for several years at the
department of health so we have
only one place really in society
where we tell people you need to
be vaccinated.
And that's at school when they
have the when they're registered
for school.
But we do allow for some
exemptions for people who have
special reasons not to get it.
but we don't want too many those
because the more extensions you
have and we're at about one
percent like I understand it but
it's been creeping up every year
we're about forty five hundred
now and every year I watch you
grow up from the two thousand
three thousand it's growing so
that increases your risk for
infectious disease if we see
outbreaks of protest rates and
and sometimes these over the
schools if we allow it to get
bigger we will have those more
those outbreaks.
So we have actually three ways
to get exams and now you've got
medical and you've got to
religious exemptions and I have
stood there in the extension of
the in the immunization programs
offices and talk to people as
they came in because I talked to
a if they tell me what they're
doing some people they just
don't have time to get their
kids vaccinated some people they
just don't want to others have
medical ideas that it doesn't
work at all kinds of ideas and
that's all those under the
religious now the religious
exceptions though there's plenty
of freedom for exemptions now
widening it sends the wrong
signal signal thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr then we'll go into
a actually Garcia.
Followed by Melissa Mason.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Ashley
Garcia and I'm a registered
nurse with the public education
department.
Public Education Department does
stand in opposition of SB two
thirty two immunizations provide
protections table the immunized
individual as well as the
community as a whole and I just
ensuring that all eligible
individuals are vaccinated it
can provide protection to those
who cannot receive the vaccine
due to those exemptions that
have been previously mentioned
such as religious there are
medical exemptions an expansion
in allowable exemptions as
proposed by SB two thirty two
may potentially decrease our
opportunity for community
immunity to these vaccine
preventable diseases that others
have mentioned and it could
potentially have a negative
impact on our most vulnerable
populations and childhood
vaccines are recommended by
virtually all reputable medical
associations to include the
American academy of pediatrics
centers for disease control and
prevention World Health
Organization and many more and
the American academy academy of
pediatrics at St the sciences
overwhelming that vaccines are
safe and effective so for these
reasons and the others that
those have gone before me
of pensions the department as
opposed SB two thirty two thank
you thank you Mr.
And then the last one who signed
up in advance is Melissa Mason
so we will have some time for a
few more if anybody else is
online and wants to come in and
please raise your hand souls go
with Melissa Mason next.
I thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I really
appreciate this opportunity I am
a pediatrician in private
practice in New Mexico and I
have grave concerns about the
passage of this bill because of
what and I'm not going to be
labor what has already been so
eloquently said I one hundred
percent agree with those things
but I just want to add that by
allowing further areas of the
exemption you are preventing
people from having those
conversations with their health
care providers and in my
experience I've had a number of
families who were very nervous
about immunizing their kids and
wanted an exemption but after
talking about it and directing
them to good sources about
information on vaccines risks
and benefits overwhelmingly
those families have worked with
need to get their kids immunized
so to increase the
available exemptions without
really having to force those
people to talk to their
healthcare providers I think it
really opens us up to many more
exemptions and many more issues
that vaccine preventable
diseases so I am in strong
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you doctor and then I see
the doctor Larry Schindler has
been admitted so you want to say
anything in opposition to Senate
bill two thirty two Dr Channell.
Senator is finished she said
you're listening to the webcast
probably turn that off.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Go ahead Larry.
Go ahead.
This is Chandler I'm a
pediatrician in Santa Fe and I'm
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico pediatrics's side of.
State chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics we
strongly oppose this bill.
For the reasons as already burns
stated by my peers so let's take
up any more time.
Priestly immunization rate.
Increase risks in children as
we've seen in recent outbreak in
rural New York City area of
measles increased.
Thank you Kristin.
Is this thank you.
And again the.
We oppose this bill.
Thank you.
Now we have that in two more
minutes for some other comments
from people who didn't sign up
in advance I see someone with
Melissa's iPhone who's at.
Please.
Can you hear me yes.
I am asking permission to
defer to doctor Alexander's
stand of it she was the
president of the New Mexico
pediatric society who is here
with me mate may she have
permission to speak yes please.
good afternoon everyone I really
appreciate having this moment to
speak and I will keep it short
I'm Alex generation president of
the New Mexico pediatric society
and I'm a general pediatrician
in Albuquerque.
Just wanted to ask you to
strongly consider voting against
this bill I find it very worried
some and I just want to give you
a quick story when I was a
resident
back in two thousand four I took
care of a thirteen year old boy
who died of post result and
suffer latest.
I got measles when he was nine
months old from and I'm immunize
child we don't give the vaccine
until kids are yearolds his
parents were very much in
support of vaccines but he got
the disease before he was old
enough to have the vaccine it
ended up causing a brief illness
when he was a baby but but it
was thirteen edge when he was
thirteen and reactivated in his
brain and caused a long slow
horrible neurological death by
it you know due to this vaccine
preventable disease so I ask you
to consider not just the fact
that this allows people who have
their own reasons not to get
vaccines that it does expose
children other children who are
not able to have the vaccine to
potential illness and that thank
you.
Thank you very much.
We'll go to we'll spend
fifteen minutes with people who
signed up to propose to support
this bill.
And
First one is Oshana spring to be
followed by Sarah Smith.
Hi Oshana spring natural path
are you aware that currently
blood in thirty seven children
are adversely affected by
vaccines there actually insured
and since the national childhood
vaccine injury act of nineteen
eighty six the vaccine
manufacturers are not liable not
at all and those snacks are
important actually funds
colleges for doctors and the
doctors make a lot of money
pushing vaccines and this is
what big pharma does and the
doctors are indebted to them for
their careers vaccines are
created and I worked in
immunology vaccines are created
using animals and aborted Uman
fetal tissue this gets put into
a child's body plus add oil and
Aid my emotions the some of the
things that you put.
All of the keys to.
Which we see an abundance
throughout the country so I
would definitely advocate
against or for I would advocate
I think to have a new another
way to avoid getting injured by
vaccines and thank you doctor
she metes and thank you Senators
thank you thank you Mr or doctor
spring I next we have Sarah
Smith followed by Lawrence
Parker.
Florence
Following.
Great thank you so much
so the Peter Parker one you can
skip and that's my has been we
didn't quite know how to sign up
so this is our joint statement.
Thank you for proposing a bill
that adds a conscious exemption
for children vaccine
requirements curriculums.
We are in two thousand fifteen
when more restrictions to the
vaccine exemptions were proposed
we were going to move had passed
as was seen with California's
removal a vaccine exemptions
there was only a modest impact
on increasing vaccination rates
however there was a large
impacted community schools and
economy from the exodus of
families who refuse to vaccinate
their children we're grateful
that New Mexico is considering
expanding exemption options
there are risks some possible
serious side effects of vaccines
and we feel it is critical that
parents have the right to choose
what risk they are willing to
accept for their family on the
side of the vaccine debate our
parents were trying to protect
their children you may not agree
with our views on vaccination
but I hope as citizens of the
United States of America we can
agree on freedom freedom to
choose how to raise our children
freedom to choose what is put
our body and freedom to act
according to the dictates of our
country thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Next we'll go to John block to
be followed by a Tracy
Hollister.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm in
New Mexico native and I support
just be at two thirty two which
will give New Mexicans more
choices on whether or not to
accept immunizations for their
child based on conscience
objections this common sense
bill gives New Mexicans more
freedom to choose whether or not
to vaccinate their child based
on very real and very personal
injections to these vaccinations
we had an objection to the use
of a four of aborted human fetal
cell tissue and certain
vaccinations or any other
concern and during this
legislative session we've seen
countless cries from many on the
left about abortion bills and
the need for bodily autonomy but
now those same people are
supportive of forcible
vaccinations which is the
opposite of suppose and bodily
autonomy by opposing this bill I
commend senator Gregg Schmedes
for putting forth this critical
legislation which will let
families make the choice to
immunize their child not the
government I urge the committee
to advance SB two thirty two
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr block the Tracy
Hollister is next to be followed
by Karen guy in our.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I am in support
of this legislation that
senators meetings proposed and
the reason is there is no one in
a better position than the
parents and legal guardians to
decide what is best for the
health and well being of their
children.
governments making such
decisions are at a much greater
distance I don't even know the
children then that haven't
necessarily even done the
research into the quality of the
vaccines secondly.
If there is a greater ability
for exemptions there can be a
much more rigorous public debate
about the effectiveness of the
vaccine or in the case of the
COVID nineteen vaccine a brand
new mRNA technology that is
completely a departure from
regular vaccines where people
are given an attenuated version
of an actual virus in order to
develop the immunity.
Third vaccines are created equal
and as of Shawna pointed out in
nineteen eighty six
pharmaceutical companies were
exempt from any.
Problems that resulted from
their vaccines which have been
many and have been numerous.
So I urge you to support this
bill because it provides greater
accountability and discussion
about the efficacy of different
vaccines rather than have them
forced upon our children or
society thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee I urge
you to support this bill.
Thank you Mr Hollister.
The final version who signed up
ahead of time was caring guy in
our but is there are other
supporters of this bill who want
to speak we'll have enough time
after to take a few more so
Karen Gaydos.
We'll go to shame.
Whose iPhone was on an iPhone.
Yes.
Alright first two and then I
need to so.
Yes thank you for hearing
chairman and senators I
appreciate your your wrist
spinner and I would just like to
support my
as the two thirty two I have
some friends that have had a
vaccine injured children and a
couple in particular you do not
associate with that particular
religion and they would like to
not vaccinate their other
children because of their
particular health issues with
their first child and so I think
that everybody should have the
opportunity to refuse
vaccination rates regardless of.
of religion or medical
exemptions I think that anybody
should be able to say you know I
don't feel comfortable with
state of the COVID nineteen
vaccine I'm and so everybody
should have that choice and you
know as the government control
of what goes into our body or do
we have some sort of freedom
over our own bodily autonomy
thank you so much for hearing
this bill and thank you to Dr
CD's.
Is there anybody else who wants
to speak in support of this
bill.
Mr chair I don't know Sir Smith
had gone back on or not you may
want to.
She may or may not be on I just
yes I am here.
Yes this is Serra Smith sorry I
did not receive this only for
some reason so I was trying to
get in.
Go ahead okay thank you I'm sure
Smith and I am a registered
Democrat in New Mexico and I am
representing one thousand eight
hundred and forty eight New
Mexicans from all over the state
have signed a petition in
support of this bill.
It is a fundamental right for
parents to be able to choose
medical procedures for their
children.
It is now that vaccines have a
level of inherent risk and even
if that risk is small it is
still a fundamental right for
parents to be able to choose
whether or not their children
receive vaccines I personally
know someone whose child was
vaccine injured and who was
still not able to get a medical
exemption for their child so
medical exemptions are
notoriously difficult to get in
this state I'm not exactly sure
why but those parents who have
these kind of situations and
parents who have specific
reasons need to be able to
choose whether or not to
vaccinate their child.
Thank you for hearing my comment
thank you Mr anyone else we
still have we can take two more
comments is still people want to
comment.
The Senators raised you want to
read the year of your
presentation I sure will thank
you very much Mr chair members
of the committee I will say that
I actually agree with
a ninety five percent of what
the opposition said I just want
to clear up a few things you
know that this this bill is not
an anti vaccination bill
whatsoever my own children are
are updated with their vaccines
I participated in World Health
Organization vaccination
programs in sub Saharan Africa
I I'm very very familiar with
the budget vaccine so that this
bill has nothing to do with with
the efficacy of vaccinations I
think you know if if people are
wanting to
have high rates of vaccination
it's really about facilitating
appropriate doctor patient
relationships as well as
education and power but
empowering people not not
forcing people but empowering
people to make decisions for
their own families
the data that was presented you
know Senator
opponents talked about
developing herd immunity you
know for for our our community
an absolutely vaccinations do
that they the developer
community but if you if you if
you have just a very very small
amount of people that feel very
strongly about objecting to a
certain vaccination I think that
you know we're not gonna take a
huge hit in her community
although we're gonna have a
someone had said from the
proponents side we're going to
help.
Will that have very strong the
objections to vaccination
whether not only one just you
know go out of state and those
sorts of things so I think that
they really this is about this
is about medical freedom of
choice and then lastly the data
that was that was present about
you know outbreaks yes outbreaks
happen but those communities
were not New Mexico we're
talking about orthodox Jewish
populations in New York City
there there's been a there is a
recent paper published about
eight a Ukrainian.
A community with lots and lots
of international travel for for
those communities so the you
know when we talk about public
health we have to we can't
compare apples to oranges we're
talking about New Mexico this
bill applies to New Mexicans
doesn't apply in New York City
and and once again this is about
this about Freeman choices non
anti vaccination bill at all
thank you Mr chair.
Dr Senators committees okay
let's go to the committee then
for questions comments.
Motions ultimately.
Senator was your first.
In center Dr Schmidt is just a
couple of questions and I
appreciate you saying that you
will this isn't an anti
vaccination though I've got a
bill coming up later in the day
that I've had discussions
questions long
some of vaccines but.
I just got a real quick one
wonders aren't health needs
Levin thousand dollars to rule
of publication
and noticed here for for the
department of health to need
that kind of money disposable
and noticed Jerry if you heard
from them on why it's so high.
Will Mr chairman hi I have not
the you know what I'm saying is
it's a it's a three year cost of
eleven thousand dollars I mean
these and you've seen the state
budget now we're talking
billions of dollars so.
You know you're you're you're
saying hi I'm that does seem a
little high to me but I guess in
the in the grand scheme of
things
you know I I in general
Don't have a major issue with
that eleven thousand doctors
pretty small amount of money I I
I you know in general but but
yes I I think it probably
wouldn't cost that much just to
there are already accepting at
affidavits of of medical and
religious exemption I don't
think it's going to take much.
Except an affidavit for a reason
of conscience.
All Mr center the reason that
question that is more than help
did not require any corporation
to teach current and future
nurse practitioner so I just
wondered why this was sort of a
stand out from what we're used
to so
Mr chairman and senator I guess
my next question thank you.
This increase on that same
children are public schools.
Well Mister chairman Senator
that's a great question
you know.
We don't know for sure we can
look at other areas and of of
the country where there are
exemptions or or more like more
loose exemptions and so I think
the reasonable to have a a very
negligible decrease perhaps in
some vaccinations
however you know once again the
the the talk about these big big
outbreaks of folks we're talking
about very very specific in
different communities that have
not been studied in New Mexico
and so I I don't anticipate any
sort of you know huge influx of
disease based on this bill I
think we're trying out a very
once again I think it's a very
small amount of people that
would choose to object based on
these grounds so we're getting I
think what we're getting is a a
negligible decrease in
vaccination but we're also
getting a very very big increase
for medical freedom.
But I don't I don't see any
evidence to suggest that there
would be out you know influxes
these to our state based on just
allowing us you know some people
to have a little more medical
for you.
Thank you Mr surgeries hi my
last question has very little
bit of the bill I know she had
Sir Smith along
and I have a lot of I regard for
do you know any of her
background.
And what she's due for mass.
Mr chair and for NASA no I I do
not.
Just a I I've worked with her on
other things other issues in the
I really like this you had a
total number population she's
working the support.
For your bill here in New Mexico
she's won the hassle crew really
good.
Technical skills and and when
she speaks I listen but
For the reasons I really believe
I can support you bill and also
that can listening press the
debate thank you.
Thank you senator Gaydos
Senator random.
Chairman I believe Senator
Sedillo Lopez
Adarand first off all of her
Sir.
Okay Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you senator let
me start my video.
I apologize I was eating so I of
you to myself Representative
eight
So we can still hear that other
Canadian
politics.
I'm doing obviously I'm waiting
to see whether my bill is called
their.
So Senator.
What I listen to the testimony
and I guess I want to get to the
bottom of exactly is the problem
that we're trying to address it
virtually anyone who wants an
exemption now can get one I'm
not clear what why we need this
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I'm sorry I wasn't clear
enough on on that that
particular issue no are are
law currently is is very
restrictive in fact if you look
at the portion law on amending
if you go up to
so on page two just at the very
top you have to have in an
affidavit or written affirmation
from an office recognize
religious nomination of the word
some sort of the pastor of work
or minister or something so the
these are very very few and far
between to my knowledge although
I'm not an expert on all the
different religious
denominations but there as in as
as we've heard from supporters
of this bill is a big is a big
community that does not claim a
a repair religion that either
religion in general the work
order religion that that
contains certain strong
religious exemptions to
vaccination I believe Senator
Invensys and jobs witnesses have
some.
Concerns there although I'm I'm
not you know personally a member
of either of those denominations
but but that's really what we're
what we're trying to do is we
have a lot of people that that
would like to attain some sort
of that exemption for some sort
of a personal reason but it may
not it may not be connected to a
religious issue and and last
lastly we've heard that there
are many people that actually
moved out of state because of of
this reason because they don't
have that medical freedom here
so that's we're trying to be
more inclusive of people not
just say look you have to have
this certain religion and then
we're gonna get an exemption
we're just trying to be
inclusive and treat everybody
fairly.
Because what I heard the
testimony and correct me if I'm
wrong is that people can just
say that they believe in their
heart that they don't believe
that the vaccination is good for
their child is that incorrect
and I do know people who have
gotten exemptions who are not
Who are not of a religious
beliefs such as Jehovah witness
or or anything else I just filed
an affidavit I certainly have
friends who have chosen not to
as to vaccinate their their
children or to do it on a
different schedule and I do
believe in bodily autonomy so
you're telling me that there are
individuals now who are being
turned down in their request for
an exemption.
Yes Mr chairman and senator yes
I actually personally know a few
people not now the building come
from.
Any sort of you know personal
like I said my my kids are all
up to date on their vaccines so
this the words of this bill is
because I I tend to you know
focus a lot on on liberty issues
and this is one that that I
think is is this is the right
overview so from from big groups
of people that that I've seen
that they're wanting this to
come to our state and want to
see more more Bollywood Tanami
but yes there are people that
cannot get one because once
again they have to go and find
some sort of pastor or minister
and and that's not happening out
the other route they could have
as a medical exemption and so
yes they could I guess find of a
physician and and and you know
they've had some submitted they
had at an anaphylaxis to to some
allergy or they had no allergy
that has no problem with the
vaccine in these things are also
fairly rare but those are the
only thing you can see right
here in the bill is the only two
exemptions that are that are
allowed in in New Mexico.
And and Mr chair has has a
physician.
Because I'm curious about how
many individuals would be able
to use this that are not
available to use the exemptions
together we probably don't have
that data or do we.
I'm sorry Mr chairman center you
cut out just a little bit could
you repeat your do we have any
kind of data about how many
individuals would be able to use
your exemption that are not
currently able to use the
exemptions that exist well yeah
I Mr chair and and Senator
Sedillo Lopez I I think you have
to do some sort of large scale
survey and and those sorts of
things are kind of you know I
guess you have to ask them a
question of you know if you are
allowed to do this would you do
it so so some of those are hard
to get a a hard number on I do
have some data
it right on the status New
Mexico opening LFC and they've
done a little bit of work on
this as far as vaccination rates
in yes we do very well in Mexico
that's why is far as having
shown that it in that's why I I
just don't see that a huge
concern about all these people
certainly not not vaccinating
decrease in our community I just
don't see that happening Mexico
the data just doesn't indicate
that and they they do say right
here they say most exceed
exemptions filed in New Mexico
are for non medical reasons
and then they say however
previous report in two thousand
fourteen found that fifty five
percent of the Senators had
chosen not to vaccinate for
For personal reasons so it's
it's kind of this we we do have
a little the data but I I I I
probably not enough to answer
your question or or try to
predict what would what would
happen with as this now we do
have Mr Burke from that division
here who could answer that
question and leave Senator you
want us yes yes Mr chair that
would be helpful.
Mr you still there.
It yes Mr chair I'm still here
so you know we have two kinds of
religious exemptions the second
kind is self attested so if you
tell us my religion is that I
cannot get that you know is
against action nations we accept
that and nobody is turned down
who signs in the self the tests
that they you know they can't
get it because of religious
beliefs so and that's over
that's like ninety percent of
the exemptions are the self
attested religious exempt.
So that so that maybe what needs
to happen is that we educate
people that if they choose not
to not to vaccinate their
children that they choose the
second option under the medical
exemption process I agree with
you that religious under the
religious exemption no to
medical I'm sorry thank you Mr
chair thank you for that
correction under the medical
under the religious exemption
they should choose the self
testing option I Mr chair I
agree nobody should be forced
against their will to have a
vaccination
with weight especially when
you're dealing with of.
Unical diseases that are not
life threatening and there's not
a massive emergency immediate
threat to life and that's the
way the constitution is is it
balances and so I I agree with
you that nobody should be forced
my question is whether this
this bill is necessary I will
probably vote for a year I may
not vote for it on the floor
just because your data I want to
go look at the report that
you're citing from the epidemiol
after the epidemiology data
because you yourself said that
fifty five percent of them are
for personal reasons and so if
people can get you can get an
exemption now I don't think for
for their own personal reasons
and I know people.
Yes of.
Choose not to they just don't
want to be or they want to make
the choice well I have a child
make the choice when they're
older I I think that that's all
that diversity is good so while
I will vote for the bill here
today I'm not positive that I
will vote for it on the floor
until I learn more about whether
it's really needed.
Thank.
Mr chair I just found to other
things in this report I can give
you under there's thank
statewide most exemptions for
kindergarten seventy eight
percent religious but then I
also toward the bottom think
it's reasonable and I think this
is the real reason for the bill
the state it's reasonable to
assume some parents have
continued to miss.
Just exemption by substituting
philosophical or personal
reasons for religious reasons so
I I think from Senator it's it's
really about enforcement a lot
of people yes and at least
Department healthier is kind of
conjecture and that that's
what's happening
but if that's what's happening
are we just enforce this and
crack down on the secular
community only.
That was not a real religious
exemption you just use that
efforts or twisted the truth or
misused as as they're saying
here this report where we can
actually give those those folks
some some protection to continue
doing what they're doing it by
the way still have very high
that vaccination rates even
though their conjecture and that
that people are misusing that
looser religious exemption so I
I think it's more about this
bill really cleans up the
statute to allow people that
freedom and not to kind of feel
like some people I guess are
misusing a looser religious.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator the lotus Senator
McKenna.
I thank you chairman and thank
you senator she meetings and
doctors meetings I don't forget
that you are medical doctors so.
I would make sure I call you by
your your other titles well.
Thank you for.
Having a good debate this
afternoon I have a lot from are
both pro and was opposing this
legislation.
Talking about liberty and
immunization and global thank I
remember back in March of.
Twenty twenty.
When our world as we know it
turned upside down.
And I remember.
Our governor really change how
businesses work how schools
work.
How to mask up.
And where I recognize that's the
right thing to do I was also
concerned about some Americans.
not wanting to cause something
I've learned is that Americans
are America is.
The most individualistic country
in the world.
Collectivistic.
so.
Not a problem the problems
many could.
Elective this to culture.
All.
For all.
And see the current statutes is
there are.
Adequate exemptions.
Well and the two religious.
that is our fellow New Mexicans
the opportunity to opt out and I
and I think the onus you know if
people want to.
Private liberty not to take an
immunization
by the medical reason.
That's.
The onus is on that individual
not on the state.
And so
I can't support this bill
because I really think
immunization.
Really good example of how
important it is at.
Are very individual
individualistic America we have
to be one for all and all for
one at times.
And
so so I think you.
Supported because I really think
our current waivers are at.
And if anything.
As as I understand from doctors
need the more and more to get
immunized against the pandemic
now the faster we can regain and
open schools and businesses and
the like so thank you very much
thank you chairman thank you
senator and Dr.
Thank you.
Any other discussion from the
committee who will of the
committee on this bill Mr
chairman I move do pass.
The motion for us this is our
second.
Senator.
Sir Senator committee seconded
sorry Senator Ingle you
mentioned to us okay.
Discussion.
I have a question for Mr Burton
Which is a vaccines are
mandated.
Well actually all the childhood
vaccines there there's a list of
them that you have to have so we
have to have four of this and
three of that one of the other
it's it's a pretty long list but
it depends on age so within
kindergarten there's a certain
list of I'm sorry I don't have
an exact but you know it's an M.
R. actually probably doctors
minutes knows better than I do
but there's a listed by
kindergarten you have to have
and then a little later you need
more and more so and actually
the requirements go down to
preschool so we requires certain
vaccines for you know.
So.
But.
Asian to school that that's
where the in the ceiling
enforcement Rio the only place
really anywhere in society I
guess some hospitals in force
like blue shots really it's just
about the only place in society
is admission to school.
And and so who was home
schooling their child.
There would be no.
The state would have nothing to
say about whether or not shown
on Max Energy actually they're
still required by law to
vaccinate their kids but there I
would say there's no
enforcement.
And.
To to my point and that is.
Why I oppose this particular
bill that is.
I I know that people have a
right to say what goes into
their own money and to make
decisions for their children of
that age.
But what we're dealing with here
the reason the school issue
comes up is because you're
exposing other people's
children.
To the possibility of of the
infection but I not immunizing
your own and so I think it's
perfectly valid for a society in
the state.
You know if you want to have
your kids go to school and
associate with other kids and
intentionally threaten the
health of those other chance we
do require that you have these
vaccinations.
Yes absolutely
Actually invalid reason to have
such a restriction on us on what
otherwise using is eighty one
restriction Human Rights decide
what you put into your own body.
Right I think you you've stated
the case very well it's a common
good that each individual has
to.
Put into by getting immunized
and and the fewer individuals
that but the more individuals
that start pulling out of that
it you know it's a graduated
thing you know you have more
risk to society and then we have
to remember the immune
compromised kids that can't
protect themselves and maybe
other people to protect
themselves by being around the
building vaccination.
Thank you thank you senator Tom
and you have a comment.
Thanks thank you Mr chairman
I'll be very brief.
Anything I just want to
reinforce what Senator McKenna
said was so true such an
individualistic country.
Such a selfish country is all
about the individual we are not
our brothers keepers.
And this could very well
contribute to our downfall thank
you.
Thank you Sir Senator Ingle you
have a comment.
Miss Mister chair your muted.
Senator Ingle have a COVID you
want to make.
Let's set the secretary called
the roll and do best motion.
From Senator guy and seconded by
Senator Schmedes.
Thirty two center got a ghost
yes.
angle.
Senator well.
Yes.
Thank you.
No.
Yes.
Senator.
Sorry yes you're right.
No.
to piano.
No.
So you have a.
It's it's forty three thank
that's correct senator.
Motion.
Senator and you your move ahead.
Thank you very much Mr chair
let's go to your your next bill.
This bill I don't know and don't
know if we're gonna be more or
less simple and thinking simpler
Mr chair.
Okay this is two thirty eight.
And this also has the
vaccinations are appreciate you
for the for the public.
bundling these together Mr chair
this one very simple so as as
the emergence.
What.
Sorry Mr Cheney one second here
us having a some beeping can you
hear me yes we can hear you
thank you sorry about that so
I'm as the emergency powers were
rolled out New Mexico I think
like many of you members of the
committee looked at the
emergency powers acts and and
what the law what the law says
and there was really one thing
that really struck me and it's
it's in this bill and that that
was that the executive has the
power to put an individual on
house arrest if they refuse
vaccination and really what
struck me about that is if you
go down just lowering the
statute here
if you go down to
to line fifteen of page two.
The executive also has the power
to to put effort on house arrest
if they're sick they're sick
they need treatment in there for
some reason refusing treatment
as unpleasant as it's as it is
to talk about putting some on
house arrest I can envision a
time when that might need to be
necessary where an individual is
such a because of their
communicable diseases such a
threat to their community that
that that sort of action has to
take place but my bill has
nothing to to do with that my
bill is talking about
a you know someone that that may
not even been exposed to a
particular disease it's it's
saying that a big because you're
saying you're not going to get a
vaccine you could be good and
healthy perfectly you could even
have no at risk contacts but
still in statute that power
remains for the executive to
place you on house arrest
and hoping not to get into a
discussion of enforcement on
licensure how some of these
things would be enforced if it
would be a
sort of a ankle monitor thing or
or or state police or something
but really it's it's the fact
that the question I think this
committee needs to
Debate today is do we want to
allow this power to exist even
the potential for it to
literally tell someone they have
to be on house arrest committee
your house because you refusing
vaccination and once again I'm
leaving in the treatment are
they can still they can still
the the you know.
The this the under state public
health emergency they can they
can still of quarantine somebody
forcibly who's who's refusing
treatment so we're not talking
about that about about
vaccination I just thought that
was a little strong and I I
don't believe it belongs in
state statute and that's why
we're doing this bill is a is
we're just removing that power
to put you on house arrest
against your will.
Thank you Mr chair.
We do have some people who
signed up in opposition I don't
know if they're here we'll start
with the Billy Jimenez from the
department of health.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee Billy
Jimenez W. secretary and general
counsel of the department of
health other Department of
health opposes Senate bill two
thirty eight it during this
incident public health emergency
we don't anticipate having to
use anything like this for we
have to know put somebody in
isolation or quarantine as a
result of of not getting
vaccinated but as this this
public health emergency has
shown us we don't really know
what the future holds and and we
don't know if there could be a
potentially very Maryland strain
of some kind of disease that
would require us to really
tightened some of the range to
make sure that we can protect
the public as best as as we can
so we we do note that we need
all the tools at our disposal in
case something like that were to
occur in and would like to know
that even with the existing
quarantine isolation procedures
there's a dedication process so
the people are for to due
process they get a chance to to
to present their case and so
there is court there has to be
court signed off there has to be
a court order issued in order to
make that happen from the
apartment side of things so
there is due process there is
protections in place for folks
so there are some checks and
balances and for these reasons
the department of health opposes
Senate bill two thirty eight.
Thank you Mr Jimenez.
Next we have.
Karen Armitage well in my area
and showers.
Karen Armitage's issue was in
for the last bill.
Showers.
Okay that that those are the
only people who sign up in
advance in opposition to this
bill is there anybody else who
is in the U..
Wants to speak in opposition
raise your hand and will
recognize you for up to two
minutes of conversation.
We'll go then to the supporters
of this bill.
And
Early.
Miglior Lester Oshana spring to
be followed by Sarah Smith.
Hi and thank you for supporting
this bill did you happen to know
senators that both visors of
moderne is experimental and RNA
gene therapy do not confer
immunity against COVID no more
present it's transmission they
do our process to limit the
severity once one gets it so
they are for I would also did
you know if you gatt comment you
have a ninety nine point nine
six percent rate of recovery.
So the thanks to the andtax
Tremaine somewhat similar in my
eyes and those L. from either
group should stay home and that
any any impose session otherwise
harkens back to **** Germany and
I think the norm Burke hello
pretense that from happening I
hope that thank you for
supporting this bill.
Thank you Dr
in the spring where do you
practice.
I am retired I and almost
eighty.
Thank you.
Followed by.
Either the partners for
uncertainty here.
Thank you for taking comment on
this bill since center gave us
was asking a little bit about my
background I just thought I'd
mention I am a former NASA
aerospace scientists which I did
for a decade so I'm still a
registered Democrat here in New
Mexico and also on this bill
representing one thousand eight
hundred and forty eight other
New Mexicans from all over the
state who oppose the power of
the state to isolate or
quarantine people who refuse
vaccination.
It's a basic human right to
decide whether to inject
something into your body.
And to take away a person's
ability to earn a living to feed
their family to pay for housing
based on whether or not they
choose to get a vaccine is
discriminatory.
So we vehemently oppose the
state having the power to put
people on house arrest who
choose not to have a vaccine.
And urge you to please support
this bill thank you.
Thank you we'll go then to
either Florence for Peter Parker
followed by Tracy Hollister.
Five point here sorry I have
seven children and a dog so if
you hear noise in the background
I apologize.
To be a truly free people we
must have the freedom to decide
without quarters and what is
injected into our bodies as we
heard from the last bill here to
monitor that we must vaccinate
for the greater good this is a
utilitarianism view and at its
best access to impartially
consider the interests of all
people affected by our choices
but at its worst it has been
used to justify horrific human
rights abuses human
experimentation and inhumane
treatment of people throughout
the world in the words of Thomas
Paine the greatest hearing needs
are always perpetrated in the
name of the novel's causes if we
are truly to be a just and free
society utilitarianism can not
be the main principle and
guiding our actions for creating
laws and policy for our country
no one should be coerced or
forced to use a product that has
paid four point four five
billion for injuries and deaths
and that are made by companies
that have no liability in
regards to vaccines and have
paid over thirty eight billion
in criminal and civil penalties
in regards to their other drives
there is a risk in life and we
should be allowed to decide what
risks we're willing to take
informed consent as are right
anything less is to radical
thank.
Thank you Mr Tracy Hollister
followed by insuring that you.
Thank you Mr chair Senators I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak again.
People who carefully consider
the conflicting reports of
safety various sacks scenes and
again not all vaccines are
treated are are equal should not
be penalized for their
conscientious decisions made on
behalf of their own health as
was pointed out by the former
speaker there are risks in life
there are risks when we get into
our car to drive to work or to
drive anywhere and we have to be
able to be free to take such
risks
answered.
Having a vaccine or not having a
vaccine does not necessarily in
all cases depending on the
vaccine it is for instance this
is a new and more in a
technology we're talking about
with this experimental emergency
use authorization of COVID
nineteen back.
And
there are other treatments
available they could ensure that
the person is not at risk of
getting the disease for instance
Dr Pierre Corey who probably has
been banned from you too but you
could probably find him on bit
shoot.
has talked about the substantial
data of ivermectin being a
wonder drug to help prevent
COVID nineteen and certainly to
prevent the mortality rate of
people in hospitals so this bill
does not consider what somebody
has already done the research
that they've done to protect
themselves for instance vitamin
D. three has been known to be
highly effective in not getting
a severe case of COVID nineteen
vitamin E. vitamin C. I take
that every day so we need to
understand that there are
alternatives to vaccinations and
vaccinations are not the savior
against a particular disease and
finally also David my own life
had three months of paralysis
she got be in bar a syndrome
from taking a vaccine the flu
vaccine about twenty years ago
and possible other complications
so somebody like her should not
be penalized or restricted from
participating in society when
their bodies don't respond well
to vaccines thank you Mr chair
and Senators.
During our.
She was in here for the last
chairman church is here again
but Diane Charles has raised and
did you want to say something in
support of this bill Diane.
Rancheros.
Probably listening on the
webcast let's go to should name
you have your iPhone you have
your hand of pollution and.
Yes Sir thank you for again Mr
chairman and senators for your
service and for hearing my
comments I would like to express
my concern I am personally the
parent of not one but two
vaccine injured children one
more severe than the other and
so this bill is very concerning
this
B. Kleist of this bill I I'm in
support of because
my family would be put on house
arrest if we refused a vaccine
and my like the person before me
spoke
They are our bodies don't
respond well to the extent we
actually have a gene mutation
and so for someone
to be placed on house arrest
because their bodies can't
respond well to a vaccine is
extremely concerning I I believe
that you would see a lot of New
Mexicans moving out of state if
this were to be the case are to
be enforced in some manner and
as as as the past year has gone
to show us that there's a whole
huge likelihood of something
like this happening and that's
very concerning to me so I do
support SB to thirty eight thank
you for hearing my comment.
Thank you Dan Charles will give
you one more shot at this are
you there.
You raise your hand.
John what do you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block as you now and I'm
a native New Mexican and I
wholeheartedly support just be
to.
Two thirty eight I support this
bill for limiting the authority
of the secretary of the
department of health under the
public health emergency response
act to isolate or quarantine a
person who is unwilling or
unable to undergo vaccinations
for reasons of health religion
or conscience I support senator
Gregg Schmedes SB two thirty
eight to take more power away
from unelected bureaucrats and
place it back into the hands of
the individual.
Our committee to for putting
forth this bill which will put
power back in the hands of the
people and I wholeheartedly
support this bill to secure
people's bodily autonomy and
keep people from being placed
into house arrest thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Clark M. Charles
you are you on yes I am so sorry
this is Diane the cash I just
wanted to point out as a teacher
I saw families who could easily
opt out of the vaccine and still
send their kids to public school
I was kind of a call because I
knew that they did not have a
medical reason it was just a
strong personal preference.
Their kids benefited from the
fact that an overwhelming number
of the kids did get vaccinated
but their children can't receive
vaccines for medical reasons and
it's those children need to
benefit from heard that herd
immunity provided by the rest of
us and our kids so I really feel
strongly about this and I hope
that.
If we don't go through.
Thank you so.
Restraint and Diane you're
you're speaking against this
bill.
I'm sorry I'm speaking against
I'm hearing people say that you
should have the freedom to not
vaccinate your kids I'm saying
that it's important that public
schools for example if you're
going to public school you need
to have your kids vaccinated and
it we should not allow
unvaccinated kids public school
that's what I would like to get
across.
Thank you very much thank.
Okay let's go to the committee
now members of the committee
will ensure what are your
comments or questions.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator.
Sorry only.
Sorry I apologize I'm listening
to the strandings.
Is that that is that was my
understanding is that this could
not happen without a hearing an
opportunity heard and hearing
process but it's not as.
Should be a little bit your
microphone.
What was your apologize I
apologize I'm ready I'm
listening to you I apologize.
You know what you're saying
Senator Ivey Soto.
I'm sorry.
Myself and the other hearing.
Of.
So my understanding is but I
didn't see this is an additional
service we're still we're not
getting the entire public health
that is no quarantine what
happened or forty can force
without a hearing and an
opportunity to be heard.
Process and I.
Because I have the all of this
going on I I didn't have time to
research it myself but
maintenance isn't I mean
Senator.
Mr chair Senators maybe is that
the case.
This.
As we speak center here's here's
my part of the answer to your
question I don't know if I can
answer fully so I I think I want
to start by saying I think that
this would be a great research
project for for somebody for now
lost to somebody I feel statute
that I'm striking the way that
it's written in.
It's it's got to be
unconstitutional because it says
someone who's who's actually on
able for a reason health and
then they can have it it
documented health problem or
disability or something and then
all the sudden we're we're
saying you're you're gonna be on
house arrest and search your
prior point yes it's is
emergency powers to me they're
they're fascinating because you
if the balance the emergency
with the with the constitution
right and so but but for me I
mean goodness.
Later on in the statute we're
we're talking about six people
that are refusing treatment of
these sorts of things but right
here all we're talking about a
vaccination and someone it says
I'm I'm physically unable I have
a doctor that says on medically
unable to do it you know that's
that just seems like strong
language to me as far as the due
process I don't know how how it
would it would occur I am I'll
tell you just because the issue
has been raised I'd be very
concerned of a person that does
not happen needs to hire an
attorney and and get the big you
know get the big guns out there
to fight for on I'm I'm I'm a
little afraid they get rolled
over by the state but I I'm not
sure what the process would
would look like legally.
Thank you senator yeah.
I need you are you okay yeah
thank you.
Thank you for doing that I of.
But I accidently muted myself
there and so they heard what I
was trying to say here and you
weren't so I apologize for
having might here there to see
if they call my bill but my
Mr chair could we defer to
To Mr Jimenez from the
department of health.
I'm again I have not looked into
the into the statue right this
minute but I'm pretty sure that
this could not happen without
due process.
Senator for if you want to look
it up while we're talking well
the answer it's twelve dash ten
A. dash ten a court hearing to
contest isolation or quarantine.
Are you still with us.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee that that is correct
there's actually two sets of of
court procedures either under
fair the public health emergency
response act or the public
health act itself and it it is
true so there's there's a
specific somewhere and orders
issued by the secretary of
health and then upon that orders
issue than the court a court
hearing is scheduled where a
person can put on their case and
for for not being isolated or
quarantine I can tell you from
experience just during this
public health emergency that the
courts were in cooperation with
the so they had prepared long in
advance of of sort of the bigger
senator in this emergency and
they had actually found a
volunteer attorneys to to serve
and represent people's interest
so the court had arranged for
representation of the the folks
who'd who would need it up if
necessary so that's kind of how
played out during this instant
public health emergency.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr chair
this is a very this would be a
very very significant W.
deprivation of liberty if there
was not a process with because
there is a process to protect
people from of the step
provision without giving them
the opportunity to be heard and
to without giving them the
opportunity to present why so
when Senators maybe says well
even somebody who was sick.
If that person and could not
take the virus if that person
posed a risk of death to others
around them this to me is where
individualism vows to
collectivism as I I really
appreciated senator McCann is
Conceptualization about it
because I look at it has public
health versus liberty and and
when she said individualism
versus collectivism that's a
similar you should go to law
school I guess she should go to
law school because it's a
similar the similar balances we
make and because there is a
hearing process and this is
grave emergency I can't be with
you on this bill and this one I
I just think that when you have
an emergency situation when you
have the protections that are
afforded to individuals and they
pose a grave grave threat to our
society.
The state has to act and to to
protect people and so for that
I'm not with you on this one
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair Senator just
make sure I'm clear the the the
part of statute I'm leaving
alone is the power to isolate a
person if they're refusing
treatment so someone who is sick
I'm not touching that with with
this bill just want to be sure I
was clear on that this is just
about the the someone that can't
vaccinate for medical reason or
religious reasons.
That's correct but but that that
I general vaccinations that herd
immunity I believe that it's up
to the individual however you
know and and you should be able
to force people however when
you're talking about a grave
Pueblo danger.
And protections under due
process then I think.
The balance is struck
differently do you see what I'm
saying and and so that's why I'm
not with you on this there's
protections in the bill and it's
it's only triggered if there's a
new urgency.
Thank you senator here lotus
Senator McKenna.
thank you chairman and thank you
senator Dr Schmidt really I'm
really enjoying that the debate
this afternoon.
I'm curious membership our
chairman and senator.
Has this has this been triggered
in light of the pandemic that
we're experiencing right now in
our state.
Mr chair and and senator well
yes it has and the reason it has
is I think probably like like
most members of this committee I
was just curious when when when
the executive declared an
emergency here I thought well I
I would just like to read read
the statute see what's going on
and so reading the statute from
beginning to end a lot of that
seem very reasonable to me for
times emergency and then this
this is really the one thing
that stood out to me out of the
whole the whole emergency powers
I thought actually it just seems
like it's just a little too much
is just not doesn't seem
American to me that.
Force people to stay on house
arrest just because they they
can't get a vaccine I mean this
is not you know the last over
time out the reason of
conscience or someone just
saying they object to it but
this is people that have a
health issue or have had an
allergy or
as well as you know religious
exemptions as well so I think we
would be kind of saying.
Kind of boxing those people out
of society saying well you you
have this medical condition or
you have this religion so we're
gonna we're going on house
arrest verses you you're you're
healthy and you don't affiliate
with a religion so and you can
get this vaccine so you can go
out and and live your life it
just seemed a little over the
top to me and and I I I very
much respect the the comments
before about yes there is a
process here but but we're I
it's it's is intimidating
process where someone is
potentially going to be
victimized being drug into court
they're gonna have to you know
the this you know prove all all
these sorts of things disclose
their personal medical
information disclose a lot of
things that that's a lot to go
through and and I think that we
we just yes you know once again
education educating our public
on the emergency on the health
crisis yes if someone is sick
and and maybe they have they're
posing a danger to society okay
fine that makes sense maybe
maybe under square circumstances
they need to be put on house
arrest well as far as as as not
being able to take a vaccine or
or having a certain religious
issue with it I mean and we're
gonna punish those people and
put them in their house for you
know thirty days at a time it
just a little too much so that's
why it it that's why I brought
this bill forward Senator.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator and Dr
yes I'm I'm trying to get my
mind around within what kind of
incidents we've had the past
year that New Mexico D. O. H.
has had to go to the ex it
extremists we're going through
is extraordinary and I'm just
trying to.
Appreciate if the if you're
wages had to do this to any fell
on a New Mexico and I'm.
I'm not aware that they have
okay very good.
The the the issue of of freedom
freedom of of
to express who we are the
location that that's what makes
this country the envy of the
world and and I absolutely
appreciate that chairman and
senator with our freedom of
thought and speech and I'm so
many other things that
So many other humans around the
world wish they had
but where I have to put pause is
if any of our fellow New
Mexicans have a.
very contagious.
Transmissible disease.
I'm to me they don't have the
right to.
Going to a public space and
endanger others and please
someone tell me from deal wage
from the chairman from Senator
if I am misinterpreting what
what proposed changes being
made.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
yeah I think I can give you a
good example what I am not
changing I'm not changing that
simple you just again so let me
get a real simple that happened
back in two thousand fourteen we
had an Ebola outbreak in western
Africa in there was someone that
showed up on a plane the show to
emergency room in the Dallas
fort worth area with people they
were actually not diagnosed and
sent home I don't know if you
remember that story and they
came back very very sick that is
the person that needs to be put
on on house arrest and hopefully
if they're reasonable there is
going to say all okay I I've
been diagnosed with the
dangerous communicable disease
and if they're reasonable
they're gonna just stay home and
isolate themselves however that
that disease is so dangerous to
society even if the person says
well All our I just don't want
to you know I don't want to go
home and I want to stay home or
I need to go to work or
something well that's.
That is when the state I think
could step in and say no Sir no
ma'am you are such a danger to
our society we are actually
going to require you thank you
stay isolated I'm not touching
that in this bill at all this
bill is only for people that say
you know because of a of a
deeply held religious belief or
something like that I I cannot
do the vaccine for I medically
cannot vaccinate in so it would
protect those people from I'm
saying no to vaccination I'm not
talking about someone who is who
is sick or or some with the ball
is going to go out and get
people sick that power for the
department of health in my bill
roommates.
You chairman thank you senator
because I'm I'm on page one.
Of the bill line I and it shows
section B. is is proposed to be
struck.
Yes yes it Mr chairman and
senator that is for the purposes
of vaccination only if you go
down lower in the bill it has
all the the you know house
arrest for isolation quarantine
for for refusing you know
treatment or something like that
you know to undergo it says the
secretary of health may isolate
or quarantine a person who is
unable or unwilling regions of
health conscience a religion or
conscious undergo treatment and
so that that's that's lower down
on page two I'm I'm not messing
with that I think that would be
too much I I think the state
does need emergency power to to
do that and I I have no
intention on removing that from
statute.
Very good thank you chairman
thank you senator so this is
simply for the vaccination
piece.
Mr Chairman center yes that's
correct all right thank you for
that clarification.
Thank you.
The committee was any questions
or otherwise will of the
committee.
Senator Ingle.
Yeah I'm moving to pass.
For a new.
Mr.
So.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senate bill two thirty eight
center guy goes.
Yes.
Ingle.
Yes.
Sir McKenna.
No.
Yes.
Thursday Lopez so.
Sierra your videos on this now.
You know.
Senator Gallegos past.
Although yes.
to supino.
So this was was telling.
I have.
Excuse.
Yes for those of the the motion
is seated and we'll just move on
to the next item Senator thank
you Mr chairman.
Burns really a pleasure
discussing these issues with you
today.
Thank you discussion
will now go to Senator he's
still on
Immunizations detrimental to
some children in the Senate bill
two forty four Senator you will.
Senator.
Yes.
Are very good I apologize I'm
not and so I'm trying to make it
to a physical therapy
appointment
and I hope this is a really easy
quick going for after the last
two
and people don't get.
Mr chairman the bill that I'm
presenting and I have an expert
witness Linda Segal is simply
allowing.
Practitioners as well as
physicians to give a family a
past.
Having and immunization on the
legal reason that they could do
so
in the original bill basically
it just says they have to have a
that the form has to be assigned
by position and this is
extending it to nurse
practitioners to do primary care
it also makes a few little
changes to in terms of talking
about the child that then they
can her and I now would like to
defer to my expert witness miss.
Mr chair Mr chairman of the
committee will represent the New
Mexico locations Council.
Can you is there some way to
increase your volume we can
barely hear you.
The committee.
The.
And.
So every year we find something
within the statutes where.
Because of the language being
antiquated over the years we've
only physicians could do most
everything and we have gone back
legislative session after
legislative session to add nurse
practitioners or where
appropriate nurse midwives to
the statutes which which keep
them from doing the work that
they can do according to their
scope of practice you know nurse
practitioners have independent
practice prescriptive authority
they are probably half of the
thousand nurse practitioners in
New Mexico are doing primary
care and this bill came to me
because one of our nurse
practitioners which with the
clinic and Valencia County had a
patient a young patient the
family have been coming to her
for years and she had a severe
allergy and needed the
exemption which could be signing
by acquisition but not by a
nurse practitioner so that child
and her mother had to go to a
physician who never saw the
childhood never seen the child
before to get that form signed
so all we're trying to do is
find though the legal access of
the statute already provides for
physicians to sign an exemption
for health reasons health
reasons on why thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey I muted you
because of the background noise
do you have anything else to add
before we.
Go to the public.
Thank you Mr chairman that thank
you Mexico for that explanation
it's just that straightforward
answers practitioners able to
sign the form giving an
exemption and happy to answer
questions the COVID what
happened.
And our thank you.
Thanks Senator let's go to the
public on this one.
And
I can find my list.
So
we have.
The following people.
Speaking against this measure.
Hi Karen Armitage.
We.
K..
Melissa Mason.
I thank you I'm chairman
committee I am don't have grave
concerns with this bill however
I feel that it is unnecessary as
that children who have medical
issues that would preclude them
from safely receiving
vaccinations are very likely
under the care of a physician or
even a medical subspecialists
it's also really not that
inclusive as it does not include
physician assistants so I I
think that the number of
families this affects is
actually quite small and I don't
really see the necessity of a
passing this bill so I speak in
opposition thank you.
Thank you doctor.
Is is there anybody else who
didn't sign up in advance once
before against this in the
public.
Hi thanks for allowing me to
speak Mr chairman and members of
the committee I agree with
doctor Mason that no disrespect
to nurse practitioners but it
seems and unnecessary change
since children who have medical
exemptions are generally needing
to be under the care of a
physician thank you.
Anybody else.
You for again.
Seeing we'll go to the committee
and senators committees and yes.
Yes thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Dr Hickey
yeah that's really the only
question I was asking was it was
already brought up was why not
PA is as well as prescriptive
authority pharmacists oh god no.
Millis plays ministers of.
Thank you Mr chairman and Dr
Schmidt Senator drive however we
call ourselves
the they have not requested it
the nurse practitioners have I
don't want to second guess their
society and how it is the nurse
practitioners who came forward
on this and and I would also
like to point out to some of my
colleagues that it isn't just
a medical exemption there may be
a religious valid exemption as
well and us the child may
not need to have a physician or
specialist thank you very much I
yield.
Thank you Mr chairman and
speaker on on I'm not
necessarily suggesting you put
those and I just my question was
more of the and I think you
answered it and then they were
asking for that authority I'm
just I'm just curious to several
years ago we.
EA's.
In this.
Lab.
Expand the Kirk uh their
independence and so I'm it's not
all critique I I just was was
wondering and I I'm I'm curious
what what the PA's thank on at
as well as those those
prescriptive pharmacists that do
some of these things because I I
I just want the committee to
understand that a medical
exemption sometimes it could be
very very simple it could be
some sort of history of of you
know anaphylaxis or a severe
allergy or something like that
yes it could be very complex in
someone has a host of river
maybe the complicated genetic
the issue or something like that
that the job probably is going
to be under the care of a
physician but some of these
exemptions are gonna be quite
simple so we have to kind of you
know think about that but thank
you senator you've answered my
my question.
Thank you senator Schmidt is
anybody else on the committee
what's the will of the
committee.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator and Dr.
regret I was a little slow there
I I do have to follow up with
what doctor and senator smitteez
Aston that is a chairman and
Senator Hickey if it came to.
The point where PTA's and.
I think there was another
medical practitioner that was
mentioned would be interested in
being included in this type of
legislation would you be
amenable our would be a
friendly.
Amendment.
Okay now.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator McKenna I I I can see
the logic that that I when I was
approached by the nurse
practitioners
you know went through in some
detail reviewing their practices
and so forth and I would really
have to do the same the others
that the practitioners canceling
our pharmacist and that is still
being debated within the
community it's a physical
therapist want to approach me at
the group
I I'd be happy to consider doing
it next year but I don't really
want to trip this bill out
potentially by having that come
and now could be amended to in
the house in that way
but again I I I I do know nurse
practitioners practices quite
well also to some degree
physical therapist but again at
this moment yeah this is a a
standalone for them and the
pharmacist component that would
have to study that and get the
opinions of my colleague thank
you.
Chairman and Dr that's very
helpful
it helps.
Make a decision that sure I mean
in those discussions thank you
very much.
Question Senator Schmedes.
No no Mr your hand side in the
jail to your amendment.
It was.
Senator.
No no I was lowering my hand
sorry Mr chair if you're looking
for a motion I can move it to
pass.
Motion revenue from Senator it
is chairman Senate.
From Senator McKenna any other
debate on this bill.
The secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill two four force
that goes yes.
Thank all yes.
There McKenna yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Yes.
Thirteen you know yes.
Regulations thank you have a.
Do pass.
And we'll move into.
Senator Lopez thank you senator
Ortiz
Senator Sedillo Lopez is Bill
number two seventy four.
Thank you
Thank you Mr chair and I'm kind
of getting rid of the other
hearing
of this bill is a very important
bill it is a simple bill it
because it's a procedural bill
and bills on what we have now
and the pool of the bill is to
increase transparency increase
timeliness and reduce conflicts
of interest that we currently
have when
When police are investigating
their own in a police shooting
and when the district attorney's
office is deciding to prosecute
a police officer for excessive
use of for a crime I shouldn't
just say excessive use of for
but for a crime within the
department and and the crimes
are listed in this bill there is
a community committee
substitute.
I.
Eight the that everyone got in
on time.
Well let me see let me see.
Yes.
It was sent to date.
Two thirty.
Right.
Interestingly I did not get
committee says to help everybody
did but the committee substitute
if I if if we can just go
through the outline of what
would you prefer that I
explained the bill in with the
goals are trying to do or the
changes probably people didn't
read the first one so I'll just
explain the bill
and I do believe on service is
on line it of Senator I mean no
Representative Roybal Caballero
text me that she was coming.
Well so I would just explain the
bill.
Senator.
a technical.
The issue is we need to deal
with do not pass on the original
bill and they do pass on the
committee substitute.
I'm.
I do not pass on the original
bill and a do pass on the
committee substitute thank you
yes and I was wrong I was when I
said to thirty funding that was
the analysis of the building
came today.
Let me see if I can find the.
Check your twelve.
Twelve eleven email.
Twelve eleven.
Twelve eleven email yeah.
Good.
That was all analysis so.
Now this is I don't see the
bills itself.
Try to.
And higher up on the list there
is since the.
The third third row down the
first one on the left.
There it is in the middle row of
in the middle of the third row.
Mr Chairman was this can I just
checked with our
analysts.
It sounds like it was put in in
time to if there's an analysis
on it but all of those the
committee analysis or are.
Are now are minority analyst I
don't know.
You know if that was the case.
When when did it get to the
committee.
Mr chair I believe it got to the
committee yesterday.
I'm sorry not the committee to
the.
To the secretary yesterday.
I don't know when it was sent to
the committee exactly.
Twenty four hours before the
hearing is is is yes.
Yeah.
We we got into it is it makes it
very hard to.
Yes questions if you don't.
Eleven is really just one hour
before the meeting yeah.
Senator.
Mr chair the changes are not
dramatic there the nature of
clarification changes
I think that if I wanted to go
through.
Yeah it I think if I just.
I do want to go to the changes
or do you want me to go through
that to explain the.
The whole point of what your
bill is trying to do and then
come back and explain how this
is strengthens.
Thank you Mr chair with this
bill is trying to do it well and
all of tell a little bit of
history about this bill it's
actually very simple bill to
make some procedural changes and
how
officers who are accused of
using excessive force and in
this having a crime of alleged
against them
what I'm trying to do and this
is I actually bring this bill in
the in the name of my father who
was a deputy sheriff in Valencia
County.
And what I'm seeing that it's
really hurt hurtful and very
hard now is that the public has
lost confidence in our police
departments and the reason they
have done that is because eight
we didn't have body cameras and
be.
There are really some problems
with how these cases are handled
against police officers and so
I'm trying to remedy the second
problem and I got involved with
this bill.
I'm because of this we do need
United that is a community
organization and I have I
believe under as
Well this who is the
the chair of that group has
brought this because I've seen a
pattern of police cases that
were troubling to them.
And then I got involved with
this bill because elation to
Cerro and I've met her family
I've been to the spot where she
was killed
Was shot with twenty one bullets
in her body by the sheriff's
department with no body cameras
and the what the she was four
eleven if she wore shoes she was
a tiny woman and the call was a
mental health call the family
still has not received answers
to what happened to her.
And the police officers are
still operating there's been no
consequence the family does not
understand
what what that why the
investigation is taking so long.
The there was never any kind of
report about whether the
shooting was appropriate or was
not appropriate.
no explanations and that's how I
got involved with the family and
I vowed that I would work to
restore confidence in police
officers because.
The process for investigating
these case basis would become
independent and because the
prosecution of these cases would
be free from the inherent
conflict of interest that
prosecutors experience when they
have to prosecute police officer
has committed a crime this kind
of crime.
And I worked very hard with the
attorney general's office and
with the department of safety
with the state police accepted
many of their changes and and
came up with this bill it was
presented in the interim
committee and it was also
presented to the task force on
racial justice both of whom what
both of those committees gave
some feedback on the bill which
was which was accepted once
weights during the interim
committee the bill was called
really at that this is a
brilliant bill to to address
those problems of transparency
timeliness and reducing the the
perception of a conflict of
interest or an actual conflict
of interest when a police
department has to investigate
its own for a prosecutor has to
prosecute someone they work with
every day so that's what this
bill is about I have
Elaine look of delaying the
Cerro who is initially Cerro
sister and and she can tell her
for her story.
Elaine is she is she on the
call.
Yes I'm here can you hear me.
Yes we can.
I'm sorry was it is.
Yeah so thank you all for having
me here with you today
so I just want to speak
To the importance of this bill
I'm this bill really does bring
the level of transparency that
is missing at the moment when it
comes to these kind of
investigations right now
grieving families like mine are
forced to wait years after the
incident for some insight this
makes it impossible for us to
see closure and healing when we
still have so many unanswered
questions.
In our case we had Bernalillo
county sheriffs deputies leave
the investigation into my
sister's death.
They led an investigation into
their own deputy involved
shooting this I so is a huge
injustice to our family that
should have never been allowed
to happen.
This bill is needed to prevent
these kind of incidents.
investigations from continuing
to happen and help create
streamline processes that will
give the community a sense of
transparency and accountability
when it comes to these kind of
investigations but more
importantly to me at eight the
family know that gives the
family a sense of peace in the
middle of it all there it's
being thoroughly investigated
and
And we give them a chance to get
in some actual answers and some
justice when it comes to
to the incident so I I can't
help but just thank Senator
Sedillo Lopez from up for
listening to our families and
recognizing that this was an
area that needed concern.
I mean that needed to be
addressed I'm sorry I'm
emotional.
Thank you Mr chair and I believe
Andrés well this who is the the
chair of the missing of this
United.
Are you there.
And Mister chair I don't know if
the co sponsor Patricia Roybal
Caballero is as joined us.
Mr chair I am here.
You want to say anything
Representative.
I'm sorry I came in late I just
want to thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and co
chair
and co sponsors Senator Sedillo
Lopez I'm managing several
committees right now as we all
are so thank you for your
patience I just want to step up
and say that this is an
incredible effort on the part of
our community groups and of that
have been meeting for many
months actually since for years
actually on this is a bill that
I've been introducing previous
previously and it's one that
just is really tightening up the
transparency and accountability
issues as they relate to use of
force and I would just stand in
strong support and stand for
questions with the senator when
that's appropriate thank you Mr
chair.
And I should have mentioned I
should have the good knowledge
this is a a task that or a
problem that Representative
Roybal Caballero has been
working on way before I joined
the Senate but it was in the
state of the Cerrillos case that
really fired me up if not he
works very closely with the
attorney general's office to to
try to come up with something
that is workable I should also
mention that if the George Floyd
Act a federal statute were to
pass
this would be a of an approaches
taken in the federal government
and this kind of approach would
be required of the would be tied
to funding that the federal
government would provide to the
state they would insist on
transparency similar to this
they would insist on
independence in the
prosecution's if they were going
to find any of any federal
funding should the George Floyd
Act passed
This this bill does it by.
Having the attorney general's
office come into the case early
it requires once there is such a
shooting that a report be made
immediately to the attorney
general's office and to the
governor
and it makes the the.
The in it also requires that the
investigation be laid by the let
me pull.
If it is a non state police
shooting and it requires that an
outside of police department
shows in by the attorney
general's office would be
involved with the investigation
if it is a state police shooting
I want to mention that had this
bill been in effect at the time
of the salute sero was was so
brutally shot twenty one times
the family would have received
now eighteen months they would
have received six reports on
what's going on with this case I
think that because they were the
six reports would have to be
drafted it probably would have
taken that long because when you
have to write write a report
about why you're not prosecuting
a case you're either going to if
your niche if your prosecutor if
you are the attorney general's
office you're either going to
say this was an appropriate
sheet shooting and this.
The bill would require that to
be explained.
Four you're going to prosecute
and so that is the importance of
the reporting requirement
and I also of the family would
have suffered by seeing the
sheriff's department
investigating their own they
would have seen an independent
investigation of this matter.
So I this is a very important
bill and we're ready to stand
for questions.
I'm sorry it's public what COVID
first.
This.
Mr chair you're needed.
Trevor I'm trying to open the
The list of people who might
have signed up for this bill and
it was blank thanks so you can
you can you go through it what
it did anybody actually sign up
for.
That is true the no sign up for
this.
That being the case that being
the case is go to the audience
and if somebody wants to speak
on this bill if you go to the
reactions.
But the bottom of the
Screen and click on that
reactions button you'll see
raise hand and we'll go through
those who.
First we'll go for those who
oppose this bill is there
anybody who opposes this bill.
Mr chair here you oppose this
bill no you take your hand out
okay.
Seeing none.
We'll go now to bill and I have
for now under Trujillo and Diane
Charles.
Mr chair here you your first
actually so if you want to raise
your you want
yourself and speak.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
J. members of the committee my
name's that not looking with
your I'm very messed by New Line
Mexico and they sentence the
support of the S. B. two seventy
four because that's a step in
the right direction when it
comes to creating transparency
transparency within the criminal
legal system we all know that
there remains little blue code
of silence just like local to
silence among the so called
criminals that the salute this
is the are you able to abuse we
know just is being saved to the
victim of law enforcement when
they are allowed to investigate
their own offices officer
involved incidents there is
going to be a bias and incentive
to protect their own they also
try to protect the public image
in which the public has placed a
profound amount of choice that
has quickly been eroding this
would be a step in holding
police more accountable are
unable to hold themselves
accountable at this is a matter
of public safety and life when
it comes to communities of color
and those suffering from mental
illness thank you.
Thank you Mr Trujillo the next
is Diane Charles to be followed
by John Comstock.
good afternoon thank you I'm I'm
a resident of Bernalillo county
where we've had more than our
share killings of community
members by police there is
someone kids the other day I
strongly support this bill it's
never made sense to me that the
DA's offices that our law
enforcement agencies work with
on a regular basis should be the
investigating and possibly
prosecuting entities when deadly
forces use these people are to
others peers and possibly
friends sure they've had the
opportunity to become acquainted
as they work on prosecutions
together and the normal course
of doing their jobs on a daily
basis this relationship or
appearance of a relationship
makes it difficult to trust the
process please vote yes and
create a system of
accountability that will help us
better trust the process of the
investigation and possible
prosecution of the use of deadly
force against us thank you so
much.
Thank you Mr rose then we have
John Comstock.
Well more members of the of the
committee it's pleasure to speak
with here or I'm interested
the meeting through a lot of
things this is certainly one of
the most important things that
you can look at to than they are
thank
we all are impacted by the crime
and.
Then when there's as a result of
of
Disorder in the community people
got gravely injured or even
killed.
This terrible.
And if it's necessary but one
thing but if it's necessary.
It's quite another thing
I like about this bill it
requires the
inspection to be made a report
to be made to the district
attorney within twenty four
hours and then requires the
district attorney to report to
the Attorney General.
Within twenty four hours and the
Attorney General.
Tax the governor's office which
keeps a log.
Of all these infants.
And even though it seems like
it's almost impossible to get
any
kind of.
Serious connections are about
wrongful police killings at
least this would be a record of
those settings page which have
taken place.
And
all we have to fight crime we
also have to be sure.
That people are not wrongly
harmed.
By the police officers and
sheriff's deputies so I urge you
to vote in favor of the still
I've worked with
Andres Valdez I met her tree see
here are
a couple gyro
and also internet she DO.
And I think that they've done a
big service to the community by
by studying this issue and
coming up with this bill.
Thank you for my opportunity to
speak.
Hey Robert.
Thank you Mr.
Next we have the Monday
determining can read the rest of
your name side of something.
Hi good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is mitigate the study on on
thanks for having me I'm with
the ACLU of New Mexico and we
strongly support this piece of
legislation because this decade
is about transparency
accountability and calling on
public servants to do their jobs
and to do them well they're here
to serve us what happened to it
was so settle K. lands can raise
James Boyd Jacob Michelin
Christopher torsion have
happened and the process is too
long and it's really hard on the
family so ways are strongly
supported a vote yes on this
piece of legislation and thank
you to the Sanchez.
Thank you Mr.
Anybody else.
Before we get into committee
discussion we need to take
action.
On the motion we know we need to
accept the motion to.
Do not pass to Senate bill two
seventy four and into past
for purposes of discussion due
to Senate.
Public health and public affairs
committee substitute percent of
bills two seventy four is there
any opposition in the committee
to that motion.
This is just for discussion
purposes we haven't.
We will not taking final action
until after you've had a chance
to debate in.
Mr chair I see no opposition.
I don't.
Domingo with that Mr chair I
just.
For logistical in the future are
our analysts was saying she
didn't get the this up until
twelve twelve today but there
was supposedly an analysis on
the subs that we could work that
process out to make sure our our
analyst is included but if if
the if the changes are are minor
you know I I it probably doesn't
matter but I I hope we can work
out logistically so our our
analyst will have the time to
come up with her own analysis in
the future.
The excellent point and and and
and
I'm gonna send a Sunday and
makes it particularly hard if we
interesting twenty four hours
and minutes on Sunday.
Then we.
We we just have a hard time
getting the stuff out to the
committee members in time for a
Monday meeting.
So
Let's move ahead and is there
any opposition to this motion
for discussion purposes seeing
none will consider this session
Uh will take place on.
The committee substituted and
whose first one says questions
or raise issues Mr Chairman.
Of the yes we.
In the sense that Alice's from
the council service at eight
twenty seven AM today is when we
got the analysis.
when we get the analysis.
This up when we got to
got to order Mr chairman.
Yes it was twenty four hours
ahead and and and.
And
We're we're this far into it and
then unless there is a strong
objection will go ahead and
finish of action on the Senator
you you you see the problem
getting into the council service
twenty four hours doesn't do the
trick as to reach the committee
twenty four hours otherwise we
can get it out to the members.
Mr chair of this the list the
drafter of the bill gave it to
our email date yesterday
To that chapter was Elisabeth
Johnson and I have a copy of an
email that she meant she emailed
it yesterday.
So you're I am not sure what was
what was received or when the
and okay I guess the Alice
received it this morning but it
was submitted to the committee
secretary yesterday.
And and I know this is a problem
it was on Sunday however these
are drastic changes are most
they're mostly in the nature of
this isn't a major restructuring
at all or anything it was much
more in the nature of cleanup.
Well let me let me start with
questions and because nobody
else is razor and
Change to prosecutes these
cases.
In the attorney general's office
in very early and then there's a
coal prosecution and the reason
for a call prosecution is when
you have to highs on an issue it
there's much less likely to be
are of.
When I used to teach ethics I
used to say don't ever respond
to an ethical problem all by
yourself you need to bounces
bounce it off someone else and
so the Attorney General would be
the check on a prosecutor who
might you know have a problems
prosecuting somebody who was
just testifying on their behalf
the week before and so and it
also provides the option of if
if we agree
or if the Attorney General
believes it's appropriate for
the Attorney General to take
over the prosecution it also
provides for a multi district
task force so there are several
districts in New Mexico that
already proceed this problem.
And they've created multi
districts task force or multi
multi discipline what are they
called of.
Where is
if it retains the idea of this
multi district task force in and
it says.
This should not preclude the
department of public safety on
page three from requesting
assistance with the with
assistance with the
investigation from other
agencies as part of a task force
agreement.
and so this this Task Force
these task forces.
Already perceive the problem
that we're dealing with they
perceive the problem with
independence in the
investigation and they perceive
the problem with independence
and in the prosecution
what's the problem with the task
forces is at timeliness and
transparency so these task
forces will still have to make
sure that we're if if there's a
task force the reports will
still have to happen every three
months and so hopefully or the
idea of this bill is if there's
a report that has to be drafted
every three months of these task
forces will take so long but we
decided that it was important
not to and do the important work
the it that the attorney
general's office and the the
Different.
Agencies police agencies around
the the state have done to try
to work on this problem this
problem is is not I know that I
don't have to say that district
attorneys are shocked that I'm I
am making this claim they're not
police departments are not
shocked by this by this claim
they're not they've been working
to solve the problem themselves
this just takes it to another
level.
Well you know on page four it is
relevant prosecuting authority
should be responsible for
deciding whether charges will be
filed just so so what is the
point of having the Attorney
General.
I mean.
What what are the relevant
question during the thirty says
no this police officer there was
was you know
Fully within his rights to to
shoot.
The person is accused of
shooting but does it do a have
to concur with that or were I
mean or what should be a doesn't
agree with that.
The I'm sorry the Attorney
General doesn't agree with that
in the Attorney General to take
over the investigation could
take over the prosecution.
So so the debate until the point
for the AG doesn't agree.
The other way around what is the
DA says yeah we're gonna throw
the book at this guy but the
AG's no can they take it away
from the dust them the current
system is that the Attorney
General could take it away.
The current system is.
And that would not change.
Changing it when I was getting
at is this dual authority over
the prosecution.
A novel or is this something
that's been going on all along.
It's can occur.
but is relatively
The best way to put it
it's not typical of the Attorney
General of the Attorney General
can stand up to the way it works
now is the prosecutor the local
prosecutor has to can refer it
to the attorney general's office
and there's a conversation and
the Attorney General can take it
or not
and the Attorney General can
come in if they feel that there
is of I don't I think I think
it's manifest of some kind of
problem that they need to fix
and that's because the Attorney
General
kind of.
Supervises in exactly the right
word because these are all
independent elected officials
but the Attorney General is the
chief prosecuting agency in our
state so that they can come in
and what this does is it
mandates that in every case
involving a pool a police police
action that results in
In death or great bodily harm
that involves excessive use of
what we're there's an allegation
of excessive use of force.
Yeah.
H. three U. site
criminal of the evidence of
criminal offenses committed by
the officer and useless madam
sections what are those one of
those crimes.
There are the crimes relating to
excessive use of force their
battery or of.
Murder
and manslaughter.
batteries not the what is it
what's the crime when you really
significantly
hurt somebody Molly hard yeah
great thank you thank you so
those are those of the crimes
they're the most they're the
very serious crimes and that
that's
Is that.
Crimes that police officers are
charged with when something like
this happens.
Well.
Right.
Right broadly harmful causing
great bodily harm intentionally
causing great bodily harm all
the way to murder.
So in in previous versions of
your bill that I've seen
the the Attorney General was
reluctant to take over these
investigations are they support
of this bill with this limited
role this.
I hope you're not offended if he
if he's watching this call this
Attorney General told me you
know almost anything you do
Senator will improve the system
as it then it from what it is
now what his perception is is
sometimes these cases of faster.
And the investigation is a very
good the prosecution and make
building the case is a very good
and then of this the twenty
general is called in and not
involved early and is and then
have to take over and.
And kind of keep clean up the
mess and so he out of he just
said to me at almost anything
you do will be better I worked
very closely with Claire Moran
of from the attorney general's
office he's who is now a
District Court judge when we
were first working on this bill
actually wanted it to be on the
call for our special session
at because I I felt so strongly
as you know the black lives
matter movement was heating up
and I felt so strongly that we
really this is horrible when
when the public doesn't trust
the police.
That is just a horrible horrible
situation and the truth is and
the public doesn't trust the
police right now there are many
many members of the public
and the community spect
particularly people of color who
do not trust the police and as
long as there's a perception
that the police will not convict
their own.
And the perception that the
attorney general's will not will
not prosecute these cases.
Stresses that relationship is
not going to be repaired.
My other question has to do is
the investigations.
And.
In the past.
I and others legislation has
been reluctant to have.
The local police investigate
themselves.
Your bill has.
Has continues.
Nope no it does not
Mr chair under this bill.
The department of safety the
state police will come in.
And and of investigate the
matter.
In all cases that are there's
that involves not but if it's
the but but if it's the
department of safety that is of
the state police if they are
involved in the shooting then
another department will come in
and investigate the case Mr
chair I of.
I got a text that one of my
experts under as well this is
actually in the room.
And he didn't have the
opportunity to speak.
Is here.
We wanted to.
Mr this are you there.
The Texas I am here.
We sent invitations and he
hasn't he hasn't gotten on the
may have a technical difficulty.
I don't see his name showing up
on the list of participants.
Will
when she's not on the side of
apologize Mister chair I just
got this text and I I thought
that I should mention it I can't
see everybody on the resume.
So so so you have the the state
police investigating local
police departments and the state
police we're not in the
investigate themselves the
Attorney General would would
appoint a local police
department to investigate and
and the state department of
public safety's.
Important notion well what they
pointed out when I talked to
them is and now I'm getting a
call from Anderson's I
apologize.
Representative Herrera could you
call Mr Mr well this and tell
them that I can't.
That and talk to them please
I'm.
I apologize Mr chair what did
you what did you ask so is
permanent public safety
supportive of the idea of having
a local police agency
investigative state police
shooting thank you Mr chair of
what they pointed out was that
they have a lot of the labs and
special special of.
Capacities that a lot of local
departments don't have so that
they would collaborate with them
with regard to the necessary
because we don't we wouldn't
want to
haven't of police department
they didn't have the same
capacity that they have and so
what when I talk to them they
understood I should tell you
that I'm so impressed with the
department of safety and talking
about this bill because they
agree that it is a problem to
have the community not have
confidence in the police forces
and it is been a pleasure to
work with them and they did a I
had the I don't believe that
they're gonna stand up and and
say rah rah about this bill but
they've been very collaborative
with me in working on the
details working it out that's
why this bill is unique and
important because it built on
what we have with regard to the
systems now there are other
states are considering creating
a commission that or of a
mechanism some kind of mechanism
that only handles police
misconduct cases so new
attorney's name and and I think
that that would be expensive and
I think that what we can do
through the systems we have now
and that's the goal of this.
Okay thank you senator let's go
then to set.
Mr chair may I just a report
back
yes this would like the US
senator to answer the phone and
put it on speaker as you did in
the previous committee so that
he could give testimony that way
if it's allowed.
So he called you and you put him
on speaker the last time Mr
chair would you
of of money yeah let's let's go
ahead in your room okay
Why doesn't he just call into
the committee the way everybody
else does all I I don't know.
that the penny or Trevor could
you contact him and ask him to
call in because now he's not
calling me.
So.
Senator all I have is an email
address I don't have a phone
number.
Trevor the the.
This phone number and then maybe
try working at all of them and
then we'll come up let's hear
from Senator Schmedes while we
wait for that to happen.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you senator
I I was just you know comparing
high I'd rather Original Bill
I'm I'm comparing it to the sub
so I think a couple of questions
will be the comparison questions
and then other questions I just
have about the billing general
but.
the the the first.
Change I see is in the original
bill had concurrent jurisdiction
and the working current was
taken out so I do have a
question about the jurisdiction
so the way I read the bill is on
on page two it says that.
Either the you know you the
chair for the chief of police
what will happen restrictions so
I I think.
You know if we go over both both
scenarios if if it's if it's a
state police issue then it makes
sense that it's the chief of
police and if it's a if it's an
issue within the sheriff's
department it makes sense it's
it's the share of.
but then when I when I look on
the page three it says that the
department of public safety
shall be the default primary
investigative agency.
So I'm trying to understand this
DPS is default.
but DPS is basically the I mean
they're the same as as the state
police yes so so.
If if the PS is always the
default.
They're gonna be investigating
themselves.
Right or or or you know verses
if it's a sheriff's department
that's good it's getting kicked
up is that is that correct occur
could you clear that up for me.
It's on the same page Senator.
Line twenty one thank you with
the use of deadly force
resulting in great bodily harm
or death is committed by a
member of the department of
public safety the lead role in
the investigation shall be
maintained by the department of
public safety.
But members of an outside agency
we shall be required to assist.
And this was this is what date
and a minimum of two agents from
the attorney general's office or
another competent invest again
agency so work with the
investigation in conjunction
with the department of public
safety as I was explaining
before in response to the
chairman's questions
the state police have the
highest quality labs the best
equipment the the best so when
they're involved in in the.
In a previous shooting.
This prevents them from
investigating themselves by
themselves.
This it requires V. attorney
that somebody from the Attorney
General wanted investors in the
Attorney General and or a local
police department to be involved
in the investigation but they
would have access to the labs
and the resources of the leaky
the Department of department of
safety okay Mr chairman and
senator David that that makes
sense that that makes sense I'm
trying to make sense of of the
the hierarchy I also like how we
needed to clarify a little bit
right right and then I I like
what you did and actually in in
the beginning of the bill you
took out which about dying of
natural causes.
I I I don't I'm glad you did
that because it just kind of
assumed you know how can we
assume it's natural cause or not
and and you just in the sub it
just says it in custody death so
I I think that's that's much
better because that was one of
my my concerns and you I guess
you read my mind because you
already you already addressed
it.
I'm I'm still on I'm still on
page two for the bottom of page
two in the top of page three.
I'm.
Let me just go down to line
eight and nine of page three.
I says nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to
limit prosecution discretion.
And it's my understanding the
prosecution will discretion is a
constitutional protection that
we gather process is that is
that correct
it will it's an ethics it's a
requirement
In in the ethics code
prosecutors and and and in the
law are required to do justice
and so I didn't want to in any
way shape or form to interfere
with their responsibility to do
justice.
Right
you Mr chairman and senator.
When I as I read the bill I I
would like you to help me
resolve my concern that we're
not taking away that prosecution
discretion because
in subsection D. it says.
Yes the prosecuting authority
shall there's the word shall
shall represent the state at a
probable cause hearing so that
I'll just stop there I want to
keep going in a minute but you
know what if.
In the name of prosecution
discretion what if the
prosecutor says no I I don't
have probable cost yes the law
says you shall do it.
Is it is constitutional the
rights of the defendant that
nobody should be prosecuted in
the absence of probable cause
police officers no one and so
that's why the the importance of
the second sentence that you
cited they should they can't
take it that that's what that's
what I meant by doing justice if
if they believe that this is a
this that this shooting did not
violate the law then their
obligation is to not bring it
forward.
And their obligation under this
this bill is to report why.
And so the only thing they can't
that this bill changes is
they'll have to say why.
Okay okay Mister chairman and
senator that that makes sense as
well it just the way it manages
the way it's written to me it
and being you know being
conservative I I I I tend to be
when I read something like this
it seems that we are kind of
assuming that faith you know
just what it is saying shall
present evidence of the peace
officers use of deadly force and
I'm kind of thinking well what
if they haven't committed
anything but I I I see what
you're saying and I I think it's
just maybe written in a way that
is is a little it makes me feel
you know a little concerned but
I I think as I read it I I think
it's it's intending what what
what you what you mean and and I
I I understand now that that if
there's no problem because it
sounds like they won't prosecute
unless the Attorney General
disagrees and I hire the the
that the the questions from the
chairman so that that makes that
makes sense I also like the
addition at the on page five at
the end of subsection G. I like
it that you said nothing shall
be construed you know to violate
it brought basically and Mike my
other question is do you think
that language should we put it
in paragraph see on page two
when we're when we're saying
that that within twenty four
hours we're gonna give you this
information to the governor and
the Attorney General.
I so apologize I got distracted
because they called me to
Judiciary so I'm just telling
them that I'm presenting a bill
and
And I apologize you would like
to move the move that clause
where would you like to do that
will Mr chair Senator not saying
he's been moved I I just I you
you would add that clause in the
sub where it was and I think
it's a very good addition to the
bill I just wonder if we also
need to put the language and at
on page two at the bottom of
paragraphs C..
Because we're talking about you
know putting stuff in in print
is subject to IPRA.
Well I believe that the
limitation or the the language
about it for a.
Would require would of.
If there is a general bill and
so it would cover the entire
thing.
That was just clarification.
Right yeah I know and I in
Mister chairman Senator it was
really helpful clarification I
actually went back I was
researching this bill and I went
back to our supreme court's
decision on I guess there was
some well there's a ruling this
past summer and I read the
Justice V. hill's opinion on
that and and she was saying that
I guess there was a a law
enforcement jurisdiction that
refused and it brought because
of quote on going criminal
investigator tion in our Supreme
Court said no no no you can't do
that our statute it is a more
specific you can decide on going
you have to say there is
confidential information in
there that meets criteria and so
because of that recent ruling I
was just I thought well are are
we going to mandate a DA's
office or or local no sheriff's
office to prove it to this
report.
You know something that that.
Could could could be come not
subject if Russia is kind of
what I'm what what I meeting so
so step one is we mandate we say
shall in that language that
confidential information goes
into the report it's giving to
the AG and the governor but then
when it comes is someone going
to have to sift through and say
well this part that was given to
the governor this part is
confidential and so I'm not
going to release that on it is
is is that do you see where I'm
going with that Mr chair Senator
that's exactly how it works
there is a document custodian
that goes through impressed to
determine whether something is
exempt under it right or not and
then it is provided and so so
that's just how it works.
Okay I just Mr chair Senator I
just want to make sure about
that I'm.
That that that's all my
questions I I appreciate it.
Thank you Senator Schmedes
Senator Ingle did you have a
question.
I just had a question
Trying to find that bill here
I've got a bunch of stuff that
was sent home with me
how much how much money is
associated with this bill
Senator.
Of the full of the for.
I believe if I recall that I
should probably.
Not necessarily aware of.
Rely on my memory whatever but
what I'm remembering is that it
was about half a million for
the.
For the Department is
million maybe three million.
What is that they actually each
put money in their budgets for
increased the increased capacity
with regard to dealing with with
these police cases and so if if
the total is I guess.
What are you talking about the
entire Senator yes because your
bill doesn't have any money in
it all no no was the money would
come in their budgets the
individual budgets of the
attorney general's office and of
the budgets of the police
department they were in my
understanding is that they were
in the governor's that those the
money that they requested was in
the colors of Bill.
Budget however the LESC did not
included if I would have known
that I would have probably tried
to get some junior money to this
or if I would have understood
what was going on however I did
commit to both of them to try to
get more money because they're
both under under funded in
general but particularly when it
comes to these kind of police
misconduct cases they're they're
expensive they usually use of
the usually have very high tech
equipment well just like any
kind of shooting I suppose but
it might my my feeling about
this is that the prosecution of
crimes needs.
Budget and each of these
agencies put some money in the
budget and try to increase their
budgets and I hope that they're
successful in doing it but this
is part of justice cost money
and this is part of of of what
we need to do.
Well just looking at the FIR
that that I've got
We don't have anything you know
and and and and twenty one but
in twenty two the DPS is going
to be another you know half
million and then the counties
each of the counties in twenty
two and twenty three they will
meet Indian twenty one they're
going to need another five
million.
Not all not every but that's all
the county and that's all
supposed to come out of county
operating funds and well think
about it is Senator I I really
have a hard time voting for
something like this when there's
not something a little more
specific done as far as who's
going to pay for this because we
passed laws up here like this in
my years up here and they met at
a dish it's it's just seldom
really works but that's just my
opinion well Mr chair on on page
four so we tried to do with this
bill when we started in this
came this suggestion came from
the attorney general's office
was if you look at page four yes
it's is any because.
This to me we were going to save
costs to the counties because
the the the.
Attorney General would be taking
over some costs that would
previously be paid for by the
counties so if you look on page
for any costs and expended by
county or municipal law
enforcement agencies as a result
of the department of public
safety is conducting an
investigation shall be
reinforced reimbursed to the
Department and any cost expected
by the DA's office shall be
reimbursed to the attorney
general's office and this was a
suggestion by the Attorney
General.
Request.
Bill.
Idea this bill is is yes this is
going to save some departments
money and then be more expensive
for the attorney general's and
the the department of safety.
Mr chair.
It was the my Senator just a
second Representative Roybal
cover you're wanting to see
some.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and Senator Ingle for
asking the question the
anticipation is that.
Once the bill passes and becomes
law it's like any other on
administrative process that's
when the the administrative
processes will them working to
their budgets on an annual basis
whatever additional costs are
associated with conducting the
investigations or whatever the
the bill then is requiring and
so.
That's where the Costello meant
so it's going to become part of
the regular budgetary process
the administration asking for
all we're putting it into their
budget so it's not necessarily
related to an appropriation to
this bill but the anticipation
is that it is a it would become
part of the administrative arm
and processes of the on each
entity that will be required to
enhance their reporting on in
investigations and so that was
part of the discussions with
everyone involved is that that
was that was part of the
understanding so it will come
out of general fund but it'll go
from general fund to the
appropriate administrative
budget request annually because
it's part of their
administrative processes is just
enhancing that so I I just
thought I would clear that
clarify that a little bit
further and that's why it's not
an appropriations thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator thank
you Representative Senator Ingle
anything else.
You have I've votes on finance
for sixteen years and father
Steiner stuff down a lot and it
seldom it seldom works in the
estimates are are way way low
anyway I can't support the bill
thank you thanks Senator Ingle
would noted Senator Tolman.
Has been called the judiciary
I guess you lost your place in
the line Senator Sedillo Lopez.
But before we go to Senator
Gallegos I think Andrés well
this is available to make his
comments no so Mister mon this
is here with us would you would
you give us two to two minutes
of COVID.
Okay.
Please.
Okay after his.
The.
Sorry about the right size.
I just want to say that the.
U. S.
G. Andrés on just just a second
we we we cannot hear you if you
have the the.
Webcast on at the same time
because it's coming through low
then you.
So go ahead and turn off the
webcast.
We're office I have Jack Burton
only as my experts.
Thank
you for telling me that.
We'll go over Mr all this again
until you get back with this
Senator Gallegos please.
Yes.
Senator dear.
I appreciate the disk or have an
I did like one point that the
they need is going to be
spending money on this but
Mister chairman Senator.
Earlier when you're talking to
Dr Schmidt you brought up the
point about the lads I really
like the idea of the labs being
quality for the department of
state please but are there only
two laps I understood just the
state police lab and Albuquerque
police other labs is that not
correct I I thought everything
was sent to the state police
that.
I
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator goes I believe that
I know for sure that there are
those two labs I'm not I also
believe that there are
differences in the quality of
the different types of equipment
they have but more detail than
that is is beyond my knowledge
thank you very much that are on
sale we.
That is just trying to clarify
that because I understood the.
The state police lab is very
very qualified for everything so
I just want to clarify that
that's all I have thank you
thank you senator one will of
the committee.
Surgery with that I think.
The gentleman will move to pass
on Senate bill Senator.
Hello.
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate bill seventy four is
there a second.
All.
Seconded by Senator McKenna and
I see that while we wait for and
made to begin that Andrea so
this is once again with.
Mr well does do you want to make
a comment on this bill before we
vote.
Okay.
I apologize I thought I saw his
name on the.
For the third time.
See any evidence.
So we'll go back to the
committee secretary and we'll
and we'll take some of.
Secretary.
Now I see his name there.
Address are you there can you
speak.
Yes you have some comments on
this bill Mr mold this before we
vote on it.
We can see you and you're not
muted but we can't hear you.
Now your.
I'm sorry.
The committee secretary will
call the roll.
Mr.
Yes.
I move to table.
This is
not available motion.
This call the roll.
This is a vote to table.
Well two seven four.
Survivor ghost.
Yes if.
Thank all.
Go.
Anymore sermon.
No.
As.
Lopez.
Vote to table no no to table.
Senator Thoman not present to
see can you know no.
So then motion fails we'll go
back to the motion for it to
pass secretary will call the
roll.
Those are both.
Thank all.
Yeah what are we I'm sorry I got
disconnected to read to change
phones what happened.
From the substitutes for two
seven point.
Okay what's the motion.
Motion to pass this moment.
Now.
Sir McKenna yes.
Noticed by my lovely.
Yes.
With customer permission.
Not present to penal.
Yes.
Senator three to three.
This
leave it on the table Senate
Bill wreck.
But actually can I wait until
Santo Domingo's back.
Well I was gonna say Senators
committee's investor explain his
phone service to that first
thanks Mister chair I just want
to say I I I appreciate it used
to but I I in in some parts of
our state's goes back to the
very best so what bills being
brought forward in some parts of
the states I think the the
public has a very high regard hi
trust for law enforcement but in
other parts not so much and so
I.
Because of that discrepancy I I
still have a I think it's built
more favorable for a place like
Bernalillo county for the trust
lower but but not so much in
other places and so that's why
I.
Yes thank you senator when we
leave this on the table and
we'll move on and.
The the future meeting is there
is a motion for reconsideration
will take it up at a meeting
following that one.
We don't
we don't reconsider on the same
day the motion to reconsider was
in may we'll wait then Senator
subsequent meeting thank you
again.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you senator.
Our daily.
So.
Members to.
Senator Kernan next.
Yeah I'm trying to find my
agenda.
Forty two.
Senate Bill.
Two forty two citizens care
reviews Senator Kernan and
Representative Matthews.
Mr chair we may have lost a
quorum you can still proceed.
Senator Sedillo Lopez left.
Well let's see they can both be
presenting is same time in
Judiciary so one of them will
finish.
And rejoin us.
The list continues committee.
I.
We still have the committee
let's let's proceed.
Senator Kernan with us yes.
Welcome Senator Kernan.
Quorum Senator.
Where are you.
We hear you we hear you and we
don't hear you Senator Kernan.
Can you turn up your volume
somehow or.
I don't know.
She needs to hit star six or
something.
R. as.
Okay.
Get off and then reconnecting
getting back on.
Okay let's try that let's just
let's just.
Takes five minutes let's take a
five minute break Senator Kernan
gets back on.
And
S. S. S..
Day in terms of the
The.
Connections we're we're we're
just.
I think I want to add a simply
motion if centre able to the
they connected to it is what it
is.
The the the the electronic guys
were not with us today Senator.
I know you said we have a quorum
but I I don't see before this.
I was in Senator arms are.
Okay.
Maybe I was missing somebody.
The Senators Tolman in city
locations are in Judiciary
meditation both present at the
same time.
So one of them will be re
joining us.
A on my cell phone alone.
Hello.
Okay I'll tell okay.
All right bye.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
She said her link is invalid and
should need to send her another
link that's what her sector her
phone as state.
Can you handle.
Yes I can.
Thank you.
Well we're waiting let me just
comment today
In the chairman's.
The chairman's meeting I brought
up the.
When we have hard stops at six
o'clock.
It makes it very difficult to to
complete our agenda is that we
choose having dinner.
Brought in we work right through
dinner and just keep on working.
And of course somebody right.
Want to just take a half hour
generate.
And then reconvene and gender.
How you all feel about.
Problem is my granddaughters
here and she's on fire with me.
No I don't mean tonight I mean
in in future meetings we have to
give people plenty of notice so
we're going to do that.
Meetings will be in Santa Fe.
Well maybe to.
Wednesday were going back
Wednesday right.
Yeah so we'll be there then.
We're still in our will be in
our offices.
We take a break and and then
have quicker I think we should
sit in the same committee room
six feet apart myself so we're
sitting on your chair can you.
Yeah I can hear you Senator.
Thank you all right.
Okay.
Senator
Shannon Pinto is with this did
you have a question Senator.
Yes I had a question about the
committee substitute if that was
received in time for the two
forty five.
Once we see that Senator Sedillo
Lopez did have issues with hers
So I might have to wait well
let's see did we get that bill
in time.
Two forty five.
Senator I just got this on the
agenda but this is this is the
committees so I don't know if we
have to so.
I had handed to me just about a
half hour ago.
So we're going to route will
roll that one over Senator Pinto
to to when she.
Okay thank you and I just want
to make sure we step on any toes
you thank you Sir and we'll see
you Senator thank you for
checking.
Okay let's go ahead and then was
Senator Kernan to build.
Thank you very much
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Mr chair
Senate health public affair I
did have a committee set you
wanted to.
Do not pass on the Senate bill
two forty two and then do it did
pass on that side.
This.
I apologize somebody's door
sorry
can run away.
So Mister chairman I do have a
committee set up and so do you
want to do a do not pass on the
original two forty two and then
a do pass on the set.
Yes that would be very good.
Senator.
You Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Ingle and and
some for discussion purposes
will take a committee so.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee some for
Senate bill two forty two.
Thank you very much Mr chair
also Senate bill two forty two
began as a C. Y. FTE agency bill
but I'm working with the staff
of both CYFD and the substance
by Rick councilman addressing
recommended amendments we
determined that the committee
said would be more efficient.
CYFD acknowledges that oversight
is critical to comply with act
which is federal law related to
child abuse prevention and
treatment at Senate bill two
forty two expands on the
intentions of captive that
creation creation of a grievance
procedure for the council this
substance Advisory Council with
an independent agency
established under the act in
twenty sixteen it is
administratively attached to the
regulation of licensing
department for administration
purposes only according to the
LFC analysis and staff of the
New Mexico attorney general's
office it is to perform
independently of other agencies.
The IOC notes confidentiality
requirements in the bill as
abuse and neglect leave legal
matters are not open to the
public the substitute care it
and Advisory Council and
substitute Care review boards
have access to records to ensure
reviews at CYFD are
comprehensive and
recommendations to the
Department are accurate Senate
bill two forty two requires the
department to acknowledge
receipt of reports and indicate
the position just to each
recommendation within ten
business days and at this time I
would like to ask at first I
want to see my cosponsored
Representative Matthews is on
and I'm not sure she is but I
would like you for a chance to
say just a word or two if she is
on and
So I I wonder if you ever can
our our someone can determine if
she's on the list.
Representative Matthews are you
with us.
She was trying she was trying to
go between committee so she may
not be on and I can call her
later if that would be okay she
joins later will certainly
differ in our.
Very good and at this time I
first would like to turn to one
of my expert witnesses judge
Angie Snyder to make a few
comments please.
Senator welcome.
Mr chair thank you senator and
good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee as
Senator Kernan just Madam Angie
Schneider I am the chief judge
in the twelfth judicial district
which encompasses Lincoln and
Otero counties and in addition
to my do duties in the twelfth
judicial district I serve on the
children's court improvement
commission if you want justice
advisory committee and I was
recently appointed by the
Supreme Court to the children's
court rules committee I am also
the chair of the substitute care
Advisory Council which is the
capacity in which I appear
before you well today.
The council was statutorily
established in two thousand
sixteen and seventeen I was
appointed by governor Martinez
to serve on the council as the
children's court judge
Representative.
Thousand nineteen my position on
the council was reaffirmed by
governor Lujan Grisham I was
also elected council chair in
two thousand nineteen at this
time I am the longest serving
member on the council.
One of the reasons I accepted
the appointment to the council
by governor Martinez and then
later the responsibilities as
chair is that I know my work as
a judge the value of independent
and objective oversight of our
child welfare system.
When I began my service on the
council I look forward to being
part of the process that brought
different perspectives together
to identify what was working
well in the child welfare system
what was not working well and
what was needed as a kid to
result in better outcomes for
our were most vulnerable
children and families.
What I've learned during my
service on the council is that
the statute under which the
council is currently functioning
is missing essential tools
needed to provide true
independent and objective
monitoring of CYFD and that can
lead to meaningful system
improvement.
Senate bill two forty two
outlines the changes the council
believes are needed to achieve
this goal.
Although there is a long history
in New Mexico a citizen review
board oversight of children who
are in CYFD custody there was
never a statutory requirement of
an ongoing solution is to
dialogue between the C. Arby's
and do this.
Only require medication
continued in the two thousand
sixteen legislation that created
the council.
There is not exist statutory
mandate that CYFD respond in any
way to individual case reports
done by council staff or that
the meeting fully and
consistently participate in
council meetings at best there
this has resulted in missed
opportunities to having
important discussions that drive
system improvement and that
better the outcomes for better
outcomes for children and
families in the child welfare
system at worst the lack of
statutorily required dialogue
has resulted in concerns and
issues going on addressed and
two children and families
possibly experiencing additional
trauma.
Currently when council staff
conduct conduct reviews of
children and youth in CYFD
custody the staff reviews legal
documents filed in the case
reviews CYFD policies and
procedures and best practices
and conducts interviews with
individuals involved in the case
council staff then draft a
report where in recommendations
are made to the department CYFD
is not required at this time to
acknowledge receipt of the
report to respond to the report
or to engage in a dialogue about
the report and the
recommendations an ongoing
dialogue between the council and
CYFD is critical to both counsel
in both council meetings and
with regard to individual cases
for both meaningful oversight of
individual cases and for system
change.
Adding the cabinet secretary or
the secretaries doesn't me as a
non voting member to the council
and requiring CYFD to respond in
writing to recommendations made
in specific case review reports
and adding the ability of the
council to review third party
grievances creates a culture and
a transparency accountability it
could create creates a culture
of transparency and
accountability and it provides
the on going collaboration
needed to inform system practice
changes and helps to ensure
positive outcomes for system
affected children and families
the question is not do we need
independent objective oversight
of our child welfare system to
improve outcomes for our most
vulnerable citizens we know that
we do and the free market exists
with the substitute Care
Advisory Council the question is
what foundational tools are
needed in our current statutory
framework to ensure it
meaningful and independent and
objective monitoring and to
create a culture of transparency
accountability and an ongoing
collaboration to inform system
practice changes.
The changes in Senate bill two
forty to give the council the
foundational tools needed to
improve child protective track
child protection practices in
individual cases as well as on a
system wide level Mr chair
members of the committee I
sincerely thank you for your
time today and I thank you all
for your service to our state
our our council director Micheli
poker I will now address the
committee and then both of us
will be available for questions
thank you.
Thank you chair Snyder and thank
you Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Shelly
Bucher and I currently service
the council's on the council
staff in the position of
director in this position I find
oversight and administration of
the day to day activities of the
council I am a licensed master
social worker with two degrees
in social work and a degree in
human development and family
studies my life experience is
taking me to different states
and countries where I have been
able to expand my knowledge and
skills of systems child welfare
and cultural awareness this year
will be my twentieth year in New
Mexico working towards child
welfare system improvements each
of these twenty years has in
some form or fashion involved
work with CYFD.
I became involved with the work
of citizen review boards in two
thousand thirteen when I was at
NMSU administering various
contracts and funds related to
child welfare I was really
excited to take on the challenge
of administering a statewide
permanent system of independent
and objective oversight of CYFD
and to work together towards
system improvements by virtue of
my position I am appointed by
the New Mexico Supreme Court to
the children's court improvement
commission and I'm also a member
of the New Mexico child fatality
review board and the national
advisory board for citizen
review panels in two thousand
sixteen after the citizen review
care substitute Care review act
was amended in the council was
formed it became apparent that
the statute was missing key
elements needed to complete the
work of examining policies
procedures and practices at CYFD
and the reviewing of specific
cases from access to CYFD
information to CYFD funding to
CYFD responding to our
recommendations our current
statute is silent this is
resulted in the work of the
council to essentially be at the
mercy of whomever is the CYFD
cabinet secretary for example
the current statutes states the
council will specify what
information is needed to conduct
case reviews when the council
notified the previous CYFD
administration of what
information was needed we were
told well that's nice to know
but the statute doesn't compel
us to give it to you so
therefore we will not.
A year long negotiated agreement
resulted in CYFD providing
limited information regarding
children in their care as well
as the formula for the inter
agency transfer of funds well
discussions to revise this
agreement have not been fruitful
with the current CYFD
administration we do greatly
appreciate secretary Blaylock's
efforts to stabilize the
interagency transfer of funds to
create a culture of transparency
and accountability and to
support the codifying a
fundamental aspects to the
structure of an independent and
objective oversight system.
To that end we are also
requesting support for the
inclusion and Senate bill two
forty two the basic
qualifications that council
staff it is common for statutory
language to include parameters
for staff especially when the
work require subject matter
experts child welfare is one of
those areas which require
specific knowledge and skills in
my nearly twenty years of
experience in New Mexico I can
state unequivocally the
necessity of child welfare
education and experience for
those who are responsible for
child will work whether it be
direct or indirect the
qualifications included in
Senate bill two forty two are
from the general position
classifications with the state
personnel office to and I quote
plan develop interpret implement
and evaluate social service
programs policies and procedures
as well as provide
administrative review services
and to act as case consultants
or subject matter specialist in
assigned areas unquote in
addition we believe the
codifying of expected annual
training for staff offering
professional services is
fundamental as is the ongoing
meetings between counseling
department staff to reach
mutually agreeable solutions
lastly I will speak to the need
of protection for individuals
who contact us for assistance or
provide information to us we are
requesting support but language
in Senate bill two forty two to
protect the identity of those
individuals who make contact us
with the concern about CYFD as
well as protect from retaliation
any individual who provides
information to us it is not
infrequent to have individuals
hesitate or even declined to
provide us their perspective due
to the fear of retaliation the
fear of retaliation is so
pervasive that Kevin just
settlement agreement C. Y.
injured in last year in response
to a lawsuit filed on behalf of
children and youth in foster
care require.
Your CYFD to and I closed
published guidance and prohibit.
It published guidance
prohibiting retaliation against
any person including foster
parents for raising concerns
related to the unmet needs of
children in state custody or
their caregivers on quote
including anti retaliation
language in Senate bill two
forty two supports the
prohibition of retaliation by
CYFD it's agents and contractors
as well as promotes a culture of
transparency and accountability.
To paraphrase Maya Angelou when
you know better do better we
know that as an independent and
objective permanent system
intended to improve child
welfare outcomes we are missing
fundamental tools with the
implementation of Senate bill
two forty two we can and we will
do better for our children our
families and our state thank you
Mr chair and members of the
committee for this opportunity
to speak and as with
Chair Snyder I'll able to
respond to any questions you may
have.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
want to see if Secretary Blalock
zoom I would like to give him an
opportunity to say a few words
if he's thank.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Kernan Secretary Blalock with
the children youth and families
department I'm mindful of the
late hours so I want to reserve
time I would just say that this
agency beginning under this
administration of twenty
nineteen has been committed to
increasing accountability and
transparency we created the
office of children's right to
ensure that our young people
within our department have a
voice at the highest reaches to
the department to ensure that
they're getting the services to
which they're entitled created
new a foster parent and parent
grievance processes so that
there's a way to contact us and
let us know for not doing
something well so that we can
fix it this bill is a very vital
step forward for us as Shelly
knows and Senator knows we've
been in conversations with the
best ways to strengthen subs to
Care by three council as that
third party oversight of course
you at the since I got here and
I'm very excited to do this bill
moving forward I think this bill
does exactly that and we're
excited to see it move for thank
you so much and Mister chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr chair one more time
could I see if Representative
Matthew legislation.
I'm not hearing her so Mr chair
at this time we would be glad to
go to public comment.
Your new gym.
Sorry I.
Two other people signed up for
public comment but I'm holding
the secretary can hang on in
case there are questions for him
so I have Merioles back and Jill
Jones will start with Maryland
back.
Thank you chairman and and
members of the committee my name
is Maryland back and I am a
former foster parents in the
time I was a foster parent I had
almost forty children in my
house aging from newborn to
nearly eighteen years old.
I'm I have been very very
familiar from the very first
case I had about the important
role as the SCAC I'm which was
formerly the citizen review
board simply for oversight
accountability of these cases
what I found in my journey to
bring attention to how
egregiously mishandled by first
K. five was that there is almost
no oversight and accountability
except for the FCAC I have now
two of my cases out of the
multitude I had I sent directly
to the New Mexico attorney
general's office for oversight
because they were so egregiously
mishandled I'm including fraught
you name it fraud falsified time
cards and just poor decision
making at every level in working
with the SBHC it wasn't until
this past summer that I actually
had a case in my care be
reviewed by the SEAC and Sally
Booker's team I'm what I saw
from that from the first hand
experience is it was the most
dedicated impressive detail
oriented case of any single case
I've ever seen in foster care
they went back to the child's
birth certificate we were able
to pull school records and court
history documents this child had
been in care multiple times the
**** court review was the most
thorough document I've ever seen
in child welfare unfortunately.
When it went to the children's
court case the judge or the
special master that point didn't
even read the court case they
didn't even read the FCAC review
in court and so with the amount
of I mean I it was one of one
hundred basis but with the
amount of paperwork background
and thoroughness that the STTC
had provided enough thorough
oversight it wasn't even right
in court and this child is
languishing in a congregate care
setting so it is my most extreme
support for this bill because
Sally's team does great work we
need oversight we need
accountability and then we need
CYFD to acknowledge receipt of
these these problematic cases
which are most of them frankly
and then work with the A. C. E.
S. C. in partnership to improve
outcomes for child welfare and I
encourage all members of the
committee to take a moment and
read the twenty twenty annual
report from the **** it's one of
the most gaping and horrifying
documents about state of child
welfare in our state thank you
with that I stand.
We have the second public
comment from Jill Jones.
Sir can you hear me yes.
Thank you.
Okay thank you very much chair
and members of the committee and
Senator Kernan I just quickly
want to state that I strongly
strongly support this bill I am
also like Maryland a former
foster parents and
Shelly as I was hearing you
speak earlier this year
retaliation within CYFD is real.
And
Public information does say and
show that I have had excuse me.
It is speaking up I have had my
license revoked and I'm
currently being sued by the
department but I do want to
strongly strongly.
Strong we let you know how much
I support this bill mainly for
independent monitoring at CYFD
and I would like to see that
transparency within statewide
the is not a word that is just
being thrown around because it
sounds good and we truly need
transparency within.
And the department and I thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Kernan anything else.
Mr chair ready to stand
questions thank you.
I'd like to start with some
questions of my own.
and I was senator Neville.
Sponsored the original
legislation to convert in the
previous citizen review board
program.
Into this.
Well oversight committee.
But.
I must say I'm done but I'm just
been so totally dismayed.
The.
This is what we've been doing
for the last four years.
Nobody reads the reports the
annual report on the status of
the department is pretty much
ignored.
It just has not produced much of
anything.
And I'm a little perplexed the
the the secretary of the
department this speaking in
favor of this measure along with
a couple of foster parents who
will sentence CYFD never listens
to this department this review
committee so what's going to be
different I mean why are you
suddenly Mr Secretary going to
be paying attention.
To a group that you have not
paid any attention to in the
past.
Thank you Mr members of the
committee I think it's fair to
say that under this
administration we have been
communicating more with SEAC I
think we have some concern that
I don't know what it was like
under the last administration
but part of our concerns as we
would like SCAC to be more
rigorous and their oversight and
I think we all agree on that and
that is a big part of this bill
is to increase and increase the
regular of the oversight to be
sure that the the reviews of the
case filed happen under of
methodology and increased
professionalization of those
reviews so that CYFD can be held
accountable in be sure that we
are
will be in being held
accountable with sufficient
rigor the second piece is in
this bill it does require that
there's more meetings with ****
and that requires a response
from us so that we are
responding to those at the
investigation so we think that
both of those are important
step toward edges as well.
Well.
I mean I understand that this
does require you to do more than
you've done in the past and to
be more cooperative and so on
the.
I mean this is this is an agency
that has.
it does not have a very sterling
track record MSA in terms of.
It is produced.
In terms of reviews having any
impact.
And and I'm just I'm just really
skeptical about whether these
changes.
When senator Neville and I
introduce these changes it was
because the children's court
judges and sent to us very
clearly we don't know if this is
supposed to do when we don't
even read these reports because
a lot of them get to us after
the hearings so we just over the
years we just started snoring
these reports.
And
And so we we made changes we
made four years ago.
And.
I didn't see any difference at
all for three years and now they
want to make additional changes.
Committees this is an agency
that has.
Four hundred thousand dollars a
year budgeted I mean we're not
talking about.
The.
They have a funny resource.
And yet the judge's attention to
them and now see what this thing
intentioned to them so while I
respect Senator Kernan her
efforts.
I am independent information
from people who say with choir
you continuing to fund this.
This is a waste of time in a
way.
G. so the secretary says he's
going to start listening to what
they do and they're going to
need to do more right.
This is all together.
Exercising in holding the views
you're in organizations the last
four years has been very
disappointing.
And.
And.
There is another alternative
approach to making CYFD more
accountable the Supreme Court is
in dancing and that one seems to
hold a lot more promise I wonder
Mr Secretary you can speak into
wishes to you and you say we're
doing.
Mr chairman.
Could you which could you point
out with Hillary referring to
there was a bill that senator
Lois is calling for in the.
Justice the hill is spoke in
support of
A Mister chair members the
committee I think that is that
the the family representation of
bill.
The S..
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee I appreciate the
question that bill and I've
talked to quite a bit justice
Neil but it really appreciate
the her expertise and
perspective she brings to that
and I that bill I think would
increase the quality of legal
representation across the state
and also give the opportunity
for a collateral representation
on civil legal matters which is
near and dear to my heart I
think that's one of the best
ways that we can help of both
hold the agency accountable and
also help help children and
families to really solidify and
strengthen so I think that's
important I wouldn't hit the
those together I don't see them
as exclusive and obviously as
the Senator Kernan mentioned Mr
chair members of the committee
this as the issue goes
originally agency built before
we did the before Senator Kernan
moved to do the committee
substitute today and we do think
that this is an important step
forward with with accountability
and transparency here in New
Mexico.
Let's go to the committee.
The committee on the committee
with a question or comment on
this bill.
I'm sorry we moved away from
public comment to Mr Alexander.
Harry.
We'll go to Senator and
diagnosed.
Mr chair Senator.
I appreciate this.
This can I ask you and I know
Secretary layoffs on during our
meetings earlier this year to
see these new changes correct
all the questions we have as far
as the accountability in the
participation of the groups.
So Mr chair and senator guy it
goes I I doubt this bill will
cover all of the issues that we
have been concerned about and we
met about prior to the session
but I do think it's a start I do
think it strengthens the steps
to care Advisory Council in the
sense that now.
At the department does have to
respond I think one of the
issues that senator piece there
are Ortiz Pino brought at west
with regard to the fact that
that these reports are not right
by the judiciary and I spoke
with that judge Snyder about
this during some of our
conversations and I think it's
critical that the judiciary at
some point I understand the
importance of this council yes
and and take to heart the
recommendations I think that
many constant and I think one of
my concerns over the past year.
When when hearings are are
taking place within the judicial
system and information is
related to the judges my big
concern is are they getting all
the information that they needed
I think the answer to that is no
and so I hope that this is a
start I hope that data by
requiring the CYFD department to
respond to these reports if you
if you want to take a look at
their annual report to see what
they're doing they are doing
good work but the problem is I
don't think it's getting to the
people that need to read that
part read the report stand up
and go from there so no I don't
think this is going to solve our
problems.
But I do think it's a step in
the right direction I think
there's a process for grievance
that that will not allow for
a retaliation I think that's
critical that you're right I
remember in twenty sixteen when
up this bill.
when it was Kerry by Senator to
balance senator Ortiz Y. Pino it
was.
It's a step in the right
direction but these things this
may not be the total answer and
I think it is hard yes.
That that.
No I don't think it's going to
stop everything that I think
it's a step in the right
direction because we do have to
respond to captive in part of
that responsibility on a federal
level is that there has to be
certain things in place with
regard to captain and so I think
we are responding to their
intentions of that but we're not
that we're not there yet but
this is a step in the right
direction.
Thank you for that Senator and
and Mister chairman Senator if
you allow of the secretary in
this new bill in in in the has
provision that they would do the
right response to the council's
annual report recommendations
and I was wondering how he would
look at that from his department
what kind of issue that would
give him I like the clarity I
like the opportunity for the
detail we put in work put down
in writing as we're talking
before I just wanted oversight
so someone would be able to have
the availability to give out the
message to the public that CYFD
is doing the right thing or
they're not in a I like the
written report part written
response it has just wondering
if secretary can explain how
hard that would be for his
department to to bye bye well if
you.
Yes.
Yes senator of Secretary
Blalock.
Mr chair members the committee
in the thanks for the question
Senator so right now
we have the ability to respond
now to reports when we when we
get access to more we see them
ahead of time the report's gonna
different times in the state of
the case so sometimes they do
come earlier in the case and
they can be used as part of the
court record
I think one of the things we
like to see improved is when
that's appropriate appurtenant
getting that information to the
judges because I think it's very
helpful for the judges to have
information to come out of the
SCG report sometimes as was
mentioned I believe by the chair
Mister members of the committee
sometimes the outcome of the
report comes later and is no
longer germane to the case and
so then we can use that as an
opportunity to see if there was
a system failure to think that
we might be able to fix or
correct going forward
and so that you know that's
something that that we welcome
the opportunity to do it are
already talking to SEAC about
best ways to increase the
responsiveness Mr chair the
committee that also includes
having higher leadership into a
P. at SPC hearings which we
started doing recently in the
last hearings and then
encouraging other departments to
do the same to really can
elevate SEAC and be sure that it
has the the seriousness which
which is our.
This
is following question the the
the the legislation calls for
all these different departments
to be represented do they come
to the meetings.
Mr secretary into the into the
education department in the
health department and they
actually show up to the meetings
or is it largely just the
appointed members that are
coming to the meetings chair
Shelly answer that question
because we've had that
discussion and and I think she
is probably the best person
because frankly right now CYFD
is not part of the council so
could Shelly responded that.
Question.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan and
other members of the committee
the appointees that as chairman
I you have mentioned they are
very active we don't have a full
council of some of our public
members have not yet been
appointed by the governor but
are you asking if other people
attend from those departments or
are the people who are pointed
at ten.
The the various departments does
health department show up and
and
to dig into the bill to see the
different departments sure.
But.
Mr chair members of the
committee I just as a review of
the cabinet secretary of the
department of finance and
administration the public
education department Human
Services Department and the
department of health I see there
are the cabinet secretary or
their designees and at this time
we have
Through to cabinets W. secretary
appointed I'm from DFA and HSD
and we have the chief
pediatrician and school medical
officer from the department of
health and we have the
coordinator for the foster care
every students succeed acts
of coordinator from the public
education department and yes
they're very involved and
active.
Senator Davis.
Mr chairman and senator current
I think that answers my
questions I just want to make
sure that we're going down the
right road with the
accountability piece and be able
to document I appreciate your
effort and I will support your
bill.
Any other questions from any
other members of the committee
by Senator Tolman rejoined to
see he is wanted to be admitted
I don't see him.
I'm.
Mr chair I am back.
So we have we have a quorum we
actually have more than a court
so we can take action now no
flexibility committee Senator
Ingle.
We do fast Mr chairman.
Also just seconded by Senator
Gallegos games.
Any other discussion or debate.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Two four two yes ma'am.
Ingle yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes can you hear me
I heard you senator Cormann.
Yes.
to shipping.
No and I'll explain my vote.
I just I just saying that.
We maybe throwing good money
after bad is over I appreciate
Senator Kernan says energy for
this and I certainly you know
certainly the bill's going to
move ahead.
I'm just too concerned to the.
No tensions in the past and I'm
I'm unconvinced changes will
make anybody pay attention to
them in the future.
But you haven't Senator Kernan
manage moving ahead thank you
very much Mr chair.
We just voted on the substitute
bill and not the original just.
This is Senator the.
So now let's just repeat the
vote on this.
Because we have a substitute
bill so Senator Ingle you want
to move the adoption of
committee so for Senate bill two
forty two.
Some of Mr Chairman.
Senator guy is.
Okay.
Call the roll.
Some Senator yes yes.
Two forty two center guy it goes
yes man.
Senator Ingle yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Sir Tom on.
Yes.
Or to see Pino.
No.
So thank you very much Senator
Kernan you have to pass and.
Where do you go to finance next
no I believe we go to the
judiciary.
Yes.
In many.
So members let me just make a
couple of announcements first
about the
Where we are on the agenda
because some people may be here
for a bill that we're not gonna.
We're not going to.
Yeah we're not here to forty
seven juvenile life sentences
the sponsor.
Two forty seven AM.
That was roled over I believe.
Going into the wrong bill yeah I
know we are we are going to hear
that.
So let's let's do
Two forty six in god we trust
when public buildings and then
we're waiting for the sponsor of
two forty seven to return.
So that we can get into it so
listen to Senator guy and this
is in god we trust bill next.
Mr appreciate you allowing me to
be heard today
This bill came up and and I've
had some
letters in opposition that one
came out today that I haven't
heard the group before but I
knew the members of this came
out for multiple reasons I've
got a fifteen year old
granddaughter that that one
point we're talking some
military people in uniform
about four they were stationed
at overseas and in that
discussion of she wondered why
they don't know more about what
the military does for us outside
of our our country an additional
about our national motto never
heard about you know it in
school she said she had a a very
little understanding about it
but in right to life that for
years now we've not talking
anything about our national
motto.
A lot of people I've got the
perk officer capital and a lot
of people were saying that this
is more about the prior Campos
then it is not our national
motto but I think
they're one of the same I would
tell you that I think it's very
important that by promoting our
national model our children
be reminded that they are pre
talk about not in school and any
work.
Play it anytime they would like
but I still think Mr and centers
in bring back something that
we've been lacking for years and
it's not are being a proud to be
an American and what it means to
be
The country.
Or or founders this is brought
up by our founders early on its
own money it already displayed
in Washington there are multiple
states have done different
programs to get this back in
school actually there nineteen
states and have some sort of our
national motto in different
places whether schools
We'll major around their
communities but it's just one of
those things were I felt I have
this ready for last session but
did not get a message on it from
the government.
And I did get quite a few
negative in some threats had one
guy that I talked about over the
clip off the cliff of course me
out over it in detail he
realize that since he had two
nephews in service that my
granddaughter did not understand
why they're risking their lives
for our nation and so with that
all stand for questions I I
think it's pretty easy bills
understand I think the our kids
deserve to understand the
heritage of this plant can.
And it started out with our
national motto I believe that
and then again it wasn't our
national motto was
running until later in life for
we've increased the nation
actually in July thirtieth of
nineteen fifty six president
Eisenhower signed it into law as
our national motto.
But it's just one of those
things that I think and we need
to go back to our roots in
understand why America is the
greatest nation in the world
with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you senator is
public for comment and we only
have one person who signed up in
advance to speak on this bill
and she's opposed to it
join the millions.
Young woman in center.
Thank you chair.
Running an errand let me pull
over right here.
Thank you my name is Joe money
in Sanford I'm the director of
the New Mexico religious
coalition for reproductive
choice.
In October of twenty twenty we
along with interfaith worker
justice of New Mexico organized
the convening.
With leading scholars and
theologians like Chris and Eric
ward on.
White Christian nationalism an
applicant gaining we learned
about something called project
let.
Which is a campaign.
But the Christian nationalist
movement to implement radical
anti equality State Policy.
And use the distorted idea of
religious freedom to influence
legislation.
To undermine religious equality
tab L. G. B. T. Q.
discrimination protections.
And reduce access to
reproductive health care.
This bill is a model built from
project let it slide isn't
legislators to start with in god
we trust model bill.
That are considered relatively
easy to pass then build momentum
by proposing bills that promote
the false narrative of the US
being founded as a Christian
nation.
And then finally move to more
dangerous bill the offer very
broad exemptions for allowing
religiously based
discrimination allow public
which would allow publicly
funded adoption and foster care
placement agencies to
discriminate against same sex
couple and harmful bills that
would put health care providers
personal beliefs about patient
health and safety.
This bill my main seem
relatively harmless but it is in
fact a building block the
dangerous legislation meant to
lead to the stripping of rights
for women LGBTQ people religious
minorities and the non religious
and we urge that you do not
have.
Senate bill two forty six thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anybody else in the
room who wants to come in for or
against this bill.
If you to raise your hand as a.
No interest he'll go ahead and.
I just like to well
Steve on behalf of myself and
just say that I'm against this
legislation historically
Christianity has been used to
oppress people of color you
specially here and the Merritt
is.
And.
It is being used as an excuse
for genocide and who is for
installation and I just find it
offensive.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair is there
anyone else there's a button at
the bottom of your screen This
Is reactions.
Push that then you have a choice
of raising your and.
Yes.
Sorry I wasn't muted I said I'm
actually here for the next bill
mostly but I've heard this bill
before on the floor in other
years and I do think it is a
dangerous precedent and it
certainly doesn't fit the
meeting and the humane person
but I I'm not a religious person
and it it just doesn't fit thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
Yes.
This.
The committee for questions and
comments are a motion.
The Senators medicine Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman I still
feel silly raising a virtual
hands.
I don't know if I'll ever get
used to that thank you thank you
senator for the bill
This bill you know what
listening to the public I mean
this is a really fascinating
topic I think for me
and and how that even our our
chairman said in the past you
know that we we do live in a
pluralistic society we live in a
society where we have people of
all kinds of religious faiths
and and we have.
Secular society.
and so this you know to me
looking at this bill all trying
to kind of understand it it's
you need definitely have
spiritual underpinnings of.
People that believe in a god of
of some kind
and then the fact that it is our
national motto and this is
brought up it's it's on our our
currency during the discussion I
was actually just curious with
with some of the public comment.
that there's actually been
lawsuits to remove in god we
trust from our currency and from
other areas so very very hot
topic I think it's probably
gonna remain I think this this
issue is going to continue
I don't know what the court
system will continue to say to.
But but yeah really really
fascinating
Well it Mr chairman and senator
I I think.
I I had gotten with you offline
about some of the FIR stuff and
you clear that up for me so I I
don't really have any any
further question I probably just
just conclude by saying that
our.
What is very important I think
about the founding of our
country.
Really defines and it's not it's
not a a Christian thing.
It is the belief that are we
in downward slide in alienable
rights or not.
And I I would argue that you
cannot be in doubt with in
alienable rights.
If you do not believe in.
A god of some kind.
because if you don't then the
rights are just gonna come from.
The government.
And then if the rights come from
the government they can be
revoked by the government but I
I believe that inherently and
intrinsically.
we are endowed with with certain
rights that cannot be removed by
by any government you know
they're the right to.
Life liberty pursuit of
happiness you know that the
that's the kind of language.
That was established in our
declaration of independence and
I think you know there's a word
in the declaration of
independence like at a creator
with a capital C..
I doesn't say it's god of of
Islam or Christianity or Judaism
or or any anything else it says
a a creator and so this this
issue really comes down to for
me I don't see it as a
necessarily one religion versus
another or a certain religion
versus secularism but I I see it
as do you do you what what
really what kind of government
do we believe we believe our
rights are are intrinsic in our
inalienable or do we believe
that our rights are are just
rented by the government and
therefore can be revoked and so
I I do I do support the bill
Sander I I support you know
having our our national model on
there and and I think you know
reiterating the fact that I just
this comes down I think our our
individual rights and and what
our our country is is about and
it's certainly not about
establishing any sort of
particular religion that's
exactly what our founders came
to get away from.
is to to not to you know force
anyone to have any sort of
certain religions but anyway I
we could talk about that a lot
of it's it's getting late but
just want to share some comments
that I do think this goes deeper
than much deeper than religion I
think it really goes to the
basis of our government thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you thank you senator.
Senator do you want to comment.
Well.
I appreciate his his comments I
think that the for me I agree
with the it goes way deeper than
just the in god we trust
you know the protocol because
the young lady that brought a
project list Liz
and and I knew some of the
people who were on that project
and never heard the word project
lives but in the discussions of
we've had that are with others
sanitation rapper of Arkansas
United sit down and he passion
in Arkansas and I know that
the intent was to be able to get
us fact in our fundamental
grooves I don't know that I've
ever asked for a Mr chair to
chair the nomination of a
certain race my granddaughters
have black.
Is Senate.
I think that we need to have
The national motto peace as
being important to in every
individual for whatever their
religious beliefs yes I like the
idea that the probe brought up
that it had creator capital C.
and and that should bring us to
the point that whoever's not
whatever they're not is would be
considered and that all right so
I appreciate that Dr Reddy's and
will we'll go on with whoever
has more questions see what we
can do.
I want to bring this up Mr chair
is one of the lady said she
heard this on the floor and I've
been in the house for eight
years I've never heard.
And I did not know that anyone
else has brought this bill
before last year when I handed
it didn't get a message so it
was not her.
So I just wanted to clarify
that.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator
day goes for bringing this
timely discussion legislation to
us
When I first read this the the
language of the bill what really
struck me because I.
I love our country and I am on.
I love civics and government
since I was probably ten twelve
years old and the first thing
that struck me is we need to
have separation of church and
state.
That is so important we have
Americans that are Christian.
That are Jewish.
That are atheists that are and
gnostic.
we have indigenous people I I am
I'm an indigenous person I was
Rio Catholic however.
When I started going to you can
close the door.
Okay organized religion in New.
I learned about what organized
religion did to indigenous.
For America.
You.
And so to that end chairman and
senator I think it's really
important absolutely those of us
those Americans who are
Christian and Jewish and they
want to express in got their
trust on their vehicles on their
house what have you that's fine
but when it comes to public
buildings I think that crosses
the line of breaking the
separation of church and state.
Yes I I can't support this
legislation based on that
that's what I love about our
country the freedom right the
freedom to believe in in a god
in Buddha
in mother nature in with us and
that tolerance that's what
people around the world would
just chairs to have them why
they want to be a fellow
American and so under that
spirit I have to keep.
That chorus alive I I think you
chairman I think you Senator.
Thank.
Anybody else on the committee
one speaker just questions.
What will the committee on this
bill.
To pass Mr Chairman.
We have a motion from Senator
Schmedes a second from.
Senator Gallegos secretary will
call the roll.
On Senate bill two forty six
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
I don't believe Senator Ingle
was what Senator McKenna.
Now.
yes to explain my vote please.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I believe this is no Senator
that's correct no.
Thoman.
I know trying to vote.
And center to see panel no.
So
Schmedes and then Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair of a very
very brief I just wanted to say
that I I I I would not support I
do not support any legislation
that would establish a a
national religion
that that to me is what the
separation of church and state
is about you know it England
have the Anglican church other
other countries mandate certain
religions so I just wanna be
clear why I'm supporting this
bill this bill in my mind does
not establish any sort of
religion
and so I I just wanted to say
that Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair I'll be very
brief of yeah I'm not a.
Nine anti religious person but I
think this bill is an insult to
people who I don't know maybe
believe the way that some of us
believe
on the strong supporter of the
separation of church and state
one reason that we spent a
successful nations because.
because of that you look around
the world in those nations that
are rules by religious leaders
have been very successful and
been abusive so
Senator Griego said he wants to
get back to the past well the
past wasn't so great so thank
you for bringing this forward
and giving us the opportunity to
have this.
And
The legislative concludes my
remarks thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Clemente.
Members.
Still in the on the agenda is
Senators hello this is bill two
forty seven.
And I just want to insure
Committee.
We are
are we looking for for
proceeding we're getting very
close to six but I think we can
do this bill and and and roll
over money bill and.
And Senator o'neill's Bill to
Lindsay.
When.
Ingle.
Okay Center for weight loss.
Do Raul this Wednesday also
sentenced Senator might lay
witnesses have been waiting all
this time.
Let's try it
this right now and senator I
have chairman.
Do I have
Energy high don't recognize her.
Yeah I'm I'm I'm all right.
Let's let's let's do with one
less bill.
We've already rolled over
Senator Lois's Bill we roll over
money and will roll over on the.
That will make a little progress
we can finish this tonight.
There is an amendment on this
bill.
Thank you senator
I will I will let I would like
to explain just very briefly
what this bill does and the
amendment which is a very simple
amendment
first this bill explicitly bans
juvenile life without parole
which is already
unconstitutional and so it's
just an explicit ban and then it
establish eligible eligibility
for parole determination and
this gets my amendment my that
are this bill says ten years and
I'm proposing an amendment that
would change the ten years to
fifteen years.
For crimes committed children.
Do we have the amendment.
I just I think the amendment of.
When it sent
The amendment to the.
This.
The.
It was very nineteen.
Okay just checking because they.
Small but I don't know that are
now this is just we keep doing
this I just don't know if.
Analyze the time line changes in
water.
Some of them.
You know when we got this
ammendment.
Senator.
Well.
Today was twenty four hours a.
Mr chairman we did receive on
Friday if I remember correctly.
You is.
The
state with.
Allies the.
Come.
Can you presenter or whatever
that is.
Would you like me to explain the
amendment.
Please.
Thank you regional idea was to
offer children believe parole
over ten years and there was a
lot of feedback from people who
were
Who were the victims and from
the district attorney's office
and for many offices and so we
thought fifteen years was was a
good a good compromise.
Okay.
To my experts I have justice
Richard Lawson who is
Who is he served on the New
Mexico court for eight years
including his chief judge ten
years on the New Mexico Supreme
Court including two years of
Chief Justice Montoya is with
recent retirement so with that
I'd like to turn it over to this
is awesome.
Yes.
Yes.
And we go ahead and act on the
amendment is.
Thank you thank you I'm.
Motion to the amendment.
I move to accept amendment.
Senator McKenna second is there
any opposition to changing the
ten year to fifteen years any
opposition.
C. will consider amended and I
will move your expert witness.
Yes please.
Is here.
okay we can we can have
developed an only Wilson come
first of notifying him so I did
only Wilson is a staff attorney
at the ACLU.
Yes illegals.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is.
Opportunities Mexico and I work
with people across the he was
serving long sentences.
Honored.
Top.
In New Mexico there it just
comes.
Longer than.
Many.
Need that they will spend the
rest of their lives in prison.
Many have also already spent
decades in prison cell over
forty years for crimes that they
commit when they were fifteen
and sixteen years old.
These are sentences that tell
children that it doesn't matter
what you do over the next ten
twenty years of your life it
doesn't matter what kind of
person you become more the ways
the repair to repair the harm
that was done.
Following them then it doesn't
matter and that we don't care.
But it does matter.
All children are capable of and
worthy of redemption and this
must be fixed.
Not only because this policy and
practice runs counter to what we
know about adolescent brain
development and not.
Send.
Burns but because this is
inconsistent with New Mexico's
long tradition of protecting
children from the most severe of
criminal punishments New Mexico
is one of the first states to
protect children from the death
penalty and also one of the
first states to protect children
from mandatory adult sentences
but on this issue New Mexico is
now behind the twenty four
states and DC that are performs
their laws to abolish juvenile
life without parole and create a
second chance for children who
were sentenced as adults.
This bill will not swing open
prison doors this bill which is
modeled after legislation that
is worked in other states.
We'll give those responding
serving long adult sentences for
crimes committed when they were
children an opportunity to show
us how they have done and we
have people like Carissa Mickey
and Eric Alexander who can put a
face to that you can show us
what we might miss out on if we
reject the invitation to give
people another chance.
And with that Senator if it's
okay with you all passed to
Carissa McGee.
Thank you.
Hello.
My name is Carissa Bellaghy Act
one of your very own I am a
proud New Mexico citizen.
My story doesn't begin their.
Ends like far too many others
with the presence of uninvited
I'm pleasant and most often
under reported experiences of
childhood traumas.
I grew up in Los crucis the
youngest of four daughters
raised by a single mother in my
dream was to be a basketball
star I was actually quite the
talented athlete but that dream
was shattered when I was sixteen
and I have experienced my first
major mental health breakdown.
Or in the eyes of the law when I
committed my first criminal
offense.
One judge deemed me not to be
amenable to treatment the
sentence me to twenty one years
and an adult correctional
facility.
I was seventeen years old when I
had the prison compound.
I spent the first few years
incarcerated both mentally and
physically.
And nobody cared.
It wasn't until a community
based organization called
project echo entered my life and
enable me to reconnect with the
greatest power any of us could
ever possess hope.
I found a new sense of hope in
the darkest pits of my spare and
with that came the reminder that
I have wings and wings aren't
meant to be caged they are meant
to fly.
So I took off.
Luckily I was one of the violent
youthful offenders that actually
had a light at the end of my
tunnel I had a date for parole
board hearing.
After more than eight years of
incarceration I knew I was no
longer the lost child ahead into
the system I was undeniably a
changed woman it changed for the
good.
Thankfully I was given a
meaningful and timely second
chance at this thing called
life.
And if I may say so myself
I get that second chance out of
the park.
I successfully completed parole
and probation I don my
associates this last summer and
begin graduate school this fall
I work full time and project
echo why go back into the eleven
prison facilities across the
state to continue to pay it
forward by providing them with a
little bit of hope.
I co founded a nonprofit
organization called women in
leadership which helps other
women impacted by the criminal
justice system.
I appreciate basketball for the
high school and middle school
youth here in our own state.
And I wrote and published a book
titled trustor struggle it's a
novel based on my true story to
be an inspiration for others who
might find themselves equally
struggling.
All of these meaningful
contributions and so much more
are possible for me because I
was afforded a meaningful and
timely second chance.
I didn't do this alone.
I needed the grace of the Courts
the compassion of the people.
And now now I can be the face of
what it is to have suffered from
mental health disorders and then
learn to overcome I am the face
of what it is to be a violent
felon convicted as a child and
when given a meaningful and
timely second chance I am proof
that redemption is possible.
So when you go to cast your vote
on this issue please remember my
face.
Thank you.
Senator anybody else.
Yes I have I have Kelly center
next.
Lawson is joining to see if you
want to speak well
It's it's up to you I I the
order I have now is Eric
Alexander and Dr George Davis
and then Justice Boston.
In in your order that's fine.
Reserve the right.
Thank.
Senator.
Chairman and committee I'm more
I'm more gallons and I'm here
representing the campaign for
the fair sentencing abuse we
work to replace like with the
possibility of parole as a
sentencing option for children
and implementing interstate age
appropriate policies that focus
on rehabilitation and return and
reintegration into society our
servicing advocate in my
capacity here but that that
hasn't always been the case I
was once one of the children
that this type of policy would
allow a second chance my story
is similar to that of much of
the to the your state we have
got into serious trouble and
that our lives are more back to
automatic experiences that are
early childhood and they are
what ultimately put us on the
back press at the age of
seventeen and nineteen ninety
four marijuana alcohol in the
impulsivity a point out with the
still developing brain let me to
take part in a very unthinkable
crime bill would remorse
Tomorrowland a crime they cost a
man his life like fifty to
twenty five year terms to be
served consecutively in order to
avoid a life without parole
sentence as you might expect
present environments are not
exceptionally friendly to young
men coming of age especially
ones like myself we had zero
involvement with any section of
the criminal justice system you
experienced things that no child
should ever experience what the
force to grow fast in those
environments it's tough to focus
doing the right thing like are
in the memory of the lives lost
to becoming a better person why
you live in fear and uncertainty
but like many other children I
was able to do so or I served
ten years of that sentence and
have been home now for almost
seventeen years twelve years of
that was on parole during the
time that I've been home the U.
S. Supreme Court has taken
several looks at this issue in
twenty twelve the Miller versus
Alabama this is a concluded that
life without the possibility of
parole is unconstitutional but
the vast majority of youth under
the age of eighteen and twenty
sixteen Scotus road in
Montgomery versus Louisiana that
this be applied retroactively to
all you serving the sentences
this is a work based on the
differences and youth and adults
in terms of brain development
the judge said that in state it
we have procedures that offer
you've meaningful opportunities.
For release if they can
demonstrate rehabilitation and
no threat to public safety as a
result of the Supreme Court
decision twenty four states
including the Dakotas.
Nevada Ohio Texas West Virginia
and Arkansas with just the roll
around six percent of these
cases how all of this life
without the possibility of
parole the citizen options.
Since then over seven hundred
you school were told that they
would die in prison I now hold
over one hundred and thirty of
those men and women are active
members within the I can network
which is an acronym for the
incarcerated children's advocacy
network a national action
network that I helped co found
all of us serve time for
homicide related to offenses
that are now home live a
productive life cell this psalm
is elementary school teachers in
your state some of the biggest
councils paralegals arch for
north and the list goes on
according to a release that are
assessed data released in
Pennsylvania there is a less
than one percent recidivism rate
of monthly school this is the
the the muscle of the fact that
children who commit violent
crimes a capable of returning to
society and be a positive
contributors to their
communities we're not monsters
yes we make critical errors and
adjustments as adolescents we
all more than the worst thing
that we've ever done we just
need opportunities like Senate
bill two forty seven to prove it
thanks for having me with you
this evening.
For now I have George Davis was
a child and adolescent
psychiatrist of with at UNM.
It is.
Mr chairman can can you hear me
yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thanks for the
opportunity to talk about this I
will as you suggest keep this
compressed.
what I want to say is that the
same sort of research that the
Supreme Court used in making
their decisions those landmark
decisions of the early two
thousands about juvenile
sentencing that's the same kind
of research that pertains to
today's discussion as well and
here's essentially what it says
basically is that the the
project of human brain
development goes on
continuously for the first
twenty five years of life even
though eighteen years has is
written into a lot of Law and it
seems to have a lot of
credibility it doesn't really
have any real meaning as far as
brain development.
The development of that first
twenty five years goes on
continuously but there are two
great periods of critical kinds
of changes in renovation the
first of those you know what is
the zero to five that's the sort
of information and research that
that informs the discussion on
early childhood the second one
is much less discuss and that is
the re working the rewiring that
happens during the adolescent
years because the brain is being
rewired during those years and I
use we work loosely really what
there is there's development
going on in different parts of
the brain but they're happening
it different the different
speeds and so the adolescent
brain is considered to be in
many respects unbalanced and the
imbalance is primarily a a
mismatch between the drives and
the control of those drives the
drives building things like
increased emotionality
increased reward seeking even
thrill seeking all of which
leads to more substance use and
more risk taking on other drives
so would include things like the
attention to peers and the and
the immense amount of attention
and influence that appears have
over avid decisions
also there's more emotionality
that in the presence of in the
presence of a great deal of
emotional instability of those
if it was developed to people
all the way around to the
controls on that would be
in the frontal lobes and we need
things called executive function
those executive function.
Would modify those drives they
would inform those strategy
would be would lead a person to
ask
maybe I should delay this maybe
I shouldn't do this now.
this is going to be harmful to
other people maybe it's not even
safe and because something like
safety is itself is
not as much of a priority or
it's not it's not governed by
the frontal lobes and you find
that of the right accidents of
accidental deaths as reflected
in the mortality rate rises two
hundred percent between the
middle of childhood in middle of
the early twenties and that's
all of those deaths those
increased just are due to
the entirely preventable kinds
of accidents impulsive
accidents.
they're dealing feature of this
is that in the late twenties
toward the end of this
development curve
most of back in balance is is
corrected and is re ballots
that's why you find that ninety
percent of adolescents who
violate the law during their
teen years do not continue to
have a criminal lifestyle.
what it does not mean is that
every single adolescents who
commits a serious are maybe even
a deadly crime during that
period it doesn't mean that
everyone of those adolescents is
transformed or becomes a solid
citizen what it really means is
that there's no way of
predicting that at the time of
sentencing and that's because
the sentencing is done it either
in their teens or shortly after
their eighteenth birthday and
really don't know what those you
are going to become and that's
why it's recommended that the
they receive a second look once
their brain development is
complete.
And that's all I have to say
thank you for listening you Mr
chairman and members committee.
Thank you.
Senator did you have the justice
now yes just one more witness
Justice Boston.
I believe he's on.
Lawson.
The justice on mute.
Well he's just.
Thank okay.
Thank you very much thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez for being
the sponsor of this very
important bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for members senators and members
of this committee.
what I've heard so far eight we
went to points what is the
children do change over time.
And we need a mechanism to
account for that doesn't mean
that they're released
automatically.
Mechanism at some point in time.
And by someone suggestion here
is fifteen years why the parole
board.
I've also heard that.
about half the states in the
nation now have some system some
process for that review so
Mexico isn't being asked to be a
Guinea pig here but rather to
fit more into what has become
the norm.
I'm here.
As a former justice on the New
Mexico Supreme Court a judge of
the New Mexico court of appeals
I'm here to tell you a story.
Which you know stories take a
long time so I'm going to try to
compress it into two minutes
which isn't easy but I'll do my
best.
About twenty years ago and I'm
still in the court of appeals.
I.
Was on the K. state versus Joel
Byrom.
A case that has haunted me to
this day.
Joe however when he was fourteen
and fifteen years old.
committed serious and repeated
sexual offenses against his step
sister was banned eight or nine
years old in that range.
Over a period of two years
ultimately.
Respond that is brought to
justice he pled guilty to a
series of serious felonies most
of them sexual nature criminal
sexual penetration and so forth.
So for this Senator for the
district judges.
Guilt or innocence was not an
issue the only thing that was
that state was the Senate's.
The judge conducted elaborate
and extensive evidentiary
hearing.
At the end of it he concluded
that his child was not amenable
to treatment as a juvenile that
was not in dispute.
Therefore the only thing to
remain what what what is adult
sentence be.
As a then sixteen year old are
you.
Conducted a long and lengthy
evidentiary hearing about point
turns out the New Mexico did not
have the facilities were
necessary to treat this young
man.
Was also.
Rather persuasive evidence
contrary to what doctor Davis is
just testified to.
From this point no conscience
and then he would never have a
conscience.
Which is kind of remarkable
statement but in light of
today's scientific findings is
probably questionable but this
is twenty years ago.
So the district judge at that
point.
Very difficult decision to make.
You have to do what was right by
the defendant he also had to do
was right by society.
He was concerned that this young
man would re offend.
Was no evidence that he might
not reference.
So at that point he issued a
very poignant laments really
saying I wish.
The state law provided me with
options I wish there were an
opportunity for a periodic
review.
Of this now voice soon to become
a young man I wish I wish I wish
there was no such provision in
state law.
So we did what he thought was
the only alternatives available
to it.
He said I'm going to give them a
sense.
To make sure that by the time he
is out of prison you will no
longer have sexual urges
recalling that leading to a
friend.
Sixteen year old war give my
ninety one year old cents ninety
one.
Which meant that he would not be
eligible for parole any earlier
than forty six years.
After he was sent to prison.
That case came I came up to me
in two thousand one I couldn't
believe that the law would allow
for this but turns out after a
lot of research that was a
little and there was no altered.
So I reluctantly went along with
affirming that decision writing
my own opinion saying in effect.
Legislature we have to do better
can we address this at some
point you come up with some
alternatives.
Time went by same case was heard
by our Supreme Court after I
retired on AB's corpus petition.
Our supreme court said
essentially the same thing I
answered some seventeen years
earlier which was this sentence
is probably lawful it is
constitutional that doesn't make
it right.
With the courts can't do
anything about it it's up to you
New Mexico legislature to
address this problem come up
with the scheme.
What that while protecting the
public allows professionals
allows the system to take
another look at some point was
originally ten years now is
fifteen years the day doesn't
matter all that much but at some
point at some point thereafter
see what has happened to this
point do these horrible things
easy now.
A responsible citizen does he
show signs of we can have
confidence in or not.
Yes we there's no way we can
know.
There has to be a way to do
that.
So in conclusion I can't say
this is the only way to do it I
can say that unlike twenty years
ago a lot of states have come on
board.
In the only alternative that is
not acceptable at this point are
respectively submit is for us to
do.
Thank you very much.
Thank you yes.
Senator.
Your.
Yes Mr chairman of the public.
Well we have a dilemma here in
that we have seventeen people
who signed up to speak against
this bill and we have twenty one
people thing in support of the
bill and I'm not going to take
all seventeen.
Opponents or twenty one.
Supporters but I am going to
allow ten minutes on the side.
So we're gonna start and I'll
try to get people in there maybe
Able to speak for Senator you
want and ask you to keep your
comments brief we'll start with
the opponents.
And we we will give you a total
of ten minutes to to to make the
case so we'll start with the
more rural New Mexico district
attorneys association.
chair chairman and committee
members I'm here speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
in opposition to this bill I
will say that this morning I did
receive an email
from ms will send about the
amended amendment to fifteen
years I can't speak on that
amendment for the association
because we didn't get it in time
to meet as a group to decide on
it.
I want to say that we are not
opposed to the spirit of this
bill.
But I will say that like justice
Justice Boston pointed out
neither the New Mexico Supreme
Court or the U. S. Supreme Court
has said that life without
parole is unconstitutional.
The mandatory imposition is a
constitutional.
And in New Mexico I know it's
easy to say little kids
committed big crimes but it's
not like that the majority of
cases that and I believe you'll
hear from some victims we're not
talking about useful discretion
and the fallacy of relying on
brain development is that it the
statistics are based on normal
teens what normal adolescents go
through ****.
And there is there is no even Dr
Davis will tell you because I
spoke to him that not all
adolescents can be
rehabilitated.
And the other thing you know the
under development right I think
when the Supreme Court IRA
talked about
Life without parole is
prohibited unless the offenders
found to be a juvenile whose
crime reflects irreparable
corruption I think that's one of
the big issues with this bill is
it doesn't focus on the crime
and when you're talking about
brain development some of these
crimes the most horrific crimes
in the state are not if you look
at the behavior and how they
were committed like the Clovis
library shooter these are not
impulsive actions of an
adolescent of a of a undeveloped
at less range these were well
thought out well planned.
Yes where they did taking the
consequences of their actions
and the consequences that they
wanted to see people suffer.
And.
Unfortunately the brain
development studies cannot
predict or describe the
character of an individual avid
and that's why I believe leaving
it to the discretion of the
judge who can taken up into
account all of those factors is
is probably the fifth more
feasible way to get to where
we're trying to go.
But.
The most important thing or I
guess the biggest the biggest
objection the association has to
this bill is that it doesn't
seem to be.
It doesn't seem to take into
account how cruel this bill
would be to victims you know it
doesn't a victim.
Someone who loses their family
member to a horrific torture and
murder and rape it doesn't make
a suffering any less real
because it was committed by a
juvenile and to have these
victims come before the parole
board.
Fifteen years and every two
years thereafter that is just
very that's I'm discretion to
scribal cruel and it goes
against the victims of crime act
which says that we must take
their the victim's rights and
balance them with the defendants
or the cues rights.
I I would just say that there is
a public safety issue for every
success story and I appreciate
those.
There are hundreds of sick of so
the stories were given I was
were released and continue to
commit horrific crimes.
I don't think that this is the
bill to get to where
everybody who feels like it's a
good idea I don't think it this
is the way to get there and on
behalf of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
we oppose the bill in its
current format and again we
oppose it on the ten years I
have not had it you would not
have a chance to meet on the
fifteen years but they're still
a very real concern of having
the the parole how did the
victims.
Come before the parole board
every two years to relive the
trauma.
And at this time I will pass it
and and thank the committee and
the chair for the time.
Thank you.
Mentioned you to four minutes so
there's only six minutes left
and so we'll go then to learning
in region action organization in
terms of juvenile murders.
Hello everyone hear me yes okay
have on hello thank you everyone
for allowing me to come and
speak to the member representing
the national organization of
victims of juvenile murderers
and I think I just want to start
my testimony by saying that like
our previous witness said not
all juvenile crimes are just
dumb immature mistakes I think a
previous witness said the
juvenile crimes are errors in
judgment critical errors in
judgment but it's just not true
some juvenile crimes are evil
what the Clovis library shooting
or one example I give my written
testimony are a sixteen year old
young man kidnapped a two year
old girl raped her and strangled
and beat her to death okay
that's not a youthful
indiscretion that's not an
amateur mistake that's people
and so victims like that little
girl they don't get second
chances they don't get parole
hearings and we think that
justice demands punishment that
are proportionate to the crimes
and fifteen years for highly
aggravated murder like that it's
just not proportionate I'm so in
a sense that late we feel like
it on the values of victims and
demeans the crimes and also
it really quickly mentioned that
this bill would give to immerse
excessive numbers of parole
hearings are a juvenile who
lived to be in the seventies
would potentially get dozens pro
dozens of parole hearings if
he's eligible every two years
and he gets after fifteen years
and so the programs is very
painful for victims I've seen it
first hand of council many
victims who've gone through it
in my R. as naive as a victim
advocate I've done that and on
parole hearings victims suffer
flashbacks not yours and other
symptoms forcing to victims to
relive the crimes and inner pool
here X. every two years this
bill would trap them and the
never ending cycle from what we
ask for you just remember the
victims like that little girl I
told you about who was raped and
murdered at the age of two just
remember them and don't put the
range of even.
Workers above them thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Next we'll go to and the someone
you us nice during his office.
Thank you hear me yes.
Okay I'm really familiar I
wanted to let you know that I
came in on the library Clovis
library shooting case at the Tel
and but was able to get to know
and meet several of the victims
in that case the victims in that
case have been on the line since
one fifteen today to give a
statement and I wish you could
hear from the mall
No Molina Alexis Molina Jessica
thrown Howard County.
Wanda Walters who is now
deceased who was shot and killed
that day Christina Carter who
shot and killed that day their
family members were ready to
speak and that thank you very.
she's orient Aaron Lowman
Alexis.
Malina.
meant eighty Fischer all wanted
to get statement regarding this
since I'm gonna read one
statement that I do have again I
wish we could hear from everyone
else this is from the NASA Gary
she said I'm writing this letter
in regards related and Daniel to
it matter on August twenty
eighth two thousand seven he
walked into the library and
turned many lives upside down I
recall my son Gabriel eleven at
the time walked into the library
within ten minutes have to skate
the first shooting in our lives
although we survived the
emotional part was very hard to
get over and the lack of feeling
safe with hard will be a Gary my
husband also encountered Daniel
he held them at gunpoint but
look that was able to distract
him long enough to keep others
from being hurt his PTSD has not
been needs the center automatic
and it will carry throughout its
life by the grace of god we are
all alive thirty three lives
involved two amazing lady gone
too soon for ensuring with scars
for life the panel needs to
service time and be held
accountable we believe god will
forgive him but he needs to pay
for his actions that's very
traumatizing and that
traumatized them every time I
have to call them and let them
know that state funding updates
for today that anxiety comes
back up for them and they're
having to relive that and having
to go for a parole hearing every
two years that same anxiety and
that English and that Porter and
that terror all those feelings
come up in these people's lives
and they are all wanting to
speak against this bill thank
you for having me.
Thank you and we we can take one
more I see the Fisher is on is
on the is in the room would you
care to make a statement in the.
Result.
Sorry about that.
Pre prepared as I'm sure you
know I probably have hours to
talk about this but I have a
kind of content so I'm just
going to read it okay.
Good afternoon my name is Amy
Fisher and I respectfully speak
in opposition to this bill for
many reasons my life has been
forever altered by a violent act
of local terror at the hands of
the juvenile at the Clovis
carver public library shooting
that occurred on August twenty
eighth two thousand seventeen.
He was in full awareness of his
actions as he opened fire in a
public space that resulted in
the murder of two women one of
which being my mom.
In addition to their desks we
would be several others and
physical and mental ways that
continue to cause English to
this very day the violence of
the men women and children
witnessed in a library that day
is inescapable.
We will be haunted in a prison
of our own for the rest of our
days because we can't have our
loved ones back and never should
have to bear witness to that
kind of bloodshed.
My mother had an entire second
half of her life left to live.
Yes potentially released after
ten to fifteen years justice
will not have been served I am a
person who does honestly believe
in redemption I believe he can
redeem the soul slowly from
within the correctional facility
serving his two life sentences
to completion his choices
rippled out to too many lives
for me to be overly concerned
about his localized single life
I don't ask for inhumane
conditions I ask for justice you
should not be able to resume a
normal life when he's taken our
normal lives away from us I
should be able to call my mom
and her birthday every year and
tell her that I love her no I
can't I have to tell our prayer
and there are days that that is
as hard as Dale Auster.
I cannot support the passing of
Senate bill two forty seven and
I want to thank you for hearing
my statement and I really
appreciate your consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you wish we we we had a
leisure being able to hear
everything that we're moving out
to ten minutes from the
supporters of this bill and I'm
just going to take some this can
speak for several of you so I'll
start with the nation.
terminal yes.
For members of the committee my
name is Dave Representative and
I have spent the last fifty
years writing rewriting The New
Mexico children of in the lobby
bills through the legislature.
Provisions of this bill.
As an adult.
In nineteen ninety three.
One has remained largely intact
to this day.
Twenty eighteen the New Mexico
Supreme Court.
Invited the legislature.
Create that toward change.
To modern modernize the staff at
with the statutes.
Now sentencing practices New
Mexico has fallen behind.
Alright thirty years since it
Representative.
This bill two forty seven
Representative it's a great
start.
The modernization
of our.
You are not just small adults.
That needs to be kept in mind
always writing the code.
Well when you have provided
regarding them.
Changes to our.
I need to be governed yes yes in
cover.
COVID nineteen by science.
By the progress in brain
development side.
I apology child placement.
Some problem.
The development of the child.
Progress great progress.
About.
The staff.
Changes may.
court sentencing process process
which should be mandatory in all
cases.
I want to to refer to page
eleven.
Or mean ability factors that
weighed.
When I when his sentencing the
young man or young lady.
To.
Now thirty years if this bill
passes seventeen years and it
needs to be emphasized.
That.
They come back they don't have
to grant rolled at the first
during the second or the third
hearing.
They need to waive the factors
that.
Thirteen and the changes taking
place in this trial something
perforation.
Well Raul board hearing process
you'll see on page nine the bill
two forty seven as outlined in
this legislation.
This factors the way both
sentencing consideration and
then the parole the iterations.
Those factors you know why.
The to to.
This considering.
Tiles.
By the science that I just
described and so it after.
Long support Senate bill two
point seven its passage thank
you.
Thank you.
There's five minutes left in
we'll go to Alison how to me of
the law offices.
Defender.
Sure.
Hi this is.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Alison how do
you know the office of the
public defender I want to think.
Sponsored for bringing this
important piece of legislation.
I'm an attorney.
The.
But the.
I'm sorry your years here then
is
in your we can't hear you
because of the band.
Convicted and sentenced to
prison as adults so to forty
seven.
Yeah we can hear you know if you
were.
And.
Okay.
Here.
Representative then it may any.
The.
And we're forty seven by
providing an early.
We're.
We want to really have stripped
from his.
Representative members of the
committee can you hear me OK
yes.
Is this legal services for
children stands in support of
Senate bill two forty seven my
name's lily hoster I'm an
attorney at Pegasus in case
you're not familiar with our
organization were nonprofit law
firm in New Mexico our mission
is to promote and defend the
rights of children and youth to
safe and stable homes quality
education and healthcare and a
voice in the decisions that
affect their lives.
By providing an early
opportunity for parole and
explicitly ending the
possibility of life without
parole sentence for juveniles
the bill does what twenty four
states and DC have already.
All right US Supreme Court found
almost a decade ago now that
mandatory sentencing of life in
prison without the possibility
of parole for juveniles is
unconstitutional and violates
the eighth amendment it's time
for New Mexico to enact this
legislation as one of the only
public interest law firm
dedicated to representing
children and youth.
We're strongly in support of
Senate bill two forty seven
thank you.
Thank you.
So I just threw Mexico can.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my
name's Erica Sanchez I'm with
New Mexico can an organization
that partners with young people
impacted by the foster care job
juvenile justice systems we
stand in support of this bill
and I I'll keep it brief there
were others to be able to speak
but for all of the reasons that
have already been stated by the
experts and other members of the
public thank you.
Thank you.
How to the Soto from the
southwest organizing project.
hello everybody my name is to
the group the Senators assassin
I can.
I support bill as the two forty
seven because I focused on New
Mexico invests in its youth and
not the institutions time to
throw them away New Mexico ranks
last in education and child well
being so we can take care of our
youth on the outside we most
certainly should not put them in
cages reform is key reform is a
key component making sure you
have a chance to become greater
than what the system thousand
there will be
notes known that you'd brains
not developed until twenty five
so to put it under the L. during
instability though not further
their minds and anyway is absurd
there's just under a hundred
people in Mexico serving ten
years or more for crimes
committed and as children
testing is billion emissions it
becomes something more than they
ever thought they could be.
Service the last it's a recent
cases in Supreme Court United
States support banning life
without parole for use the case
is recognize that juveniles more
likely to be real bit
rehabilitated been an adult and
they're forced to get a chance
to be released by demonstrating
maturity and rehabilitation so
New Mexico second part of the U.
S. supreme court's decision in
band on constitutional
architectural sentences for you
I am twenty years old not meant
a lot of mistakes that could
have been detrimental to my
future is not given a second
chance these you just need this
these use just need to see that
they can be more than they ever
imagined so that's why I support
this bill and I hope others do
as well.
Thank you.
One less enrollment from shift.
There's an.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to let everyone know that I
began my career as a prosecutor
here in Tennessee I am very
sensitive to the total that
being a victim of a crime or
losing a loved one to a crime
takes on the person the family
had those hard conversations
and I'm also very mindful of
public safety
but what I want you all to
understand from the campaign's
point of view now that we have
seen twenty four states plus DC
has these kinds of bills.
Is that if New Mexico takes this
step you are not alone.
It's not like in West Virginia
they don't care about crime
victims victims of violent crime
they don't care when someone
loses a loved one it's not like
in Ohio.
They're not listening to voices
for public safety what they
concluded is that justice is not
a zero sum game or we can only
care about or feel compassion
for one side of the equation
it's not it's not a situation
where I feel compassion for a
fifteen or sixteen or seventeen
year old kid who invested
rehabilitation that's that's
somehow diminishes my concern
for the person who sustain this
awful tragedy whose life is
never going to be the same the
parameters of my compassion are
big enough that I can feel for
both people and this bill
strikes that balance.
We understand that people age
out of crime we have the
statistics now West Virginia
passed a fifteen year review
bill back in twenty fourteen
seven years that they have been
doing this successfully and the
recidivism rate as was mentioned
earlier is a mere one percent
you know so this is not a threat
to public safety it's not a get
out of prison free card it is an
opportunity for people who were
too young to serve on a jury to
sign a contract or to buy a pack
of cigarettes it's an
opportunity for them to to
mature to invest in
rehabilitation and to be given
the opportunity a second chance
and we're seeing it work all
over the country so for those
reasons we encourage Mexico to
join Arkansas and Oregon and
Nevada and that the code is West
Virginia and Massachusetts and
Virginia and Ohio and give kids
a second chance thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Which again as I said those who
are against the bill for those
whom you were for it.
We can take all of your
testimony in the we've already
been in this committee meeting
for five and a half hours some.
We're gonna have to.
Turn it over to the to the
Committee members no discussion
and debate in hopefully a
motion.
Then Senator Sedillo Lopez to
Germany so you wanted to say is
a route.
I just to feel bad that the that
the victims the survivors I
think there's a survivors didn't
have an opportunity to to tell
their stories because there's
therapy it's a therapeutic thing
I I've been a victim of horrific
crime
with rape and abuse and
the only the only thing where I
I found peace was to finally let
it go
and and with counseling and and
with support
I understand I understand you
have to get in touch with your
pain before you can understand
your anger.
So I'm sorry that they do have
the opportunity to speak.
Well as the children
in this is just many of them
were also victims and.
I was in courts and corrections
when Justice Boston spoke his
story was just etched in my
mind.
So when I have the opportunity
care this bill I really wanted
to do it because I just can't
see going away the lives of one
hundred people who are sitting
serving sentences for crimes
they committed has children.
And so I'm I'm very grateful to
have the opportunity to bring
this bill this is a very hard
issue and again I just extend my
deepest of compassion to all of
the survivors who are concerned
about this bill but I believe
this is the right thing to do
and that's why I brought it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We'll go now to the committee on
the Senator first.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thanks for the discussion
the question I'm trying to
figure out of someone's there
are hundreds kids of the would
be able to be out on parole with
this bill I heard that we only
that we do not have any people
serving life sentences as far as
children can you confirm that or
do you know what your numbers
are in the process it was
unconstitutional for someone to
have a mandatory life life
without parole sentence so I
believe there is no no one of I
should probably defer to my
experts but I believe that
that's true
and the data that I have is that
there's just under a hundred
people serving sentence of
greater than ten years that
number is probably smaller that
we now that we moved it to
fifteen but I will defer to my
experts in only.
Senator thank you for the
question and you're correct that
there is no one serving a life
without parole sentence here and
in New Mexico the bill does two
things that are really important
and it makes it so that that can
never happened because it's it's
just a matter of of a chance
that no one is serving a life
without parole sentence for a
crime committed is as a child so
you are eligible to receive such
a sentence and so the bill makes
that
so that it will not be possible
but most importantly to it to
get to that I think that the
name details of your question of
what the what the bill does is
addresses sentence that that
that are not life without parole
per se but but do the same as
life without parole and that
they deprive a child of a
meaningful opportunity for
release of these are sentences
like ninety one and a half years
which we heard on from Justice
Boston or to kind of get a
couple of other examples that
I'm familiar with sentences of
sixty years life plus forty one
and a half years these are real
sentences that children are
serving in in our adult
facilities and those are are the
sentences that are addressed by
the early parole eligibility
prong of this bill.
Thank you for that Mr Saturn
expert witness I had a young
lady come offices tell me about
this bill and.
I know that you know if both
sides have a lot of pain and
angst on this and so this is one
of those hard built up Mr and
and etcetera the DA's office
said that they had not had time
to evaluate the fifteen year
change and and I heard you know
as you presented it so it went
from ten to fifteen years can
you explain that.
I guess I'm having a really hard
time Mr chairman and senator
that sometimes we rush these
amendments sent through so fast
that even our analysis can't
understand them with community
deal with that and tell me what
it does to the bill in in a
whole.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
Adding adding five years is
actually hard because in the
life of a child five years is a
long time I thought ten years a
decade was a very very long time
because for a child it's fifteen
ten years is is more than half
of their of their life however
it was very of.
Moving to hear the concerns of
the victims survivors.
Their families.
And it was also we talked to
various district attorneys a lot
of people have been look working
on this bill and for a long
time.
And we felt that this was in the
nature of a compromise because a
decade and a half.
The child would be in prison if
they were present when they're
fifteen that would be as long as
they've been living.
And so we felt that.
This compromise might give the
victims more that victims and
survivors more time to heal and
to feel safe.
before they the child was up for
the possibility of parole and
remember it's just a possibly
it's just the possibility of
parole that decision would be
made based on the child's
development and growth in the
system.
and so yes it was it was not an
easy decision it wasn't rush
through it was in the nature of
a compromise to hold ups I hope
to all that out a little
A little comfort to the
survivors and the and the
victims of the district
attorney's office I don't
I'm disappointed because I think
when I don't know what time
period would be sufficient for
them because they do support the
idea and of course it's
unconstitutional but then as I
said the mandatory I also
believe that we're on the way
well I I to really looking at
At the these very very long
sentences for parole to really
rethinking them
and this is a very good start as
fifteen years at least to start.
Mr center and I apologize I I
still lose a lot I lost all my
wide fire earlier but it is
still breaking up but.
I guess my next question then
was.
Did you have any you know we
heard from the DA's office than
any other departments that had
any really backlash to this
year's years will require wonder
about that is it seems like we
have bills to remove guns but
then we look at releasing the
shooters and I'm wondering if
the department of corrections
would have any kind of issue
with that are thank you know
that they came to the table with
you as you're discussing this or
what you know any of the other
departments.
There was a report that this
would save the department of
corrections some mining.
The costs a lot to to have
somebody in prison.
So I I I don't have the FIR just
right in front of me but there
was that that report
but I didn't I didn't have
anybody from the the those
departments come in and reach
out to me.
Personally.
We love Senator.
The last.
Little little.
He'll probably try to get back
in and we'll inspection anybody
else on the committee with
questions or wanting to do
maintenance issue.
Senator Ingle Senator McKenna
here there are.
Chairman I I I think you wanted
to wait until Senator Gallegos
could the back to back to join
us but when ready I'm prepared
to make a to pass the bill.
Let us see you Senator Ingle did
you have any questions or or
debate on this matter measure.
Senator Ingle.
I'm sorry I didn't vote for god
I was muted.
Anyways I can hear so clearly
everybody is hard to relieve a.
But anyway I I represent
certainly Clovis is a big part
of my district and
we had a
That horrible horrible shooting
there and and our might by
constituency is not.
Not for this bill and then
Senator faction.
We're kind of waiting for
Senator.
Economists.
As he tried to cover.
No yes.
Make your motion and we can
continue talking about it yes
hello intends to.
Chairman I think Senator Tallman
wanted to say something can I
hold back a bit
sure.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair this bill go
to Judiciary next yes.
Okay thank you.
Thank you.
Very good I thank you chairman
and I think you Senator I I
would like to move a do pass on
just be two forty seven.
Okay.
We have a motion and a second
for us.
And we're hoping Senator guy is
back on many hasn't yet.
So the secretary will call rule.
Mr Chairman do best as amended.
Thank you Frank thank you.
Senate bill two forty seven as
amended to.
Action on the amendment Senator
Carolyn yes okay.
Senator Gallegos is not present
Senator Ingle.
You know.
Yes.
This is not present for Lopez
yes.
Sir Tom.
Yes.
And center Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Yes.
You have.
One no.
Three excuse.
Just a second Senator guys got
admitted.
This chance to release more on
this bill.
Yes Sir.
We just had a motion to yes
right now we were just going to
close it I want to give you a
chance to vote on this bill.
Okay apologize for the wifi
problems.
So.
Senator
is yes.
Although no.
Thank you.
I was trying to tell you.
For yes is to nose and true
excuse.
Thank you senator is a little
and looking Judiciary your.
And for those of you who didn't
get a chance to testify tonight
you may have a chance Judiciary
then you may have a chance in
the house is to.
So this is not your only
opportunity to the and we
received I will say I recognize
names.
On the waiting list to speak who
is the mails to a so so I just
want to know the.
You.
Use in many northern we
certainly receive.
What's your use already so thank
you.
Members are lesser some business
still remaining.
We'll just do it just turned up
we will ensuring the meeting
next meeting we went to see
right after the floor session.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Good night Sir.
Thank you very.
