it like we do any other piece.
Expect yeah so
what other things.
So what we will be zoom of
telecare unit we're we're on the
web but we also will have an
opportunity for public comment
the is assumed.
Out.
Because of that workload we
can't let people speak for as
long as they want we do have to
cut it kind of keep it within
the bounds of reason and try to
cut some some of the comment
period short if it's a highly
controversial bill our practices
to ask Miss Sanchez to provide.
A limited number of people to
speak on behalf of the bill then
we'll give the opponents a
similar number to speak against
it and and rather than say
anybody who's who's here into an
opposition can speak we try to
keep it pick pick your pick your
spokespeople
To reflect this as best you can
the full array of reasons why
your bill is supported or
opposed
Then the meetings if you can if
if if if somebody.
Wants to propose an amendment to
the bill we are asking for
twenty four hour notice on on
the amendment if it's a simple
wording amendment you know we
change the shell to
may or something of that sort
you don't need to give us twenty
four hours on that but if it's
something that would
substantively affect the the
content of the bill would like
enough time for the analyst to
at least give us
the benefit of their
consideration before we try to
act on it
And if if it's lengthy enough
you know we need to have the
council service draft the
amendment we we rather than try
to do it on the fly here just.
Pen putting pen and and or
pencil to the paper
For security email address.
You you you've gathered already
all the email addresses for this
to committee staff so we can
notify you if we if we take a
break and we need to get a hold
of you we need to have your cell
phones
all of that I think is taking
care okay anything I've left up
it's crucial that we need to
bring up.
Anybody have any questions on on
how we're going to operate.
Comprehensive okay let's do it
then this move to our agenda for
today and the first item up is
Senate bill five.
Senator Stefanics welcome.
Welcome thank you Mr chair
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here Senate bill
five is an appropriation bill
but it's up it's creating a new
program and we have a tiny
amendments so do you want me to
explain the bill or go to for
the amendment explain bill and
then went to the okay the bill
actually is creating a fund in
the department of health
specifically the environmental
health epidemiology bureau of
the epidemiology and response
division of the department we've
had several climate events
traumas in our state wildfires
floods drought
contaminated water
issues that really kind of found
communities and the communities
do not prepare or plan for this
is a fund that would allow the
department of health
to grant funds to political
subdivisions grants of up to two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to actually assess these events
as they might hit their
communities and what they need
to do to prepare.
So this is a inner cord needed
events or.
Bill that would work with
homeland security it would work
with the schools that would work
with Human Services that would
work for the with many different
state agencies before it goes
out to the political
subdivisions because let's just
use for example I represent many
rural communities and one of my
communities.
Rideau so had a fire ten years
ago their water system did not
get corrected from that fire for
ten years.
Every time it would flood from
the from fires and then rain it
would flood it would take water
or mud into the reservoir that
serves not just read does so but
also the city of Alamogordo and
so the BLM an army corps of
engineer would come in with
their fix they would scoop out
the mud and taken away that
didn't fix it it would flood
again and they couldn't use the
water then they would put in
liners than they would due to
the next thing and the next
thing so it's taken close to ten
years to correct the issue and
if communities have the
opportunity to actually work on
this in advance.
Prepare then they might be more
ready for more prepared while I
was on the Santa Fe county
commission we actually did an
exercise with a fire board and
we brought in it was an outside
company that actually owns this
apparatus and they had
parameters they would we brought
in homeland security we brought
in the county fire city fire the
county commissioners to city
councilors anybody who might be
responding to the hospital to
show what the impact would be if
a fire would hit the east side
of Santa Fe and wipe down into
several homes and how we might
have to respond to that to the
water to the homes to people
leaving the homes it cetera
that's the kind of a situation
that's envision here that the is
that these requests would assist
communities.
So would you like me to go to
the amendment.
Or okay.
The amendment is point two to
four two six six point one.
And it is strictly changing
dates.
On page four line twenty one it
strikes the year twenty four and
insert.
In lieu thereof twenty four
through twenty eight in on page
five the same exact thing it
would insert in lieu thereof
twenty twenty eight so it's
simply a date change.
Is there a motion from the
committee on.
Used to be on the committee as.
And that.
We have a motion about the and
seconded by Senator thank you
the the debate or discussion of
the amendment so this is that
means the money appropriated
this year.
That's correct and it would be
would be available for.
From the.
That's correct it limits the
amount that would actually be
taken out every year there is an
amount in this bill that is
administrative for the
department to set up the the
bureau the program for staffing
in any administrative overhead
and then the rest of the money
is available for grants and it
is intended to go out through
twenty twenty eight.
This beverages.
Well for one.
Really.
Thanks for.
So the version is only twenty
twenty eight.
If every year the million one of
whatever that that's correct Mr
chair and the FIR from
provided
finance committee indicates that
that one point one would be
recurring the rest of the money
would not be recurring.
That is.
Currently we have four now we
have used the twenty twenty
eight the reversion for.
Do that.
It says
it says that the top five.
The
brought forward five.
For the balance remaining at the
end of fiscal year twenty twenty
eight.
That's correct Mr chair we felt
that that might be more
palatable the Senate finance
committee given the chance if it
was the desire of the committee
to make it forever.
That be great.
The.
Because you don't you don't have
a sunset clause of the.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
the product I was going to just
ask questions after the
amendment but it is put put put
you here to appropriate into the
future.
That is exactly what we when she
was.
Recurring lady recurring.
Well Mr chair this is intended
this is up
we hate to use the word pilot.
Demonstration project pilot
project so it is intended to get
up and running and to show
success if it's not successful
if if political subdivisions do
not avail themselves of this
then there wouldn't be a need
for us to continue the funding
in the program.
Okay.
Well before we even get into too
much more detail on the bills we
have a lot of federal funds Mr
chair that could actually match
some of what we would be putting
in here and my expert witness
we'll talk about that for.
Other questions on the
amendment.
That the Senate.
Yes Mr chairman of the Senate is
pasta products so you just want
to make sure that that one point
one million is spent when you.
Make it two years instead of
five.
Mr chair that is the amount that
would be spent each year by the
department for personnel and
administrative overhead.
I understood Mister chairman
Senator products I'm just
curious no big deal it just
seems for Kerry to you want you
don't want to revert so you want
to make sure you spend it all
but I think you could spend it
all in two years what I'm
talking about is the one point
one million.
Every every year.
Correct but if it spent all in
one year then why do we need the
amendment thank no worries thank
you.
I'm not sure what that question
is the question Mr chairman
Senator spikes I don't want to
get into this is just the point
is to spend the one point one
million the point is so that it
doesn't revert so you don't put
it for two years that way
nothing reverts the point was
made that you're gonna spend it
in one year which begs the
question why the amendment I
would rather question thank you
Mr.
The of the twenty twenty eight
and reversion.
Then you leave that part of the
bill the section three eight.
One point one million for
administration every year.
Representative so C. acts Mr
chair my expert witnesses
indicating that this is
recommended by the committee
analyst.
And we just went along with it.
Yeah legislature's.
The fund these.
Each year up to five million
dollars over the for the yeah to
support for funding to do the
work of working with computers.
Is going to take about one point
one million dollars a year to
administer and develop these
programs.
Six six six people thinking that
six hundred and fifty dollars.
so for.
For for for years for the
program is.
It actually hasn't been as
successful.
For.
I
left over this.
We
have.
That one point.
From the general department of
health expense in fiscal year
twenty twenty four twenty twenty
eight.
If each year
one point.
I would make it more clear.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
spike so on page twenty one you
can after the word an
unforgiving page four line
twenty one after between the
words in in fiscal insert the
word each.
So that you would be striking
year twenty twenty four and
inserting.
I'm sorry very striking fiscal
year twenty twenty four and
inserting in lieu thereof each
fiscal year each fiscal years
twenty twenty four through
twenty twenty.
Seven minutes.
Okay
that's friendly let me read it
back I think it's different
FY twenty one Department of
Health for expenditure in future
fiscal year.
Each fiscal year of twenty
twenty fourth through twenty
twenty eight.
Okay that's I was confused I
just I just for one year thank
you Mr chairman.
It's it's fine Mr chair okay
seconded by Senator.
We never did go to the First
funding as a former amending the
remaining the amendment.
Second.
Investors of any questions on
reporting on the.
For the second.
Is there any opposition to the.
Seeing that will about that and
then with the those changes
twenty twenty and.
Thank you Mr chair in at this
point I would like to turn it
over to my experts with this.
Mr Charles good marker.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you senator
Yes hi I think it's important
that this committee be aware of
that the first part of this bill
the part creating the bureau
within the department of health
originated in the H. M. to task
force that was passed last year
so and and it was one of four
major recommendations was to
increase the you know create a
climate health bureau within the
department so that was part of
an overall look at public health
in New Mexico and it was one of
the top four of recommendations
The are you happy for you to
hand outs
this one with the multiple
colors and.
Has was produced by New Mexico
voices for children so I should
say I'm Charles good marker and
I am here on behalf of New
Mexico voices for children today
and so it's not going to read it
of course but there's three key
numbers in the middle that also
speak to as does the other hand
out with some graphic
illustrations for years.
To some of the.
Thanks that.
There are extreme weather events
in ongoing changes to our
climate that are producing
health adverse health excuse me
adverse health impacts here and
now today
this is been going on for quite
some time.
For instance the chart about
heat hospitalizations it's
actually he.
Urgency room visits rather than
hospitalizations but the numbers
are correct showing a clear.
Tendency over eleven years of
data.
That.
People are seek help
health support because of heat
hospitalizations that they
doubled during that time period
in New Mexico.
And he ways already kill more
people in the United States than
any other weather related event
sometimes they're not they don't
grab the headlines as much as a
fire or or tornado something
happening right then and there
but it's on going and it does
affect the Mexico
New Mexico voices for children.
Supporting this bill created the
handout because the impact of
these events is greatest on New
Mexico's most vulnerable
citizens and certainly our
children are among the most
vulnerable the affects our
physical in the affects our
mental.
Mental health you can imagine
being a child who grew up was
from the area of governments P.
calf canyon fire in thinking
about what is their future hold
for them.
Much less adults so
you know and and New Mexico by
the way is Dr Scrase is noted
recently New Mexico does have
the highest social vulnerability
index in the in in the United
States of all the states so
really we're bringing this bill
because we see it as our
collective opportunity.
To work now to protect the
health of our people against
health hazards that are
happening now and we know will
happen more frequently and
fiercer in the future thank you.
Thank you Charles.
Anything else Senator I believe
there are some people here to
support I don't know about
opposition Mr is there anybody
here in room opposition to this
bill.
Then we'll take some comments in
support of the yes you want to
speak in support okay good Mr
chair members of the committee.
Do it on the on the rest of this
in order to see thank Senator
Stefanics Mr Walker for bringing
this bill it's the next step as
Mr good mockers said it's follow
up from the task force
recommendation to address public
health more specifically of
course as you alluded to impacts
on children in rural communities
big cities but also mostly rural
communities were of these
natural disasters are happening
regardless of whether you
believe for what the source of
the natural disaster as they are
happening you're having a
greater frequency that I strive
for communities are not prepared
to handle it for adults for
children and this appropriations
will go a long way to establish
infrastructure that is dire
dire.
In rural parts of our state to
address these growing problems
thank you thank you David is
there anybody here from the
health department first I should
ask if there's anybody here from
health.
I was hoping since we're giving
them six point one million
dollars my.
Okay.
Who else yes more.
Mr chair.
And we stand in support of this
plan of action was the promoter
you prove interagency
collaboration focused on public
health equity to.
Thank you Mara yes Sir.
Yeah Mr chairman members
committee German cloud middle
skills and Las Vegas on this
recent prior you know past our
property three times burned a
lot of the surrounding homes and
This bill is is under funded as
it should be ten times this it.
There's so much coming down the
line that that we have to
prepare for in the last Vegas so
this really well there's a group
of citizens are now trying to
look at resiliency how do we go
forward because we know that
more climate disruptions are
coming our way so looking at
that agricultural sovereignty
Energy sovereignty health and
and the water how can we restore
our watershed so very strongly
committed to this bill thank you
thank you John yes.
Support this alright.
Rural communities.
What's great about this bill is.
Search.
Work for solutions bring them
back share the local
communities.
For that because officer.
This.
What's going.
And rural communities I got a
family of four.
Uninsulated house no air
conditioning.
Alfa.
Program.
We know that.
Thank you for yes.
You yep thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee and I believe that it
ended decision I've been
practicing in New Mexico for
eighteen years taking care of
New Mexicans largely in rural
areas and I also would like to
speak in favor of this and I'd
like to present also the
perspective of someone who is a
physician for adults including
over a little bit I would
characterize the more people
than we think it to anecdotes
about how patients of mine have
been affected and in ways that
maybe that may also be
underappreciated
one of them was I'm someone who
was a forty nine year old dad
physically fit I was running had
collapsed has your was founded
had a stroke also a landmass
after at two week admission to
the hospital with multiple
lumbar puncture spinal Tax MRI's
cat scans multiple consultants
was found to have a possible
infection this follow up action
is called proxy it is part of of
of a new section that is not
generally found in New Mexico
but is commonly recognized among
doctors who are specialists in
infectious diseases that is
becoming increasingly common
because of the issues of our
it's hotter and it's drier and
what's also particularly
problematic to that is because
physician here aren't prepared
to take care of this because it
did we haven't been trained to
do so it is practically very
uncommon in New Mexico similarly
people if you live do you know
about the mosquitoes the
particular issue that's come in
because of as a result of the
climate climate changing they do
carry infections such as picking
me up which and the only person
I know who's taking care of that
because I've worked in refugee
camps in Burma it's classically
here also Dante fever also
doesn't happen generally in this
part of the world and I'm and
I'm sorry health care workers
are prepared for this either so
with that that I would ask that
the medical community really is
committed we know it's getting
harder we know that there are
the effect that happens to
people I work hard their homes
elderly people being dehydrated
also people who work in jobs
like construction but also these
downs.
Remove the template catastrophic
consequences so ask for your
support of this and thank you
thank you doctor very I did not
recognize you with your mask on
them so.
Yes we'll take a few more yes.
already impacting the court
experience.
Find the funds and foundations
necessary to prepare for the
extreme weather events.
Today hired.
Thank you yes Mr chair.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Khan which you know and I'm
the reserve this for the
public's of act of Act money in
town so we're support of SB I
You know we've heard
about the the majority of.
and severe weather accounts
across the country thunderstorms
a snowstorm butter New Mexico
the impact of climate change has
been drought and the impact on
rivers and lakes and streams but
even more so the impact on the
groundwater surface water and
offers
In I guess the real major
concern for makeup Communities
access to fresh water and
without access to fresh water
that creates somebody up public
health insurance as for those
reasons of Mr chair members
likely percent of support before
thank you Mr chair yes Sir here
in the in the back there you you
had your hand up.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Senator policy we also want to
speak in support of this bill It
should benefit of rural
communities and those
communities that are primarily
overburden already by pollution
and health impacts I also have
the least amount of resources to
be able to access health
services and and economic
resources to address those
impacts so just wanted to
support.
Representative thank you I think
I think I think we'll just go
ahead and go to the committee
then
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Hickey.
Okay Senator Sedillo Lopez you
a.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is an excellent bill especially
in light of what we've seen I
just have a couple of questions
just for clarification purposes
How do you anticipate what I
guess we'll start with a little
would
the Popo political subdivisions
of the state on page three with
that include land grants a
second so ciation what is is it
intended to be as broad as
inclusive as possible tribes.
Mr chair there is a definition I
saw that in the analysis Senator
that there was a question about
the definition there is a
definition for political
subdivisions in statutes
relating to the local government
division
enabling them to receive funds
from the state.
So I don't have that cited in
this bill but we could go back
to that statute
and you don't know the statute
includes a second because I I
just it does so with that so
Mister land grants Mr chair
Senator having Representative
many land grants you suicide Q.
they are eligible for requesting
funds from local government
division that they could not
school districts are included
soil and water conservation
districts are included
thing I want it yes tribe's
incorporated towns not
unincorporated cities counties.
So those all any entity right
now that is eligible to receive
state funds is usually captured
in the definition of political
subdivisions excellent thank you
and then how do you anticipate
this funding being dispersed
I think that okay so Mr chair
Senator I'm going to leave that
to trials to answer.
In the department who.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that excellent question yes the
second section talks about
Priorities for the fund
so it lists among them and
emphasized that this secretary
meeting the secretary of health
course with emphasize planning
projects and activities that
benefit people in low income
disadvantaged communities find
for integrated health concerns
and other emergency planning at
the local level if the size
planning that.
That could make the state or the
local entities eligible for
federal funds and in fact there
is a major programs.
called brace that the federal
government has at this centers
for disease control brace
meeting building resilience
against climate effects and is
part of health is not here but I
have a they they made a note
that the proposals.
The proposal submitted by with
our state last year
was scored high but wasn't
funded because there's not
enough staff capacity in our
state right now so it's just
telling funding this will get us
more federal funds immediately
plus there are other grants
federal grants available to
local jurisdictions thank you Mr
chairman I guess what I meant
are these going to be
competitive funds or or
you know because I saw the
priorities and I agreed with the
priorities I think they're
excellent and it's the it's
definitely has environmental
justice aspect to it which I
think is is crucial but is it
competitive you know because I
know some of these subject
political subdivisions don't
have a lot of capacity to be
involved in competitive grants.
Mr chair Senator I think that
would be hard to answer
Department so usually allowed to
set up their own rules and
regulations for how to implement
a program by having the
priorities in the limited amount
of money per grant that's giving
some guidelines but it is
allowing the department to set
up the program as they see fit
thank you Mr chair so that leads
me to the next question should
we authorize rulemaking.
In the.
In the bill.
On that point Mr just getting
attention yeah.
Mr chair I would leave that to
The attorneys I don't know if we
need to include rulemaking
authority it's assumed and I'm
looking at the and Lispector
it's assumed that when we give
something to the department
that.
They're gonna develop that Mr
Chairman.
It by various members
In order for department to issue
formal regulations for a program
like this it probably is best to
have an authorized.
Commented by the Alice's about
that I Mr chair I'm not
suggesting we at it now but for
judiciary you may want to of
when you take it to Judiciary
may want to consider whether a
that I want to do I will go to
finance if it's not if it's
simple language we might want to
add it here Mister chair where
would you put it.
Well
the department is authorized but
the on page four at the end of
maybe yes.
At the end of the four section
three at seventeen.
And I ate very simple language
the department of is authorized
to make rules pursuant to this
legislation.
That sound good to you Senator.
Mr chair any appropriate correct
language is fine.
I I just put that I just picked
it out I think there might be
more or if you could just say it
again okay of the on page four
line eighteen the desert.
The department.
Is section F..
Then the wording the department
is authorized to make rules.
To implement the statute.
This.
The department is authorized to
make rules to implement to
implement this act this act.
This program I think probably
this program get into the
department of health if you need
to state department of health.
Everybody clear on what it said.
So I move that amendment.
Seconded by Senator Maestas any
discussion of the.
Seeing none will consider it to
them amended you're fine with
that and thank you Mr chair
thank senator for then my final
point is I really appreciate
this but it does seem like it's
mitigation and adaptation and
not prevention and I didn't
think you know it looking
through it.
Yeah I would have liked to but
I'm not going to insist on it I
would have liked to have seen
some prevention of money has
well I know there's planning
money just because.
It it saddens me that we're
already moving to adaptation and
mitigation and not engaging in
trying to prevent it thank you
Mr chairman.
Senator Hickey you're next
followed by Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senators to funds for bringing
this bill forward
A lot of people don't
necessarily think of something
like this or the environment in
the extremes as public health
this is public health in in the
aspects that the good physician
brought up and
I think we need to see it in
that context and I want to see
it in the context as we talk
about expenditures the reason we
do public health As so people
don't succumb to
Adverse situations events and
what have you because and and
become second and then generate
a lot more costs so what I
wanted to the first question is
Senator Stefanics and Mr chair
do you see this as an investment
in health overall by taking this
course through public health and
in that division.
And and and and eventually there
will probably be some calculable
R. O. Y. or at least the a
radical thank you thank you
Senator and Mister chairman
Senator Hickey I actually see it
as an investment how we would be
assisting communities in
preparing for a birding health
issues such as asthma other long
diseases other infections from
the mosquitoes that was already
mentioned so I think that the
return on investment is going to
be very significant for those
communities that avail
themselves of this opportunity.
Thank you Mr chair the second
question is a little bit related
I heard someone say will discuss
so many years will evaluate did
have an impact but I don't see
language stating such in here
not that I'm requesting that but
I have a recommendation Mr chair
that you're gonna love
the new head of LHS and
I I think it is critically
important as particularly as we
do these community grants to
prior to doing those requests
set up measurements for the
different activities they can
take place if it's street
clearing brush clearing whatever
it is something that's
measureable in other words if
particularly as it comes in for
LFC at some point are we getting
an impact out of this secondly
as we measure and evaluate this
will provide some communities
many steps ahead from others and
the centralized one point one
million group then can collect
that in disseminated in fact it
could become part of quote
public health policy within the
state
I'm I'm chagrined to say that
many people I talked to in this
legislative governmental
structure who look at money in
different things don't really
have a good understanding of
what public health is I think
this is a great understanding
and in fact when I brought forth
the school of public health we
were advocating a department of
environmental health and that
department could get federal
grants to help the evaluation in
that there is a lot of money in
federal money for that type of
the valuation I hope that that
would happen I would ask a
senator that you pass that on to
the Department should this get
through but to our chair I would
like an evaluation on how the
measurements are being set up to
LHS next summer for this bill
and the with the measurements
and I would like to get because
we need to educate some folks
who can't understand the
relationship of the cost savings
and public health and real
health that's too far downstream
becomes extremely costly I would
like to see some econometric
the study analytics to go along
with that so
thank thank you.
again for bringing this really
important bill for and if it's
working please send a live and
I'm just going to work but it is
to help people understand the
value of public health thank you
Mr chair on that point I think
the rule making might critically
if it's communicated by the by
the sponsors that the rulemaking
might help with your your
concern very good suggestion
thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you Senator Hickey Senator
Maestas on thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator Stefanics to good marker
for and for all your work quick
questions.
The epidemiology and response
division which is within the
department of health and then
you got the avid epidemiology
bureau.
Why is it a good idea to have
this program in in that division
and that Bruce bureau.
So Mr chair and senator there's
an environmental health
epidemiology bureau that's in
that division and we see this as
environmental health and Mr good
blocker has worked with some of
the staff there could you
comment on this yes Mister chair
Mister Senator Maestas yes we
we've talked with and have
Develop this along with people
in that division
and they assured us that this is
the proper placement so to speak
within the department of health
currently there's there's only
zero point two FTE.
Assigned to health related.
impacts of climate within that
bureau.
Now thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator no that's fantastic
initiative and and
And I like the of the future
appropriation aspect of it
hopefully a couple three years.
I will just go away and it'll be
a good old fashioned line item
in house bill two but keep in
mind Mr an odd gentlelady the
Senator products the five
million theoretically could be
spent in two years correct.
To be spent in one.
Mr chair if the
That's why indicated that the
department Senator usually has
rules or regulations that set up
the requirements to apply and
be approved for these requests
and many small communities don't
have capacity immediate capacity
to do that so the department is
with their one point one would
be prepared to assist these
communities who technical
assistance so the first year
there might not be a ground
swell and applying because they
might be in the technical
assistance face needing to apply
the second year so you are
correct depending upon.
The high interest to the
capacity this money could go
fast but it's intended
to assist those communities who
aren't necessarily ready to jump
in as well absolutely thank you
Mr chairman I'll we should it's
you know the secretary of health
to go fast you know because the
DFA will transfer the five
million of the five million it
reverts and for five years but
then we can see how the need and
the impact that is doing and and
make more appropriate
appropriations in the future
thank you Mr right good point
Senator of Senator atomic your
last.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator fast ring is
forced sponsoring this bill.
you have a reputation of.
Sponsoring a ladder for the
transformative built with a lot
of substance.
So the question is the second
page of the analysis it says
that.
The poor air quality due to
smoke from.
Wildfires can worsen the health
of people in the this bill.
Implement strategies to reduce
harm.
So hearings sample of how.
We can.
This bill.
Reduced harm from committee
analysis and.
I have so many analysis Mr chair
but I'm gonna let Mr good more
requests for that.
Thank you Senator the chair
Senator Tallman thank you for
the question
So it it it would start an
entity again political
subdivisions if it applied and
was successful with the grant it
could include request for
assessing say the people in who
for what for whatever reason
can't leave their home you know
disabilities they have eight
what are all the stories that
happen in the Las Vegas fire
people that couldn't leave for.
The count that jurisdiction
could put in their plan and the
request for in the grant money
to provide better home
air filters could be as a for
instance around smoke also this
they could ask for money to
create more capacity to access
other sources like the seed bill
that was passed last year that
community energy efficiency
development block grant which
would provide low income
weatherization so they could
use.
Funds that they getting through
this grant to help access other
requests that could also help
with that kind of situation.
Okay thank you Charles for that
explanation thanks again for
bringing this to go forward
which I.
Go support thank you thank you
Mr chair thank you senator Tom
and then I understand Senator
Gallegos on soon that you have
the question please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator products I was quite
surprised please that up Mr good
markers your
Your partner there
I expected some like you know up
while.
Senator someone like that up I'm
glad that you guys working
together and I was grateful that
Mr good Margaret made a comment
you know the the consideration
mental health I know for our
schools down here during the
COVID closures we saw spike in
that so appreciate us
considering that Mr chair and
Senator products my question
starts with I've got family that
were affected in the
northern New Mexico area and I
know that there is a lot of our
discussion on the federal monies
that were offered they have not
made it to and the fires you
know Mr chair in center if this
were already have placed you
believe these would of that up
the federal grants are supposed
to be coming to New Mexico.
Mr chair and Senator I'm not
sure that.
Bureaucracy at the state or the
federal level could be rushed
I'm sorry to say I do know that
Senator Campos has a bill that
we're gonna be hearing in Senate
conservation tomorrow to try to
have the state front the money
for the federal government to
assist those people up north and
the people down south I mean we
have people all throughout the
entire state that have been
affected this past year with
floods fires
contaminated water it's cetera
so I know that many people are
waiting
I don't know.
Of Mr chair Senator that if this
would improve the dissemination
of funds.
Couldn't hurt thank you for
that.
Alright it wouldn't hurt.
Thank you thank you Mr I I
actually up I know Mr Chairman
shares so Senator Sedillo Lopez
talk about prevention I thought
this was that we would have
things in place before the issue
arise so I was hoping this would
help.
My question though is is there
any.
With this bill interfere with
any of the existing state agency
programs I just didn't know if
there's anything we already have
in place that would conflict
with this small you'll back to
help with that.
So Mr chair and senator guy it
goes usually communities have to
front of funds to instigate
evaluations for emergency
preparedness there are General
trainings for emergency
preparedness that are done from
the state that's available for
cities and counties but often
times it doesn't help
communities planned for these
disastrous events and what steps
to take to handle those we learn
how to handle wildfires but we
don't necessary learn how to
handle the aftermath of people
being displaced from their homes
and it takes community advocates
and organizations the NGOs to
come together with the
governments to do that so I
think that this bill would
assist in doing that.
Thank you for that Mr chair
Senator and maybe have gone to
brought I was thinking you know
like the department of health
has Adam controlled quality
control programs I just didn't
want that if we enacted this if
it would
because any contact confront I
know like state engineer has
order for temporary restrictions
of the guy in this river
diversion no all through the
state we have different things
to help for service some of the
things they've got of.
just in place already
but you're saying this would
actually come along them and
help them even though it's
already in place going back
Department help in the house of
control this would actually help
their program by having funds
available is that what I'm
understanding.
Mr chair and senator this really
is to help this is communities
in evaluating before the event a
occurs and no such issues that
you're bringing up were
identified in the analyses I got
an analysis from the
provided of finance committee
one from that let L. E. S. C.
education one from this
committee and one from another
group.
and none of them identified an
issue of overlapping or stepping
on toes of other state agencies.
Well thank you for that my last
comment just parent are grateful
that we have the abundance of
money this year last year at
this time compared to last year
all gases forty four percent
higher than one year ago and
that kind of work hard work at
my secretary of state gives us a
lot of latitude on four we spend
monies this year and what that
all you think structure.
Anybody else any other lingering
issues where we go ahead and
vote and the finance secretary
this is a bill that's been twice
amended to we have a motion for
passage Senator does amended
Senator Maestas moved as senator
he seconded it.
If you call the roll of the
committee secretary.
Etcetera various.
Senator Gallegos did you hear.
Sorry about that Mr I had our
time on mute and so I'll be yes.
Senator Hickey.
yes in a very brief explanation
I.
Senator Ingle.
That.
Senator my S. this yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator city Sedillo Lopez yes.
Center Thomas.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
This call back to go back to
Senator Ingle past.
Call his name again Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes and to
explain his vote Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to note that I have two interns
working with me one from the
medical school from from the
school of public health and also
public policy and this woman
Rebecca Neal worked on this
bills this summer unfortunately
she couldn't be here today
because you got exposed to cover
COVID but I just want to give
her a shout out thank you Mr
chair thank you senator Senator
Ingle to explain your vote.
Have a.
Secretary some of this with this
year's seems so richly written
that to I'm a little bit
frightened but of of health
we're we're will lead us down
the path and where will actually
get some answers and I hope that
Senator phonics can get a little
more defined here in is that
when the health department's not
here kind of.
I'm not being accusatory or
anything but he seemed a little
strange they're not but anyway I
just to.
Just been here a number years
in office voted on so many of
the things that I thought were
so good and in reality of the
accomplished very little.
But there's a lot of for a lot
of money spent thank you.
With school.
So then the secretary what was
the final vote.
Seven yes to no so your bill
passes Senator congradulations
of seven to two vote thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you Senator
Campos you're next.
The Senate bill twenty three.
That.
It he's cleaned up his act for
the session.
Going to make.
A.
If you could be right on your
way we still have five more
bills to go.
Senator Campos welcome it's
great to be here Mister
chairman.
Go ahead thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee in
essence the Senate bill twenty
three increases the funding for
emergency medical services and
in terms of that I'm gonna go
through a few points and
privative and then from there
turn it over to one of the
experts mystery J. forte and
then from there there there's
the other individuals who are
here with us and if we could
look try to expedite the
information so that you all have
that for your consideration
questions so in essence a Mr
chairman members of the
committee Senate bill twenty
three appropriates an additional
ten million dollars from the
general fund to the emergency
medical services fund to support
EMS services across the state
the MS Fund receives
approximately two point nine
million annually which is
insufficient to support critical
emergency services across the
state in just a couple of other
points in terms of the fund
itself we have not seen a
significant increase over the
last three decades along with
that but we continue to see or
the enormous cost increases when
it comes to purchasing Attorney
or if you will the ambulances
that that we have there many
other issues as we deal with
this and one of the things that
we're seeing is that those
volunteers who are definitely
dedicated to the life services
for people when they're involved
in an accident or when I'm
feeling Services need to respond
we're finding that that group is
also dwindling there's so many
points here to make Mr chair
members of the committee but
what I'd like to do is to defer
to the experts that are with me
to have them make their points
because you'll see that the salt
dove tails it comes together
ultimately when we talk about
the need for additional
resources so if I may Mister
chairman Mr AJ forte please
thank you senator Mr Porter Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
aged forty feminists believe.
Senator did a great job
explaining this bill we work
with the center for the past
year trying to structure.
How do we improve EMS in New
Mexico and what we learned was
it's been thirty years since we
put any money into that
distribution you all have taken
care fire through the fire
protection fund in the last
several years we've taken care
of law enforcement through the
law enforcement protection fund.
Now it's time for EMS.
In working with the senator.
When center was a more he let us
he reminded us of use more he
could by ambulance for fifty
thousand dollars.
Now it's two hundred fifty
thousand dollars on a low end if
we can get one I'm so what we
did with the structure of the
bill was eight an additional ten
million dollars and then reduce
the administrative fee to the
Department so in total they will
receive more in funding but that
additional one percent from each
one will go to EMS services and
the other percent will go to
system improvements so in this
everyone gets lifted up so that
Mr chair we we stand for
questions and we do have
our state EMS chair here as well
for any specific questions you
may have did you want to say
anything or you just available
for questions.
I'll just be available for
questions I think these two
gentleman senator and Mr forte
of a really expressed the need
that we have here in New Mexico
for EMS right let's go to the
audience and see is there anyone
here who supports this bill.
Okay great let me check is there
anybody here who opposes this
bill.
Okay let's start with some
supporters yes Sir.
You Mr chair.
Just like to say we were out
without a service for.
And part of that time was.
It.
I'm sure we lost people.
It does.
I've been more pro.
We lost two years.
When it comes time.
Representative.
Act.
It's so important to here.
Bob here.
I can give you a quick every
little story really.
Tired.
a police officer.
Yes.
Or.
But.
Right now we're at.
Thank you this meant.
This is a priority bill for us
this year or is going on now
sleep our board of directors
for.
This is part of it but for.
Public safety and public support
that we've seen over the last
couple.
Thank you specific.
Our two for one to counties
senators.
I wanted to give you a little
context on what we do with.
About eighty percent of.
For my County that's the fire
stations we receive about
thirty.
we've expanded the whole fund us
early November everything else
that we supply and whether that
be oxygen masks IV catheters
eighty pass comes out of the
general fund.
Now we're taking away from
other.
We are definitely in support of
this I think most.
I appreciate you looking at
this.
Actress for thank you Sir yes
Sir.
Fire chief quite.
I am.
Funding three one.
Cost increase trying to try.
Tires state budget.
That doesn't that doesn't
include operating cost of the.
I.
Supported.
High cost of it.
Other issue which is allowable
under state.
Thank you Sir yes Sir.
You take every Patel I also.
Very good thank you.
Anybody else yes ma'am hi Andy
Barr.
I worked very closely with.
Try to.
Different types of funding we
try to get.
The increase and also the.
Thank.
Very good.
What's the will of the
committee.
Senator Ingle.
I second the motion and a
second.
Any of the discussion in the
media.
Senator Gallegos same thing
with.
Yes senator Senator Maestas
first Senator Hickey who you
want to thank you thank you
thank you Mr Senator Mr fourteen
all the work that you do what is
there a is there a consistent
funding source for this fund
currently arts strictly
appropriations here here here.
Mr center it's just two point
eight two point nine million
goes to the distribution which
is fun to be a general fund.
And so the to fund the reference
Mr chairman the law enforcement
protection fund that's that's
peeled off from insurance
policies correct Mr chairman
center yes the premium taxes.
Anyway okay thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
Senator Hickey Russian yes thank
you Mr chair and Senator Campos
thank you for bringing this bill
forward
I do have a couple of
observations about it and you go
there it goes again he's a
doctor thinks he knows
everything I don't
that believe it or not I used to
drive ambulances in the Indian
health service and through that
experience and also because that
brand Medicaid programs and what
have you I am up aware of a
program that Medicaid puts
together.
That allows it is particularly
for small rural counties and it
allows them to do what we
familiarly called cost reports
in hospitals like what are your
real cost of news that in
determining disproportionate
share a number of other things
but
I I think it that there may be
some source of funding that I
think is worth pursuing through
CMS and and and I say that in
light of the fact that I'm I'm
still a rookie here no question
but I'm getting smarter and one
of my staff places that gets
more about is that it is
absolute hell to get anything
through finance and I'm so
worried that this with all the
merit of it has that with
potential limited funds is going
to get stymied in finance and so
I I'm what I'm wondering is you
know for the first year put that
ten million out there I mean
we've got to get this going but
I would I don't know if you
consider
adding to this bill or we can
talk about it later we don't
need to amend now but as it goes
that HSD pursue this federal
funding and what it is basically
allows a every.
Every county municipality
whatever's take their and this
is public costs this isn't
private ambulances this is just
public because they're they're
reimbursed so poorly by Medicaid
and that cost report says okay
you know we had twenty Bucks on
a hundred of our cost is the
other eighty comes from the
federal government and it's a
systematic program that can be
put in place I think a large
number of other states are doing
this now maybe ten or twelve and
so
one of the other things I've
learned is that you know we
can't afford it but the federal
government can let's go get it
through that and and I think
that we could and so I would
encourage you to look at
requiring HSD to investigate
this program and come back with
the details I mean it's it's
really it's it's yes preparing
the reports can be difficult but
here's the good news.
The fifth you get to charge the
federal government for doing the
report you get to do five ten
percent of whatever it is you're
getting back and put that to the
administration of the business
center has to go through HSD the
Medicaid agency so I I would
hope that again you know if
someone else can pay for it I
would be great if we could do
that and the other thing is is
that just you know once we get
to finance just so many these
desperately needed things I mean
behavioral health Mr chair you
and I know how much water to be
done and it just doesn't get
across that finish line so I
think this is this is an opening
and that in while doing this
pursue that as well with that be
possible Senator Campos
agreements Mr chairman of course
Senator Hickey it's a point well
taken in terms of that that
would probably come up in the in
a separate bill and we're
looking at that to see how we're
able to to to address that
particular issue thank you thank
you for the recommendation thank
you I'm glad you're aware of
that and looking at this up and
I think you forget Senator
Campos is the powerful member of
the finance.
That we can get this through he
can appreciate that that was
only one Mr chair.
Senator Tallman you're next.
Well individual thank you Mr
chairman ever drove ambulance
but nice.
Granddaughter drove ambulance
and she's now in her first year
medical school.
So.
Three hundred EMS services
statewide the section three
hundred.
Agencies companies.
Mr chair Senator Tom and yes Sir
there's about three hundred and
thirty seven that have reported
in this last fiscal year that
statewide now about fifty five
percent of those are actually
volunteer.
Also one thirty first thirty
three counties every ten
investor in every county.
Well that's average so he says
well I saw that a lot.
This.
Well thank you so this is your
based on call volume population
service coverage area.
So Las Cruces go twelve million
dollar budget there are getting
Twenty five thousand which of.
Doesn't even keep from and beer
and cigarettes so.
It's nothing so how.
How can they get so they
obviously have a high call
volume in high population for
the only getting twenty five
thousand house doesn't make.
Defense we.
Mr chair of Sierra so the way
that this for funding formula is
set up with the existing funding
that we have or actually just
talk about real the real dollars
but this ten million dollars
appropriation you have what's
called a base level of funding
essentially the local
distribution is divided up into
three different sections of
money one is the base funding
which is dependent upon your
level of service their start up
funding for a new agency are you
have your basics our first
responder then you also have
your basic and advanced and it
just depends on the level of
care and how those units are
actually staffed.
So then the other two portions
of money one is based on the
geographic size of your County
and then the last portion is the
population of your county and
each to each of the thirty three
counties is given at are
allotted a certain amount of
money based on that funding
formula and then call volume
dictates how much each
individual entity within the
county receive that funding
unfortunately the keep the
maximum that the current
frontier can support as funded
with the a two point seven
million is only about twenty
thousand dollars per that is the
maximum award that you'll get
right now the actual
distribution or average
distribution when you throw in
all of the three hundred plus
services it's about ninety two
hundred dollars is what the
average works out with.
Since Los crucis has such a high
call volume and they have higher
a higher population they will
receive a lot more they only
receive the twenty twenty
thousand twenty seven thousand
dollars.
Thank you Mr thank you for the
answer so.
Representative Lara is is the
formula.
Such the.
The
This is a smaller volunteer
departments have less resources
they get a greater portion of
money.
Now.
You should.
I'm indicate you know but I.
But that that would be correct
really it depends on that call
volume the size we have some
depart are some counties that
are a hundred percent volunteer
we're yes they would potentially
depending upon their population
their geographic size that's
where that formula would come
into play so there is a chant
with with this particular bill
it should should this pass
throughout the entire session
the kit rough calculations that
we have right now is the average
distributional increased almost
thirty thousand dollars.
Okay so thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that answer this
I certainly
The support this would cause the
in the give indicated there's
certain very need thank you
thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez your last.
My question okay.
So we have a motion anybody else
was any further discussion.
Senator Gallegos is Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you Mr up thank you
Senator Campos for this and I
had a question for Mr Williams
sort of like what we used all
poured on earlier of.
On the associated costs just for
for instance in Eunice of the
city provides us and err med
Kerr and cost us this will
reduce any the participants cost
is basically to get us caught up
where we were well used thirty
year no increase is that correct
you won't reduce any of use cost
more let's just fill the gap
that serves at so what I'm
understanding.
Hi Mr chair Senator Gallegos yes
Sir it will just fit the gap it
won't increased cost to the
consumer.
Okay and I want to Mr Chairman.
Senator Campos miss Williams I I
want to start up with thank you
Mr Williams for being part of
this I like the idea of where
they've already moved it three
from three percent and then down
to one percent and then Mister
Williams us from down in our
neck of the wood and I'll tell
you when he was city manager he
allowed me to give up to
ambulances to tier C. additional
their names so I know he's
always looking statewide to try
to help out so with that Mr I
will yield and get ready for a
vote thanks Sir.
Thank you senator Angus anybody
else.
Do you want to make any
concluding statements in your no
Mr chairman we're ready for the
thank secretary will call the
roll.
Senator virus.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes etcetera
smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
explain is both Senator Ingle.
Are you.
I do issue the shape.
Very good what was the vote.
Yes nine.
Nozzle.
Very good congratulations and
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate health and
public affairs committee thank
you.
Senator o'neill will take your
next.
Senator o'neill welcomed local
thank you messed Mr chairman and
so it's great to be in front of
the **** committee formally ****
anyway if
so basically Senate bill twenty
nine repeals existing statute
governing the state system of
medical geriatric parole which
the parole board as primarily
responsible for determining
whether an inmate is eligible
for the program but it replaces
it with a new system that still
involves a parole board of
course but it transferred as
much of the authority to the
corrections department and I'm
here with Douglas carver who is
with the sentencing commission
some of you might recognize this
bill it did really well two
sessions ago guy kind of hung up
on the house side but it's
basically like if somebody's
dying or like close has some
severe illness and they're
they're not they do not pose a
threat to society than
public safety threat then it
should be fairly streamlined to
allow them to get to be with
their families and their last
days so with that I will have a
Douglas carver explained the
specifics of the bill and I
would emphasize this actually
came from a bipartisan
recommendation unanimous from
the sensing Commission including
the dust and the victims rights
groups and the bill has not
changed since that time so thank
you.
thank you senator thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Douglas carver I am
deputy director of the New
Mexico sentencing commission
it's good to be in front of a
the re christened sh back
again and to be here in person
this bill for your information
is the same bill that passed out
of this committee in twenty
twenty one with the difference
being that we re ordered the
paragraphs so that it.
Read more consistently but it's
word for word identical to the
bill that you all saw in twenty
twenty one it make certain
changes to the medical in
geriatric parole program
a lot of the language in here
that looks like new language is
actually carried over from
existing law for some reason in
nineteen ninety four they put
medical geriatric parole in two
different sections of law so the
one we're repealing we decide to
consolidate in one place so
we're teal repealing part of it
a lot of that money which is
rolled over into this tale of
the big change in the
definitions is the definition of
geriatric inmate and that age
has been the age of sixty five
in the present program
instructor age fifty five and
this bill the other language in
the definitions is all
essentially the same as an
existing wall.
And what this does
Mr chair members of the
committee is it sets into
statute many processes that are
currently being used by the
corrections department
What we did when we drafted this
bill at the sentencing
commission is we worked with the
secretary of corrections and the
head of the probation parole
bore bore to come up with this
language so there are four of us
on that working group I was a
member of that working group as
well and we came up with this
language mostly it mostly
reflects current practices that
the secretary has put in place
at for geriatric and medical
parole we've put in some
timelines and deadlines
for when corrections has to
respond when the parole board
has to respond there is an
appeals process if someone is if
the medical care at your parole
was denied to go through the
standard District Court of
appeal process that language was
put in by the administrative
office of the courts at the
sensing Commission will be
drafted this three years ago at
the sentencing commission and to
give you
Mr chair and members the
committee an idea of who the
sentencing commission is is we
are a state agency made up of
people from across section of
the criminal justice system in
the state of the chair is
appointed by the governor but
there's a pointing appointments
from both parties and both
chambers of Supreme Court has
some appointments to district
attorneys said on the sense to
commission the Attorney General
department public safety
corrections behavioral health
services division there's a
victims advocate CYFD I might be
missing one or two members it's
a twenty seven member commission
and as centered o'neill mention
Mr chair this was approved
unanimously by the
sensing by the sensing
Commission this year and it also
received the endorsement from
the courts corrections and
justice committee this year Mr
chair members I'm happy to go
into details of the process if
you would like or I could stand
for questions.
Thank you good.
Thank you let's go to the
audience and will come to the
committee anybody in the
audience here in support of this
measure.
Is there anybody here opposed to
this measure.
Okay let's take some supporters
yes ma'am.
I know I in the past.
The date of this bill allows for
common sense compassion allowing
parole hearing for older or
infirm individuals were found to
not posted.
It will cancel to increase
safety in general we've also
always heard the stories about
this lack of safety endangers in
our department of corrections
because of understaffing so
whatever we can do to lower
inmate population in our present
can also offer full benefits not
only to those individual
citizens and their families but
it could increase benefit our
thank you for everyone working
with.
Benefiting that staffing levels
topics this week responsible and
we we just need to be judicious
to deliver when it comes from
perspiration we need to be
mindful of would continue.
Very good thank you yes madam
secretary.
Thank you Mr chair Senators my
name's Alisha Tafoya Lucero and
the cabinet secretary for the
correct.
This bill this is an item that
we've been working on for quite
sometime.
Stress again we got really close
last year last go round it had
bipartisan support we just feel
like it's a very common sense
thing to do a lot of these
things we already do but we felt
that it was very poor.
And that we we could all be on
the same page but as Douglas
carver mentioned the sentencing
commission is a broad range of
into the.
Criminal justice world and we
all came together unanimously
agreed to support this bill and.
Thank you madam secretary yes
current.
Chairman members of the
committee here in Canada with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we I couldn't say
better than everyone is at a
here we stand strong support
this measure thank you thank you
care yes Sir
good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barron Jones on this senior
policy strategist with the AZL
Mexico and we strongly support
the.
And appreciate and thank the.
Thank you Mr Jones anybody else.
Members of the committee any
discussion Senator species.
Question thank you Mister
chairman Senator and we've had a
little little off
But I recall off the beaten path
discussion to.
because I I was enjoy your
bills.
And so what a question just ask
you but I think we good for the
committee discussion is
On on page nine it says.
Inmate who has not served their
minimum sentence is eligible.
I and I brought forth the
possibility of.
You know what if someone is you
know fifty three fifty four
their sentence and the sentence
for something
no sense for twenty years some
like that is there any
requirement that they've served
a certain percentage of their
sentence and if not what one on.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you for that question there is
no requirement that they have
served a minimum time and the
reason is tied to the reason for
this bill it's
To if people are seriously ill.
for terminally ill it's a huge
burden on the correction system.
for that person
and there is an element of
compassion and releasing them
now it's very important because
in December address this sort of
the outfit in the root directory
of the H. fifty five because in
the debates two years ago I
think that was a misunderstood
somewhat for geriatric parole
the age is dropping from sixty
five to fifty five all of the
questions we have around sixty
five year old inmates I mean
they would exist in the current
policy as well as with fifty I
wrote inmates but that is only.
That is even really get you in
the door if you look on page
two at the definition of
geriatric inmate so you have to
be confined.
Fifty five years and that is in
line with almost every other
state that has this kind of
policy most have fifty or fifty
five we are an out liar with the
H. sixty five for geriatric
parole policy but you also have
to suffer from debilitating
chronic infirmity illness or
disease related ain't aging and
not constitute a danger to
yourself or society at the time
to review so when you go through
the process let's say Mr chair
Senator in your example I'm
fifty three years old I've
committed a horrible murder law
actually murder one count
because first degree murder
doesn't count but I'm committed
all four some other horrible
crime
in two years I think I'm fifty
five I can apply for this now.
No if I'm not seriously ill if
I'm not to have a debilitating
illness or whatnot you you don't
even know we could apply for
your application won't get very
far.
With the application be
submitted to the classification
officer under the bill then it
goes to the secretary for
approval then it goes to the
parole for recommendation to the
proboards in the file goes to
the parole board with the
recommendations have come all
the way along the line and then
the court proboards goes through
it's a list of
factors that it needs to
consider and that's on page six
of the bill Mister chairman
Senator
where they consider the age
severity of the illness health
evaluation their institutional
behavior
including any evidence
rehabilitation there level risks
for violence that's critical and
alternatives to maintaining
the inmate in a traditional
setting all those factors Mister
chairman Senator are in existing
law again as I said in my
opening comments there
underlined here but that's
because we imported them from
the other section so an inmate
who turns fifty five and is
still a danger to the community.
Because he might commit another
violent crime
he might be capable enough to go
out and stick up a bank again or
seven eleven or something will
not pass through this process to
give a sense of scale and
numbers at present
Five minutes to get to the right
number Mister chairman Senator
with the under the present
policy of eight sixty five is
roughly a hundred ninety one
that's when we did our last
prison population profile
hundred ninety one prisoners who
are sixty five or older
But the department and correct
me if I'm wrong madam secretary
it's fewer than ten year that
even get considered for this
review so it's a very small
number of people we've we get
considered and the so many hoops
that you have to go through Mr
chair and senator before you
would even get to the parole
board it's unlikely that someone
in your.
Senator.
Would be would be released and
if I may add to that just to
emphasize the probe or
additional the releasing
Authority thank if somebody is
clearly trying to game the
system such as this hypothetical
situation I have console
confidence that that wouldn't
even get past the corrections
procedure of a dig at the parole
board I mean that they take
their work very seriously public
safety cell.
Thanks committee thank you Mr
chair I would like to mechanic a
motion but you know it I mean if
if you'd be interested adding
number seven if they would just
say they would take into
account.
The amount of the sentence
served I mean I think that's
pretty fair very nice to have it
there
I think this is very it's very
close to being bipartisan I
would be debating the bill if it
was just a straight pars I don't
want to waste your time
But I think that would be the be
really really good part of the
bill you know about the
percentage just say they they
take into account what the probe
or do with the the.
and I think there is wide
bipartisan consensus on on page
eight.
Number two and three and by the
way I don't have a major concern
about the age I really don't the
person is suffering they're
suffering why doesn't matter if
they're sixty two or.
Fifty doesn't really matter
right those people are equal
value and so
Numbers two and three up there.
bipartisan right someone
physically incapacitated some of
the terminal illness I mean
you're gonna get flying colors
from everybody you know it's
really the up at the top there
that the the have a chronic
infirmity
I think this with you know some
of the chronic infirmities can
be chronic chronic low back pain
we can talk about mental illness
that are chronic infirmities as
well.
And and once again I I
understand I think the crux of
this debate is can we put it in
the legislation or we going to
allow the parole board to use
their judgment and as a
separation of powers guy I do
not like to allow
much decision making authority
to flow from the legislative
branch to the executive branch
that's just you'll hear me say
that over and over.
and so that's what this does
here so so that's where I'm a
little ease the uneasy but the
more things you can put in there
such as like I said adding
number seven the whatever the
words are percentage of sentence
served that would be really
really nice for me and could
potentially help me vote for the
bill
lastly
the expert did.
Did mention that first degree
felony first degree murder is an
exception to this rule I I would
like to see a couple other
things
You know I I would like to see
first or second degree felony
from human trafficking.
The reason for that as we think
about these people as they're
physically maybe unable to harm
someone punch someone or some
like that but these are people
that could potentially have.
The relationships with that
people right I think it's still
coordinate things or whatever
make phone calls so that's still
a concern for me I'm getting
this list from one of my bills
that have we've basically said
Hey from a CJ perspective give
me the biggest baddest kind of
offenses that we have so that
was that was high on their first
degree felony abuse of a child.
sexual exploitation of a child
and constituting at least second
degree felony.
So I you know.
Putting those on their putting
number seven on there I think
you know could could help me out
a bit
just just some thoughts Medicine
thank you Mr chair Senator rose
appreciate your feedback and at
this point we can entertain a
motion but let's continue to
talk maybe it's the floor
amendment but I'm but you know I
guess honestly I'm biased
because I was a part of the
we'll see the juvenile justice
system in this case where as
part of the parole board
executive director of the
juvenile probation and I just
know how seriously everybody
takes the responsibility as
parole members but also there's
so many safeguards that that are
that are already in the bill and
the way that it came out like it
how rare is it that we can get
total agreement from victims
dust public defenders so I'm
just kind of hesitant to mess
with it but on the other hand I
was respect your input so if we
can continue to talk that be
good.
Sir.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you.
Probably the same exact
questions last two years ago I
know if they make that questions
I asked the summer and that is
how many people will this affect
I know you said they're a
hundred ninety one people who
are
over sixty five and then branded
specifically do you know how
many people.
Effective
Mr chair Senator have a number
for now I do remember you
asking.
Of course and we ran the numbers
at sensing Commission
and I'm gonna qualify it if I
may Mr chair Senator with same
answer again to Senator
committee that the number of
people who are fifty five or
older does not reflect the
number of people who are
eligible so the number of people
fifty five or older
incarcerated is five hundred
thirty people.
But the sense the commission
does not have access to health
records so of that five hundred
thirty we have no idea how many
suffer from a debilitating
chronic illness etcetera
etcetera etcetera
how many of those are in for
first degree of murder for
instance I can tell you Mr chair
and senator members of the
committee and it's always worth
remembering that many of the
people who are in now are going
to get out soon we for
correction secretaries over the
year mentioned that in in our
prison population profile that
we did in December I had a look
at the sixty five plus to fully
a third of the on inmates
currently in our correction
system who are over sixty five
are going to be out by I think
of the twenty twenty five twenty
twenty six so already I mean it
gives you a sense we look at the
numbers and how this policy
might apply
So that five thirty is not a
predictive number by any stretch
of the imagination.
That's just the people over
fifty five and as I said Mr
chair Senator it's under ten a
year of people who apply for
this process at present in the
correction system which would be
about five percent to five
percent to five hundred and
thirty yeah we're not talking
about a ton of people Mr chair
the the pro for the volunteer
board isn't it
Mr chair Senator I believe it is
they get per diem they get per
diem I'm not sure Mr chair of
sodium I know whether the chair
is.
Volunteer as well thank you.
Chairs and pointy chairs an
appointee and what is volunteer
Mr Senator the chair get paid.
I believe so
Mr chair Senator but I I.
When the state I don't think the
chairs is paid either I think
that during the second director
I'm sorry okay have a rate so
that's the which is eight my
next question is staff and how
how will of the staffed.
Mr chair Senator
my understanding is that they're
understaffed and in poor
facilities it's been a couple of
years since I've spoken with
the executive director of the
proboards at the time they're in
that facility with them so we
keep pipes and that because it's
it's.
And that windows Mr chair
Senator I don't know if they've
been moved since that
conversation two years ago but
they tend to be understaffed and
under three source as so many of
these import agencies in our
government our thank you Mr
chair that's a different issue
about making sure that the
parole board has a Reese's
resources it needs to do a good
job but I think that's another
justification for moving a lot
of these responsibilities
over to the corrections
department and they have first
hand knowledge about what's
going on with these inmates so I
think it's a good bill
compassionate appropriate and
thank you for bringing it.
Senator my SS.
Thank you Mr chairman central
mill to cover thank you so much
the up that you made an
excellent point that you know
all great what a great minds
been working on this for years
actually and it's possible times
in different iterations so it's
thank you for your.
Your work on this issue couple
things one is up on page four it
says on the top of page force
like who can apply you know when
inmates incapacitated.
And it says the corrections
department care providers.
With that include a case worker
essentially I think it's
appropriate for a DO see person
to like.
Philip you know to to apply for
that for that in may.
Was a care provider what
qualifies under care providers
Mr chair Senator of my
understanding but subject to
correction we have the secretary
in the audiences that care
providers someone in the medical
system.
Like a health care provider but
actually Mr chair Senator the
head of depression
appropriations pro divisions
here in I may mitigate a better
answer yes please do you have
the answer good afternoon Mister
chair and senator Maestas yes
any we have a hospital staff and
medical staff that can apply for
them as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator the up.
Okay so we want to say health
care provider
but I think that suffices also
with regards to the restrictions
the restrictions are just on
geriatric parole or are the
restrictions on.
Up terminally ill inmates as
well
Mr chair Senator
Which other terms of who's
eligible to apply.
Mr chair Senator the
restrictions are the same other
than age if we look at the
Definitions on pages two to
three
thank essentially the same.
Thank you Mr side for the ages
and give me I mean restrictions
in terms of their criminal
history it's on homes prohibited
the staff of the agency Mr chair
Senator it's the the program is
the same it's a first degree
murder felons are eligible
everyone else could apply for
any of the three hundred under I
understand I understand and
that's just up the art of the
compromise and you know exactly
an account in my opinion Mr the
contradicts that terminally ill
and make provision but I I'm not
gonna fuss over it if everyone
in a perfect world every inmate
forgiving as is up.
Is up sign up for Medicaid and
Medicare so.
If they get out going to hospice
I don't want to diminish their
experience but it saves a lot of
money for the state and provides
much more better care in their
in their dying days do you want
to say something Mr chairman yet
Mr chair Senator just very
quickly that terminate
terminally ill is slightly
different and that they have to
be someone who will likely be
dead within six months and
there's an accelerated timeline
for terminally ill people
because of that
because of that issue so
corrections has fifteen days to
get the recommendation parole
board has seven days to make
their decision and so there is a
lot of overlap Mr chair Senator
I agree between the two
categories but for if you are on
deaths door as it were the
process is speeded up for you
and then but the courts as well
Mr and is that is that of of
first degree murder exception
applied to the terminally ill
yes Mr chair there out of the
anybody with that is that is out
of it Mr and that's in I think
we we move that to the and it's
on page ten it's
Representative Q. this is
medical Jerry or geriatric.
But the thank you for thank you
Mr chairman.
I just have a couple of did did
Senator guy goes have a.
Yes.
Okay I have a couple questions
about the list goes Senator gave
us.
Thank you Mr thanks Center for
this bill I do have a dispute
clarifying question so look into
the bill page line of page one
line Levin says and you go to
page three line of sixteen or
just all the way down and and
it's when you're talking about
of geriatric.
medical for geriatric medical
medical and Jerry act is that a.
Or or is that is there a reason
you go from and to for.
In the bill throughout the
building.
Mr chair Senator I'm not sure
where you're pointing.
We'll start on page one line
eleven.
Two twenty.
The medical and director patrol
so roll procedures in the tile
if you.
That it is all set each time it
comes up so if you go to page
three line sixteen.
This is a medical for care
geriatric parole I'm just
wondering if there's a reason
for the inconsistency or I'm
just not seeing something
throughout throughout the
document.
Mr chair
Senator
Right proofreading catch the
places where you pointed those
two places are both in titles
which have no weight and all the
first is the title of the actual
bill and the second is that
title of
the section of law which has no
weight and law and under a.
Under our laws of statutory
interpretation.
But it is something that is all
of us should have caught as
we're proofreading this
researchers areas of COVID Frank
three four nine nine.
That.
You've got medical ordinary
activities and.
That and that and throughout the
document Mr.
Mr chair
Senator in that instance
grammatically that is correct
because the program is a medical
and geriatric parole program the
applications for either medical
or geriatric parole the
government okay yeah but I'm
happy to feel any others.
Let me go to page four lines and
looked
Line line line starts at most by
those inmates of the opportunity
to apply for medical or Jerry
Jerry act.
So then you drop down to while
Levin and says eligible for
medical or geriatric.
FY twenty one goes back to.
And
Classification officer this
isn't just and our
description slash cash offer job
provide an inmate over the age
of fifty five with a copy of the
medical and your active patrol
policy
Senator again this is it's
grammatically it depends on
whether you're talking about the
policy of the program which is
the collective end or whether
applying for individually for
medical or geriatric parole in
which case you'll use the or.
Okay Mr chairman and up and
gentleman on that I guess it's
just part completion to me but
all go to questions I have Mr
chair if I may
I'm wondering what in NMAA care
they get now so my mother right
now is under hospice care in the
because of the silly what do
they have and how does that
work.
Mr chair Senator my
understanding but we have people
from the corrections department
here could answer is they have
care up to the most severe care
available in the facility but if
you'll permit Senator we do have
Representative from corrections
in the audience who can answer
your question yes please I
appreciate.
Good afternoon members I'm sorry
sure I'd.
Good afternoon my name is
Melanie Martinez I'm the
director of adulteration pro and
we do have care up until it
becomes
whether it's terminal are we
have to transport them out
because they don't have the
services available but we do
have a full hospital setting in
our central New Mexico
correctional facility.
Including hospice service
including hospice service.
Well thank you for that Madam
and Mr chair of the reason I was
asking that is
My concern of going in and out
of hello so once they are put on
this program and released it
their health gets any better and
I understand the six months my
mom spent on that directive of
six months left about a week ago
she had really good strong
mobility and determination she's
eighty two years old so we're
not talking about a fifty five
year old we're talking about
eighty two year old and I have
to have alarms on my doors well
that way she doesn't skate and
my fear is with without having
some kind of to check make sure
if there health gets better that
they're not leading wherever
they're at with whatever family
they are
at fifty five I would find that
a problem because their help may
be their body may be strong
enough to do more damage and
that's what my concern was will
we have anything in there that
watches that so if there is and
there again her it was one week
of strength and her mobility and
determination were at a peak I'm
just wondering how you manage
that once they are released Mr.
Mr chair Senator this is Douglas
speaking again
is a part of the evaluation
process both at the corrections
level and at the probe or board
level is a complete medical
evaluation and I trust that that
would include whether someone
might or might not potentially
recovered they do remain though
they're released they do remain
on supervision for the duration
of their sentence with no credit
for good time so what state you
are released
going back again Mr chair to
Senator Schmedes question if
you're released and you have
part of your sentence still to
serve
You were still on supervision
for the rest of that sentence
any parole term that would have
been applied to that sentence
and even though and said you're
out of the system out of the
facility on this program you do
not earn good time behavior that
might cut off part of your time
so if you have I'm just gonna
say two years left in five years
of parole right you will be
under correction supervision for
seven years which means they're
checking in on you and doing
everything else the that ms
Martinez's office does to make
sure that people are staying on
the straight and narrow when
they're out on parole so I think
there's no
Mr chair and a center guy goes
if I understand you were it
sounded like you're asking about
the centric clawback provision
to get healthy do you bring it
back in there's no provision
like that presently but the
evaluation should determine
whether that is going to be an
issue that's why you and the
proboards can request a full a
new work up on someone if they
have questions about how serious
their this is and as I said they
were still under the observation
under the supervision of
corrections for the duration of
their sentence including any
procurement on the end of it so
it's not like they're going to
disappear
out into the world once they are
out on this program I hope that
answers your question Senator Mr
chair.
That does Mr chairman Kerr I
appreciate that it takes me to
my next question the reason I
have caution on their in this
process with the family of the
victim have a voice and see if
the I typically I understand now
that they do that they're being
led out of.
From from jail but in this
situation are they at least
being heard Mr
I can just enter any parole
board that's a big reason why
they existed they are.
They want to hear from the
victim so this would be no
exception so the victims would
always have a voice in any
parole hearing aids Mr chair
Senator I actually asked this
very question to the secretary
of corrections during the
hearing for one of the the
earlier bills today and she
confirmed that not only are they
notified they get a phone call
as soon as the process is
initiated so that as soon as
this pops up on corrections
right are they are reaching out
that doesn't email or a you know
an informal letter the reaching
out in person by phone
to the victims to ensure that
they're notified that this is
happening.
Well I appreciate that Mr
Chairman center and this car
reasoning for that is a lot of
times these iterations I keep
children are done by family
members and I just want to make
their their checks and balances
that they knew of this person's
coming home and so they could be
prepared to to protect their
children family member of my
last question Mr chair and
generous carver is on line
thanks to the line twelve it
starts out talking about the
responded the Jerry act in may
and it goes into line sixteen
which describes a fifty five
years of age or older and my
concern there and I know working
in it were one of very few that
have not changed from sixty five
to fifty five but if you put in
just geriatrics into Google.
It gives you a sixty five year
age limit at some wondering if
that's not going to cause
confusion because I did it just
to see what would come up but
the expectations are if you're
talking about geriatric.
It is sixty five years or older
I'm wondering if if you guys
have considered that maybe we
call Google and tell them change
their dates in their tax I just
brought that up justice
something that notify you
because very and this bill to me
has been a little little bit
confusing to me that's why I
went through all the lines and
pages on the answer or straight
up I'm just wondering if you'd
notice that and if you have any
thoughts on that Mr I yield
Mr chair and senator thank you
and I have to say Senator I
remember working on some of your
bills when I was the council
service and I always enjoyed our
conversations and this bill
means a lot to me and I
appreciate that how
how much of engage with this
bill on that very question
Being someone who's now on the
wrong side of fifty five in fact
I'm sympathetic to your question
there is mountains of evidence
that people who are incarcerated
H. far faster than the general
population so for the average
person out there sixty five
might be a standard definition
of geriatric
for someone who's been
incarcerated up all the medical
evidence in study after study
has shown that they H. at a far
for yes it right and that is why
most states have an age that's
of fifty five or fifty for their
geriatric parole programs it's
to take into account the
difference in aging for someone
who's been incarcerated since
someone who's in the out of the
world as it were thank you
senator thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr.
Anything else Senator Gallegos.
Now Mr ideal thank you so much
of the debate thank you senator
Senator is one quick question
choose thing Mr you have to
follow up on on Saturday this
coming about the victims is that
is that in rules are statute
that they our contact.
In the center Mr chair why I
just right just a microphone
Mr chair Senator my
understanding is and we get ask
Miss Martinez again is that it's
triggered by the I can remember
the name is set to the victim
notification Act I believe it is
so I believe it's in compliance
with another part of statute
okay thank you.
And I had one quick question for
you this is always triggered by
specific request from an inmate
this is this could not be if
it's a chance for the state to
dump somebody who's gonna have
very expensive condition
precisely Mr chair Senator and
that's an excellent point it is
triggered by a request from the
inmate one of the things the
statute does that's not it
present in statute is there's an
informative
Obligation put on the
corrections department
but again it's what they do
already to notify someone that
they might be eligible but the
process is triggered either by
the inmate or a representative
of the inmate that's that
language that's a for the on if
someone isn't capable to make
this decision themselves or to
mitigate the process that
tourney or care providers are
conditioned to process.
We don't have a motion yet puts
the will of the committee I move
to test seconded by Senator
McKenna city lotus moved and
McCann any other debate in the
discussion.
Anything else senator o'neill or
Mr around just ready for the
vote.
Yes.
Tens of the the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator guy and also.
No ma'am and I'd like to explain
my vote.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Senators missions.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Was senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Flexibility of Senator Gallegos
you wanted to explain your vote.
Mr I appreciate the opportunity
to explain I'm just still have a
lot of Harper I understand I'm
here with my mother Senator
final moments I understand
wanting to be with family but I
still consider there's a little
bit of a liability that's in my
mind
Still out there for the public
but I appreciate the dialogue on
this and will actually out those
stories of war thank you Mr.
Thank you senator what's the
code six two by a vote of sixty
two you have to do yes thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee thanks thanks for
Senator Lopez welcome.
I'm good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee I sit here in front of
you with a bill that may sound
familiar from last year I'm
clear back in front with there's
a few changes but we are here in
front of you is Senate bill
thirty one I'm which is relating
to guardianships and Mr chairman
members of the committee to this
is an issue that
of course whether you're in one
area you know under the age of
eighteen we also have other
concerns about guardianships for
those who are over the age of
eighteen
but this one particular five
year deals with those who are in
the CYFD system who have
potential of being within our
foster care system Mr Chairman
over the years
We have always had conversations
about how do we provide services
for families how do we provide
income support in some way for
those families who are what I
call providing care doing angels
work in providing a home for
those children who are in their
care this is one way Mr chairman
under
I have been to sit on a few
commissions and committees Mr
chair members of the committee
that we're we work with in
trying to find different to ways
of working with and helping our
foster care system and I won't
go into much more in depth
because I have two very
auspicious persons here with me
today who can fill in and do a
short presentation and then we
can stand for questions for your
state do have judge Begay who's
of course our children's court
judge in Bernalillo county and I
have Erica Sanchez who is here
with New Mexico can that has
done phenomenal work especially
with those in our foster care
system over the those are
eighteen and over who are or are
aging out of the system so I
will let it stand because I can
talk for everyone is to and if I
could Mr chair which is
beginning let's begin welcome
thank you very much so chairman
and members of the committee
senators it's nice to see you
all here I don't want to belabor
the point what we're asking you
to do is essentially to take a
bill that is already on the
books that is intended to help
families support those familiar
relationships and pull over to
provisions over to the
children's code that will allow
better oversight by the court
that allowed the practitioners
who work in this area to already
know this the courts to put some
rulemaking in place and also to
support CYFD in these efforts so
it's a pretty straightforward
change there are a few things in
the bill that we think are
important it will help clarify
the court process having the
court involved in this is
important and explaining how
that would happen and and.
The court being involved in
setting those procedures it also
continues to protect parents and
children's rights by having
representation well these
voluntary placement agreements
are happening with the
department it requires of course
the assignment of a guardian
Adlai item whose duty is always
to look out and to tell the
court what is in the child's
best interest and then the
a process for allowing CYFD
access to the court to be able
to file a petition to be able to
bring children into the
department civil custody when
it's appropriate to and
necessary under a voluntary
placement agreement so I don't
want to belabor the point as I
said but we would ask for the
support of this committee and to
move us on to the next place.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sanchez.
Members of the committee
American scientists in New
Mexico can and I don't have
anything to add that I'm here I
question.
Thank you very good let's go to
did you want to say something
else yes I just wanted to alert
everybody that the this is it a
bill supported by the New Mexico
Judiciary that this has been bad
at the budgets for the
children's
children's court
improvement commission I just
got the names when you say yes
chief Edwards or judge board is
with us today she's one of the
co chairs so she's also
available for questions to is
there anybody here from CYFD.
Okay good we have somebody here
from CYFD to okay good well
let's let's hear from judge ward
and we'll hear from you search
your.
Indicated.
This bill would.
Right thank you judge what yes
ma'am.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Evelyn
Martin and.
We we are in some.
And our member of the.
Children's court we have so
many.
Improving.
and have.
Support.
It provides with this
significant amount of cleaning
up of the children's code
So thank you right thank you Mr
Martin anybody else here in
support of this measure yes
please.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee unexpended placement I
am the executive director pick
Pegasus legal services for
children we're a nonprofit human
rights organization that
protects children's rights and
family rights
I'm also on the children's court
proving Commission and I also
guarding that light of my
practices require this guarded
by the I need the tourney in the
second and worked extensively
with you Friday at a variety of
issues Pegasus has been
providing free legal services
for families seeking kinship
guardianship for the full other
than act which is almost twenty
years ago and I absolutely
support this bill we've worked
on it for years
everything they said and I just
wanna say generally terms the
kinship card is anything we can
all do to keep improving that
system it is a huge need one of
the things we've seen in the
last couple years is significant
increase in the need for concern
guardianship and that's
primarily because children have
been orphaned by COVID and we've
seen a huge increase of the need
for that over the years just
last year for example
Pegasus posted for that
Representative over four hundred
families getting their kinship
guardianship and in New Mexico
approximately this is from the
kids count done by Casey
foundation which is really
accurate numbers about seven
percent of all children in New
Mexico are living with the kids
some of them have a legal
guardian some of them don't and
that's because it's about thirty
three thousand children who are
living with kids without their
parents there for a variety of
reasons
so anything you can do to keep
improving it this bill
absolutely improve the system to
get together bility it gives
representation to all the people
involved to have the best
outcome for the children because
we always look at the best
interests of the children but
also for the whole family so
Thank the senators lease for
supporting this work in our
efforts thank you for listening
to the.
Thank you misfortune.
The chairman members of the
committee Karen candidate with
national association social
workers New Mexico tech and we
stand and support from the
reasons right thank you for yes
ma'am.
Get people impacted by foster
care to.
Keeping children.
One currently.
Thank you and we we have
somebody online who wants to
make a comment.
Lisa did you want to make a
comment we'll take it now yes
thank you
Mr Chairman I was having trouble
meeting myself there for a
moment my name's Lisa deal
Mr chairman members of the
committee and I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
And we stand in full support of
the spell because we agree with
the experts that can take care
of a child we must take care of
the family and we know that
subsidized guardianships help to
do that by creating protections
for the rights of both parents
and children this bill really
strict and the process of
keeping children with their
families and community and
finally we just want to raise
our support for the fact that
the solutions are contained in
this bill have been developed by
those who experienced the
problems
and for that we we fully support
and encourage you to pass thank
you for your time.
Good thank you very much.
And then we'll take one final
comment the.
The gentleman.
My name is John sure.
Five thousand protective
services cases and this is a
half.
Thank you John didn't see you
activate it then you you you did
you have a comment yes.
Thank you these.
For anybody else okay members of
the committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I this is
great and I'm glad you this is
just really great work and I
think it's going to be in the
right place and everything else
I think that of I have got to
communication I found the email
that was really interesting from
a constituent and that is that
inventor the APA that the
definition of ticked fictive kin
includes foster parents however
this definition on page five.
The relationship has to exist
prior to the child entry into
foster care that looks like it's
specifically exclude foster
parents and then he tells a
story about his
His experience in foster care
and
they she had they had an infant
they took in an infant and that
was great they would it was
returned the answer was a turn
to the mom then the mom kept up
the relationship with them and
then she's now six the mom
asked.
It came into problems again and
asked that they be the faster
Google and they did she's now
six
And she's they they say they've
been it continues part of our
life and they were concerned
that this bill seems to exclude
them from being considered
fictive kin and that seemed
important for me to raise
because.
This is a success story and so
why would we exclude them.
Senator.
To judge somebody for.
Senator city of the budget love
this definition of fictive kin
it mirrors the if that
definition of fictive kin but
removing the references to that
Indian family protection act
which passed last session and so
that bill was very well vetted
and
And we we were just nearing that
definition
but I think that there are a
number of reasons important
policy legal reasons why I to
parents aren't included in that
definition effective can.
Judge did you want to add
anything to it I was just gonna
say this what the foster care
system and having foster parents
are really important to making
sure that we have safe places
for children but the goal from
the ABA's through the national
association of children's
council a statement by this
legislature by its elected
members this is the definition
that you all have said meets
fictive can this is the goal you
want CYFD in the members of the
need to Judiciary to also follow
It the the goal under all of the
laws both federal and state are
really pushing the relative
placement to explore children
growing up in their same culture
the same language to have access
to the pictures of the relatives
of had to be able to learn those
family traditions like those
that you have sometimes and
getting up early on Christmas
morning and what you what you do
there or for native children
when you participate in our
cultural dances the goal is to
head in that direction I think
the legislature statement in the
Indian family protection act
that this meets fictive can is
simply what we're asking you to
do hear that budget should be to
all children of New Mexico not
just those Indian children.
Thank you Mr chair so with a
foster family be excluded I
understand the priorities I get
that totally it needs to be
family first it needs to the
native American families need to
be
Which you know should not be
broken up I I get all that but
would exclude.
State there is no family like in
this situation it sounds like
this is this is a child who
really didn't have those
opportunities with this exclude
them from being part of this
child to from being allowed to
get a kinship guardianship.
the chairman and and senator
David exception it's what the
princess for in Senator Sedillo
Lopez you know this is just one
pathway forward for pet families
doing this kinship guardianship
it's the one that our
legislature has said is relevant
to can only right that's in the
name but there are still other
ways that foster parents are
able to access the court whether
it's filing
to intervene in the case they
can have conversations about
whether or not they're the
appropriate placement and then
under the children's code under
the abuse neglect co they do
have the ability to adopt
children through that abuse
neglect pathway to but this
definition is just reflecting
what you all have already done
which is to make a definitive
statement about fictive kin are
here in the state of New Mexico.
It might my take on it Senator
is that.
In this instance they would be
could could be considered
fictive kin because prior to
this placement.
Prior to this placement they
had developed to a a significant
family like relationship with
the child they did it in the
context of a prior foster care
placement but they were
considered fictive kin then this
time they would be considered
fictive kin that's way I would
interpret it but I you know I'm
no lawyer and all that that's
very good lawyering Mr.
I I think the I think that's
certainly an argument you would
be a lot of foster parents don't
have lawyers to make those
arguments.
Fictive kin means it was not a
relative it's just fifty of is a
fiction you know so it's it is
specifically does designed for
those people who are part of a
lot the life of that child.
And I guess I am a little
concerned.
But maybe maybe doing it your
way if a foster parent has
create has created a
relationship with a child prior
to this placement because it you
know lawyers argue and the other
argument on the other side is
prior to the child entry into
foster care.
which was.
The probably the first time and
so I I just raise it because
this this individual and I
promise I wouldn't say the names
of the two I would never see the
name of the child but I also
said it would use of this
person's name but I'd seem to me
to to raise an exists an
interesting point and I
understand what you said about
the policies
But fifty of kin to me is for
those individuals who don't have
family because it's affected
kids it's it's not.
It's not family and so I just
raise it I'm gonna vote for the
bill I just want to sure you I
just would I would didn't serve
on this commission so I didn't
get to raise it but I did want
to raise his voice since he
could be here to to raise it and
he did you know this constituent
called me and really had a
compelling story so thank you Mr
chair.
Maybe a Senator Schmedes Mr
Chairman wanted like to move in
a minute please.
She said I'd like to move
amendment on what the same topic
that Senator Lopez was talking
about I think we could fix the
problem by on page five of nine
twenty three if we could strike
the comma.
The word which
line twenty four as well as the
word care online twenty five and
that would allow foster parents.
To be placed back in.
and I agree with Senator Sedillo
Lopez about I'm not sure but
words in her mouth but from what
I hear her saying is this gives
the parents options if they
choose they said Hey I have a
you know good foster family here
and I I want I want help from
them.
It also doesn't it doesn't
exclude these you know the these
families in a it gives stability
to give stability to these kids
and I think that's what these
kids need some stability in.
So so.
Thank you to your amendment
again you yeah I I'm not I move
to strike on on online twenty
three.
Page five we strike the comma in
the word which.
When we strike all of one twenty
four all of them to move and and
we strike the word care from one
twenty five.
It is from that last call this
is really just that yeah.
Hello that's friendlier that
still leaves it would still
leave it up to the judge to
determine if this if the child
really I mean the whole point is
that they the kid knows this
person.
Somehow.
And by doing that you'd be
striking that.
What do you think.
If it helps I can read the
definition of the eight from the
ABA fictive kin.
Mr chairman if I may say this in
our discussions in the sub
committees that we're working on
this particular piece of
legislation I'm we did have a
discussion over the language of
what you are currently
discussing right now in in the
context of what we were doing in
the sept Committee
We're trying to reflect what
this legislature has already
passed this is already an
existing statute is not
equivalent I forget with the
title I'm out of thank you I'm
I'm out of the state the letters
everything stands for Indian
family protection Indian family
protection act so in changing
what we were trying to do is
just to make sure that we're
mirroring the same language that
we've already passed because
again when she began to make
more changes to this so what we
have to do is go back and change
I mean there's there's just so
many other things that this
would have what I call a
repercussion of having to go
back and change something else
I know.
This and then finally this point
to say just a friendly.
Okay.
Senator Senator Maestas.
Debating but he he's he's made a
motion we don't have a thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
Lopez Senators committee the
And and appreciate what.
Senator Lopez was saying because
yeah in that particular instance
that would be awesome if that
person with the guardian.
I don't know the policy but I'm
just guessing that the policy
was made at some point and was
made consistent with federal and
state law elsewhere and I think
it's because there may be a
conflict of interest because
with the with foster parents say
if the kid as money.
The foster parent can't be the
guardian would you need an
outside.
Tuition I believe that's the
policy that I would stand behind
that that policy and
respectfully do not support the
motion made by secretary of
state thanks.
Senator I guess just one more
thing and I don't you know I
didn't know that would be no
friendly I just
I I do have a definition of
fictive kin from the abuse and
neglect Act artist New Mexico.
Then it says is so there's
multiple definitions which is
probably a problem.
it says and I quote a person not
related by birth adoption or
marriage with whom the child as
emotionally significant
relationship.
And so.
I mean that's kind of what I'm
trying to more here's just ended
with that emotional family like
relationship using or family
like I think that's really good
L. emotional family like
whatever we just ending it there
which is in conjunction with the
abuse neglect act.
So I so I realize it's
unfriendly I didn't know if
you'd be on from there not but I
would still hold the motion I I
think it's
I still think we could change to
make Mr chair.
Senator hi this is response from
debate I I raised it because of
the particular circumstances and
my concern is in warehouses were
a judge have discretion.
And I think the judges normally
would if there was nobody else
and I want to honor the work of
this commission
and I felt like I needed to
raise it because like I got this
this call so I'm not seconding
the motion
we might think I would I'm not
because I think it's really
important to honor the work of
the commission but I I do hope
there's discretion.
The judge would have if there
was no one else.
Just to the judge of the no
the big okay Sir thank you very
much chair and then also Senator
Sedillo Lopez I think I need to
go back and make a quick
clarification the prior factual
scenario that you raise the one
that was posed by this
the constituent that you had is
one where that person would
actually qualify I believe as
fictive kin right they the child
had a relationship before coming
in this time where the court was
going to look at permanency
going forward and so making that
very clear we still believe that
this definition that we're
proposing is the right one this
legislature has already told the
state of New Mexico and CYFD how
you expect them to
work with these families and who
who they should consider
effective can I think we should
hold that it the same across the
board for all families working
with the same agency.
Thank you your argument would
prove prevail Mr chair.
Of the we your amendment do do
you want to keep see if you get
a second for dialysis.
Got a second to get.
Did you second the amendment
Senator Gallegos.
Mr I would.
Thank any other discussion.
Vote on it then.
Secretary will call the roll on
the amendment which was the man
in the proposed by Senator
committee seconded by Senator
guys with.
Senator there are.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey if.
I know.
Senator Maestas.
No.
Senator McKenna no.
Senator smitteez yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez nope.
Senator Tallman Bill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no.
So the amendment fails we're
back on the bill is there any
other discussion any other
issues I don't have anybody else
on the list I don't believe
Senator Schmedes thank you and
nothing more affected can I
think I understand that
listening to.
Senator Lopez how many of the
the V. P. has to we have a New
Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee it's under ten.
It's just a handful at any given
time up to this point under tent
also.
Mr chair there any.
Hi so you had a hundred eighty
days on their other any that are
greater than a hundred eighty
days are going longer than that
now or what is the what is the
department finding.
This meeting is the.
The whites.
That we.
It should be driven by the face.
Okay.
All right I think Mr that and
that's all I have I was just
curious and I think this
You know I I think when those
are going longer I just wonder.
yeah it sounds like you could do
the extensions I just wondered
you know.
What the other options are at
that point but I don't think we
need to get into that.
okay thank you very much
appreciate thank thank you
senator.
Senator Sedillo thank you I I'm
sorry I forgot this because I
got wrapped up in the other
issue this is a technical issue
that was raised by the analysis
and I I don't know if you make
that change Judiciary
that the AG's office says that
sections thirteen to fifty limit
rate payments to fully licensed
guardianships and that what they
say it's unclear what that means
New Mexico does not have a
professional licensing scheme
for guardians so I don't know if
you want to strike that language
here or wait till Judiciary or
otherwise fix it.
Mr chair members of the
committee ID so that's that's
language internal the CYFD so
that's why there are other this
is talking specific to the
kinship that CYFD is working and
not kinship more broadly so I
think that's why it created
confusion for the AG's office
so I I would actually just the
way they do if they want to
propose a definition for fully
licensed guardians or if we just
strike the state fully licensed
thank you Mr chair will then you
can wait on the way to Judiciary
I just was going to offer to fix
it now but.
On the path to do this year you
could figure it out.
Thank you so much my question is
did anybody else have another
question my question is chair I
did cut my hands up okay Senator
guys go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for this as you know
I've bought CYFD like forever
but I do have a question because
in the FIR it shows on page for
this they have a huge fiscal
implications that they don't
know that they can absorb have
you guys talk to them about this
and see what that.
Result could be.
Miss Martin.
yes senator
Mister chairman Senator.
There.
It's.
We have to project and predict
how many PPAs through.
They have if we have a
significant increase of the.
Place we will need.
Attorneys being able to.
Staff
To have.
We've had the last couple.
Senator Gallegos.
Well and and I guess my fear is
that if if we make as much as
Charlotte just like of center
city Lopez finding that issue
we're actually not solving that
here were handed off to
Judiciary hoping they do our job
but I'm just wondering if
there's any way to.
To hold back and talk to see why
P. and try to find out I know a
lot of it's no no don't get me
wrong I I understand it's hard
but with this year having the
over abundance of funds we have
to be really good to fix
something as we go forward than
expected to be fixed late in a
later date and all the that you
all to think through I do have
another question when right for
Mr chair we're ready for it go
ahead.
Well then I'll go back to
the regular bills section nine
age twenty two eleven fund bill.
I'm in the amendment.
The garden faced but in
lunch.
In section nine what what I
caught was that there's
better financial and read it to
you exactly.
Twenty four twenty.
Page twenty two.
We are striking.
Here it is on page twenty two
one twenty point two point five
is our regional or striking ride
reasonable visitation with the
child I hear Lea County we had a
really bad time with young lady
that is not blind for life now
because of the regional old
visitation and I'm wondering if
that's a precursor to this
because.
Led to a third cost problems for
her for life and I'm just
wondering on that exact item
eight is rationale for that Mr.
Mr chair Senator date.
I'm so we're actually we're not
we're not striking the.
The intent what we did here is
just we again we merit if I so
where they live where they laid
out
these were these rates for the
parents we just use the same
languages F. I right here so
you'll see it now there's a new
paragraph a that said have
visitation with the child.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
your honor can you direct me
where that's at.
Age twenty three.
Line eight.
Up.
but see they're still on a
reasonable it's just a
visitation with the child up.
I and I understand you're trying
to look at have it all one
verbiage on in two different
areas but
this is the second item that has
been looked at in.
At least were reviewed and and
try to find a resolution between
the two but I understand I'm
only one vote so I will go for
No yield Mister thank you.
Thank anything else senator
Gallegos.
No Sir.
Okay my question just had to do
with does making somebody
fictive kin the guardian entitle
them to receive any kind of
benefits do they get.
It it it kind of financial
assistance from from becoming a
guarding it chairman just the
designation as a fictive kin or
the designation as a guardian.
got of of being a guardian I
guess because yeah so so part of
this bill is to support CYFD is
processing getting families to
over the over the line for
kinship guardianship so if a
person is identified by CYFD as
a proposed guardians they they
work with them on foster care
maintenance payments and then
set them up so that they have a
child with them exercise that
oversight once a petition is
filed the court under the
domestic affairs would grant
that guardianship that person
does become the guardian they
may have started out as
effective can did I answer your
question so once their the
guardian do they get of of
foster care benefits they they
are once they get once they meet
the technical definition of
guardian as defined by the
statute where they are in fact
appointed by the by a judge was
reviewed all this information
they become the guardian and
that is under the guardianship
assistance agreement that's when
money begins to flow to them
that contract was negotiated
between CYFD and the the
relative wrote.
And it's at the it's at the
foster care payment right.
Where is it at the foster care
payment right that might be a
question better answered by this
this morning Mr chair that right
is is usually.
Okay very good thank you.
Anything else.
What's the will of the committee
regarding the bill without
amendment we didn't make any
amendments on it so Senator
Maestas thank you I move out.
Move the COVID access seconded
by Senator Sedillo Lopez.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Maestas.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
What.
Senator McKenna us.
Senator smitteez no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator to the panel back to
Senator Ingle.
Senator Gallegos and senators
committee voted no everybody
else so far as voted yes.
Senator two yes.
So by a six to six everybody six
to three vote your the other two
passed and the good Judiciary
next.
Good luck thank you very much
thank you Senator Padilla.
Wedding bells.
To.
The card
whenever you're ready I Mr
chairman.
We'll let the room clear a
little bit and then.
That's.
Okay let's proceed then Senator
by this bill we only have one
more after this one and that'll
be Senator cels I thank you very
much Mr chairman and thank you
for your flexibility to it today
we will not be hearing Senate
bill thirty nine we still have
some work to do on that one we
would like to just got to move
directly to Senate bill forty I
am joined here today Mr chairman
by pearl Google doing who is an
ordained minister and has
conducted over thirty five
hundred
weddings here in New Mexico over
the years I've hundred thirty
five hundred in her time doing
this Mr chairman so she and
senator former senator Majority
Leader senator Michael Sanchez
brought this to me recently and
and asked me if we would work on
this and
Mrs you misspelled on it reached
out to me and several of us over
the years and I think we finally
have something that we want to
move forward on here but
essentially what it does is the
legislation
removes the requirement of of
someone who cannot be available
for an actual wedding are
someone that solemnization
procedure excuse me which is
another term for for a wedding
can be available because they
may be in the military overseas
or have some sort of an
assignment that prevents them
from getting here for their
actual ceremony could be
somebody who is having a medical
episode of some kind cannot get
to to the to have a to be
available for for this
previously or currently you'd
have to write a letter to a
judge if there would nine
hundred troops had to jump
through then they might ask for
additional information what have
you the legislation clearly
outlines but all you really need
to do at this point is come
forward with an affidavit to the
county official the county clerk
and file that affidavit with
that individual and you could
have your marriage either
through a ceremony with an
ordained minister or have it the
the accepted in place in and
sign of the license marriage
license so that the waiting can
occur this just clear clear
something up that has been a
real hurdle for some people and
I have pearl.
Here she's going to say a few
words Mr chairman with your
permission and I've asked her to
maybe keep it about two to three
minutes Max thank you thank
discover the.
Yes this is
you know there's a lot of I do a
lot of military weddings and
currently whoever's in the
military S. top flight
Albuquerque they have to have
leave and sometimes they just
they need to get their marriage
Sierra we fashion they need to
be legally married maybe for for
family insurance housing spousal
support other other reasons but
they can't postpone it they
can't come from overseas I can't
come from other states there's
currently only one of the state
that does this and there are
tens of thousands of military
personnel act who are who need
to get married I think we would
do them a tremendous honor to be
able to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
did hear that bringing her years
of experience conducting those
over thirty five hundred
marriages it's really were a lot
of us came from just to make
things a little easier for these
folks could cannot be physically
available for their their
sermon.
This thanks questions whenever
you're ready let's go to the
audience anybody here in support
of this bill yes.
Worries that.
Counselor to do this for.
Your.
Issues I couldn't get access.
In.
Thank you anybody else in favor
of this anybody opposed to this.
Members of the committee.
I'm just so seconded the motion
second I anybody else have
questions on this.
I a member of my family is very
fun to the television program
called ninety day fiance I'm not
sure any.
The leave now bill.
I will best you know know that
we did okay so it was still I am
sorry.
And and in that program there's.
Frequent scenario is there
somebody in Afghanistan or in.
Turkey or some Molly residual
who who is been courted over the
internet.
Could somebody get married over
the who've they've never met in
person.
But.
One party here says yes I she
loves me I know she does she's
not in it for the money she
really doesn't want to green
card she really wants to come
here and I know it because she
said so many many times can they
get could they get married this
way hi I have no idea I don't
know if I've ever married
anybody under those
circumstances they come to me
because they want to be Meredith
got a license and if they were
ninety days I would probably do
some counseling but I don't
believe that that is as common
as television might make it nine
thirty five hundred ready okay
and more to the legislation.
It is it look let's just zoom in
the Legislature provided I would
say that I just want to draw
your attention to this page
let's see a page I and all of
the different things that you're
affidavit is going to have to
contain I think that you're
going to be in a in a real world
heard if you wind up going down
the road of trying to do
something you're not supposed to
be doing so there's a number of
things that you have to come
forward with in this affidavit.
Okay.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you have a
save the decision is prices
spike in in the end when when
they determine whether they're
going to give them a green card
and so they do a very thorough
analysis and if they'd never
that would be something that ice
would probably not given a green
card for it's still be married
for you know or whatever but
they would get the green card if
it is a feeling heritage's money
and get his possibly but they
would get the green.
She could get my legislative
retirement.
Because of the marriages presume
valid until it's notified it
could probably be notified but
just the law is it's presumed
valid until snow fights the more
should be okay but ice might not
give them the green card okay
received and you've never seen
anything like this I have not
been I have married quite a
number of people who were
foreign citizens but they were
able to get their license here
in the licenses determined by
law that they had to be here
this bill bill bill would make
it possible for somebody
overseas who's not physically
present here to get legally
married but they would have to
be in the military only in the
military correct so it's only in
the military in the military
thanks SO yes you have on page
to connect to this six online
nine member of the armed forces
of the United States or active
duty.
And unable so it's only for the
military correct.
That's all to no problem Mr
chair but.
Senator Hickey yes to stick up
I'm trying to get this fully
clear so in order to be married
you can be overseas but you have
to have a stand in for you who's
been noticed so so there there
are two people there the stand
in is acting as a proxy Mr chair
if I understand correctly thank
you very much Mr.
Hello to table tennis.
As a result of active duty as a
member of the armed forces very
good Senator most of thank you
Mr chairman Senator but yet the
so what I'm looking I'm I'm
unfamiliar with respect to some
look at the bottom of page for.
New language and we're talking
about getting a marriage license
and it says that.
If a party to the marriage is
unable to be present at the
office of the county clerk and
then on on line twenty three it
says you may obtain a license
the unavailable party may
proceed remotely proceed to get
the license or proceed to get
married remotely to file the
affidavit to get the license
okay thank you Mr chairman R.
Senator Padilla so took proceed
remotely in my mind is your
honor as soon.
But what this contemplates is
you just proceed.
Even though you're not there
with the actual affidavit and
then you have someone that
stands in for you.
Okay but I'm just looking at
this one word Mr chairman of
center for the this one word
remotely on page twenty three
because the way I read it is you
may proceed remotely remotely
tested I don't and I don't know
the definition remotely triggers
in my mind you're you're on as.
So so if if you're not assume
you may want to save may
proceed.
it up sencillo or or something
to that effect and then also.
This only gives instructions on
how to get the license but once
you get the license you're good
to go to get married it is not
my understand the curriculum and
the officiant wilt would perform
the ceremony if they want to do
it online or by phone but they
don't have.
Paper with two proxies somebody
does have to stand and say that
they have witnessed marriage.
Okay so this is a Mr Mrs or but
this so this this of the
language on about on page four
page five B. six is simply a
procedure to get the license and
then connect the the the wedding
itself is kind of a given.
In another state in another
statute right exactly that
there's a whole other set of you
know rules around our law
there's a lot of other law run
how this the actual marriage
takes place actual ceremonial
Act and then it has to be
seventy.
The at the at the.
The priest the the gentle lady
the Elvis then they sign all
their documents according to
what they did correct.
And is there approximately we
have the Mr Chairman the man to
give me is like has its.
Go to contract the contract
but I do know that baby and only
in the shows like weddings are
called off they get this
military guide mail is affidavit
or women males in the affidavit.
And then you know is there any
way to and all that if they
change their mind.
It would be the pro the same
procedure you would have today
for something that which you've
just described could happen in
a traditional ceremony also
thank you Mr.
Anybody else.
Yes but so will the committee we
already have a motion and and
the second the second.
Thank you Senator Hickey
seconded.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator guy just lost.
Okay Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
The actual.
Senator my S..
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator to the panel yes and
Senator Ingle to explain his
vote.
The license stand in a new
profession you're talking about
somebody would make a career
this.
We're doing what we can Mr
chairman to create jobs in our
state and.
The other option that.
So.
Does it pay.
Okay I signed me up this sign
this.
We we wait eagerly the
submission of the license stand
in bill.
Of the declares the screen
what's the final tally seven
seven two zero thank you very
much members of committee thank
you very much more sales rose
Senator souls were up to you.
Three almost orient.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
have an information sheet is one
of the thirty of arms.
Good can you get that first.
In this particular bill Senate
bill forty nine on reducing
adverse childhood experiences up
comes out of the resilience
group leaders group in Los
crucis which is part of the N.
AGD Institute many of you know
of that particular group in the
institute that is been meeting
and has come up with the plan
and wants to start a full
service families in Dona ana
county this bill was heard by
the interim health and Human
Services Committee when it met
down in Los crucis and got a
favorable vote from that
committee to proceed forward
with and I don't know if you
column endorsed legislation.
But this one we got a favorable
vote from that group in that
committee I do need to make one
change that as I was talking to
people today and they actually
looked at the bill if you look
on the information sheet I
handed out it's for a three year
pilot project The appropriation
is for one year and so I would a
proposed to make an amendment to
raise that substantially so that
it covers a three year pilot
instead of a one year pilot.
The as you look through the
various services that would be
provided for this
the so the total would be or you
could say one million per year
twenty four actually looked at
on number nine that four point
one for over three years those
numbers don't quite match of
but.
You that would be to do.
Some of the advocates we're
working on it today when they
look at it's like well that's
not right.
And so you know I apologize for
that you'll lose the endorsement
of the interim committee it
doesn't make a whole lot of
difference but of that I'm just
trying to figure out.
In part of the reason for that
if you look on number is going
to change the amount just gonna
change the amount yes.
Four point one four point one
four.
Well it's not three times the
number that's there but that's
the number that this group has
done as they in the outline they
don't have absolute dollars on
it but if you look on number six
is linking family services there
for navigators there so that's
for person for parenting
educators to care providers who
were food service manager if you
total balls all up it's about
sixteen FTEs to run and manage
this particular center it's very
quickly you get up to a million
dollars worth of just straight
up salaries for the people to do
the work for a family center of
what they're looking at as far
as a family center is when
children at.
Birth come in that the
navigators link them up with
home visiting services and make
sure that they don't just get
referred but they actually get
to those that they've got
transportation that they got all
the pieces they need I look at
it it's very much you always
hear the COVID children are born
with instructions they want to
provide all the instructions for
children to to thrive and to do
well and so instead of children
that end up in CYFD in child
protective services because of
trauma and adverse childhood
experiences this is looking at
instead of negative.
Of the social determinants of
health this is setting up
positive social determinants of
health for the parents and that
they have one place to go rather
than trying to go all over the
county trying to provide
services let's let's go ahead
and deal with the amendment we
have a motion to adopt the
amendment to change one point
four million to.
One point one four million to
four point one four million move
by seconded by Senator Tallman
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez discussion of the
amendment.
Senator Maestas Mr Mr souls what
we did earlier and if you're
here we we put each in each
fiscal year so but that was for
programming there was another
bill which was the same though
where we gave in five million
for the for the duration of the
time.
So would you prefer just the
four million up front or or
would you prefer each year.
The four million for three years
is gives more flexibility
because you may need more on the
front end and not as much in the
prior years once you have things
up and running I think and so I
think that's a more effective
way of running up a pilot
program for three years then to
have a set amount it's the same
each year.
Okay any other discussion on the
amendment is there any
opposition to the.
Seeing none will consider the
amendment to been adopted.
And will move now to the
audience who's here to speak in
support of this bill anybody.
Anybody here to speak in
opposition to this bill.
Members of the committee.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr.
Chair thank you for bringing
this bill forward I read the
book.
And get your gun or an agent
AJ the way I'd the follow up
book now the new members would
like cold David age fourteen
which talks about.
What happens to someone is the
age up.
So.
This is on a
The district one county because
of the too expensive to to
provide the statewide.
I'm sorry go ahead Mr chairman
and senator Tom and
the early childhood education
and care department has five
pilot programs planned within
the budget when I talked to
secretary Groginsky this morning
what through that they are
hoping that gets funded that is
not currently my understanding
in the funding from the LFC
budget but is in the executive
budget and so one of those
counties is Dona Ana County.
So this would provide direct
funding if it doesn't come out
of the executives funding
through.
Early childhood education and
care department is asking for
this this kind of a secretary
and I kind of these kinds of
centers they're looking for
local groups are already engage
invested have the connections in
order to make these kinds of
things happen thank you Mr chair
so isn't this a model program
says this program going to be
have a chance to succeed before
the state funds more.
Mr chair Senator Tallman.
I don't I'm not very good at
predicting the future
and so I'm hoping that this is
in fact the model that is then
replicated into other counties
in other communities make the
mistakes here early so that
other communities have the
benefit of that doubt Los crucis
being one of the large the
second largest community in the
state they're the big model
they've also got some pilot
projects at much smaller
counties Mr U. zero go over
those of this is a model program
for this kind of.
Pan out she expenses now.
Here she going to implement our
program before you say have a
chance to see if this is
successful.
Mr chair Senator you talking
about within this legislative
session as to which one's going
to get funded first.
Of the twelve yes.
What I'm hoping is that this
gets funded and becomes part of
their I County model in which
case yeah the the the money is
the money.
Regardless whether it comes
directly out of early childhood
or whether comes directly out of
appropriation the idea is to get
these up and running and started
so so just if I could follow up
your question.
Her proposal is to tap the fund
for that for five projects.
My understanding is and her
proposal and is.
Someone I I think from early
childhood education care.
It their proposal is the the
funding that is available to the
early childhood education care
department to fund these through
their funding now what that
early childhood fund to well and
they got some also direct
appropriation there's not enough
being spun off of that Fund
right now the fund as huge
amount but the current law only
allows that fund thirty million
dollars I think total three year
rolling average in that but
there is the the new amendment
as well the the permanent fund
amendment that would put another
hundred million dollars into
that department so that they
could probably I if the LFC I
mean if the finance and and
Appropriations Committee would
okay it thank you probably fund
all of those without having to
to tap any other general fund I
guess it all becomes general
fund is that is the issue but
but they don't need a separate.
What I appropriation for the
over and above what they
requested in the executive
budget to do what they want to
do you're raising the question
of do they know what works what
we heard in the interim
committee is in in Colorado they
have a number of these and they
all were great.
That's for the in the New Mexico
yeah that has been successful in
other states at least in
Colorado as you and I heard
Mister chairman Senator yes
obviously it needs to get
tailored towards each individual
community because all
communities are different but
this type of model it had is
successful other places.
So the whole impetus behind this
is.
That.
Parents.
Have a hard time connecting with
all the necessary agencies of
the need to connect to this cat.
Acts as a clearinghouse which
expedites the.
Receiving services that the
whole idea behind this.
Mister chairman Senator yes but
I think it's broader than that
it's providing direct education
for parents not just helping
them navigate the system but
certainly there are concerns
about navigating the system this
group would also be looking at
as they need services for
clients and there are gaps
identifying those so that the
local community can work on
filling those gaps so that we
meet the needs of all of the
children.
So it provides a.
The laws caused by poor
parenting.
So is it is that help to parents
come.
Or housing or Mr chairman and
senator Tom and it's not always
poor parenting but we want to
make sure that the children are
not being penalized because they
made a bad choice of parents
it's to make sure that the
parents are getting the skills
that they need and provide that
if those aren't there making
sure that the children are
getting the services that they
need and trying to do prevention
of abuse and neglect by going
upstream on the front end so
that we don't have to have so
many referred to child
protective services in adoption
services as you heard when the
prior bills this is doing the
prevention side so one last
question Mr chair so a more
direct questions teach parenting
skills.
Mr chairman and senator that is
one component of what they do is
yes it will have very active
mechanisms for teaching improved
parenting processes using the
latest research in science and.
I have to be careful I could do
I could go on for hours about
how that would work and actually
do it but that's not the purpose
here.
You have.
You have a thorough knowledge of
this issue and
I commend you for bringing this
forward and I think good part.
Parenting skills is something
that's important thank you for
bringing this forward thank you
Mr chair that's all I have
Senator thank you Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator souls for bringing this
forward this is a critical area
that we don't know much about I
mean we're learning that we need
to know more about I have.
To
questions
Today or tomorrow my mental
health parity bill is going to
be released and.
It is quite different from other
states and stretches.
Federal law and regulation
because it requires the coverage
of family and marriage
counseling right now family and
marriage counseling are not
covered by insurance companies
you have to have one individual
in that group who has a
diagnosis of some mental health
or substance use disorder for
them to cover it and then it
tends to be very short term yet
as you have pointed out here so
much dysfunction comes out in
the family when people can't
solve their problems
particularly to parents together
and sometimes with the family as
a as a whole so I I am hoping
that as the my bill works its
way through if oil and you will
and there are or this model will
look at not just parenting
skills but
relationship skills between two
individuals who have a family
and there is a that doesn't come
with a manual either as much as
we think it might but it it
doesn't and there are definitely
a skill bases in
couples counseling that can
resolve conflict and not have it
and up in violence as that
sometimes either verbal or
physical so I would hope that as
you're looking at this
implementation here making a
person dedicated each strategy
you would bring that into the
consideration and look at it so
that's probably more and
advocacy for something that we
in health care have neglected
historically forever is that
really a ME relationships are
critical to well being a
critical in the well being to
physical health at center but we
just we.
We have been blind to it and I
will likely have a significant
resistance from the insurance
companies because they're going
to say my god where's as ever
and well probably all of us
could use that couples
counseling along the way so
strong advocacy for that concept
here the other pieces and and I
know we heard it was strong and
Colorado but I would like to see
laid out how we're doing the
evaluation of this so again Mr
chairman I I hate to do this to
you
but we would like to hear how
you have set it up based on what
models and what measurement
criteria you are going to
implement to determine success
particularly across the five
models because again will learn
its mutual learning but if we
don't also we have if all we
have is the subject of it's
really great it's really hard to
carry it forward and expand on
that without some objective
measures being looked at so I
would us do you have room in
here and I see that you want
somewhere that that I grant
writer which is tremendous
because there's lots of grant
money and we in the state don't
look for grant money very well
the governor vetoed a bill for
rural areas having grant
capacity of last year I don't
know why
but again the grant writing and
grant writer is going to have to
work off of measurements of is
that what you're anticipating Mr
chair Senator Hickey right
offices grant writers has
evaluated and so the evaluation
piece is part of this as has
been from with the resilience
leaders from the very inception
where they are looking at
research they have a very formal
metrics that they look at for
success and that they will be
reporting as part of this any
good pilot program has.
To be able to show what they did
why it worked and how it might
work into the future that
requires that you have strong
evaluation processes so others
can learn from it thank you
senator cells and thank you Mr
chair that.
Thanks Senator nobody else
Senator Ingle.
Two quick question opera may
have missed something here but
on the your sheet here that
you're headed out on number nine
appropriation of four point one
four million over three years
and then there's percentages
that causes percentages on how
the money will be spent.
Mr chair and senator yes but
those percentages do not add up
and I looked at them and the all
I mean you're at seventy percent
and on salaries and fringe
benefits and then leave much for
the hi there will.
Mr chair and senator that is
where the majority of this is is
providing the salaries for the
people who are going to be
working with the parents it's a
very people to people intensive
program not buying things not
necessarily arguing that but it
doesn't you know where where the
other figures come in and.
Level in and Mister chair and
and senator I'm not sure I could
tell you directly they have an
extensive
Document as to their budget and
what they are planning with it
so they were trying to do some
synopsis the certainly there are
some direct costs some of the
things that they talk about is
when somebody needs to to get
some place they may need to
provide transportation and how
do you get it and that but the
thing about is it on the first
line here's here's a hundred
percent when the fifty percent
building capacity thirty percent
on parental earning support
twenty percent on making family
in the next one is seventy eight
two seven nine that's pretty
well.
Hundred percent on both lines
and I'm trying to figure out.
You know just physicians like
there's some.
I think that the first line
shows what activities of how the
budget will go to those act the
second line is kind of a line
item although your eleven
percent short.
Yes I know that being a math
person when I got this today in
my email as like well that
doesn't line up.
Good point and I just was
curious of what playoff with the
figures were showing their the
new math.
Gently thanks Senator Ingle
anybody else.
But so will the committee over
the past thank you seconded by
Senator Tallman Maestas.
Any any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my S. yes yes yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes thank you
senator so also think you have
a.
Seven eight two six two one one
thank you committee and I think
this was the last one I do have
that extra set of books to
people like which is kind of the
next one know any J. in a Dodd
this is a teenager who didn't
die but is still trying to
navigate the system and and how
hello trauma informs our lives
for the the bad.
Regardless of thank you very
much thank you senator.
And members of the committee
with that we conclude our work
of the day and we'll see you on
Wednesday.
