Good morning, Chairman and
committee members. Yeah. I was
pleased to be asked to join
sponsoring this Senate memorial
with
Senators Pinto and Sadia Lopez.
Um
It's not clear to me Chairman
and committee members.
That
The state has had a
comprehensive
Assessment.
Okay, now the alcohol
Abuse.
And treatment for indigenous
people in New Mexico and
So we all agreed that it's time
to
To, um to update the facts, Mr
Chair and members.
Very good. Is there anyone in
the audience?
Um, Mr Chairman. Thanks very
much. My name is Bob Carol. I'm
with the Veterans and Military
Families Caucus, and, uh, we are
in support of this signed it.
Oh,
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Pinto. Senator
McKenna. Thank you for bringing
this of
I'll keep an eye on this as
well. But what the task force
should also do if it has
capacity as to
Essentially, um
Create a database of existing
services, You know, database of
existing services, which
organizations do what
And then we can figure out what
organizations have capacity to
grow.
I was. I was thought that if we
had the money
That these organizations would
naturally grow, But they need
capital. They need capital. They
need buildings they need
locations.
Not just the entrepreneurial
skills about treatment
providers. So anyway, we have
the financial means to build
out. We've got to figure out
why.
We're not building out faster
than we are. But anyway, great,
thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you senators for bringing this
bill. This is a critical bill.
Uh and my
First three or four years here.
I've seen lots of scattered
approaches. There's some
communities are doing better
than others, but there is no
consistent approach. There's no
significant data to be able to
look at it. And as I've had a
lot of them to experience that,
in terms of family, I mean, what
we do know is that we've got to
get
Some way for people to be
removed from the environment in
which there that's set up to
stresses for that for a period
of time, and then get the peer
support, Hopefully, in some sort
of living situation for up to 18
months or what have you
Albuquerque has vouchers now for
people going through, Um
Yes. Recovery, Uh, that will
cover them in and sober housing.
So there are a lot of things
that we can look at the
infrastructure is very
important. But I think this is a
critical bill. There are ways to
do. This or other states are
getting this consistent
approach. And so I hope this
task force helps move along that
line and I, with all the
experience that I've had it with
mental health parity and
addiction, so forth bills.
I'd be happy to be an advisor or
member. What have you just
wanted to note that and but
thank you for getting us to get
focused? Great. Anybody else?
Senator?
Neighbors. Thank you, Mr Chair
and senator in reading this the
only word that really jumped off
the page to me is on page three
lines, 15 and 16. The word
disparities used and so studied
the health disparities and
treatments of treatment.
Disparities of persons addicted
to alcohol. Is that
Because alcohol has
Different.
Yeah, affects a person's health
differently with respect to, uh,
their alcohol use. Is that what
we're getting at?
I didn't know why the word
disparities was used.
Mr Chair, members of committee
and Senator
Because some of their treatment
programs that we have available
are through the cultural aspect,
So we want to not necessary to
say that the some of the
programs that are out there are
just about cultural but also
other, um
Programs also treat like
prescriptions and trying to get
them off. And, um there's
there's a couple of programs out
there and back to Senator. My
Yes. This about the database is
with the alcohol tax that we
were trying to build that we
were trying to move through. We
could not get a real number on
how much we actually spend, um
on
Because of all the different
ages, addressing this, so that
needs to be consolidated and
also brought forth of how much
we actually spend.
But disparities I think is
trying to keep it open that
Um and not to say that it's just
a cultural thing, but everybody
has a different and unique way
to be treated to for this
particular issue.
Bad. I just
There. There may be some better
words.
That that could be used. Anyway.
It left me wondering. Wow.
What? What we were intending to
do with that. And Mr Chair
member Toman. You your next,
okay?
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Just a quick comment, you
know, a couple of years ago, Lfc
did a
Study that indicated that even
though we had significant
increases in, uh
Treatment of
Substances.
Alcohol abuse. There was no
improvement.
So we have a long history here,
throwing money at problems and
not showing any, uh, advance and
improving the situation, So I
fully support this, but
I hope that the task force will
Address the problem of
Coming up with why we aren't
making better use of our money.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. And I would just note
that the interim committee
Uh, found out my amazement that
the State hospital in Las Vegas,
which I had always assumed
Provided elk residential alcohol
treatment does not
It's not certified to do it.
They're trying to get certified
to do it. And so that would be
One little step that we could
take that would help members of
the committee. What's the will
of the committee on this? We
have emotion for a do pass. The
secretary will call the rule.
Senator.
Senator Hickey? Yes, Senator
Hickey votes. Yes, Senator
Maestas.
Estos votes. Yes, Senator
McCutchen Center. McKenna. Yes.
Votes? Yes, Senator. Neighbor
Senator. Neighbor votes. Yes,
Senator. Smitty's yes votes.
Yes, Senator City ALopez,
Senator Tommen.
Yes. Salman votes. Yes, Senator.
TCP? No. Yes. No votes. Yes.
Congratulations. You have a due
passi. Thank you, Mr Chairman
chasing we're gonna go to you
next.
Um, this is House Bill.
236
We have a committee sub for it.
It was already It's already a
committee sub, Okay?
It was already our committee. So
I think was it, Somebody's
committee said. So this is a
mirror. I think of the bill. We
already passed out of your
members. So I just remind you of
that.
And Senator, I mean,
representative. Glad to see you
here. Welcome.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I have with
me, Um, Katherine Christiano
from New Mexico counties and
Carter Bundy from Smith.
And as you said, you have seen
this bill. We have, um
In the process of the senator
and I have amended the bill so
that they are the same. We did
put one last amendment on the
House floor to clarify that the
Sheriff's returned to work but
also including if necessary.
there, Um, Court deputies if
they were appointed for court
security, because very often
that is what is done with the
sheriff, I mean for the court
security, So that was the only
change in the version that we
see only change. We passed on
the floor from the Senate. Yes.
Okay, Understanding and and I
thought that had already been
covered. But I guess Senator
Ream wanted to be really
representative remoter to be
We thought it might not be
necessary, but it wasn't an
unfriendly amendments. So
We agreed to that. So do either
of you want to say anything
about the bill? Okay, Catherine.
What are they paying you the big
bucks for if you're not okay, No
problem, Um, members of the
audience who's here in support
of this bill?
Oh, boy.
State police are in favor of the
courts are in favor of it.
The labor unions are in favor of
it. Who could stand against it,
But we'll see. We'll find out
who here is an opposition to
this bill.
Anybody online? Either way.
Members of the committee.
I moved to pass.
Seconded by neighbor. We already
saw it. We already
We probed through its internal
organs very closely earlier
radio Okay, members. Secretary
will call the roll. Senator
Hickey? Yes. Votes? Yes,
Senator. Masters? Yes. Medicines
votes. Yes, Senator McCutcheon
Center. McKenna. Yes, Votes?
Yes, Senator Neighbor.
Yeah. Yeah, I remember that
Senator Nyberg votes. Yes,
Senator Smitty's yes votes. Yes,
Senator Sergio Lopez, Senator
Thomann
on boats? Yes, Senator. TCP. No.
Yes. Congratulations. You have a
do pass. Hopefully Yes. Three.
Um, Senator Representing Keep
saying, Senator. I'm sorry. It's
Representative Thompson.
Senator Ivey Soto. What do you
What Bill? Are you here for? Oh,
okay. We'll get to that great.
Representative Thompson welcome.
Good to see you. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Good to see you.
This is 98 House Bill 98
accounts for disabled
eligibility. These are those
accounts at the state
treasurer's office. Correct. Go
ahead. Thank you, Mr Chair and
good morning members. So House
Bill 98 is, um, regarding the
able act, able achieving a
better life experience for folks
with disabilities.
Right now they can have no more
than $2000 in savings before
they start losing benefits. And
so this program is was a
national of federal program that
this state treasurer's office
picked up and it allows people
to save for education or home or
something and not be in risk of
losing their benefits.
So this is a very simple couple
of very simple changes. So I'm
page two line. 24 it, um
increases the age from 26 to 46
to people who are who will be
eligible for this. Um, and it's
the they must have had their
disability occur before the age
of 46 and the changes to get
more veterans. We know that
people are coming back with
injuries and
Brain injuries and that kind of
stuff, so this is to allow them
to use this and then the second
one
basically is on Page four
starting online 19 that says
that the Medicaid program will
not go on the death of a person
with a disability. The Medicaid
program will not try to pull
back the money for services that
they have provided.
And I think with that we Unless,
um and this is, um Jerry, modest
from the state treasurer's
office. Who's my expert? Very
good. Good to see you. Welcome.
Did you want to add anything?
Yes, I just wanted to Mr Chair
and members of the committee
Just clear up. Some, um There is
a misconception in the F I r
regarding the Medicaid recovery.
Um, one of the concerns was that
it would
Have more people apply for
Medicaid, however.
These folks are already on
Medicaid, so it's not going to
increase.
That, um, sought after benefit
And then the other thing is
currently the state has not been
collecting Medicaid claw back
and they have just recently
started. Um they have contract
ID. There's like an over arching
contract already that has
included a state recovery.
However.
Federally, they're not
responsible to a can or they
can't. They're 16 other states
that are not. They prohibit
Medicaid recovery from these
folks, So I just wanted to
anybody from Medicaid testified
at the hearings in the house. In
fact, the F I, R says that it's
a minimal
If not Indeterminant impact
economic impact.
Alright. Great. Thank you so
much for everything. Anybody in
the audience want to speak in
support of this bill?
Good. Thank you, Ellen. Did you
want to say something, or Jim?
Come on up. The handheld makers
the best one to you, Cube.
Um, Mr Chair and members of the
committee Ellen pants
representing the Disability
coalition, and we do support
this bill and urge your support
of it. The change from 26 to 46
for the age of onset of
disability is a change that was
made by Congress. Um, as his
sponsor, said, This is
originally a federal program New
Mexico's programs simply as
implementing it at the state
level so that part of the bill
would simply bring us into
compliance with the federal law
and not cut off anybody.
From New Mexico's program who
should be eligible under the
federal statute.
And the part about Medicaid, a
state recovery as I understand
it, our Medicaid program does
not pursue a state recovery
beyond what is required by
federal law. And this stat this
bill, if passed into law would
simply codify that so that
policy change could not be made.
So that if a future
administration wanted to take a
state recovery beyond what was
required to what was permissible
that would not be allowed, But
it wouldn't change anything in
terms of current practice in New
Mexico. Thank you for that
clarification, Jim.
Mr Mr Chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights, New Mexico In
the interest of time, I'll just
say that Ellen laid out all the
reasons why this is a great bill
and we encourage you to support
it. Thanks.
Very good.
Hmm. Anybody in opposition to
this bill?
Anybody online either for or
against, Is there anybody online
period?
For the friend of the bill,
Okay?
Um, members of the committee.
Senator of, uh, Thank you, Mr
Chair and good to see
Representative Thompson, Um, had
a question, um, very supportive
of the bill.
On Page five. How did we come up
with
2026 and 2024.
Is that because of some existing
contracts between the state and
Medicaid providers.
Mr Chairman, Senator Smitty's,
So the first one is when the
federal 40 the age of 46 becomes
law, federally. And then the
other one is just as soon as
practicable essentially
Okay. And and Mr Chair and
Representatives so but but none
of the Medicaid providers are
going to have an issue with that
effective date there. It's not
there, and I complain about
that. That's all worked out. Mr
Chairman, Senator. Actually,
this really doesn't have much to
do with Medicaid providers.
Okay, Great. Alright. Thank you.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Anybody else?
What's the will of the committee
to pass?
Seconded. I think Tillman was a
little quicker on the
Sorry. Next time you gotta you
have to be. You have to get up
pretty early to beat Senator
Tollman.
Secretary will call the roll,
Senator Hickey? Yes. Votes? Yes,
Senator. Mestas? Yes. Votes?
Yes. Sarah McCutchen. Senator
McKenna. Yes. Votes? Yes,
Senator. Neighbor Center Never
votes. Yes, Senator Smitty's
votes. Yes, Senator Syria.
Lopez. Senator Thomann? Yes.
Santa Tom. Man votes. Yes,
Senator. TCP. No yes.
By a seven in the in favor and
zero against you have a do pass
and we go to the floor of the
Senate and from there
Law is great.
Um
No Senator Ivey Soto, The
sponsors actually hear from the
house. Did you still want to
come up and present 30 to come
on up? So you're a Senate
sponsor. Excellent. Okay.
The ban on using your name on
these bills continues. I see.
And yet here I am. And here you
are, and we'll go to you. Go
ahead, Senator. Hemp Field will
go to you next after
Thank you very much. Members of
the committee, Mr Chairman.
Uh huh.
Along with Harry Garcia and
Megan Delarosa from the Military
Base Planning Committee on
behalf of hospital 302 and Let
me just turn it over to
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee. Uh,
Built mean House Bill 302
relating to military
Providing exemption from state
license your requirements, But
this bill does everything's uh
Mr Chairman.
Just give me a second. Okay
if there's childcare facility on
a base that is licensed by the
federal government exempted from
state licensure requirements.
It also expands the list of
protected classes and the Human
Rights Act, including military
status. And it, uh at space
force to the definitions of
armed forces throughout the
statutes. Space force. Forget
about them. Yes, absolutely. We
often do. Mhm. So why should we
support this Bill?
representative, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. I have
a have a
A letter here from the
Department of Defense.
And they are 100% behind it,
because what's happening there
is about 22,000 enlisted people
here in New Mexico and on their
basis and about 20,000 spouses.
Plus the kids.
And what's happening is the
daycare they need provided.
Is not sufficient and and the
military providing, uh,
Child care.
And they're experts at this
stuff, and, uh, that will be one
good part and the people that
are providing childcare cannot
provide child care.
For people that are not in the
military like the kids that are
on the military.
All they can do is provide for
for the service members and
their kids You cannot provide
for kids that are not
Involved in the service in the
military.
So in other words, Miss German
They cannot come in and open
daycare centers and take
business away from other people.
they have to provide just
strictly for military. So the F
I, R. Seemed to indicate that
really childhood department is
in favor of this. They have no
problem with this. That's
correct. Okay, good. Did you
want to add anything?
Add, Um my name is Megan
Delarosa, executive director of
Kirtland Partnership and also
representing military based
planning Commission today, and
we do have 3000 active members
of US space force stationed on
Kirtland, and we're currently
bringing in Delta 11, which will
add another 300, so we're
constantly growing So d O d
priorities help us.
Grow emperors.
Alright?
Anything else, Senator anybody I
would just add as a tactical
matter. The space force is
really a core.
However.
It was called the forest, so
we're going to leave it as a
force, but it's really a core.
They were influenced by the
movie. I think I think they were
Yes, Representative Mr Chairman
is right now. I think there's
3000 members. Yeah, Spaceport
here in New Mexico. That's good,
including officers.
And I won't even ask what Delta
nine is. We don't need to get
into their members really
uniform. Anybody here in favor
of this bill?
Bob, you were here for a long
time yesterday wanting to say
anything. Do you want to add
anything?
Mr Carroll.
Yes. Uh, my name is Bob Carol.
Remember the veterans and
military families Caucus support
HP 302 because it benefits the
families of military service
members as recommended.
Very good. Thank you. Anybody
else? We have some online and
they've been waiting and
We don't get too many online
comments, so we'll go ahead and
take them.
Um Kelly May Douglas.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly May Douglas,
representing the Department of
Defense here to provide comments
and support of the policy
changes addressed with within
house Bill 302. Taking care of
our people remains the top
priority for the secretary of
defense and is at the center of
our national defense strategy.
The policy changes expressed
within this legislation support
our focus on ensuring a high
quality of life for those
Who serve our country, including
their families and New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Miss Douglas. How
about Raymond Mondragon? Is he
here or online?
Online.
Okay. He signed up to give
testimony. But apparently he got
delayed members of the
committee. Senator McKenna moved
motion for a dupe as
Is there a second?
Second from Ortiz de Pino.
Discussion. Thank you, Senator
Maestas. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, President Garcia,
Center, Every subduction lady
the so representative Garcia
when you were saying a military
childcare agency cannot serve
non
Military personnel. What point
are you trying to make? Are we
changing that or that's just the
reality, and we just want to
deal with that reality.
Senator it the military
They don't want to bring him
childcare providers that's gonna
take from somebody else.
This is just to provide child.
This is an exemption under
licensing.
Understanding Mexico they don't
have to re license.
And they don't want to come in,
Uh,
And provide child care for
people that are not in the
military. The kids just strictly
for military involved, people.
Okay, Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Representative Soul.
Does this bill make them
automatically licensed or or
specifies that they don't need a
state license? Nor Mr Mr
Chairman and senator, these
people, we will be licensed by
Department of Defense.
Now That's what we're doing is
just the rules. They don't have
to re license to the state of
New Mexico. Okay, Okay. Thank
you, Mr Chairman,
Representative, so they because
they are licensed by the federal
government. They do not need to
be licensed by the state of
Mexico. What we're trying to do,
Mr Chairman, Correct.
That's why the senator is it is
necessary. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Senator neighborhood.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator and representative
I really like the
The first part and the last part
creating a protected class.
Based on military status, which
is a very expansive definition.
Causes some problems. I think
So we're in this bill.
We're
Allowing some Weissinger issues
to be taken care of, which is
great.
Word we're adding, uh, you know
some definitions, which is
great. But then the
The bulk of this thing.
Is a human rights act.
And at the military status as
one of the protected classes
under that act.
Um, when you define military
status on page 12 lines, one
through five
We have
Open this up.
Where a lot of people all within
that class and I'll just
And I'll tell you I'll be one of
them.
Military status means a person's
active membership in the armed
Forces or state Defense force or
being a veteran in the armed
forces or state Defense force
and includes a spouse or child
of an active member or veteran
of the armed forces or state
Defense force.
My father was a veteran. So I
assume under this definition
I am now.
In the protected class under the
Human Rights Act, and that may
not be your objective, but I
think you get it there and
Yeah.
If we're gonna do this, why do
we even have a human rights act?
I mean, basically
That net is getting so why that
virtually everybody's in it.
Um, And that's not the intent of
that act, and it's certainly I
doubt it's your intent, either.
I'm not going to put words in
your mouth, but
My question, Mr Chair, Senator
and representative.
For this bill, Why would we
include that within what seemed
to be a very straightforward and
simple
Simple built to to allow a
couple of things.
But with the
Human Rights Act.
You're taking this place is that
I don't think anybody ever
intends.
Senator. Certainly Mr Chairman.
Senator, I would. First of all,
let me affirm that I think
you're special.
Yeah,
Yeah. 100 111 that would
disagree with you Fitted. Uh
but, uh, the lawsuit will say
that you're special, too.
Hopefully the, uh and and the in
in all seriousness the You know
what? What? We're what what the
Pentagon is concerned about.
Is, is that, uh, that there are
there are situations where where
people's
Service in the military.
Uh um.
Ends up becoming an inhibitor to
certain jobs.
Ah, and, uh and, uh, they're
veterans status sometimes
becomes an inhibitor.
Certain jobs and and and that's
what the Pentagon's interest is.
And and having this recognized
as a protected class.
It's it's It's not in terms of
suggesting that anybody who's
ever been a child of a veteran
can ever be fired from a job.
Um and and in fact, uh,
Senator and and
Mr Chairman and Senator Nyberg.
Ah ah!
If if you're to run into trouble
there at Hinkle, I can't imagine
why you ever would. But if if
you're never run trouble at
Hinkle, I doubt that this would
ever come into play. Because
because you you don't. Uh, um,
identify yourself openly as a
As a member of, uh
A military family.
Um, you don't put yourself out
there in that manner and and
that would not be the basis.
For any issues that would be
coming up.
So, so that would not be the
reason. But if that were to be
the reason
That's the interest that the
that the
Again.
Mr. Chair and Center, Right? I
just
I mean, I'd love to support
this, but
Okay, We're expanding. Uh, law
well beyond, uh what I think the
intentions ever were.
I guess.
I was gonna say, are we are we
being Ivey Soto? When? With the
insertion of this part in the
Basically two very simple,
simple parts, and that aspect of
it, I think complicates
The debate that complicates the
discussion and complicates a lot
of things and other
That act and adding some other
of the guess.
Other of the
People that fall in those
categories. They've been
Debated at length, whether they
should or shouldn't and and this
and that, but
I'm not sure we have even the
time to engage in that debate,
but
Military status is defined in a
very broad fashion, and, uh
It's gonna be tough for me to
meet of support it with with
that language, So okay. Thank
you. Mr. Chair. Senator Schmid's
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Um,
Senator, Representative Garcia,
um, to to piggyback on that I'm
on page 13, and I want to
explore that.
Concept with you.
Um And I'm in that, uh
subsection D there.
So let me just kind of read
this. There's a lot of
Clauses in here, but I'm gonna
just going to kind of read this.
So it's going to say if if any
employer prints and
advertisement that specifies
Race.
We don't want to do that, right?
We don't want to say we really
like hiring this race at our
Firm, right. We don't want to do
that.
Well, let's do that with
military now.
Any employer that wants to print
advertisement to specify
military status.
What if an employer says we're
proud of hiring veterans and we
encourage veterans to apply?
I think our society is pretty
good with that. There's a pizza
place that I like to go to this
Chicago pizza place on
Your bank in Wyoming. I think,
and they've got all the veterans
stuff. They say we like to hire
veterans. We like to give
veterans discounts and all these
things. Um and and so and I'm a
protected class. I've got a U s
a credit card. They give me a
discount and all that.
But I think that could actually
create a problem. Um, I think we
need I don't have a problem with
advertising.
Toward veterans and saying,
We're a veteran.
Friendly place, but once again
flip that around with race What
did you say? We're proud of
hiring.
You know, X Ray, You know we're
proud of hiring white people.
Black people has been I mean,
You know, you don't see that.
And so I think just to echo. Um
Doctor, doctor neighbor.
There are hybrids concerns. I do
think we actually create some
problems and I want to hear a
little bit more. If you agree
with me and and subsection D.
Um
Premature. Did you want to
respond? Yeah, I would like to
respond, actually, and and and
actually, by way of response,
But I'd like to suggest if I may
Is is that you give us just a
moment go onto the next bill.
Oh, no, You're not going to try
to amend this.
Is that what you were gonna
suggest there would be 10 amount
to killing it. I think we could
just
I think we might have to go back
for we have just enough time to
do it. Concurrent. One minute.
Oh, sorry. Sorry. I think I
think we'll just have time to do
it.
Okay, let's go into the next
Bill. Representative Serato.
Let's do you this is, um
Public Finance Accountability
Act. Thank you, please. If
Senator Ivey Soto, if you move
out into the hallway to do that,
or some of the place
Thank you.
271
Go ahead. Welcome. First of all,
Welcome again. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you, Senators.
So we have house Bill 271, which
is the public Accountant Finance
Accountability Act, and it
effectively does two things. It
codifies the executive order
that requires fiscal agents to
be up to date with their audits.
Uh, before they receive any
capital outlay and the number
two it creates the Public
Finance Accountability Fund,
which would then allow the
auditor's office to support
entities that might be that
might not be in compliance with
the act acted ensure
Is that they're up to date.
As we all know, there's more
than $3 billion in unencumbered
capital outlay because they
can't get it working in our
communities, and this act
effectively tries to bring that
together. It ensures that that
money can get spent right away.
The last year, they had a
special appropriation for about
$500,000 so that they could
start this program. They really
focused on small local bodies.
Kia's, um you know, land grants
these smaller groups that have a
hard time getting an auditor out
to their communities to do this
work.
And they were able to pull these
resources together and get them
the help they needed. They
without $500,000, they were able
to get $2.4 million in capital
outlay in the community for Roo
I about 381%. So the statute
that says they have to be sorry
that the executive order that
says they have to be up to date
has been in place since 2013 and
under both.
Republican and Democratic
governor, just as a matter of
responsibility, and so what this
does is just puts that into law
but also gives the auditor the
ability to assist these public
entities. With that being said.
My expert today is Christopher
Hall with the auditor's office.
Um I think that we stand for
questions.
Okay. Good. I was at the press
conference when, uh, Auditor,
Maestas said announced the
executive order and I thought it
was a great idea, then I think
it's a great idea now.
And I understand you have the
money in House Bill two.
Uh, Mr Chairman that the speaker
Mr Chairman Senators? Yes,
that's correct.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this bill?
Anybody in the audience against
this bill? Anybody online?
Members of the committee. What's
your interest in this? Uh, we
have a motion for a do pass
Seconded by Senator Tollman
questions, Senator. My stuff.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you, representative
bringing the stadium.
I think
I think it belongs in statute as
opposed to an executive order. I
think
I think
One of my tasks. Mr Chairman is
getting money out the door and
into shovel. You know what's
called Shovel ready projects
were sitting on mountains of
cash that have been
appropriated, but not
Utilized in the ground. And so
that executive order, although
Message of the tart prohibited
projects from being built and so
Um
I don't know if there's a nexus
between prohibiting a particular
project and lighting a fire
under a particular governmental
entity.
Um I don't know if that nexus
exists.
But my concern is what, um
Is this going to prohibit
projects from being built? And
so if there are younger there
are I'm sorry. Smaller
government entities.
Whether we have all kinds of
these
Different soil Conservancy
district, all kinds of different
local government entities
throughout the state. Um
Is there a plan to provide
accounting services for these
entities? That's part of the
bill. Go ahead.
Go ahead.
Mr Chairman, Senator. Yes, there
is And in fact we've as she
already cleared up over $2
million of
Capital outlay funding that was
being withheld under the
executive order by
Clustering these entities in
sending out, uh, accounting
services to them. So we are. We
are active in that and plan to
continue that to clear this up.
It's both
I guess, carrot and stick. If
you would. It's it's Let's
Strengthen the compliance
requirements but also help
people with the path to get in
compliance so they can get that
money in the ground as you say.
Mr Sherman and Senator if I may
add, it also ensures that the
public knows that we are being
accountable to them, and we're
putting these in responsible
hands. There are pieces to this
legislation, in particular that
on pages three and four they
talk about when the grand team
may not be in have ever have a
solid audit, um, that there are
things that both the department
of the can do.
Finance Authority went into the
administration diva can do, Um,
they can help them remedy that
and also give them special
provisions, so it really doesn't
give them the flexibility they
need to ensure this money is
moving as quickly as possible,
but in a responsible manner.
So on the bottom of Page four,
you've got that section there be
Talks about make a grant to a
grantee.
That's where the fund that has
been created with a million
dollars in House Bill two.
1 million
We have the 1 million in House
Bill two would would make make
it possible for those grants A
for an auditor to work with
them.
All right. Thank you know,
because I know that the the the
inclination, Mr German
In state local government is to
is to
To figure out a reason why these
things shouldn't happen, and
hopefully this will change the
culture, too.
So that folks in the state say,
Let's make it happen the door.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. News neighbor.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh,
Mr Gerin represents the one
question I had is, do we not
already have accountability with
respect to the capital projects?
Mr Chair. Thank you, Senator.
That's it's already a executive
order that is in place to expect
this. This just codifies it into
statues.
But I mean, even absently
executive order. Do we not have
Mechanisms for accountability of
all government projects.
Mr Holmes.
If I may.
Chairman, Mr Senator, Um
We do, but we don't and I'll
explain that we There are laws
on the books that say
That audience have to be in and
if they're not, they are as
currently situated in the way
the funds are commingled
unenforceable. It's basically
withholding grt and you can't
withhold somebody else's
somebody's own grt from now.
So really the only active teeth
for the Audit act right now is
in fact, this executive order
and it's what is the main thing
that helps
incentivize entities to be
compliant with the Audit Act. I
would
Well, I'm in. I'm in favor of
the bill. Don't get me wrong,
but it just seemed odd to me
that here we are in 2024 and
have we don't have
Any mechanism for for
accountability, or that's kind
of how I read it as well.
Surely we have to have
accountability. We have an
entire department. That's that.
That's an elected official
That's supposed to be making
sure that government entities
are accountable to the citizens
of the state. And so it just
struck me as on but correct me
if I'm wrong, but I think the
majority of the governmental
entities involved in this
Will be not the municipalities.
But the
That's a key associations. The
land grants the water systems,
those kind of quasi I mean, they
are fully governmental, but they
don't really have the resources
to do good audits. That's that's
the point of any other
discussion.
We have a motion and a second.
Secretary will call the rule,
Senator Hickey, Senator Hickey
votes Yes. And her master s.
s center Masters votes. Yes,
Senator McCutchen. Senator
McKenna. Yes, Votes? Yes,
Senator. Neighbor Senator Never
votes. Yes, Center. Smitty's
media's votes. Yes, Senator
Silvia Lopez. Senator Thomann?
Yes. Explain my vote.
Sarah Thomond votes. Yes,
Senator TCP now? Yes, Senator
Tollman to explain his folks.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Real quick,
say support this, but I wouldn't
want anybody to think that
This is gonna make a substantial
difference in reducing our $5.5
billion reserve in the capital
lately. Fun. Thank you.
Vote of seven in the
affirmative. Zero in the
negative you have to pass
committee and I see the 302
contingent or back you have you
come up with a
Resolution representative and
Senator, we have your, uh
Excellency is fine your
chairmanship.
So what are the reasons why it's
good to take a moment to read?
Before doing something
completely on the fly.
Is that you realize that it's
actually done correctly in the
bill, and there's nobody need
for an amendment. Uh, so in a
We're talking about an employer
unless based on the bottom fied.
Special qualification, rather
etcetera provisions to refuse to
hire. That's we we want to
prohibit refusing to hire
somebody based on military
labor organizations in what page
are you working on? 1212?
Be a labor organization to
exclude a person well or expel a
person. We want to prohibit
labor organizations from
refusing to admit or expelling
person based on military status.
See Labor Organization or Joint
Apprenticeship committee to
refuse to admit or employ a
person what we want to stop them
from refusing to
Employed person or admit
somebody based on military
status.
D
Uh,
To print circulate or Cosby
printed.
Any limitation, specification or
discrimination.
Based on
Ah!
Military status. These are the
ads that would be put out.
That's right, And that's a
that's a but but that's a
limitation or discrimination.
Yeah, well, we wanted we We We
do want to private that he would
be refused to list and properly
classified for employment or
refer a person for employment
and unknown available job. Well,
we do want to prohibit that.
Under eat and and on, So
actually, no, this is this is
properly this is in the proper
context. And as we've gone over
each of those, some of them, you
just have to go through and read
through it and dissect the
subsection carefully because of
all the different descriptors
that are in there, you just have
to go through and do the
dissection. You're basically
saying in the bill.
It would be illegal to
discriminate against somebody.
If the reason you're
discriminating against them is
They're a military brat. Correct
is either they their military
status or their familiar
Familial military staffs.
Correct.
And I think that's that's what
you want to do, and it sounds
like a pretty good senator.
Naive, But you're the one that
had raised the question. Does
that help you? Correct? That is,
that is that is the intent of
the bill and so and so we are
comfortable with the language as
it is with that, Except I think,
Senator Schmitt. When you left
Senator Schmitt, he still had
the floor. I'm sorry. I didn't
mean to run over you with that.
Except I think, Senator Schmitt
when you left, Senator Schmitt,
he still had the floor. I'm
sorry. I didn't mean to run over
you with
your moment at which she says
Okay, Great. Thank you for the
explanation.
And Mr Chair, Senator
representative. Yeah, and I'm
tracking with you. And almost
all of it. I'm still on that
paragraph. D if it only said
limitation or discrimination,
right? And certainly if it just
said discrimination. Yes.
absolutely. Nobody wants to
discriminate, but I'm still
stuck on specification. You
know, an employer that wants to
do a special advertisement
that's pro veteran.
Um
You know, I don't think
obviously that's not the intent
of the bill. But the way I'm
still reading, that is they are
not allowed to specify right.
Like once again. I'm back to the
same point. We're not going to
allow a pizza business to
specify on employment ads We
want
A certain race. That's good. We
don't want that right. That's
existing law. But now we're
going to say Well, you can't do
a specific ad that we want to
encourage veterans to work here.
You know, I go to that pizza
shop because one of the reasons
I mean, it has good pizza, but
because I like to support
veteran on businesses, and
they've got all these and
they've got all these like we
want. We want veterans we want
come and apply. I mean, so I
still think we're capturing
them.
And in paragraph D and I could
create a problem is is all I'm
saying No. Right here. You're an
attorney, but it does have the
phrase I don't know. It's based
on the bona fide occupational
occupation.
Okay. Qualification. That's up
above on page 12 were looking on
page 13. Now I was looking on
page 14 fortune. Yes, that same
Yeah, same language,
It says if you want to hire a
veteran, because you you're
working with veterans correct do
that.
Correct.
Right?
Right. And so, Mr Chair and
senators, so I would go to the
case of religion. So if you're
you're
And this is just in general. I
know this may not apply to the
bill, but the general concept of
if you're Catholic school and
you want to hire Catholic
teachers, right? I mean, that's
but you know the primary purpose
of that businesses to sell pizza
so
You know, and they're going to
be able to hire anybody. It's
not that they're a veteran
services agency.
Certainly, and and and and Mr
Chairman, Center. Speed is what
I will. What I will tell you is
that
Well, religion is here. Um,
there are many businesses in New
Mexico.
That
Uh, our pizza places or
businesses.
That have
Across
Or a dove.
On there.
As part of their logo.
Ah ah, and let people know that
they are Christians.
That is a specification in that
context specification.
That is not considered to be a
violation of human wrong.
Frankly, to take
Take that term specification.
To its degree it would be, I
suppose.
Based on national origin. It
would create a violation of the
Human Rights Act Advertising
Italian restaurant.
Um
What, But But Mr Cation in that
contact is a specification in
the negative context of
specification, Okay, because
it's between limitations
specification discrimination.
Specification in the negative
context of specification.
Okay, Mr Chair and Center. I'll,
um
You know?
Hearing your perspective. You're
saying you're still good with
it? Having this discussion I
made
I don't know if my colleague
next door may have some comments
as an attorney, I'm still not
totally convinced. But I It
sounds like you guys have looked
at it and you say you're good
with it, but I just wanted to
obviously make sure the intent
of the bill is being satisfied
So absolutely Mr Standish
meetings. We also when we
started out, we did check with
the Pentagon. Actually, did you
really actually did we did we
did check with the Pentagon.
There are comfortable with this
language. What? Ryan, That's
great, Senator neighbor. We we
have. We have round walls. They
have
Four walls and a spare
Senator. Never ridges that
satisfy your concern.
Um, Mr Chair. It, uh,
I'm glad you address the issue.
I just I think the human rights
Act ought to be pretty, uh,
narrow.
We are making a pretty big
expansion to the Human Rights
Act and
I guess my one concern and I
think I know the answer to this,
but I asked it anyway, Mr Chair
and Senator
If Albuquerque Police Department
one of the higher policemen.
And there is an MP at Kirtland
Air Force Base.
That
I would like to apply for the
job.
But because of the
Demands of the Albuquerque
Police Department, which is
really a 24 hour job. If you
really look at it.
They can't hire somebody who
already has a job as an MP on
Kirtland Air Force Base because
of two things are going to
conflict.
So it seems to me that's the
Albuquerque Police Department.
Would discriminate and not hire
that individual because of their
military status and in my mind
That's appropriate because that
person can't commit to two
Masters.
You can't be on call at a p d 24
hours a day and still be on call
24 hours a day at curling Air
Force base.
Yep, I think I understand what
you're gonna say. But, uh
Does that prohibit?
That type of discrimination.
Mr Chairman, and remember, it
does not because that's that's
where you have to be fo Q part
of the BF oq.
Is is scheduled
What is it? B f l Q Modified
occupational qualification.
Which is which is a term of art
that is used in employment law.
And the term of art that's used
in employment law, among other
things, it's it's a It's Trevor
That's used in e E. O. C. Ah,
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission law, uh, federal
discrimination law, and that's
that's where initially came out.
Uh, from U. S. Supreme Court
cases in terms of
nondiscrimination versus
discrimination and and whether
or not something is an actual
bonafide artificial
qualification or not, and
whether you can use that as a
discriminator discriminating
factor, And in this particular
case, the ability to show up to
work.
Is a bonafide occupational
qualification.
It would have played even if he
was working for the isotopes. As
a security guard. He's in and
wasn't available at times. That
is absolutely defense status is
not the military status. It's
the scheduling status.
Yeah. Mr Chair and Senator, I'll
throw 11 other thing out at you.
If you do this
And you
Don't allow discrimination based
on military status.
Will an employer be able to say
we have a preference for
veterans? That's kind of
actually doing the opposite.
It's kind of Smitty's position.
Because you can't you can. If
you add this you you can't
discriminate based on military
status, which means
You possibly may not be able to
give a veteran preference in
hiring
So Miss Sherman and Senator
Albert All of the All of the
provisions are negative
prohibitions.
I will note. For example, in the
procurement code, we have a
veterans reference.
That is allowed in the
procurement code.
I don't think this obviates the
veterans preference.
And the procurement code in
terms of adding extra points to
an RFP request for also
So, uh, so I do understand the
point that you're making.
I don't. I don't think it I
don't think it goes down.
I think you'll find some
plaintiffs lawyers challenge
that.
Okay. Thank you. Mr. Yeah. Good
point. Senator Maestas. Quickly.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I didn't
bring this up because we ended
up
But, um, this this does
contradict the current Human
Rights Act.
Um And so we have to ask
ourselves. Do we want to do
that? I think, um
When we talk about when we talk
about, um, sexual orientation
when we talk about sexual or
gender, identity, gender, we
don't say their kids.
I mean and so
But we're it does it does?
Where it is consistent in my
opinion is with, um
Is with the
Pregnancy status. You know, I
mean, like, you're five months
pregnant. I don't want to hire
you because you know you're
gonna leave in four months or
whatever so I can see so I want
to learn more about existing
discrimination against against
Military personnel. One is
You might leave your husband
might leave your wife might
leave.
Um
But if you're an adult child of
a military person, I just don't
see it so And then I asked
myself how can I minor child
A military person B.
Unlawfully discriminated
against. So, um
And then I also believe that if
this were to become law an
employer can cannot have a
little boxing.
Do you have prior military
service? I think this would
outlaw that.
So then that begs the question
in my opinions.
There may be military personnel
who discriminate against not on,
you know, not unlawfully but
unjustly.
But I believe Miller former
military personnel are
benefiting.
Under current societal norms,
and and so will this
Take that away.
Um, because I don't believe
there's a
I think there's a scientific
justification for a 10% bump on
an RFP to build roads.
But there is it's good law, and
no one's challenged it. Um,
anyway, I just don't think it
should apply to a child.
Or a spouse of a veteran, but it
should apply to a spouse of a
current person.
I just don't see. I just don't
see it.
But, um
That's what the Pentagon wants.
But I think you know the issue
is that that there've been
existing. There've been
incidents where people who
applied for jobs were denied
them because they were married
to somebody living on the base.
And God only knows how quickly
they'll be how long they'll be
able to be there. So your status
as a member of the military
ruled you out from
consideration, and that's what
they're concerned, agree. But
this this definition of military
status includes spouses of
military veterans, not active
duty.
And so
You know if your husband or wife
is 2030 years removed from the
military, how
How does that play out in the
real world? It's it's
It's a wonderful power grab.
Um
But let's acknowledge what it
is.
Anybody else?
We have a motion from Senator
McKenna and I seconded it.
There's no affiliate discussion.
We'll go ahead and take a vote.
Senator Hickey, Senator Hickey
votes Yes, Senator Maestas? Yes.
Masters votes. Yes, Senator
McCutchen. Senator McKenna. Yes,
Sara McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Neighbor? Yes. Internet reports.
Yes, Center. Smitty's
Meters votes now senator City of
Lopez Senator Tillman Yes. Hotel
Moon votes? Yes, Senator. TCP.
No. Yes. No votes. Yes.
6 to 6 in the affirmative. One
in the negative, you have to do
pass.
And we're gonna go. Senator
Hickey, can you present the
other one and and hang on? We
may squeeze you in still for
your second one representative.
One. Good. Thank you. We want to
get this, uh, pharmacy provider
reimbursement straightened out
HB 165.
Harry, don't go away.
165 house Bill 165
Pharmaceuticals. This is the
Neighborhood Pharmacy Act.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'm
filling in for house folks who
can't be here at the moment to
introduce this bill and I have
my experts with me. Ah, and
essentially, the crux of the
matter is we are rapidly losing
our independent pharmacists,
particularly in rural areas in
the state.
And they
You've heard me talk multiple
times about the games of PBMs
play and how they hurt them
before you go. Caucus has been
canceled. So you've got another
half hour. We've got another
half hour.
So somebody please tell
representative Garcia, he
doesn't have to leave.
That's good. Go ahead.
Thank you. Um And so what This
bill? Essentially does. I'm
going to have to leave it mostly
to the experts, but I believe
that it assures that there's a
appropriate Medicaid filling
fees in order to make up for the
losses that are coming through
the the PBM actions also, uh, I
will say if you recall during
the summer
Mr Chair in the L. H. H s. We
did hear about these issues with
independent pharmacies and in
the research we commissioned
which I have finally received
and I'll be sending out. We did
address some of this issue,
although that's not
Here in this bill the day but
again, this is a critical issue
that we need to take some
action, on least setting
direction and with that, I'll
turn it over to my expert.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
representative Terra had a meal.
I'm here today from rural New
Mexico supporting this bill
Terribly important for a rural
communities. Um
Two years ago, we had 70
pharmaceutical companies, small
private ones, and today we have
45 so imperative that we support
our rural communities. Thank you
for having us here today. Thank
you, Representative. I'm sorry.
I didn't recognize you. And and
And you're You are one of the
prime sponsors of this. Thank
you. Did you want to add
anything? Mr. Thompson? Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee of My Name's Jason
Thompson. I'm the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
Pharmacy Business Council and
also here representing American
pharmacies or the
Representative groups for the
independent community based
pharmacies here in Mexico. Um
and I'm here to answer any
questions. Senator Hickey made
it out pretty well.
I'll make it brief. This is
mainly around fairness in
dispensing fees and Medicaid
reimbursements. The intent of
this bill will raise the current
reimbursements rates up to a
level that is equal no less than
the P for service rate, which
will help these pharmacies
immensely basically helped them
with ever increasing costs of
doing business.
But that will stand for
questions.
Okay, Great.
An industrial, then the bill
would increase the
Prescription. The that you're
That pharmacists received.
Does it only for years, or is it
for all the pharmacists?
Mr Chairman, Committee members.
that will be mainly solely for
the independent community based
pharmacies not to change.
Mr Chairman, That's correct.
Let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
this bill?
Okay, Mr. Let's see if those of
you who lined up come on up and
and say a few words.
There's a handheld mic there
that I think is the best one to
use.
There It is. Right over there.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Dale
Tinker Representation.
Um, we stand in support of this
bill.
Um, as as you may have noticed,
it's been them down quite a bit
and what's left is critical
statutory requirement that
Medicaid match the
Be for service rate.
Under the M C o programs is
critical to
And Ken Ewing, our community
pharmacies as I mentioned in
another committee when I started
for pharmacists 35 years ago,
there were 100 and 50.
And now we're about 50.
So we've lost quite a few.
Anything that can be done to
support those, um working. Thank
you, Dale.
Whatever it may be. John
Thompson registered lobbyists
for American pharmacies in
Mexico Pharmacy Business
Council. One thing that I felt
it imperative to relate as I
just left, there were extremely
excited that the bill had missed
that pharmacy will close and
somebody gets sick. They're the
ones that fill it.
We need community based
pharmacies and the Medicaid
code, so it is not for larger
chains or out of states
primarily there in rural areas
and in many rural areas, they
are frontline and perhaps the
only health care in some of
those areas. It is imperative
that we recognize
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Kim
Elegant. I'm the registered
lobbyist for Capital Rx.
Capital, or X is a full service
ppm and pharmacy benefit manager
that serves Presbyterian Health
plan.
Transparency and accountability
or embedded in the capital acts
are ex business model.
Capital Rx aims to change how
prescription drugs are priced.
And how patients are cared for
this bill makes a positive step
forward and doing that, and I
want to thank you. Thank you,
Kim.
Anybody opposed to this here in
the audience?
Is anybody from Medicaid here?
And we have one person on
online. Um, speaking in support
of HB 165 Ashley safer.
Yes, Mr Chair. Thank you. So
much for hearing us. Ladies and
gentlemen of the committee. My
name is Ashley. Steve Martin. I
own character drug. Um, one of
the last of two independent
pharmacies and San Juan County
and we are in grave need of this
to be passed this session. I
appreciate you hearing it and
being so prompt at getting us
scheduled. I can't tell you how
much it means to us to have this
done. Thank you very much.
Thank you. And also Kirk Urby is
on.
On the on the zoom call.
Hello? Yes, I'm with Lowell's
pharmacy and artificial New
Mexico and and this is very
important to to us. I side with
actually completely
Great. Thank you so much.
Members of the committee.
Senator Schmid's
Thank you.
Mr Chair and senator very happy
to support the bill. Just a
couple of comments. Um
Maybe a question.
Let me start with the question.
When we this is going to help
through Medicaid.
Um
Has has it been considered.
What insurance companies and or
PBMs could do.
In response to this bill. In
other words, are they going to
Are they? Are they going to
potentially shift things on the
private insurers side?
To recoup costs or has that ever
come up or are you
Uh, Mr Chair and and Senator.
I'm always concerned of what
PBMs will do whenever there's a
tube. They're they're increasing
margins every year that they do
that is going to have to be
addressed through a PBM focused
bill that basically cuts off the
loop cuts off the escape hatch
is that they have for things
like this.
Um so I can't. I can't answer
for them. Uh, but that's
certainly has been their
behavior in the past. I do note,
however, that the CEO is here
contracted through Medicaid and
the money is in the Medicaid.
and so they have to pay it. But
if you'll bear with me well, you
won't I guess, but, um, I've
consulted this summer on what
we're trying to do with the PBM
so that we not only cut off
these escape routes
For them that cut off a number
of other things are trying to do
to take money out of our
pockets. Did you enter? Respond
represent?
Ah, Mr Chair and Senator, I
think the most impactful
statement was from a
pharmaceuticals, small rural
pharmacies that indicated that
this was a Medicaid provisions,
and it was simply to bring them
to baseline and, um and I think
that that was the most impactful
statement. They just
I want to hold where they're at.
And, uh And and I agree with the
senator Working and Mr Chair,
Senator, Um
I guess I would. And I think it
escape hatches, the exact kind
of metaphor I was looking for,
and that's perfect.
Um, because I do always worry
about that. You know, Um
Regulation is a commodity for
big business for big
corporations. It's not a
commodity for you guys, and we
have to always consider that the
more we
We kind of regulate, the more we
disproportionately affect
Kind of smaller community on
folks. And I think it it
broadens the discussion, which
I'm not going to take the time
to get into about G R T reform
and all the all the policies
that I think we we have in New
Mexico that harms small business
And you all are no exception.
Um, just a couple of other
things. Um
You know pharmacies.
Um, a lot of pharmacies,
especially hospitals and
pharmacies have really made they
make a ton of money because no
one knows the prices and they
have
500% markup is 1000 because once
again just gonna bang this drum
as long as I can for a couple
more days, they would be
embarrassed they would be
absolutely shamed.
And embarrassed into
nonexistence if the public knew
The mark ups that some
pharmacies are are charging.
And so, but it's written into
our state law s a 27-2 e dash
too. It is illegal to for hs D
or any even contractors of HST
to release prescription drug
manufacturer prices.
And and this is how this is how
the insulin problem came on
board because of completely
Abjectly criminal behavior by
drug manufacturers and their
parallel pricing schemes once
again because we disenfranchised
the diabetics that needed the
medicine because they didn't
know what they're buying.
Drug manufacturers were able to
say, Hey, you're gonna raise
your price that would normally
make me competitive in a free
market, right? Because I've got
an equally qualified product
with a lower price. But what did
they do? They said, Well, People
don't know our prices, so we're
going to just raise our prices
to the same as our competitor,
and we're both going to get
filthy rich and no one will ever
know our prices.
So my I'm very happy to support
the bill. But when we have in
our law that we were not going
to allow people to disclose drug
manufacturers prices, that's the
that's the root cause problem
and it's right here in our state
statute.
And and somehow, drug
manufacturers have convinced
people that that's a trade
secret. That's ridiculous. Is
that a trade secret? How much
How much? You know Yeti charges
for these, uh, insulated things
or how much Del you know charges
for this computer? No.
Prices are not trade secrets,
and so, um, anyway, just just to
bang that drum that that's
that's the root cause problem
here. I think we we've got too
much regulation. We don't have a
small, business friendly state
and we do not know the prices of
the drug manufacturers and that
that's gotta end. It's gotta
end. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Smitty's
Senator Masters. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you Represent. Thank you,
Senator. Gentlemen. Mr. Trump's
in the No. That was a great
comments. Enter the so real
quick on the back page page for
the appropriation was that
stripped out in earlier
committees.
Mr Chairman, Senator Masters.
That's correct. Okay, great and
did that any success in hospital
two with the verse to the
funding.
Mr Chairman, Senator, It's our
understanding is that the the
Rays and the dispensing fee is
built into the current Medicaid
budget for turquoise care once
it starts in July. 1st
Fantastic. No great work.
Congratulations. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Any other discussion. It's the
will of the committee. We have a
motion for a do pass from
Senator Hickey. What's the will
of the committee Any? Is there a
2nd 2nd seconded by Senator my
estas?
Any other discussion Secretary
will call the rule, Senator
Hickey. Senator Yes, Senator Mr
Any other discussion Secretary
will call the rule. Senator
Hickey. Senator Yes, Senator.
Myostatin Masters votes. Yes,
Senator McCutcheon Senator
McKenna. Yes. Sara McKenna
votes. Yes, Senator. Neighbor
Center. Neighbor votes. Yes,
Senator. Speedy's enthusiastic,
Yes. Senators. Movies, votes.
Yes, Senator said you, Lopez,
Senator Tollman.
Yes. My votes. Yes, Senator.
TCP? No! Yes. No Vote. Yes. So
congratulations represented by
the 7 to 0 vote you have to do
pass on
five. So then
Okay. Well, now do Senate House
Bill 298.
Service members Suicide
prevention
Representatives Alkon and Garcia
again. Welcome back
representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman to my
country. I mean, representative
not making today and I hope it's
easier this one in the last one
Anyway, Mr German members of the
committee, uh,
I would build 298 as amended
return to veterans enhancing the
service members of veterans
Suicide Prevention Act within
the Veterans Services Department
Act, providing department
responsibility to raise
awareness regardless suicides.
Well, Mr Chairman, what's
happening in New Mexico?
Right now, with the second
highest suicide rates in the in
the country.
On our veterans, and that's what
we brought this year, but it is
just to make awareness to the
department and give him better
tools for the two boxes. We can
address the issues that we're
having our veterans without I
stand for questions. Okay with
that we'll go to the audience.
Is there anyone here in support
of this bill?
Yes. Did you want to come up and
speak on it?
We're on.
Senator Silvia Lopez were on 298
house built in 98.
My name is Frank Smith. I'm a
member of the service members,
veterans and family.
Caucus. We support HB 298
suicide in months service
suicide among service members,
veterans and their families is a
public health and national
security crisis.
The suicide rate among veterans
is almost twice the national
average.
And it's even worse here in New
Mexico, with a suicide veterans
rate is over 2.5 times.
Greater than the national
suicide rate. HB 298 will help
to raise awareness regarding
suicide within the population of
service members, veterans and
military family members.
It will increase access to
suicide prevention resources. We
ask for your support. Thank you.
Great. Thank you, Mr Smith.
Mr Jackson. Did you want to say
something to
Mr Chairman, members of the
members of the Canadian Jim
Jackson for disability
Disability Rights. New Mexico.
We support this bill for those
reasons that we are committed
to, uh, helping people who have
mental illness issues and this
bill will enable the department
to really get to get going on
veteran and military suicide
prevention is really important
and we encourage your support.
Thanks.
Very good. Thank you.
And anybody online.
Know anybody here from Veterans
Services Department.
Members of the committee.
I saw the appropriation was
stricken.
Did you get any money into
hospital to for it?
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Yes, Uh,
Senate finance put, uh, I think
the funding is in
In for the Good. Okay, so Senate
Finance came to the rescue.
Uh, Mr Chairman, can I Can I
just say something before you go
to vote? Sure. The gentleman
You know?
We were in, uh, Vietnam at the
same time 55 years ago.
Mr Smith is a former Marine, you
know, in 55 years I had never
met a gentleman.
There was in the same place I
wanted the same time.
It was your about eight months
before he was, but I just
thought I'd bring that up.
Great. Well, thank you, both for
For which you
Did in your service. That's
great, Senator Maestas. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you
Represent Garcia very much into
that focus on this side of the
chamber may not be as familiar
But I just want to
Thank you for the service. You
did 55 years ago. Your your
Serving your country and your
community in Southeast Asia, but
unlike but not just that, Mr
Man.
Throughout his life. He's up.
He's cared about veterans and
none what he could about
veterans, and we've had veteran
champions from time to time.
Most of the veteran bills deal
with tax breaks tax credits,
which is great.
But but it's bills like this
that actually provides services
change lives.
That are outstanding. So I just
want to thank you for that. You
continued your commitment to
your fellow servicemen, but also
if I may, if if you do know Mr
Chairman represent Garcia, like
I know that
Counseling and all that stuff
has had out negative stigma.
Particularly in certain circles.
Are we over that our veterans
over that, like is it is it
Our veterans comfortable coming
forward and saying, Hey, I need
help, you know?
Or there or there, or there
still kind of co closed.
Kind of keeping stuff to
themselves, which leaves them
more vulnerable.
To to behavior, health and so
suicidal tendencies.
Men and Senator, You know, a lot
of veterans are still inside the
little bubble. They can't get
out of it. You know that I'm
gonna speak for the Vietnam
veterans, you know, because I
was in Vietnam.
And you get into this bubble of
mistreatment all the time. You
know when I came out of Vietnam,
and the gentleman behind me came
out of Vietnam were considered
baby killers.
You know you weren't even
servicemen, You know, that's
what they call them baby killers
and you know, and the and the
It's still there, You know,
people.
Are people and they remember all
the bad not to good.
And you know it it There's a lot
of veterans out here. They don't
want to come out of that bubble.
The simple reason that they just
get mistreated.
You know, I I came out of Let me
give you an example. Mr
Chairman. I came out of Vietnam
55 years ago.
About three years ago, I was
going to Group of Colorado to a
veteran rally.
And I was putting gas in. The
lady drives up behind me and
says, Uh, what gang do you
belong to?
And I told him I don't belong to
a gang. I'm just going to a
veteran.
You're nothing better,
relatively and group of cream.
Come all you're one of those are
You know, I don't know what you
meant. But
And it hurts.
You know, so instead of saying
who you are or what you did
bubble up and say, you know
what? We'll deal with it.
Hmm. Well, that's your question.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator Sergio
Lopez. Thank you. Just briefly.
Thank you so much for bringing
this Bill Daniel Fernandez, who
died in Vietnam was from my
hometown in a family friend.
Um and he is a hero and we
continue to honor him. But the
other thing that happened in in
the Valencia County areas a lot
of kids. Um, a lot of young
people went to Vietnam. They
were older than me. Um, but
there were a lot of family,
friends and cousins.
And some didn't make it back
like Daniel Fernandez.
But some of the did really came
back with drug problems with
with a lot of severe problems,
and it just broke my heart that
you know just these promising
young men, and so I'm very
grateful.
That you're doing this because
we need to remove the stigma and
we have to recognize that war.
Is traumatizing and and and
there's nothing wrong with
asking for help after after
trauma, So I'm very grateful
that you're bringing this bill
and I'm in strong support of it.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman, You know, I'm
grateful the kind words and you
know that's why we're trying to
give the veterans services more
tools.
So they can address the issues
that are there because the
issues are great out there, you
know, I mean, there.
You know, like PTSD. People say,
Oh, you know, it's not a joke.
You know, these things are for
real and
As long as I'm credibility can
for veterans.
And like, Senator, Mike said,
This is the bill not to give
somebody a tax break. This is
the bill to see somebody's life.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garcia, You're a
true hero. And of all senses of
the word. Thank you.
The only thing I would add to
the discussion is that this
talks about the money going to
Veterans Services Department and
that they would develop a
program and and I just hope that
in their implementation of it,
they don't try to do it in
isolation from
The Behavioral Health Services
Collaborative, which is all the
state agencies that provide
behavioral health services that
they would be part of that
because there may be ways in
which the Medicaid or the Health
Department or the
Aging and long term services
Department resources might also
be brought to bear on
On supporting this work, so
Just keep that in mind later on
when they start implementing it
is a great idea.
German, you know, Thank you for
that, you know, And you know,
I've been a referee years and
and
Help for veterans has been very
minimal.
You know it's getting better.
And we have language to go. But
You know, I had a, um person
that works in the in the capital
told me their day, you know, and
all of all the
Issues about veterans come and
go.
Nothing ever gets done.
And she told me that you've been
here We shall little bit more
moving, and I'm not bragging on
myself.
But
If I could do strictly one thing
veterans I would do strictly
that right? And you know if we
can save one life, we're doing
good.
Thank you. Wonderful. It's the
will of the committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
from citizen I. Burt's
Thank you did from Senator
Maestas Secretary will call the
rule. Senator Hickey Senator who
gave out Yes, Senator Myostatin?
Yes Votes. Yes, Senator
McCutchen, Senator McKenna. Yes,
Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator. Neighbor Center.
Neighbor votes. Yes, Center,
Smitty's centers. Meetings
votes? Yes. Center Syria. Lopez?
Yes. Lopez votes? Yes.
Senator Tom Man? Yes, man Boats?
Yes, Senator. TCP. No. Yes. No
Vote. Yes.
Congratulations on a vote of
eight in the affirmative. Zero
in the negative. You have a do
pass motion from this committee.
Take Senate driving so to the,
uh, just keep it down. I can't
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. We
have two less memorials. They're
both ones that I'll put on and
I'm going to turn the gavel over
these symbols of power over to
Senator Tillman and try to get
these done.
Go ahead. This builds on the
work that's been done over the
last several
Years by the interim committee,
working with
Um
Advocates for the
Developmental disability
community and for the personal
care community.
Uh, and what it what it asked
for is that we
We begin getting
Um, from the Healthcare
Authority Department. Uh,
information.
An annual information report
that we would get
Ah!
On the number of folding part
time direct care workers.
The percentage of that there
were employed by the agency.
The length of employment of the
basic information we need to
know about this workforce so
that we can make good decisions
about it.
And with me or the two expert
witnesses that can speak
directly to this need. Um Adrian
Smith and Jim Jackson.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yes, sir. This bill Senate
Memorial 17 does exactly that It
builds on previous work. You all
might remember House Bill 395 In
the Senate. It was Senate Bill
203. Both chambers voted
unanimously for these bills. And
in fact, this memorial will
simply help the health care
authority align what is already
in law.
For caregivers of people with
developmental disabilities, and
it does the same for personal
care services workers who are
also those Medicaid funded
caregivers, the lowest paid
workers and they are those
caregivers who work with the
elderly. So this memorial will
comport with, um the house Bill
395. Secondly, there's a cost
study that will be
Required of the healthcare
authority that is also already
being done by the what will now
be the department and effective
July 1?
Ah, every two years, a cost
study will have to be performed.
That will value these workers at
150% of it.
Jim.
Mhm.
Mr Chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson, for just
for disability rights, New
Mexico as well as the disability
coalition, and I would be just
happy to answer any questions
that you might have.
And with that will stand for
it's
Yep. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair and members of the
committee Ellen pines,
representing the disability
coalition. Direct care workers
are the workers who help people
with disabilities, including
seniors with activities of daily
living to allow them to live in
their own homes and communities
rather than being forced instant
into institutions.
They are absolutely key to the
independence of these people.
Unfortunately, this is a
workforce that doesn't get the
recognition or the pay it
deserves. We need to start
taking seriously this workforce
and ensuring that we have an
adequate supply because, as I
said, it's absolutely
Thank you. I'll just speak
briefly. It says the possible
reasons for direct court work.
Direct care worker shortages
include low wages, I would say
that is a major reason. Um and
if we could take care of that
for the lack of benefits
It just really
I think we know the answers just
to some of this, but I strongly
support this and thank you for
bringing it.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator. Um
A root cause comment for you.
Is. I think that these folks are
underpaid because
These people are undervalued.
Right. We all agree with that.
We don't put our
Our funding. Ah!
You know, where are we? We put
our funding where we value right
and
And I want to bring our
attention to a bill that
Congress just passed six days
ago. That is getting to the root
cause issue of this because what
What payers are doing is they're
using these quality adjusted
life, years metrics to say,
Well, you're you have a
disability, So you're a quality
adjusted life. Years are lower
and the services you receiving
are therefore gonna get cut and
those people get paid less
right. That's how it works. It's
a top down from the feds.
So this is a bill that just
passed and mind you.
It passed six days ago with a
211 to 208 vote.
Pretty tight.
The purpose of the bill is to
amend Title 11 of Social
Security Act, and it says to
prohibit the use of quality
adjusted life years and similar
measures in coverage and payment
determinations by federal health
care programs.
And and I'll read you just one
sentence about this. So it says
we can't discriminate because of
an individual's disability.
But it adds the following text.
It says, or
Treats extending the life of an
elderly, disabled or terminally
ill individual as of lower value
than extending the life of an
individual who was younger, non
disabled or not terminally ill.
That's why these folks are not
getting paid.
Because we haven't passed this
yet. It's going over to the
Senate.
Seems like a very tight vote.
We'll see if they can get it
through, but I really hope
The federal government.
Can make an improvement in this
because the use of quality
adjusted life years for
determining payments for all of
our health care programs is very
cruel.
Thank you. Happy to support the
bill. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I strongly support this bill or
this memorial and
So
Anyone wishing to make a motion.
Some of
We have them motion as second
from
Myself.
Oh, I'm sorry. I couldn't see
him.
The second from Senator Hickey.
So please call the roll. Senator
Hickey? Yes, Senator Hickey
votes? Yes, Senator Mayer stuff?
Yes. Masters votes. Yes, Senator
McCutchen Center. McKenna. Yes.
Votes? Yes, Senator. Neighbor
Senator. Never votes. Yes,
Standards. Meetings.
Meetings votes? Yes, Senator
Sergio Lopez. Yes. Center City
of Lopez votes. Yes, Senator
Tommen.
Yes. Votes. Yes, Senator. TCP
No! Yes. No votes. Yes.
678
Past.
What is it?
Congratulations, Center. You
have a do pass 8 to 0.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee and
then the last one If we could
squeeze that in, that would be
great Senate Memorial 11.
By the way, the last one was
actually senators defend X was
the one that
Developed that last memory.
This one is one that I brought
forth out of the interim
committee.
As you remember the interim
committee last year, uh,
appropriated money.
Proposed the appropriation of
money.
To the higher Education
Department to study what it
would take to create two
different levels of program one
for graduate behavioral health.
Professional programs,
Psychiatric nursing
psychologists, social worker and
counselor
And then a 2nd $100,000 study
was appropriated to
Higher Education Department for
the branch colleges and the two
year programs in the community
Colleges.
To try to develop some of the
other programs have become, in
effect the pipeline programs
into the graduate programs. Um,
we had asked when that
appropriation was made last
year. In the end, it was
included in the budget junior
money, but it was still in the
budget.
They said they could get it done
for that amount of money, and we
expected there's report in
November.
At the interim committee
meeting.
And it wasn't done.
They had to admit that they
hadn't got it done.
This memorial reminds them that
they still have until June 30th
to spend the money.
You know? Do you know? Don't
give up on it.
We still want to hear a report
giving us your recommendations
for the best method of, uh,
proceeding and I know in, um you
know, you know, hearing what was
that in rules was that in rules
that that that you brought up
the point that the senator
Nyberg favors alone alone
program rather than um, Grant
program.
Because then you say you can
repay the loan with service.
That would be a very I think
appropriate way of dealing with.
We just wanted to higher
education to take a look at the
whole issue and make
recommendations does for the
best way of structuring that so
that next year's legislature
could come
Can come up with a proposal and
that's what this memorial does.
It says Guys, get with it, get
it done.
Thank you.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of this
memorial.
Yes, The lady in blue.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee Ellen pins
representing the Disability
coalition. We have a pressing
need for more behavioral health
providers and getting creative
about how we do that is
certainly to be supported. Uh,
I'm sorry that the higher Ed
department didn't take up this
task, and I hope that passing
this memorial will encourage
them to do so. And we are just
support. Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak and
support.
Anyone.
In opposition.
Harrington. Do we have anyone on
line? No. One online, So we
turned to the members is also
the first one wants to speak is
Senators Theater idea? Lopez do
pass.
We have to pass and we have a
second from Senator Hickey.
Please call the roll. Senator
Hickey
Hickey votes. Yes, Senator. Me
Estas Masters votes? Yes,
Senator McCutchen and Senator
McKenna. Yes, Senator McKenna
votes. Yes, Senator. Neighbor
Sarah never votes. Yes, Center,
Smitty's Center Street is yes,
Center City of Lopez. Yes.
Center City of Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator Thomann? Yes, votes?
Yes, Senator Tuesday. Pino.
Yes, I know. Votes. Yes.
Congratulations, Sir. You have a
do past 80. Thank you very much.
And members. I think this clears
the deck for what we have. Now
we may get a few more.
Today from the house, and if we
do, we'll try to find the time
tomorrow to meet
Unusual time or place or
whatever, but we'll try to get
get that done as well. But at
this point we've cleaned the
deck.
So thank you all for your hard
work this year. Okay. On that
note, we stand adjourned.
Everybody have a great day.
Hey, man.
