In our nova.
Senor Pinto
Scott
Centerio Lopez
Senator Hickey here Senator
Lopez.
Here.
We have a quorum.
And one more announcement.
Senator Scherer came in.
Just before committee started on
Senate Bill 168.
Um, he asked it to be rolled
over.
Carried over um for our next
meeting, which will be Sunday at
one o'clock.
So we will be meeting Sunday
afternoon at one.
He has a substitute, and if it's
not ready tomorrow, then we'll
just continue to uh to move it
maybe to Monday's meeting, so
just FYI.
Um, I'm Senator Siio Lopez. We
were here, um, you did a
presentation on the bill.
And
Seem so long ago, how our days
roll together. Um, we did take
public testimony, um, there was
a, we didn't do any discussion
on the bill, so that's where
we're gonna pick up today.
If you would like to do just for
purposes of people who are on
webcast, if you wanted just to
give like a very short.
synopsis of what this bill is
doing and then we'll go to
questions, please.
Uh
Thank you, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This
bill, um,
It's been, well, I think it's a
really important bill because
what it does is it does two
things. It gives guidance to all
the people that can certify.
Um, a U visa for the US
government to consider, and in
addition to giving uh guidance,
which is helpful, it also uh
provides a process if if there
is an agency that refuses for
whatever reason to uh or the
denies a a U visa certification.
It uh provides for a second
look.
And uh, and possibly a third
look, um, of the, of that
decision.
Which is good. Um, I think it's
important, you know, because
Sometimes these are done because
or or certifications are not
made because they.
The individual doesn't know.
How to, what, how they fit into
the process or the entity
doesn't know how to fit in, they
fit into the process, or
sometimes, and this is very
unfortunate, they do it out of
animus.
And um that's why we think this
bill is very important and I'll
just, we're ready to stand for
questions. I have two of the
best immigration lawyers I know.
Thank you, Senator, and I forgot
one more announcement as we will
be our, our job time for tonight
is 6 o'clock.
There's an event tonight that
our staff, um, where they're
being thanked and honored for
what they've done with us and do
to support us during session.
So, we'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
On Senate Bill 177.
Senator Gallegos
I'm chairing Senator, thank you.
We met before, uh, trying to get
some.
Thoughts on how long this is
going to take and I hope to be
brief, um, we originally talked,
uh, as you and I talked about
the preemption and I told you I
thought this bill was trying to
Uh, trying to trump federal law
to prevent.
Uh what the administration's
gonna do I'll get right into
just a few questions, Madam
Chair and Senator an expert
witnesses, uh.
It stated that um.
In my notes, uh, 177 should be
challenged in the doctrine of
federal preemption, which we'd
said it does not, which rise to
state law conflicts with federal
law, rehension can be expressed.
Field or conduct preemption.
Uh, it asks feel preemption
immigration is an area of
exclusive federal control under
the Immigration National Act.
And then the US Supreme Court
has repeatedly held that states
cannot legislate independently.
In immigration matters, even if
they claim to cooperate with
federal law.
Newman chair and senator and
expert witnesses explained to me
how this is not gonna be in
conflict with federal law.
Oh, this almost is like a, um,
everybody wants to answer it. I
will just briefly answer and
turn it over to my experts, but
federal law, immigration law in
this instance, provides a role
for the state.
And that's what we're trying to
give guidance to the state. It,
it, it provides a role by
requiring that a police officer,
a judge, a district attorney.
Certify that the individual has
um and if you get more
technical, but basically
assisted or made themselves
available to assist with the
prosecution, and so that.
That gives them the authority to
certify the federal government
will not act if there's no
certification.
So that's why it doesn't
conflict. It's just telling the
state actors and empowering them
basically or how to uh how to
fit into this federal system
there's no conflict, all of the
responsibilities that we don't
tell the federal government to
do anything, the
responsibilities, the, the
legislation here only involves
state actors.
And
chair and Senator Gallegos,
thank you for this question. uh,
SB 177 does not regulate
immigration status and thus, um,
there is no preemption issue
here with SB 177, um, as Senator
Savio Lopez mentioned this
provides the same scheme that's
under federal law but applies it
to state actors. And
unfortunately in our state, what
we've seen is that more than 80%
of jurisdictions here in the
state.
Do not have a policy in place to
process the U visa
certifications. So what we are
doing here is, um, just
providing a scheme guidance, um,
and a time frame for how to
process these certifications,
whether that's a completion or a
denial of the certification, um,
but
It does not attempt to take, uh,
the role of adjudicator from
United States citizenship and
immigration.
Madam,
I'm sorry, please.
And
Senator Gallegos, please.
And chair center and expert
witness then as you're talking
about guidance, it's just talk
just about the guidance. Are you
trying to say that you're having
guidance for ICE on immigration.
Or is it just the
State on immigration.
But I'm sure I'd like to turn
that over to my expert, Madam
Chair, thank you and thank you,
Senator Agos for the question.
Um, again, this has um no
involvement with, um, ice or any
federal government agency, US
citizenship and immigration
services is the branch of the
Department of Homeland Security
that ultimately adjudicates the
U visa, um, as my co-experts
stated the U certification
process is really just a tool,
not only for um law enforcement,
but it's also.
So mechanism for the applicant
to demonstrate that wherever it
is that they participated in the
investigation of the crime is
confirming that yes, they were a
victim. Yes, they helped with
the investigation or prosecution
of the crime. And so at SB 177
does is simply just to reiterate
what the code of federal
regulation already says, and
then requiring that state
agencies or that certifying
agencies rather have some kind
of process so that when
advocates.
Victims of crime are seeking
that certification from law
enforcement or whatever agency
is relevant. Um, knows exactly
who to contact, um, what the
office is that that reviews the
youth certification and so I in
and of itself is not part of the
conversation in this uh regard.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and senator.
Extra witnesses and I just wanna
go back on.
a really hard time on that
preemption and, and I understand
that this.
Or in your view
didn't have anything to do with
federal, but uh there's relevant
case in 2012, Arizona versus
United States and the Supreme
Court struck down portions of
Arizona's immigration law.
Which was Senate Bill 1070.
Which was holding the state
cannot create.
immigration enforcement
mechanisms.
And the court found that even
state laws intended to
complement.
Federal law are preempted.
And they would intrude upon
federal immigration enforcement.
Now, Madam Chair and senator and
expert witnesses, are you not?
Um, intruding on federal.
Immigration with this bill.
Thank you. There is a big
difference between what Arizona
was trying to do and what this
bill does, what Arizona was
trying to do was supplant the
federal government's role has
enforcing immigration law.
Um, that is detaining people,
doing, you know, doing the job
that is the responsibility under
federal law.
Of, of ice.
In contrast, this bill is giving
guidance to state actors, which
we as a legislature have
authority to do.
About how giving them a policy
basically for how to process
these vehicles, um, or these,
these, uh.
Yeah, these, these
certifications because we as as
was stated last time.
When you
Contact all of the, I think how
many did you contact? We
contacted 130.
Law enforcement agencies and ask
them for their policies and very
few people agencies responded
and very few had policies. So
what this does is it establishes
a uniform policy around the
state or how state actors should
take on the state responsibility
that they have under federal law
that's very different than
trying to supplant what the
federal government does.
Madam Chair, sinner, and expert
witnesses then you're explaining
to me now you're.
Um
Said Bill 177 crates a new level
of authority.
In New Mexico
Uh, Madam Chair, not a new level
of authority because New Mexico,
New Mexican agencies already
have this authority under
federal law.
This is just giving them a
roadmap for how to do it.
Um, and how to do it in
compliance with federal law.
This was very carefully drafted
to not have any conflict.
Um, with federal law and
regulations, very detailed and
it adheres very carefully to
federal law.
Would you like to add?
Um, and yes, again, uh, thank
you, um, Madam Chairwoman, and,
um, Senator Gallegos for your
question. Um, again, Senate Bill
177 just aims to require some
kind of process on how to um
certify something that they have
been empowered to do under
federal law.
I
Madam Chair and Senator.
Experts, so if it's just the
process.
Uh, does this give the Mexico
courts any jurisdiction in the
process and Terrence Senator.
Uh, Madam Chair, New Mexico
courts already have authority to
issue on their own a
certification um under federal
law.
So what this does is it allows
um first.
The AG's office to give it a
second look if there's a
problem, and then it allows the
courts to review it if there's a
problem. I'll give you a
hypothetical that is real.
Um, I'm aware of a situation in
which somebody who was.
Um
She had a prostitution history
and in my mind, um, it was a
trafficking situation in, in my
mind, but at the time the the
the chef, the then sheriff who
was in Bernalio County had not
figured that out, uh, and she
cooperated in the prosecution
and the sheriff refused to
certify because he didn't like
her background.
As having some uh experience on
the streets.
And that is totally
inappropriate for the sheriff to
make that decision, that is a
decision for ice. The sheriff.
is supposed to say to to
identify, did she help with the
prosecution or not, that's all.
If it's no, no certification, if
there was no availability to
help with the prosecution, and
if it's yes, they're supposed to
certify yes she, she helped with
the prosecution, and so it was
heartbreaking to see a sheriff.
Take a decision away from ice
because it's up to ICE to
determine whether this
individual is eligible, um, yes,
yes, USCIS, thank you. It's up
to you, you, uh, SCIS to
determine whether the individual
would be, um, would get the U
visa or not.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for that.
And I guess talking about just
the sheriff and prosecution.
If they say yes, if they do, who
makes the determination?
On the visa.
Uh,
I will turn that over to my, my
experts if they're such great
lawyers. I don't know why I
don't turn it over more. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos, if, uh, it's the
district attorney's office who
is reviewing the certification
request, then they ultimately
certify the certification form.
They'll complete it, they'll
review the file, they'll see
what they have in their notes as
to the victims, uh,
participation in the prosecution
and
As long as she didn't refuse to
participate in the prosecution,
then they'll complete the
certification.
Madam Madam Chair and Senator
Gaos, if I may also just briefly
add to that, ultimately the
adjudication of the U visa
application as a whole is solely
within the purview of US
citizenship and immigration
services. They use certification
does not provide any sort of
endorsement or anything like
that to the U visa application,
as that is specifically within
the jurisdiction of USCIS.
Macha and center and expert
witness and my question is, so
if we've we've had the sheriff.
Uh, determined
Prosecution is yes, then it goes
to the district attorney's
office.
Are they not, are they not
giving advice to Iceland if it
goes back the eyes to make that
determination.
Are they interacting?
If they're separate and sold
entity if, if we are not
infringing on
Federal law.
How are we in New Mexico making
that determination that this
person
I allowed to have
Uh, thank you, Madam Chairwoman
and Senator Gallegos for the
question. Um, essentially the
way that the U visa process
works is, um, whenever a person
is a victim of a crime and has
been helpful in the detection
investigation or prosecution of
the crime,
who certifies that just depends
on who the relevant agency is.
Sometimes it can be a police
officer if just a a police
report is made. Sometimes it can
be a district attorney. If they
ask the victim to serve as
The witness on the case if the
case goes to trial, sometimes it
can be a judge if it's based on
domestic violence, for example,
and in order of protection based
on domestic violence is filed.
So who the relevant certifying
agent is, is just kind of on a
case by case basis, but
essentially the, the actual use
certification is a 5-page form
that's issued by uh or that one
can print anywhere from USCIS's
website and, um, again, there's
just a small box of comments
where the relevant.
agent where it be um police
officer, district attorney, etc.
um, confirms the facts based on
the police report, based on the
the court record, etc. and then
signs that says, yes, this
person was a victim of this
crime, and um, yes, they were
helpful by whatever the
circumstances will be. And that
essentially is the end of the
certifying agencies's
involvement in the immigration
process. Of course, it's the
case moves forward, um, with.
The prosecution then that
relationship with the victim
maintains in the context of the
criminal justice system, um, but
with the immigration side, once
the certification is done, then
from the advocate's perspective,
that's really the last thing we
need in terms of being able to
finish and file the U visa
application. Of course, as, um,
my co-expert Deshonda mentioned
if there is an issue that comes
up where the victim then
unreasonably refuses.
To continue the cooperation,
then again, that's not even
really something that involves a
certifying agent because that's
then a conversation that USCIS
has to have with us or with our
client of why they refuse to
continue cooperating, um,
whether or not that means that
they're no longer eligible for
the U visa, but they're kind of
just two separate process that
crossover in a very brief way
with the certification by the
agency, but then kind of just
take their own course, both
within the state context and
then in the federal.
contacts with USCIS.
I'm chairing senator and expert
witness that part of my
confusion, you, you talk about
they're separate, but they do
cross over and they take their
own, but and I still looked at
as interference.
In the immigration law
federally.
Uh, can you explain to me how.
Um, so you've got the
Sheriff, you've got the DA.
Everyone's done their checkoffs.
This person's eligible.
Uh, what is the next step? Uh,
how does that get?
How does this person get to you?
Visa
Is it done through
I
And how does that
Madam,
Madam Chair, no, once that
packet is prepared by the
lawyer, the advocate, the the
client.
Um, the individual, it goes to
US citizenship and immigration
services, and an immigration
lawyer, uh, will help.
With that process.
It the the criminal process. So
here's the immigration process,
the criminal process continues.
And so there's no after the the
police officer, the DA, the
judge, whoever's certified after
they do the certification, they
have no.
Um, and it is not a
recommendation.
It's simply a certification that
the individual did make
themselves available, um, to
help with the prosecution.
That's all.
Well, in chairing center, I
don't know that we'll ever get
to an agreement on this because
I look at it now you you're
talking just certification.
You, you've got the packet done.
Then you're handing off now to
his citizenship and immigration.
But me, that looks like we've
just built.
Another independent.
System in New Mexico.
That is not ice.
And it's not US citizenship.
An immigration
It's a third entity.
And that's where I think we go
back to the Arizona where the
state cannot.
Uh, preempt what's done
federally.
How are we gonna work through
that uh Madam Chan Center and
and I know you're ready to go,
but my theory is we're gonna end
up in a lawsuit and I've used
this on other bills, other we
have unintended consequences.
At some point in time.
I would like to see them hold us
accountable. I've got a bad bill
that costs the state $2
million.20 million dollars,
whatever it is, it should be my
responsibility on how we resolve
that because it's coming from
taxpayers.
A review things that we should
have seen or pay for things we
should have seen that I
ultimately think.
Is gonna to happen even though I
chair and senator, you may not
intend that.
There's case law.
It shows we shouldn't be
interrupting federal
immigration.
And so I was just wondering how
those independent pieces, even
though they're supposed to be
independent.
Do not create
Its own
Its own system.
So you've got
State law, you, you're gonna
have this check off so thinking
through, it's not just the the
saucer and the DA, but whoever's
managing that pack.
Is that not an independent
system, Madam Chair, Senator,
this does not create a system in
any way, shape or form, existing
law.
Existing federal law already
allows for uh um.
Law enforcement officer, uh,
district attorney or a judge to
certify, so that's not creating
anything new that's already
existing law.
There are 19 states that have
passed similar.
Similar guidance to their state
actors and some of them have a
review process, um, and I am not
aware of any federal litigation
that has found these to be
problematic.
The the federal litigation has
been involved with declining to
um assist ice.
Or
Um
uh, in trying to enforce
immigration law.
Those are the two kinds of
litigation I have seen.
The litigate and all the uh I'll
leave it there.
Tend to be a lot less is more
and if I may briefly add, Madam
Chair and Senator Gallegos, um,
again, um, SB 177, um, does not
cause any preemption issues
because
again, once, once the
certification is endorsed by the
agent, their involvement in the
immigration side is completely
done. Um, the advocate doesn't
really require their involvement
at all after that, um, and once
that.
gets sent to US citizenship and
immigration Services, an agent
that is hired by US citizenship
and immigration services is uh
the person who reviews the
merits of the application, um,
senses, for example, a request
for evidence if they think that
the victim has uh issues with
meeting some of the eligibility
criteria, but again, that is
just streamlined through the
immigration process that really
no other point should the uh
Enforcement agency or any of the
certifying agents, uh, be
involved in again the
immigration uh process, which is
completely separate from
anything that may happen on the
criminal side.
For that, Madam Chair and
senator and.
expert witness, so earlier
testimony said this is a
existing federal law.
Law enforcement has the option
already.
So Madam chair and senator, why
are we running a bill?
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair, senator,
as I started?
A lot of agencies don't know
anything about immigration law.
They're very and or even federal
law, they're very well versed in
state law and
One of the things that this will
do when we pass them, this is
they will have guidance for what
they're supposed to do.
Um, I hope to, and I know that
New Mexico immigrant Law Center
and the Dreamers go out to
agencies and do trainings about
what they're supposed to do.
And then the other thing it does
is it um.
It has a consequence if someone
just doesn't like immigrants.
And decides they're not going to
certify for that reason.
That's very inappropriate under
federal law and state law.
Um, because their job is to just
certify this individual helped.
Or they didn't. That's the only
issue they're supposed to
certify for.
So that I think is um.
I mean, I think that's really
important. We're giving guidance
to the state actors. We're not
telling the federal government
to do anything.
Um, all of this is already.
An option for them.
And if I may, Madam Chair and
Senator Gallegos, the reason
that SB 177 is so needed, even
though there is already a
federal scheme, is that the vast
majority of New Mexico law
enforcement agencies are
ignoring the federal scheme and
preventing survivors of crime,
domestic violence, sexual
assault, and stalking, among
other serious crimes from
applying for the U visa because
the agencies are refusing to
process these requests.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and center and
expert witnesses then.
Possibly my last question, so
then am I to presume this is
forcing.
Law enforcement to do things.
Beyond what they're used to now.
Uh, I, I thought I heard, I see
Senator shaking her head, but I
thought I heard Madam Chair and
Senator that you guys have
already reached out to the law
enforcement agents in the state.
How was that reaction?
And are the majority of them in
favor of this or not?
Uh, yes, ma'am Chair, I'll I'll
start and turn it over to my
experts. I had a discussion with
the current sheriff of
Bernalillo County about this,
and he, he welcomed the idea of
guideline guidance.
Um, I had a discussion with the
district attorney about this.
Welcome the idea of guidance.
Um, and I'll turn it over. Yes,
and thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Gallegos, um, our IPA
requests were to ascertain which
of the jurisdictions had a
process, right? Um, because as,
uh, my, my co-experts stated
many agencies just don't either
understand what the use
certification does, um, they
have a misunderstanding on
whether or not it is an
endorsement of the actual
immigration application, um, and
sometimes, yes, we have seen
situations where there is a a
bias either uh one way or the
other, and so, um, as we heard
from, uh, the, um, the, uh,
excuse me, the city of
Albuquerque, um, Chief Harold
Medina, um, through his um staff
member on Wednesday, stated
support for this bill as well,
um, thankfully, there are a lot
of jurisdictions that do have
processes, um, among them, as I
mentioned already, the city of
Albuquerque, um, the first
judicial, uh, district
attorney's office.
does have an internal tracking
system, um, the Espanola police
department has both a policy in
place on how to process the
youth certifications and
tracking system and so there are
certainly already jurisdictions
who do have an understanding
that this is something that is
just that doesn't frankly
require a lot of their
involvement. It's just a review
of the record and a signature at
the end. And so, um, the, the
law enforcement agencies or
other rather sort of
finding agencies that we have
spoken to have been very very
receptive to the idea of having
a process. Um, again, it's not
about telling them how to use
their discretion, how to
interpret the youth
certification process, we are
very clear in the bill that they
are to follow the guidelines of
the code of federal regulations,
um, but instead we are, uh, this
bill proposes that some kind of
uniform process be placed on how
they receive, how long it takes
them to.
certify the agents or the
certify that they use
certification request and um
yeah, just make it more
accessible for victims and their
advocates to know how to access
that process.
Mouren, thank you, and, and I, I
wanna clarify I
I see a need.
And especially in the migrant
community.
A lot of what happened in
Colorado.
At that one facility it was a
hotel.
Was migrant against migrant
crime.
But I'm what I see now.
Is that you guys are looking.
affords a solution, I, I think
Espanola was the furthest that I
heard you speak beyond the.
Um, we're sitting in the state.
Berlio County
Uh, as far as time.
And I'm just trying to figure
out why the outliers.
Over, Hobbs.
Charles's bed.
Why would their departments not
Responding
Madam chair
They have the authority to
respond.
They're very small departments
and so their expertise and
experience with this is less
than you would see in
Albuquerque, uh, Albuquerque,
um.
Benefit or Las Crucess, um, and
I think that's why you have
those agencies, at least they
definitely had an awareness and
they responded to the approval
request.
Um
What this does is it, it informs
all of them.
This is, this is a process that
you should go through, um, but
when you go through the IPA
request, um, like Taos police
department said they're
considering a policy that would
apply both to you and to visa
certifications, and which is a
not a much needed policy in
light of the department's track
record of a lengthy response
response times.
They take 4 to 10 months after
receipt of the U visa
certification.
Um
That that timeline.
could really hurt them because
if they're star witness is
deported in the interim.
They're not gonna have a case.
So, um
They understand this risk and
what this does is it gives a
timeline so that it'll be at the
top of their priority list, it,
it tells them to develop a
process or it suggests that they
develop a process they develop a
process, um, if
If the person who requested the
visa believes that the denial
was based on.
was not based on weather.
They partic whether they
participate in the investigation
or not.
Then there's a 2nd and a 3rd
review, which I think is a
basic.
Concept in our in our.
System in the United States.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Senator, uh, just.
finish up by, uh, clarifying.
Um
Majority of my employees.
Or from Mexico or South America.
Uh, need them yearly.
They've gone through the process
correctly.
All I see you're doing here is
preventing
I from, uh, even that my return
center, uh, when it was said
that the feds were coming.
We had a lot of Venezuelan
criminals from my part of the
state.
The left
The Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Las
Cruces, so I, I do understand
there's a fear on why he needs
something to have a a way to
keep.
Someone in the process to be.
If they're harmed.
That they would be in the
process to be a witness.
Against that person
Uh, but I think that you're
talking about a regional
problem.
again in Bernal Leo.
I don't think it needs to be a
stay from. I will listen, madam
and senator, uh.
For the rest of the debate
But mine still goes back to I'm
Senator,
I hope at some point in time we
don't find ourselves in court.
Uh, with the same situation
Arizona versus US so without a
yield, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
I'm sorry, I did say Senator
Scott.
You
Hm
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
I, I can tell you that reading
through the various.
Law enforcement in our own
administrative office of the
courts.
Don't like this at all.
So I'm all of my comments are
gonna be.
Reference directly back to
Comments that
And the questions that they
have.
So
And there are a few of those, so
please bear with me.
One of the significant issues
that's listed is
That this legislation creates a
new
Private right of action.
If these
The certifications.
Or not put forth.
Or denied.
Is that private right of action
exist.
In current immigration law.
Madam Chair, Senator.
I have had a conversation with
um.
with Charles Soli.
And um he gave me authority to
talk to the drafter of the FIR.
And I have called the drafter,
but we haven't had the
conversation, there are several.
Um, I can't tell you how many
misunderstandings of federal law
in this in this um.
This fur
So, um
This idea of a private right of
action.
A private right of action is
something quite different from a
review, an appeal process.
A private right of action is
where you say.
A, B, and C.
is now a tort.
A, B, and C is now a violation
of the fair Standards Act A, B,
and C is a violation of the
communications Act.
That is a private right of
action. When you identify an
ability of somebody to file a
petition and get monetary
relief.
That, uh, or even injunctive
relief, that is a private right
of action. This is a review
process, a simple due process
that I think everyone should be
entitled to.
Um, which I think especially in
New Mexico, we care so much
about our New Mexico and our
federal um.
Uh, constitutional rights.
So what this is, is not a
private action, and again, I
really hope they correct this
FIR. It's simply a review
process.
And if I may add, um, Madam
Chairwoman and Senator Scott,
thank you for the question. Um,
The short answer is no, there is
no really processing the
immigration system because this
is outside of the immigration
system, right? This has nothing
to do with the actual U visa
application, the use
certification process is a very
preliminary step without even
submitting the application yet
to US citizenship and
immigration services, right? And
so that's why they're really is
no process like this in
immigration law because.
This is outside of the scope of
the U visa process since it's
just a preliminary step again to
certify that to sign a form that
says this person was a victim of
this crime and was helpful by
filing a police report, being a
witness and and testifying,
whatever the case may be.
But nonetheless, Madam Chair and
Senator.
In the event.
That this certification form is
not timely produced.
Or
The application for U visa for
whatever reason.
Goes against the applicant.
Is there a right to sue.
In this legislation.
No, there, there is no
compensation, there is just a
review.
It's an appellate, it's in the
nature of an appellate review.
So what what'll happen is.
It gets the the the person
didn't get their certification.
They go to the AG's office, say,
could you review this, the AG's
office has independent authority
to make a certification so they
can review it and they can say.
You know, this police officer
was wrong. You helped with the
prosecution.
This is wrong. We'll go ahead
and certify because we have all
of the data, all of the
information.
If, for example, the AG's office
said it was anti-immigrant for
some reason, and said, I'm not
gonna do it. This gives an
opportunity to go to court.
The court has an independent
certifying um.
Ability under the immigration
law, so the court could say.
I'm reviewing this and what I
see is somebody who, who helped
with the prosecution.
I'm going to, I'm gonna go ahead
and certify it.
Or the court could say,
I'm sorry, uh, that you feel
that way but you didn't make
yourself available for the
prosecution, they called several
times and you didn't show up.
I think that they were right in
not giving you the
certification.
That's all it does.
There's no private right of
action, which is one of the
reasons I was so disappointed
with this FIR.
They totally misunderstood.
And if I may add, Madam
Chairwoman and and Senator
Scott, um, again, if something
does happen with the actual U
visa application where it's
denied for some reason, maybe
the victim didn't meet some of
the independently reviewed
eligibility criteria, again,
they're.
The appeals process for that for
arguing that it was erroneously
denied again goes through US
citizenship and immigration
services. The state uh agent who
certified the youth
certification is not involved in
that at all, because again, it
goes through um the, the federal
government and not any of the
state actors. Madam Chair and
Senator, I'm gonna read.
Directly
From this
Document that's in front of me.
Which speaks.
To your representation.
I know and uh
According to US citizenship and
immigration services, UCIS
Resource guide.
And here's the quote
Certifying agencies play a key
role in the youthyA program.
They are often in the best
position.
To provide information about the
reported.
Qualifying crimes and the
victim's helpfulness as they are
frequently the first.
To encounter victims.
This legislation.
Places the judge.
In the unusual position of
re-examining.
A certifying agencies denial.
Where the youth certification.
And using substituted judgment.
Versus the firsthand knowledge
of the victim's role and
cooperation now.
Madam Chair and senator.
That's from the administrative
office of the courts. Could you
address those concerns.
Thank you. That is exactly.
Thank you for reading that
because that shows exactly what
I was saying. What they quote
from the resource guide is that
the agency, um.
The certifying agency again
plays a key role, which we agree
with and they're in the best
position to provide information
about the reported qualifying
crime. We totally agree with
that.
But what if they do it?
For the wrong reason. What if
they do it because they hate
immigrants. What if they do it
because um they're making their
own judgment about whether this
person deserves relief, which is
not their judgment to make.
Their job is to say yes, this
person uh um helped with the
investigation.
Um, and prosecution or and or
prosecution or know this person
did not.
That's the only issue.
That the
The, the
A uh attorney General's office,
which has independent authority
to do it. That's the only issue
they can, they would review.
They look at the file and they
would say,
I agree with the law enforcement
that this this uh.
Um
was not enough, this was not
assistance. Just saying you, you
would help, but they never
showing up is not enough.
Or they would say, wow, this
person showed up at every
hearing, and then, and then you
uh dismiss the case.
But they showed up at every
hearing, you should have
certified, and I don't even have
to require the court doesn't
even have to remand and ask them
to certify the court has
independent certifying uh
authority has all of the
documentation.
And says, I'm gonna certify.
Because I have authority to do
so. So saying this substituted
judgment. I mean, I am so
annoyed with this because they
quote the resource guide, and
then they they jump to a.
A conclusion that is not at all
warranted by what the res
research guide said, um.
This is not
A judge make reviewing a file
and making a determination
whether there was assistance in
the prosecution or not is not
substituted judgment.
It's what judges do all of the
time, review evidence and
determine.
I
And if I may very briefly add,
um, Madam Chairwoman and Senator
Scott, um, most of the
certifying agents are not the
ones who are um receiving for
and just to give a hypothetical
for us to be able to wrap our
heads around it. If a person is
a victim of a crime and they
file a police report, um, very
often the.
Police officer who took down the
police report is not going to be
the police officer who is the
certifying agent. They don't
have to have personal or
firsthand knowledge. Sometimes
they can, especially in the
cases, for example, of a
district attorney who is
prosecuting the case and works
hand in hand with the victim,
but oftentimes that's just not
the case. They rely on the
police report they rely on as
the senator stated the court
file, right? And so, um.
This bill would not ask the
judge to um require them to
have, to make a decision based
on firsthand knowledge, because
generally speaking, that's just
not the way that you
certification process operates.
No, Madam Chair, senator and
expert, the act of preparing
this.
Document this application.
Yes
It's all subjective.
So
So that if that document doesn't
get appropriately filled out to
suit the applicant.
And it now goes to a judge.
The legislation allows judges to
award reasonable costs and
attorneys' fees.
To these petitioners.
Who,
who challenged the denial.
Of the
Of the youth is a certification.
So
Now you're asking a judge.
With secondhand knowledge.
To overrule.
Youth is a certifications or
lack thereof.
An award
Attorneys' fees and costs.
That is nowhere present, Madam
Chair and senator in current.
Immigration law.
Madam Chair, this is a matter of
state law to provide a
consequence for a wrongful
denial.
The legislation specifically
says a wrongful denial, not just
a denial.
And so with the court and I
would imagine and and attorneys'
fees and costs are discretionary
with the judge.
But I can imagine a judge
reviewing this and saying, I am
so outraged that this.
Um
Like I was outraged by uh.
This police officers playing
games.
With the visa.
Um, I have heard stories I don't
have personal knowledge of
favors demanding favors before
they would get certify the visa.
I could imagine a judge being so
outraged by that that they would
assess attorneys' fees. Very
rare that judges assess
attorneys' fees, but otherwise,
because they can't, they can't
give damages.
For that, uh, denial, um, but
this is some remedy when the
individual has had to encur
attorneys fees for this wrongful
denial if there should be a
consequence, sort of channeling
the chair of Senate Judiciary.
Consequence.
And Madam Chair and Senator
wrongful
would certainly be in the eye,
Madam Chair, I've got.
Uh, 3 more of these to go
through.
What I'd like to do is let
One of my other colleagues have
an opportunity to speak.
And I'll prepare my questions
for the.
For the next round when they get
through.
Thank you for now and thank you.
Well, Senator Scott, why don't
you just go ahead and finish
your questions now.
OK.
Item number 2
And this was directly from the
administrative office.
Of the courts
Significant
Issues
Removes judicial discretion.
Did you address those concerns?
I'll start. OK.
Um
That is not the case at all. The
judge has discretion, um, in all
cases.
Um
The certifications, the judge
reviews it that a crime or
crime.
Boom
That's what they're supposed to
consider.
That the petitioner was a victim
of the of the crime of crimes,
they have to decide was a
petitioner a victim.
Um, when the crime or crimes
occurred, these are just
findings, just like any time the
judge is asked to make a
decision on something and, and
we as a legislature tell them
what they're supposed to look
at.
Um, this, the next one is where
the primer crimes occurred. It's
kind of a jurisdictional issue,
um, this occurred in Burnleyo
County or Albuquerque or
wherever, whether the crime or
crimes violated a federal
exitorial jurisdiction statute,
um, that's again judicial
discretion and.
the
Stage 4
Um
My page 4. OK, there.
and this the specific criminal
activity that occurred again,
judges are, that's what they do,
the involvement of the
petitioner in the criminal
activity.
That's, that's important to for
the judge to consider any
injuries to the petitioner as a
result of the crime or crimes, I
know someone and helped him with
his petition, uh, somebody who
was almost.
Um
Almost made um.
I mean, it was so sad he
couldn't walk from the from he
couldn't walk, he, he lost the
use of his legs, um.
So the result of the crime or
crimes that's.
The judges are used to doing
that all the time, whether the
petitioner has information
concerning the crime of crimes.
Again, that that's evidence that
the judge can take, whether the
petitioner is or will be helpful
in the in the investigation or
prosecution of the crimes.
I just can figure that out, uh,
whether the petitioner has
refused or failed to assist.
Again, the uh the certification
will probably if if this was
declined, the certification will
probably say we called the
victim every day, and although
she said she would cooperate,
she never showed up.
That's evidence that the judge
can can take into account
whether any of the petitioner's
family members are culpable in
the crime or crimes again,
that's simple information that a
judge can can determine that the
certifying official will notify
us if the petition becomes
uncooperative.
Again, that's gonna be
testimony.
If the, if the
Of individual once they get,
which would be a stupid thing to
do. You get your uh
certification and then you stop
cooperating.
That's putting yourself at risk
for losing the certification.
But if they do it.
That's that, and if that's the
evidence in the, in the court
case.
The judge is perfectly, um, I'm
married to a judge. I know that
they find facts all the time.
And if I may very briefly add,
um, Madam Chairwoman and Senator
Scott, um, again, the, the judge
that would be reviewing a
wrongful denial, um, would
review whatever it was that was
submitted with the original
certification, right? So if they
are reviewing what happened um
with the police department, then
they would review the police
report, right? And so it's, it's
based on the review of the
evidence that is the basis of
the original use certification
request and um.
In terms of the wrongful denial,
I mean, of course, the
certifying agent has a
discretion to issue or not issue
the use certification, but the
discretion that they use has to
follow what the code of federal
regulation says, right? And as
the senator pointed out, there
are instances where their
discretion means not answering
our requests for over a year.
Sometimes it means saying they
have a bias or saying.
you don't qualify for a U visa,
so I will not issue the youth
certification. And so some, we
have had personal experiences as
practitioners where that happens
across the state, unfortunately.
And so it, it would require them
to follow what they are already
supposed to follow whenever
issuing their discretion is
whatever the code of federal
regulation says.
And Madam Chair and senator.
The next paragraph is
particularly pertinent.
SB 177 mandates.
That a certifying official or
agency may deny Etheus
certification only if a victim
refuses to provide information
or assistance after reasonable
request under federal law.
There are multiple grounds upon
which a certifying official.
Must be permitted.
To deny certification.
Beyond
That circumstance.
That looks to me like pretty
clear case of removing.
Any discretion.
With regard to these
applications
address that concern?
Sorry, apologize. Uh, Madam
Chair, I would like to turn that
over to my expert Jasanda
Zaparo, who
Very well prepare them.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott for that question.
It is interesting that this was
included in the FIR considering
under the US code and the
federal regulations.
Do not include any mention of uh
reasons to deny a certification
request. In actuality, the uh US
code and the federal regulations
talk about, um, well, actually
only the federal regulations
mention one instance of revoking
uh certification and that is if
they can no longer attest to
those eligibility requirements
that the senator was already
talking about being a victim of
qualifying criminal activity
that occurred in the United
States. And that
The um victim assisted or
provided information within the
detection investigation or
prosecution of that crime.
Again, I'm not exactly sure
where the analysis comes from,
stating that under federal law
there are multiple grounds for,
uh, denial, but there are not,
thank you.
I just want to emphasize it's
wrong. This FY is wrong. There's
one thing they need to certify
for. What I mean all of the
jurisdictional things and all of
the the name where it took
place, the crime, all of that,
but did they participate or not,
that's the heart of it.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, all
of these certifications.
And this
Legislation calls into question.
The applicant's view of the
judgments that were applied to
that.
Certification.
Um
Mr. Chair
Thank, uh, ladies senator, thank
you for your answers.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
I will yield the floor for the
time being.
Mr. Herr, I'm a pass.
Oops, sorry, don't touch it.
We have directions here what to
do.
There's a motion for a Du passed
from Senator Nava with a second
from Senator Sidil Lopez.
And any other questions?
Signature block.
Oh, just a minute. Did Senator
Scott, were you finished with
your points for the time being,
thank you. Oh, you didn't want
to finish them?
Uh, no, I wanna.
Take a sip of water.
OK.
And I'll come back to this. OK,
Senator Black.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, panel for being here.
Um,
Let me
It's very complicated issue.
Um
It is for you lawyers as well,
it seems.
Lot of different opinions flying
around.
Uh, but that's OK. That's what
uh we go to court for differing
opinions, uh, to see who's
right.
But help me walk it.
Or, well, a lot to the left and
how we got here.
Um, who are the type of people
that apply.
For these U visa certification.
Who, who are these people?
So I can understand that. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Block for that question,
um, a person who is applying for
a non-immigrant visa is a person
that is living in the United
States, um, without some form of
permanent status. So anyone who
essentially is not a lawful
permanent resident or a United
States citizen who has been the
victim of a violent crime in the
United States and was helpful in
some way in the detection.
investigation or prosecution in
that crime. There are of course
a lot of other eligibility
requirements regarding the U
visa application as a whole,
which is outside of the scope of
this bill. But yeah, those are
the the folks who um who we see
apply for a Yunnan immigrant
visa. OK, Madam Chair, may, may
I add that they are domestic
violence victims. They are
victims of violence in the
streets. They are victims of
human trafficking.
They are victims of some of the
violent uh uh.
that we have in in all over this
country. Yes, Madam Chairwoman,
Senator Block, yes, they, they
must have been a victim of a
violent crime. It's a series of
enumerated crimes. Thank you. I,
uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
saw all those crimes listed, uh,
in the bill. I read through
that. So
Let me make sure I totally
understand what you're saying
here.
Uh, because
Uh, these terms matter.
So you said they are not here,
first of all, what's going on
with many, many of these people.
Here lawfully or not, is just,
there's a lot of bad things that
go on in the country and how
people are treated.
Um, so I sensitive to that.
Um, so you said they are not,
these people, they're not here
without um
permanent residences or some
type of
Documentation, they got a work
visa, they got a school visa,
they got something that.
This would apply to people that
are here.
With a, with a visa as well. Is
that, is that correct?
Uh, yes, madam Chairwoman Center
Block, yes, I mean DACA holders,
people with student visas,
employment visas, they just
cannot be a lawful permanent
resident or citizen. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
those people are here, went
through some type of process to
get the visa. They're here
lawfully, they're documented.
Can I, can I assume that?
Um, Madam Chairwoman and Senator
block up sometimes, sometimes
they are here without any form
of legal documentation.
Sometimes they are here with
some kind of a visa. It's
varied. We'll we'll get to that
part. I just wanna make sure um
that I'm sure I'm kind of
compartmentalizing where I'm at.
So those people that are here.
Went through the student visa
process, the work visa process,
the green card, whatever it is,
my, my wife is an immigrant. Uh,
she had to go through this as
welcoming over, took her like 10
years.
Figure 87 8 years to get our
citizenship.
So
There's those, there's that
group of people that would
qualify for a
Uh, the, the you.
The U visa certification,
correct?
OK.
Oh, OK, thanks, Madam Chair. So
now let's talk about the other.
part here. You, you mentioned
people who are here not
lawfully. Is that correct?
Yes, madam Chair, I'm turning
that over,
I just want to understand we're
talking about two groups of
people, those who are here.
That are not citizens.
And are here lawfully and then
those that are.
Not here lawfully would still
have access.
To go through this process of
the U visa certification. I
understand that correctly,
correct? Yes. Perfect. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. OK.
So
If you're not here lawfully,
according to
Um
8 US Code Section 1325 improper
entry.
By alien, I'm sure you are all
familiar with that.
It has 4 different things here.
Um, that would be.
Improper entry. I just want to
make sure I understand this.
Improper.
Time or place avoidance of
examination or inspection.
Misreputation, misrepresentation
and concealment of facts, that's
A.
Be improper time or place.
The penalties, see marriage
fraud.
They've done a lot in the
military, by the way.
Um, the immigration-related
entrepreneurship fraud.
OK. Is that, Madam Chair, does
that sound accurate, those four
things.
Or 8 US Code Section 132 the
question be
repeated and those are listed in
the statute, but I'm not sure
what the question is,
the question was, Madam Chair
and uh panel.
There's 4 ways.
To enter the country in in an
improper manner.
By, uh, by an alien, it says
here in 8 US code.
Section 1325.
In those 4 ways are
Improper time or place,
avoidance of examination or
inspection.
Misrepresentation and
concealment of facts, that's
one. And, and there's a, there's
a, a paragraph that goes below
it. I don't want to read it.
Um, B improper time or place,
civil penalties.
See marriage fraud.
Uh, the immigration-related
entrepreneurship fraud.
Would would you agree that those
are the four things.
Uh, by statute that you if you
Improperly and, and enter the
country that violates those four
things, correct?
Madame Chair and Senator Block,
uh, I do not think that is an
exhaustive list, but yes, that's
uh in the federal code and
statute. Perfect. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So I wanna make
sure, understand these people
here that violated this code
illegally, broke the law, they
would have.
They would have
The right to go through the U
visa certification. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, yes,
that's correct, perfect. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
now when it comes to
My colleagues on on the left
over here.
The left of me
Um
Talked about uh some of the
Preemption
Things, um, laws there. Let me
just kind of go through a couple
of things here.
If, if this law is challenged
under the doctrine of federal
preemption like other laws have.
Which arises when a state
conflicts with federal law. We
talked about that with Arizona.
Preemption can be express field
or conflict preemption. There's
3 sections in the law on that,
correct?
Field preemption is immigration
is an area of exclusive federal
control under the Immigration
and Nationality Act.
8 US Code Section 1101.
US Supreme Court.
has repeatedly, and I understand
what you think is different and,
and I respect that.
The US Supreme Court has
repeatedly held that states
cannot legislate independently
in immigration matters, even if
they claim to cooperate or
compliment with federal law.
Now
Senator Scott, I think, talked
about one issue with the AOC
where it was different.
In federal law.
I, I just want to understand
here, uh, Madam Chair, in panel.
Are you, are you talking about
10th Amendment that you don't
believe.
The powers
Uh, that are not provided to the
federal government that reserved
to the state. Are you arguing a
10th Amendment?
Argument here with this bill.
Madam Madam Chair, senator.
Um
I mean, the 10th Amendment
exists and that could be an
argument made, but very
specifically.
I understand that immigration
law is a matter for the federal
government cannot be regulating
status. We couldn't pass.
A statute giving status uh to
students to people who've lived
there all their lives or who
came uh.
When they were 2 years old.
The state has no power to do
that.
But the state has a role in
within federal law.
And that is the state, state
actors, sheriffs.
Um, judges or um or DA's.
Prosecutors, um, have a role in
the federal scheme.
This legislation only deals with
the state actor's role.
It's very different, as I said
before, 19 states have passed
this. I'm not aware of any.
And I kind of
Try to keep track of this. I'm
not aware of any lawsuit
challenging the guidance that
are given with regard to the
certification process by the
state.
To state actors.
But yeah, if we were trying to
say.
Uh, we're gonna give citizenship
to all.
People who lived here since they
were 2 years old, that would be
voided in a, in a minute. I, I
agree, I agree exactly with
that, uh, Madam Chair and
senator.
So that was the field
preemption. The conflict
preemption, I think, I, I think
you're trying to thread the
needle on here a little bit.
Your bill mandates additional
requirements.
Procedures and appeal processes.
That could
Potentially frustrate the
objectives of the federal
immigration law.
Thereby conflicting with federal
enforcement.
How do you, how do you see your
bill?
um
Not as a
Not in conflict, not with the
conflict preemption with federal
law.
Madam Chair, uh, senator, this
does not, um,
Involve any kind of enforcement,
which is the is would conflict
with federal laws activities in
any way, shape or form. This
bill was carefully crafted to be
entirely consistent, if not
identical, um, actually some cut
and pasting and citation to
federal law.
This is, this is.
Very consistent with what the
federal law requires.
Thank you. So are you telling me
then, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, that SB 177 does not
mandate.
Any additional requirements,
procedures, or appeal process
that processes that aren't
already codified in federal law.
Not to the federal government.
Um, we would have no power if we
were to pass a law saying.
Anyone who was detained by ice.
Um
shall have an appeal within the
federal system or even trying to
make an appeal in the state
system, that would be, that
would conflict.
Um, with federal law, very
obviously.
We're only telling state actors
who were within our purview to
regulate.
What they giving them guidance.
And having a review process if
they fail in their obligations
with regard to the U visa.
Procedures.
Thank you. I'm sorry, did you
have something? Are you OK,
thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
On the express preemption,
peace.
The federal government
Well, the federal laws
expressively they delegate
authority over visa issuance and
immigration status.
Do you
Do you conflict with that in any
way of a U visa certification
using some state agencies that
Um
Well, let me just ask it this
way. Are any state agencies in
New Mexico, if this bill became
law.
Would it in any way.
Delegate authority over visa
issuance in any and I, I
understand it won't do it for an
immigration status. I got that.
But does it have any conflict
with the express preemption.
No express preemption is when
the federal government says.
We are telling you that
bankruptcy is an example.
No, there used to be state
bankruptcy laws and the federal
government passed a law saying.
States may not get involved in
in bankruptcy.
That is expressed preemption
when they tell the state you
can't do this.
That has not been the case here,
and there are 19 states similar
to this.
Thank you. We talked about some
of the relevant case laws,
mainly the Arizona one, I think
that's probably the most famous
one.
Um
I'm not sure if you're familiar
with Heinz versus uh David Witz
in 1941, which again, the court
ruled.
That federal immigration law
preempts state laws that attempt
to regulate immigration through
in independent state mechanisms.
I
I'm trying to understand how
this is not an independent state
mechanism.
And then another one right
around the Arizona time, uh, a
year before Madam Chair, and the
panel was Chamber of commerce
versus.
Uh, wedding.
Um, that particular case
reaffirmed the principle that
state laws even touching upon
immigration.
Must comply with explicit
congressional authorization.
I, I think based on some of the
analysis that I've read.
That this bill creates new state
level authority.
Over the U visa certification
process.
Um
Are you telling me, Madam Chair,
that this complies with only
federal agencies will still have
the authority to approve or deny
visas.
Uh, Madam Chair, that's
absolutely right. Only federal
agencies, uh, only, uh, the US,
um, USCIS will have authority to
deny to grant or deny uh visas.
And
I just wanted to say that um.
The federal law delegated to
the.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So that, that being said,
The USCIS and and DHS they do
set the standards for
certifications, correct?
So, are you changing the
certifications at all.
Or you visa certifications that
have already been set by federal
statute.
No madam chair, not not at all.
And if I may very briefly add,
Madam Chair and Senator Black,
uh, thank you for the question
again. This does not, uh, this
bill does not claim to step on
the toes of the federal
government at all. It's simply
just requires some form of
process.
OK.
Thank you for that, uh, Madam
Chair.
Let's, let's talk, um.
You mentioned the district court
in the bill, is that correct?
Um, what is there, madam chair?
What is their role, uh, the
district court, did they act as
an adjudicator.
No, madam chair an adjudicate
well, an adjudicator.
That in more of a an appellate
role, um, then an adjudicator,
uh, well, OK, I guess you, I
guess you could say yes, they,
they mean they feel fairly
function, which is to review,
um, review evidence.
And make a determination about
whether the decision below was
correct.
I'm sorry, could you repeat
that, but make a determination
about what
I said the decision below
because that's the decision of
the certifying agency was
correct.
Thank you, Mann, the certifying
agency would be who?
Whoever whoever uh.
Uh, denied the certification. It
could be the police, it could be
uh the district attorney.
So, Madam Chair and Senator,
wouldn't that right there?
Since they're acting as an
adjudicator on federal
immigration matters.
When that conflict with federal
law, federal immigration laws
because it's a federal role, not
a state role. Uh, Madam Chair,
they are not deciding whether to
regulate the status of any
individual, which is totally
within the federal purview.
They're just seeing whether the
state complied the state actor
complied with its state
obligation.
So
Madam Chair, uh, panel, I, I, I
have a, a ton of stuff here I
could go over, I guess.
One question I'll ask you, it's
a basic one is, why, why do we
even need this? If everything
you're telling me is already
everything in your bill is
already in federal.
Statute
Um
Why are we doing this?
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator Block,
thank you so much for that
question. Um, as, as Senator
Saia Lopez spoke in her
introduction and as you know, we
also shared a little bit of our
experience in our introduction
uh on Wednesday. The reason why
this bill is so important is
because first of all, for so
many um undocumented people or
people seeking a permanent path
to status in the United States.
The UVA is the only mechanism to
do that, um, they're only
eligibility for anything is the
fact that they were victim.
of a violent crime. The issue
that we run into in New Mexico,
and I mean the three of us have
been immigration practitioners,
um, at some point in Deanda and
I currently are, is that because
of a lack of process and
expectations, um, we often will
submit requests that will never
receive a response. We will
submit a request that will get
denied and the uh law
enforcement agency or the.
will not want to engage in any
conversation as to why they are
denying the certification
request to open the possibility
of maybe
Correcting what is submitted in
the request, etc. because there
is no process in place. So many
people who would otherwise be
eligible to be here with lawful
status.
Get the doors closed on them
because without having a
certification, they, their
application gets rejected by
USCIS, they can't even get
reviewed for eligibility. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, I, I'd like to say I've
never practiced immigration law.
I've done the state side with,
uh, for example, the special
immigrant juvenile status, that
is a state order that must be
submitted to the federal
government. So I've done that
and so I've only been on the
state side of immigration law.
Not the federal side, and I just
wanted to make that clear. I
didn't want people to think I
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So these
people who
Who are here
Illegally
And, and if there's a crime
committed against them, and I
have another issue with the bill
where it talks about someone
else besides the victim.
It
If there's a crime committed
against them. What you're
telling me is
That even though they're here
illegally.
They can, they can go back.
To where, you know, to a point
of entry or something to apply
for
Asylum, apply for a visa, apply
for something, but they're here
illegally. They violated, they
broke the law, which, which you
have admitted, there's two
groups, those who have violated
the law, and those who have gone
through
The required process for some
type of documentation.
But what you're telling me is,
those people, in my opinion, if
they have not violated the law
and they have legal
documentation here.
Are you telling me that they're
scared to report crime?
Is that what you're telling me?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Block for that question.
This.
The Ubisa was created
specifically to grant um victims
of crime, legal status for being
a victim of qualifying criminal
activity within the preamble of
the federal um US uh U visa
regulation. It also talks about,
um, encouraging victims of crime
to come forward and collaborate
with law enforcement and so uh
legal status is not the center
of the
this bill, it is not the focus
of this bill, um, the U visa,
which will ultimately be granted
or denied by USCIS. They
determine whether to grant a
waiver, um.
For those immigration violations
that you mentioned earlier, um,
and to be clear, the USCIS will
uh wave many grounds of
inadmissibility, um, except
terrorism or Nazism. So there is
a very generous waiver that
USCIS looks at when um reviewing
these petitions. However, again,
that's not at the center of SB
177.
And
And I'm sure that's existing
law, that's existing federal
immigration law.
Thank, thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair. So,
Again, going from the beginning,
these people broke the law
coming here. I think you would
all agree with that.
These people were talking about
that are undocumented. Is, is
that correct?
They violated one of those 4.
Sections of improper time or
place, um.
You know, improper time or place
on the civil penalties for
second, the marriage thing, and
the entrepreneurship fraud.
It, it
That, that's what I'm talking
about, this group of people.
I, I, I, I disagree. I see your
point. I can see your point, but
I disagree that someone who is
here legally and has legal
documentation.
Um, is afraid they're going to
get deported with legal
documentation because
A crime was a horrible crime was
committed against them, and they
have, hey, I'm here studying at
UNM.
I'm here from
China, I'm here from Colombia.
I was assaulted on Central.
They're, they're going to
Call the police and get help. I,
I would imagine there's no, I, I
don't understand the fear.
Of, of that happening.
I understand the fear of those
that are here illegally, Madam
Chair, and, and panel because
They broke the law.
They shouldn't be here. They
should go through the, the
process that
My wife went through.
That
My grandmother went through.
The the legal process, so what
we're doing
There is a lot of
Risk
And there's a lot of
And open the aperture.
Of someone who's here illegally,
whether it's federal or state
law, which you're talking about
on all these different things
here.
Um, Madam Chair.
It's real easy to say, hey, I,
this happened to me, that was
all these things in the bill
here.
Um
Now I want my pathway to
citizenship.
I think that's, that's the part
that we're having a problem with
because they were here illegally
first, and I'm very sorry for
their circumstances, whatever
whatever it is.
But they're going around the
process of all those people that
are already here trying that are
that are documented, they they
check in, they're going through
their citizenship for years and
years and years like my wife,
and then all of a sudden, hey,
This is an easy way to get
around all that.
I mean, don't, is, isn't that
possible for people to think of
this that way?
Madam Chair, this law is
primarily has stated in the CFR,
um, and actually Vowa uh in
2002, um, had a.
also offered this relief.
This is to help law enforcement
prosecutors and judges,
prosecute crimes.
If there is a crime and the
victim is deported, there is no
justice.
It makes these individuals, um.
Afraid to come forward and so
there would not be a witness. In
my experience with this, it was
it in lase Communitario.
Um, if you are not in this
country legally.
Pretty much you're exploited at
every which way, but the saddest
one is when you are abused by
your partner.
Who could easily do what
you did help your partner.
To get
Regularized
But in a domestic violence
situation.
That's not what happens, it's
another tool of power and
control over the victim.
That's why this was passed by
the federal government.
That policy is the federal
government's policy and this
simply furthers that policy by
making the state piece of that
policy.
clear and empowering the state
to do the right thing.
And if I may very briefly add,
um, Madam Chair and Senator
Black.
Whether or not the person is
eligible for the actual visa
application, what, whatever
their immigration violations are
marriage fraud, illegal entry,
all of that sort of thing is
reviewed for eligibility by
USCIS. What they use
certification does, it does not
address any of that in any way.
It doesn't address whether the
person is here on a visa,
whether or not they entered the
country one way or another. It
is simply to certify whether or
not they were a victim of a
violent crime.
Whether or not they were helpful
in the investigation, detection
or prosecution of the crime. The
analysis of what their
violations are, what their
criminal history may or may not
be all of that is still reviewed
by the federal government.
Senator a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
I I sympathize.
With, with that. I'm trying to
get around the fact.
Of
This
This can be exploited.
You can say, you can file.
False reports or false.
Whatever to the police, you can
do that and I'm very sim, I'm
very.
Sensitive to this, uh, Madam
Chair and panel, not just
because of my wife.
But
In Afghanistan.
I was able to help my
interpreter.
And his family get citizenship
here in the United States.
Because the guy saved my
freaking life.
At least on that.
Uh, B, the Taliban were gonna
kill him.
Uh, which happened after the
disastrous withdrawal in 2021,
um, a lot of Afghans who helped
us didn't get out and were
slaughtered by the Taliban with
that debacle.
So I, I get that. Let me.
I, I just
I, I have so many other
questions. Um, I'm gonna yield
to see if there's any other
questions. I know there's a
motion to do pass. I know
Senator Scott had something
else, but um.
Let me just say this is very,
very sad.
It's, it's sad that, you know,
we've, we've had so many people
come here illegally. Bad things
happen to these people.
They should be held accountable
for the.
The crimes against these people.
No one is disputing that at all.
You do something to anybody, you
break the law, you should be.
You should be held accountable,
no matter what, we're a nation
of laws. You should be held
accountable, and that's the part
where I'm struggling with as
well as the part of the
preemption piece.
Uh, with this, um,
This is an issue that I think
our country is going to deal
with for a long, long time
because we just can't get our
We just can't get our poop in a
group on getting a strong
immigration laws together, uh,
with both parties that had, by
the way, the White House,
Congress.
Uh, the House and Senate and the
White House. So um I'll yield
for some other questions uh
later, but thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator.
I wanna first starting on the
the legislation itself, um, and
help me understand a couple of
things.
On page 2 lines 19 says a tribal
or public law enforcement
commissioned as peace officers.
the chief of the New Mexico
State Police or county sheriff.
can process you visa, it's that
what I'm understanding under
this proposed. Absolutely, madam
chair. OK, wonderful, um.
And I think that's beautiful and
I love it, but I wanna go to
page 7 lines 19 through 25.
Holding in context what we just
said, um, and I, I was going
through the um.
The, uh, article chapter 31,
here to see, um.
If this would fit in somewhere
or if it was gonna be a brand
new subsection.
And it looked like it was gonna
be a brand new subsection.
Um, so in thinking about line
21.
Published the agency's patient.
On the website, the agency
certifying officials contact
information.
Um, I want to imagine that this
was a tribal law.
Would it require then putting
their agencies in like requiring
that tribal agency where that
officers cross commissioned
from.
Putting up this.
Madam Chair, my understanding,
and I, I, I think I'm pretty
clear on this is that the state
cannot tell what the tribes, the
tribes to do where I'm getting
out. OK, so that would not be
applicable to that. However, uh,
29-1-11 authorized tribal and
employable peace officers to act
as New Mexico peace officers,
and that's why this bill
empowers them to do
certification should they
choose.
Right. And, and I understand
that, but I do think it's a
conflict in here, um, because of
the language that's here, right,
we're saying that.
In statute, the agency has to
publish their user U visa
certification on that agency's
website, and I think it's as
simple as saying this does not
apply to tribal agencies, or as
it's written right now, my
interpretation, and I think
judicial, whatever that
committee is that.
Judiciary
Um, it will, will have the same.
Um
Um, determination because it is,
it's saying if you are this,
then you do this. There's
nothing in there except for.
Madam Chair, there are many,
many state statutes that um on
their face look like they apply
to every agency, but it is well
understood in in the case law
that that's not the case.
So I don't think it's necessary.
I think with the judiciary will
say, well, obviously this
doesn't apply to state law cause
that's what I, I look at it this
doesn't apply to state law. I
can't tell you how many state
laws that we have on the books
look on its face like they
apply, but the courts of
determined, of course they
don't.
Um, because of sovereignty.
And so that sovereignty law in
New Mexico was very strong and
so I think this bill authorizes.
Um
The tribal police to do to do
this sort of doesn't require
them to do that, and it does not
require them to put anything on
their website because it's
simply inapplicable to tribal so
because of tribal sovereignty.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you, but if a tribal officer
decides to offer this, and we
have no a tribal officer who is
certifying your visas. I could
think of like in Sandoval
commissions there.
The way I read this is that
because this officer did that,
we have to put.
Um, information for the agency
certifying official.
Madam Chair, just because the
tribal officer decide or or uh
uh tribe does an MOU.
Or does something um to
collaborate with the state
government doesn't mean that all
of state law applies to the
tribe.
It only is what the tribe is
willing to do. The tribal
government is willing to do.
Um, and that is, that is, you
know how our, our, our chair of
judiciary often says, well, you
don't need to put that because
that's so clear.
In my view, that's true of this.
Um, and Madame Chair and
Senator, I thank you for that,
and I think, um, I would have,
um, it would be easier for me to
support this if it were explicit
that we're not mandating types
to do anything explicitly.
OK, Madam Chair, I will
certainly discuss, discuss it
with judiciary. I would hate to
put an amendment right now and
then have it stripped out by
judiciary, so what I will commit
to you is that I will discuss
and see. And if you will agree,
um, and I'm happy to have you
join in that discussion whether
he thinks it's necessary or not.
Madam Chair and Senator, I
appreciate that accommodation
and and willingness to have the
conversation are too often we
make assumptions on behalf of
tribal communities, and, um,
this feels like an assumption on
behalf of tribal communities
because of how a judge would
determine um and how they have
determined before, um, now that
I'm here in the state senate and
I'm representing several tribal
nations. I want to be very
explicit about our visibility in
these systems.
Absolutely, uh, Madam Chair, and
I, like I said, I'm happy to
have the conversation, but like
I said, I think New Mexico's got
pretty strong law on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I agree with you and I
appreciate, um, appreciate that,
and we're entering a time of
uncertainty on the federal
level.
Um, which just brings me to
some, some other statements and
I'll close with the question.
Um
But in some of what we've heard
earlier, you know, not.
Every one of these survivors who
comes forward has a savior.
Right? Someone who could just
shepherd them through the system
because of privilege or power.
Um, what we're talking about
with this bill is humanity.
Dignity.
Protecting some of the most
vulnerable.
Among us.
And I take
Personal offense.
That this act
And what we're trying to
accomplish here.
would be exploited.
For personal privilege and a
work around a system.
Because I know as a survivor
myself, but as a fierce advocate
for survivors of violence that
it is.
Really impossible to come
forward when the system is
against you.
No one believes you.
And that's what we're talking
about here. People who have the
courage to come forward because
it is so bad.
That they need help.
Against their worst fears.
Being deported.
And so
I think to say that.
People are gonna come forward
and exploit this.
For those of us who know better.
It's laughable.
And it should make all of us.
Upset.
that
Um
And Madam Chair.
The, the last thing I want to
talk about as um.
One of very few.
Native American senators.
Representatives
In this system.
Um
But the honor of representing my
community up here.
Everyone else's, maybe not
everyone.
Most
here.
We illegal.
They came to this country.
With before a system was in
place.
As a colonizer as, um, oh they
came to this country to exploit
and take.
And I am proud to say.
Ideologically that no one is
illegal on stolen, um, Madam
Chair and senator, I hope that
one of your experts might be
able.
To share with us the story about
how this process in its best
outcome.
Helped a survivor. Thank you,
madam.
I just
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
uh.
Senator Charlie, for, for your
statement and for your question.
Um, if we remember on even just
on Wednesday, we had, um, a
member of the Albuquerque Police
Department, who talked about how
his mother was able to.
Pursue legal status and
eventually become a citizen
because of the U visa process.
And likewise, um, we had another
speaker who said that she
herself was a victim of a
violent crime, participated in
the investigation and
prosecution of that crime and is
now a proud US citizen, uh, and
all of that is to say as well
that this process is not one
that is done even in 5 or 7
years.
If the pathway from applying for
your visa to obtaining US
citizenship is approximately a
twenty-year process. And so this
is a commitment that the
immigrant makes to becoming
available for the, the
investigation of the crime, all
the way pretty much through
until they obtain the U visa.
The process to even get AU visa
can be between 8 and 10 years.
And so we definitely see a lot
of success stories that we're
very grate.
to be a part of, um, and the
clients in at least my
experience will obtain their U
visa and eventually their lawful
permanent residency through
their U visa, hands down the
most grateful people because
they are in the journey, the
longest in comparison to a lot
of our, our other humanitarian
clients for sure.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Um, before I recognize the next
senator.
Time.
I would ask colleagues please to
be mindful.
I have chosen not to do time
limits on debate.
Which other committee chairs do.
But I would ask for
consideration from members.
For us to please be concise to
the point which most of us have
done so.
But we do have a courtesy for
other senators who've been
waiting here for 2 days.
To present their bills.
So I would ask for us to please
be considerate.
Have any questions and such, um.
Again, it's a prerogative of the
chair in the Senate.
We're not in the house, but
we're in the Senate.
Of how the chair runs the
committee.
And I've had precedent before
under my previous 19 years as
chair of a committee of how I
run it.
So I asked for consideration for
members.
Please be concise on your
questions.
We don't need to repeat what's
already been asked.
And due consideration.
We've been waiting here for 2
days.
Um
And I just want to put that out
and if it comes up again for
another piece of legislation, I
will continue to
Ask from our colleagues, both
sides. I'm not looking at one.
Specific, but I'm asking because
we do have some senators who are
still waiting here patiently,
again, this is the 2nd day.
Um
So
Senator Scott for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna, in the interest of time.
I'm gonna skip over the 3rd
concern that the AOC had.
Go straight to what I think is
the elephant in the room.
And that is federal law
controls.
The youth these application
process.
And then
SB 77 as a requirements that go
beyond the requirements in
federal law, Section 3D, Section
4 A B C D E F virtually all of
Section 4 goes beyond those
federal requirements.
And we'll be preempted.
Our federal requirements.
Finally, my last
It's my last comment here.
Is I
View this
Madam Chair and senator as an
unfunded.
Yeah
Police department of the city of
Tatum.
Or loving or hatch.
I mean these folks don't have
the resources to respond.
To a lawsuit.
Questioning
Whether these certifications
were
Or appropriately.
Issues or not.
Appropriately issued.
So
I mean there are just so many
issues.
With this piece of legislation,
we could go on for a lot longer.
With the problems.
But
In the interest of time.
I will yield, but
You know
Support legislation. Thank you.
Thank you.
So with that, we are on a do
pass motion.
And uh if you go ahead and call
the roll, please.
Senator Block
And our boon
Senator Charlie.
Yes.
And I
no
Yes, and explain my book.
And our Pinto.
Scott
No
Center Cio Lopez, yes.
And her hickey
Yes.
Senator Lopez
Yes, and to explain their votes,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Panel, I, I, I think this is
gonna have some
Significant challenges in
judiciary.
Uh, I just do, um, I'm
interested in seeing how it
comes out.
If it does, if it's heard.
Um, but I, I will also say that
You know
There there are people who are
going to try to exploit the
system. They do it all the time.
In different programs to exploit
the system and
And
That's just human nature. I get
that.
But I, I, I just don't think um
we have to get personal. This is
about the law.
Whether we agree with the law or
not, I personally don't agree
with this bill.
I also don't agree that my, my
family came here to exploit the
country. I mean, I fought for
the country. I put my life on
the line for this country, my
ancestors left other countries
because they were Jewish.
Um, so I, I don't think we need
to go down that road. We're all
Americans.
You all be proud to be
Americans.
And um I would, I would argue
and concede that those people
who have come here illegally are
looking for a better life.
Because there's some really bad
places around the world, and
quite frankly, I've been there,
I've been to a lot of those
places.
So we don't need to get personal
here and talk about our previous
ancestors that came here to
exploit the country. I did not.
I just, I would never go there
on anyone else's.
We have to keep talking about
only the bill and whether or not
we agree this bill.
is
Lawful
And
And pass
Judiciary and get a a fair.
A debate on the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So guy goes.
I'm sure thank you Senator.
Expert witnesses, I too think we
need just look at how this deals
with
The the federal law. I do have
an amendment that I'll give to
the center offline.
Uh, because I, I did not do that
because uh we sort of got um.
Talk to and due to the time
constraints we have, uh, but I
do think that there's some
issues that we can do when I
have, uh, gives law enforcement.
The ability to reject fraudulent
claims, but maintains the bill's
goal of protecting.
And the cooperating victims and
so I, I'll hand that to you
afterwards just so you, you look
at it, it's got the line for
page.
uh, page 4 line 24, it goes
through the amendment. I think
that there are some things that
are valuable in this.
But I see a lot more.
Hesitation
To the federal law. So what that
I'll you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator for bringing the
bill forward. um, and I am happy
to stand and support, as many of
you know, I came to this country
illegally.
I did.
And I'm very, very proud to be
serving as a New Mexico state
senator and the first in the
country.
Who's a former undocumented
immigrant, and unfortunately, as
we know, many of our families do
not have a pathway to legal
status. That is a fact, and I
think it is um
Really commendable, uh, to see
you all laying the foundation of
uh facts versus assumptions and
laws versus thought processes
and as I shared with many of
you, uh, my sister was a victim
of this, and she is under the
process, uh, Madam Chair, and I
would tell you that folks would
never want to undergo these
situations, not her, not my
nieces, not my 8 year old niece
who suffers from anxiety now,
and
I just commend you for bringing
it forward because the lives of
the folks who don't have a mic.
are present
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so by a vote of 6
to 3, you have a due pass
recommendation on to judiciary.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey, Senate Bill 120.
No behavioral health cost
sharing.
And at our last meeting, I had
also asked Senator Hickey with
several amendments that he had
to please.
Put it together in a committee
substitute, which would make it
easier for us to track and
For the online tracking and
everybody else, so I appreciate
your indulgence, senator.
So the committee substitute.
I think you all are receiving
that right now.
So for purposes of discussion,
the chair will move.
They do not pass on Senate Bill
120.
But uh then a do pass again for
purposes of discussion.
Uh, considered health and public
affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 120 with a second
from Senator Charlie.
For purposes of discussion on
the substitute.
So Senator, if you would.
Present the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, colleagues, uh, hopefully
this will be brief and
Relatively straightforward.
Thank you.
Um
Just a little bit of context
because a lot of people were not
here when this initial bill.
was passed in 2021, um, and the
context is uh one of my children
or actually both of my children
had uh issues with uh substance
use and one of them.
I would go to uh intensive
outpatient therapy and uh
there'd be a copay of $50 and by
the end of the week, virtually
everyone had dropped out.
And so it became obvious that
cost sharing was a barrier to
getting uh uh therapy.
So with that in mind and also
another piece of context is that
mela and the leading actuary in
the country has written several
papers but really definitively
defined that uh if mental health
issues for people with chronic
disease or stabilized, the cost
of the chronic disease comes
down by a factor of 3 or 3 or 4.
So this is actually a bill that
saves health plans, money.
And in fact, when I was CEO of
New Mexico Health Connections. I
did put that into our benefits
that there would be no cost
sharing for behavioral health
services and medications and our
emergency room visits were 1/3
less in our admissions were 13%
less.
So, um,
Essentially what this bill does
is originally it had a five-year
period to look at um because of
the timing of how we do things,
I can't wait 5 years, uh, have
to do it somewhat sooner and we
also have, and I think there'll
be a expert online from Johns
Hopkins, uh, they found out
about this bill and felt that
the School of Public Health, it
was so significant, the initial.
They initiated a study and uh
again with
Findings about how the bill was
put together, but also about uh
its impact and that it was so
thought to be so important to
NIH gave them a full grant, uh
what's called an RO1 with
several million dollars to be
able to study this further, this
concept, and um.
So I'm I'm bringing it to you
because of the timing of the
legislature and the bill and so
forth and also the OSIs here,
and I think they'll testify it's
not raising rates, um, and
87,000 people between uh Foy
insured, uh, mostly small
businesses and uh
Uh, patients in the eye back are
taking advantage of this and I
think we maybe have some people
online who will support how uh
beneficial that has been for
them to get access to behavior
health services.
What the bill does initially, as
you can see is it crosses out,
uh, the, uh, until January 1,
uh, and bills that uh deal with
insurance regulation and
Uh, health plans that are
supervised by the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance.
There are 4 sections, so it gets
repeated 4 times. Secondly, the
bill adds uh what turned out for
some health plans to kind of be
a uh a loophole for them. Uh,
they were charging for um
And this is my uh co-sponsor for
the bill, Senator Steinborn, and
uh they were charging for
emergency room and urgent care
visit copays, so we made it
explicit in this bill that they
couldn't do that as well cause
that's not really the spirit of
the bill, and thirdly, it uh
puts us in compliance with
federal law, particularly high
deductible health plans, uh, in
a high deductible health plan,
you do have to pay.
Any cost sharing until your
deductible is exhausted, then
you do not.
And so this 3rd section that you
see on page 3 at the top,
explicitly defines that so that
our laws and regulations are in
compliance with federal law.
The um
Uh, this bill essentially will
make what we just implemented in
Senate bills 2 and 3 for
behavioral health will take that
financial barrier away from
people being able to get access
to services and I started out, I
know that for real lived
experience, as my son went
through that uh process. So that
is uh essentially the bill and
hall and uh we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn,
did you wish to add anything to
the introduction. Thank you,
ma'am, sorry, I'm, I'm late. I
apologize. I, I just want to say
it's such an honor to be a part
of this bill.
Um, this is the first, I'm sure
Senator Hickey told you we were
the first state in the country.
eliminate co-pays.
Um, for, uh, behavioral health
visits and mental health drugs,
and even though it didn't affect
all types of plans, we saw local
governments then adopting this
policy. We, we have an even more
extensive benefit than um than
the bill just because the market
kind of
Leveled up and um and I, I can
tell you that I got letters from
constituents telling me how it
literally changed your life.
And uh
It's just pretty profound, the
thought that, uh, you know,
getting good mental health care
is really an important right and
uh
So I just so honored, you know,
it's now the sunset. We've got
a, we've gotta make this
permanent and that's what this
bill does and
Definitely, yeah.
I appreciate your consideration.
Thank you, Senator Doctor
Hickey.
He's really the one that
pioneered this legislation. I'm
proud to be a part of it. Thank
you, ma'am. Sure.
And Madam Chair, if I might and
committee of the researchers
from Johns Hopkins and the
University of Minnesota are
online, I and they would like to
just say a few words of uh what
this bills meant and how they
see it impacting.
Uh, behavioral health and again
they're, they, they did, they
got published in Health affairs,
um, which is kind of like
getting published in New
England, New England Journal of
Medicine about this, and, uh,
and they did receive a sizable
grant. Uh, so if uh Samantha or
Ezra is online if they could say
a few words.
Yes, and Ezra, is it
Goldberstein?
If you'd like to say a few
words, please. We keep it.
Short.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Hickey. Uh, my name is
Ezra Goldberstein. I'm an
associate professor of health
policy and management at the
University of Minnesota and uh
as Senator Hickey mentioned, uh,
I am the principal investigator
of a national institute of
Mental Health funded research
grant that
is aiming to evaluate the
effects of SB 317. So a very
quick background about how
someone in Minnesota ended up
doing this along with colleagues
all over the country.
When SB 317 1st passed, uh, I
saw about it on, I think, a
health policy list serve that
I'm on and as somebody who does
a lot of work on mental health
policy and the economics of
mental health services, it
caught my eye because that's
actually Senator Steinbor noted
this is the first law of this
type in the United States. We
know that we have significant
issues of accessing mental
health and substance use
disorder services, and if you
look at people even who have
commercial health insurance,
looking at national data, the
number one reason they say that
they have a hard
time accessing care is still
because of costs, in spite of
the fact that they have what we
typically think of as being high
quality shirt.
Insurance. So, um, this was
really is um a very novel law.
It is the first of its type in
the country and we do know there
are other states and other uh
other policymakers that are very
interested in this sort of
policy and as such, my
colleagues and I who are at the
Johns Hopkins University, George
Mason University, and the RAND
Corporation felt like it was a
very fascinating policy to study
and fortunately, uh, the
National Institutes of Mental
Health agreed with us and
providing us with a grant.
So far we have only limited and
very preliminary evidence on SB
317's effects. We have 3 papers
that we have published in peer
reviewed journals, one of which
looks at the only the 1st 6
months of the policy, which we
wish we could have done more,
but we had some data issues that
prevented us from looking at a
longer time period.
Where we found that those people
who were uh that basically um
medications for the drugs that
were targeted by this law for
mental health or substance use
disorders, out of pocket costs
fell for those drugs by 86%
compared to people who were in,
uh, uh, who were in New Mexico,
but not affected by SB 317,
which is a really, you know, in
my assessment, pretty stunning
reduction. We did not find much
of an effect in the 1st 6
months on the volume of those
drugs, though, that were
actually uh being purchased by
consumers, although we did find
some effects of increased, uh,
prescription pills for higher
cost.
And branded drugs for mental
health and substance use
disorder services. We also have
done some uh some work that is
qualitative in nature around um
how where we interviewed about
30 stakeholders in New Mexico,
including government officials,
regulators, insurers, and
clinicians to understand the
passage of the law and its early
implementation.
Um, and we've, um, and we have
those are papers that are
published in the Journal of
Health Affairs and Health
Affairs scholar and you know,
we, we what we learned from that
was the law has actually had
fairly smooth implementation.
There has been some confusion
about who is and who is not
affected by the law because of
the nature of being state
legislation that is subject
where certain plans are subject
to ERISA and therefore not
affected by the law and that
there's broad support for doing
things to expand X to people
with severe mental illnesses,
um.
Some concerns from insurers
about potential increases in
costs and uh maybe potential of
abuse of of of some services
without cost sharing, um, and
maybe just the final thing I
know is that there is the notion
that there is still some
coordinated education that's
probably needed for the public
about the law, so I'll, I'll end
there. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Is that all of your testimony,
senator? OK. We'll go to the
audience here.
In the room, is there anyone in
support of this measure?
If so, if you'd like to say a
few words, please keep your,
your, uh,
Testimony short and sweet, 2
minutes.
There's a microphone to
introduce yourself, make your
statement.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Viaia
Akiva. I'm the life and health
division director with the
Office of the Superintendent of
Insurance, OSI has been
implementing the law in the
commercial space.
And it's also collecting data
related to the impacts of this
law. We have evidence that it's
saving money and it's working as
intended and we uh ask for your
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition, there is a very long
standing body of research going
back to the RAND study in the
senator will correct me if I'm
wrong. I believe it was the
1970s that shows that out of
pocket costs associated with the
receipt of services are a
deterrent to receiving medically
appropriate and needed services.
We stood in support of SB 317
when it passed 4 years ago or
whenever it was.
and we stand a very strong
support of eliminating the
sunset date. This is good for
patients. It does not raise
premiums, and we urge the
committee's support. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Jim Jackson for disability
rights in New Mexico. Uh, we
also encourage your support of
this. It's working. This bill
has been in place for a couple
of years now. It's really made a
dramatic difference in people's
ability to access.
uh
And we encourage you to just
continue this and take the sun.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
Please.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans, and we stand in
opposition to this bill. We
stand in opposition to this bill
because we believe that the bill
is premature. The sunset date is
January 1, 2027. A simple
solution to that is to extend
the sunset date. As you've heard
in the testimony, there are
currently studies going on, uh,
at many different uh uh
universities and different
entities, and they are looking
at this.
Issue. This is the first bill of
its kind in the United States
and the impact of it needs to be
fully understood. Uh, one of the
witnesses in support of it said
that they have limited evidence
at this point. I think extending
the debt extending the sunset
date would be appropriate.
One of the reasons why they have
opposes the bill is that when
you talk about cost sharing,
you're really just talking about
two ends of the of the spectrum.
There's premium and cost
sharing. Both of those come from
folks who are utilizing service
you have insurance, but the
folks that are utilizing
services do the cost sharing in
the form of deductibles, copays,
and co-insurance. And we think
that it's more appropriate that
the folks who are using
services, they.
Finally, I would note for you
that
When the OSI looked at data
related to this bill in
If you'll go to their analysis,
you'll note very clearly that
the OSI does not have data on
the prior years for comparison
and is unaware of if behavioral
health cost sharing elimination
had the same impact in prior
years. What happened was this
bill was implemented as of
January 1, 2022, and the
insurers built into their rates,
the differential that they would
need in order to account for
that cost sharing, looking at
the full spectrum of data coming
in from the health insurers
would.
give you an indication of the
impact on rates. We respectfully
oppose the bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz,
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.
We have been working with this.
We do have some concerns still
with the sunset provision, and
we've talked that as well. Uh,
we have not seen the sub, so,
um, not exactly sure, but wanted
to express our concerns with the
Thank you. And then on Zoom.
We have one person, I think it's
the name is Quentin.
Yes, hello. Good afternoon, uh,
Madam Chair and sons. My name is
Quentin Ampersan. Uh, I'm a law
student working for registered
lobbyist on, who represents the
behavioral health Providers
Association, which is comprised
of more than 60 providers in
communities all throughout New
Mexico, um, these behavioral
health providers strongly
support um SB 120. This law is
currently in effect and it's
already having really positive
impact and it needs to be made
permanent.
By eliminating the financial
obligations on accessing mental
health treatment. More people
can seek treatment, especially
those suffering from chronic
mental health conditions and
substance misuse.
The opposite additionally, the
office of the superintendent of
insurance reported that there's
no indication that um the
behavior health cost sharing
elimination had a significant
impact on commercial insurance
rates.
Um, and personally as a student,
being able to access mental
health, mental health care while
I've been in law school has been
a really big support for me and
I know it has been for many of
my classmates as well. Um, and I
know it's a needed support for
many young people who might not
otherwise be able to afford
these services, um, without this
still being in place. Um, the
behavioral health providers know
that eliminating cost sharing is
a good policy for the health
health of New Mexicans, and I
urge you all to please vote to
remove the expiration date on
this well. Thank you so much and
Good evening. Thank you.
And there was no one online um
in the negative.
So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee.
Then sure if I could address the
comments that were just made.
OK, I don't see any comments
from committee
from the people who opposed the
bill.
Um
No.
Sorry, we'll just go to
questions or comments from
committee.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. If I
are indicate so.
Single year cost of between 11
and $20 million.
Madam Chair and senator.
Who will be absorbing that. Um.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
I'm not sure where I see that in
uh
The FIR if there there is one
agency that I'm aware of, the
retiree authority. I'm aware of
their actuaries or actuaries,
the first time around, missed
this and the point that I want
to comment on is that I, I'm not
taking the time to go through
the studies from the
Best, most reputable actuaries
in the country. This bill saves
money.
This bill reduces chronic
disease exacerbations, which is
a huge cost. I didn't want to
have to get into the detail, but
with kind of a, a guesswork
approach by the uh retiree
authority, uh, who did not look
at the impact of how much it's
gonna save. Uh, I can tell you
when I put this in place in New
Mexico Health connections, it
allowed us to be one of the
lowest expense plans on the
exchange and
And that was because our
emergency room visits were 30%
less, and the apples to apples
comparison than the other health
plans at the time and admissions
to hospitals were down by 20%.
In fact, became our business
model for the success of the
health plan. So it was very
forward thinking and does not
have an impact. It has a
positive impact on
Rates whether or not some
insurers choose to pass that on
to the public. I can't tell you,
but it does have a positive
impact on rates.
Senator Scott.
Madam Chair and senator.
You've got uh retiree healthcare
authority.
Public school insurance
authority.
And
Who else?
Healthcare authority
And just 2 out of 3.
is where this
Number came from in the fiscal
impact report.
I believe I heard.
Madam Chair and Senator, the
Uh, insurance companies, Blue
Cross Blue Shield and
And another one both
representing.
That this was going to result in
a
cost shift.
From
The folks utilizing the services
at no charge and premiums.
And, and that seems.
It seems realistic to me.
From a pure
Insurance costs and.
Did you address those concerns?
Um
Again, I'm looking at the FIR on
the second page, the healthcare
authority states, the agency.
Built the cost of fully covering
behavioral health services into
the baseline rates of the group
health benefit for the state and
local government employees by
the state health benefit plan,
meaning permanently eliminating
cost sharing would not increase
their costs.
OK, but the HCA didn't have.
Those numbers and the the fiscal
impact report.
And, uh,
Madam Chair.
Madame Chair and senator, no,
they, they looked at it with a
responsible actuary who said, in
fact, again,
that this
Doing this, lowers rates.
Good actuaries when they look at
the impact of stabilizing
chronic disease exacerbations.
And the cost of those which are
huge.
By getting people stable mental
health.
They then their chronic diseases
are able to take care of
themselves and they don't have
the exacerbation,
hospitalization costs and that
New Mexico Health Connections,
our data bore that out as we
compared to the other health
plants who did not have that at
the time who we were competing
against for IBAC and commercial
insurance, uh, we had and and
this was an apples to apples
comparison actually done by an
agency run by uh.
Uh
Pat and who who does analysis
that, in fact, um,
It led to a, a decrease apples
to apples and admissions and
also emergency room visits. So
it's a cost saver.
And their actuaries did not have
the sophistication to be able to
go in and to evaluate that, but
when it was evaluated by the
commission here and he this
data, they were able to prove
that in fact we were able to do
apples to apples in the heat of
survey and show that it had a
positive impact and also that
patients stayed on their
medications longer.
Oh, Madam Chair and senator.
The actuaries.
Employed by those two insurance
companies that stood up.
Or presenting
Inaccurate testimony is that?
Is that what's being
represented? Yeah, Madam Chair
and Senator Scott, uh,
Actuarial sciences and art.
And the art of being able to
assess.
The impact of one action on
benefits.
Having a
Positive aspect.
Uh, again, by our actuaries,
Milliman, uh, the top actuarial
firm in the country, uh, said,
no, this is actually a very good
and well, and they predicted
that and in fact it turned out
to be the case. We were able to
lower our rates.
So Madam Chair and senator
intuitively it would seem to me
that when we make something
free.
We would get more utilization.
Which I believe is what.
Is what you're representing in
that increased utilization is
actually driving costs.
Down
Because
OK, thank you, Senator Scott and
Madam Chair, um, because if in,
and this is, I, I don't have the
papers with me. I can give them
to you, the Milleman wrote. They
demonstrated that when a patient
with chronic disease,
particularly multiple chronic
diseases.
If they have their mental health
issues attended to be an
addiction or some other mental
health disturbance. They often
go together.
If that becomes stabilized, they
take much better care of
themselves in their chronic
disease, so they don't end up
with an exacerbation of their
chronic disease in the emergency
room and the data from New
Mexico Health Connections proved
that point when we looked at the
comparison of emergency room
visit rates by people in New
Mexico held connections versus
Blue Cross, Presbyterian, and
United.
On an apples to apples.
Uh
Assessment
By a
A, a test that's called Heus,
um, that looks at those types of
things.
So Adam Chair and Senator,
you're representing that.
Emergency room visits went down.
Totally or just as a consequence
of
Mental health
Pro
The Madam Chair and senator, the
main differentiator and the
exchange in our plans from our
competitors by and large was the
no cost sharing for behavioral
health, and we had that
distinction of having that the
30% decrease in ER or lower, uh,
ER rate and a 20% less admission
rate.
And we can produce that material
for you too as well. I didn't
bring that with me today.
And Madam Chair and senator, if
we extrapolate that.
To other medical conditions.
It's ultimate.
End point
Where would we be at the at
them.
I, um, Madam Chair and senator,
I can't tell you in terms of
extrapolating it out to every,
every disease and so forth, uh,
or condition, but based upon the
reason we did this was based
upon the research done by
Millerman showing that you have
much lower.
Uh, rates of
Uh, utilization in patients with
chronic.
So you invest upfront by
eliminating the copay so they
get the services, but you get
the services, they then take
better care of themselves and
make fewer emergency room or uh
or end up being hospitalized.
So this is where behavioral
health, I mean, one of the
reasons we're trying to focus on
it is not only for the benefit
of behavioral health in the
state, but if we do this well,
we're going to see a decrease in
crime.
And other costs that we have to
pay for within the state. So
this is a, a pretty profound
positive benefit impact.
That while intuitively say, oh,
it's going to cost more. In
fact, it generates less cost for
the health plan.
And madam
Hm
Madam Chair and Senator.
So why not extend.
Or just carry this.
pilot program, if you will.
Out to its termination date.
Where
A substantial amount of data.
could be available.
You either confirm.
Or deny
What's being represented today
because I believe today
Madame Chair and Senator, we
don't have a lot of data.
To
Uh, to, to justify the
representations that are being
made.
The, uh, we, we have Madam Chair
and senator, we do have the
Milleman data.
Um, which, which applies and
says if you stabilize behavioral
health, you have a dramatic
decrease in chronic disease.
cost
And, and I will, I will get the
studies and I will give them to
you. They're pretty profound.
So it was based on those
studies.
That we took the action.
It was a business. I mean, it
was certainly a care decision,
but it was also a business
decision.
Madam, Madam Chair and senator,
was that?
Consequence of
The New Mexico program.
Or some other programs.
Being operated elsewhere.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Scott, that was a review of
data, um, nationally.
by Milliman
Uh, across
millions of, of uh claims data
points in the country that
melama collects. I mean they buy
the data and they make these
analysis. So it's a national
phenomenon.
But I believe it was represented
Madam Chair and senator, this is
the first program of its kind in
the nation.
So how are we inferring.
From other less comprehensive
programs.
That this this data would apply
here.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator Scott, uh
The
Uh, reception and again, they're
the uh we don't have some folks
online because
of the lateness of the hour, but
Um
The, the uptake by it from
people in the state you heard
from one personally, but from a
number of other people that this
really did break down the
barriers are getting the care,
um, and so to us, it's uh self
obvious that this is a good
thing to do, particularly as
we're about to invest, or at
least put aside a billion
dollars and invest 150 million
in various regional programs,
we, we, this being in place for
the commercial.
Populations will be very
significant.
Yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
motion for DuPac.
Sorry, there's a motion for a
due pass from Senator Pinto.
And that was the 2nd from
Senator Charlie.
And of course, we're still in
discussion.
Any further discussion?
Senator Celia Lopez.
Thank you. I just want to
briefly say what an amazing
thing it is.
American Medical Association
Journal, um.
That they found
That that finding, the two
findings deduction and average
out of pocket costs to use
mental health.
Or
And that there was not an
increasing.
Um, so I just wanted to make
that comment.
Um, I support the bill.
Thank you, Senator So Lopez.
Thank you, Senator. Questions,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair um.
Uh, Doctor Hickey or senator,
are, are you telling me I want
to understand this, that when we
got when we did the cost share,
did you say we're doing cost
sharing or we get rid of it.
Um
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Black, uh, we eliminated the
cost share uh and the, and the
deductible or coinsurance
whenever those were being
applied.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So did any
companies because of that raised
their, their, uh, rates.
Uh, Madam Chair, and senator.
A, a knee-jerk reaction by some
actuaries in some companies and
I can't, I mean, there's lots of
companies would be, oh, well, we
need to recoup that rate what
they're not looking at is the
meman data that demonstrates the
downstream effect.
And, and, and
Uh, that they will have lower
cost altogether in a population
with this type of activity.
Yes,
Madam Chair, Senator, it was
really interesting, this bill
when it passed.
Got
Joined up with another bill that
we passed at that same time in
the same bill creating the New
Mexico Healthcare Affordability
Fund.
The Mexico healthcare
affordability Fund is a fund
that's raised by a kind of a
surcharge on insurance companies
that actually doesn't cost the
Mexicans anything.
That is used to then lower
premiums for New Mexico
residents. So in fact, when this
bill became law,
Simultaneously, New Mexicans
were given.
Um
Uh, premium assistance. So they
uh by and large, thousands of
New Mexicans saw their premiums
actually go up for the first
time ever. It was the most
astonishing thing because it's
almost like death and taxes.
We're used to insurance prices
going up.
For the first time we saw a real
action to kind of contain those
costs.
While this benefits
simultaneously was coming online
for the policy. So, um, whether
or not
Some insurance policies were
more or less expensive. It's
almost hard to quantify because
of what was going on with that.
Policy, but I will tell you if
you look at the FIR that's in
front of you.
The healthcare authority for the
state, which manages health
insurance for New Mexico
employees says that this does
not affect rates. It's built
into it.
And, and part of it definitely
gets into how rates are
negotiated, um, when you're
talking about real premium
costs. It's one of the
challenges I will just tell you
is health policy makers is that
we do not have enough
consolidation as a strategy of
how health insurance rates are
negotiated collectively to use
that purchasing power, but
clearly, um, it has not had a
negative effect on rates. In
fact, because of the healthcare
affordability fund.
The Mexicans.
Uh, rates have been probably
kept lower, I would assume than
some places in the country,
thanks to our superintendent of
insurance and that fund.
Long,
answer, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So are
you telling me that, um,
There are no more studies being
conducted right now, we're
complete with the studies.
Madam Chair and Senator Black
know, um, this was so
intriguing.
That uh
The initial study, which was
qualitative and just a little
bit of data. They didn't have
very much showed um.
Some increase in, in, in uptake,
but the NIH or National
Institute of Mental Health, and
I am age uh which rigorously
reviews grant requests for
several million dollars.
thought that this had such great
potential.
That this group of researchers
were awarded a grant and
one in
Uh
50 grants actually after they go
through this rigorous process of
review, get rewarded. So this
is, yes, there is more ongoing
and they will be looking at the
secondary effects as well on
what Milliman uh as they looked
at their data for many years
past all over the country, said
has an impact on
Physical health by
Stabilizing mental health.
Thank you, doctor. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
You know, I
The, the information I got a
couple things here regarding the
study. Let me just say, um,
you've said we have a little
data from that, and I think we
need to be making.
Informed decisions and I agree
with, I think it was Senator
Scott who talked about, well,
let's just go to the sunset.
And let's just come back and get
some more, some more data and
take a look at it cause I think
your bill.
Um
Senators has has merit.
But when I
Hear from these companies.
Because of
The bill that was, I think it
was passed in 21.
Um, rates were raised on people.
I mean, we.
We, we've admitted that.
So why not just get the rest of
the data to see how it is for
New Mexicans.
I mean, when's the sunset of
this? Is it 27, I think.
26
Madam Chair and Senator, I
believe it's January 1st of uh
27. But if you look at, if we
were let that go, then try and
pass a bill, we would have a
period in which people would
have to do the copay again and
that
To me in in line of what we're
doing now for behavioral health
would set our attempts to get
people access to addiction and
behavioral health to lower
crime, it would set that back.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So let me make sure
I understand what you just said.
So, you're telling me if we
don't pass this bill,
People are gonna, their rates
are gonna rise and they're gonna
lose access.
Is that what you're telling me?
Madam Chair and senator, uh,
essentially they're out of
pocket costs would come back,
and the out of pocket costs for
behavioral health visit and run
anywhere from
Because depending upon the plan
from 2050 60 $70 a time and as
you know, behavioral health is a
continual therapeutic situation.
That money really mounts up over
time.
And right, and, and, and of
course, the cost of the drugs
and so people wouldn't be taking
the drugs and what we found in
the study of the apples to
apples.
Um, we found that our patients
compared to the other health
plans in New Mexico, who were
selling to the same population
of the IBA that our patients
stayed on their drugs for a
longer period. That's one of the
questions in this heated survey
than other health plans. So that
again, it, it's like
It's treating a a a disease
situation that needs to be
treated. And if people can't
afford to buy the drugs and they
get access to the therapy,
they're only gonna get worse.
And when they get worse or
concurrent chronic conditions
are gonna get worse. And that's
why we saw our health plan have
fewer ER admissions and
admissions because those people
were stable.
Thank you, Senator. Um.
Madam Chair
So
We implemented this bill,
eliminating the the copays and
the cost sharing.
We know that the insurance
companies pass those costs on to
the consumers.
Um, that's not true because
didn't we just say the rates of,
of the people they did go up
according to
What the
What the insurance companies are
telling me is the company raised
their rates.
Um
To account for the costs
associated with no cost sharing.
Is, is, are they, are they not
accurate in
And that
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Black,
some of them may have, as I
said, actuary, it's an actuarial
science, but when you've talked
to one actuary, you've talked to
one actuary, but many other
actuaries and particularly the
most outstanding actuarial firm
in the country is again finding
that if you take this.
Uh
precaution or, or take advantage
of this benefit to get mental
health stabilized, you're going
to see less cost overall in a
population because the chronic
disease costs, which are
responsible for most of the cost
increases in healthcare, they go
down.
So they didn't take advantage of
that and think that all the way
through. That's my opinion.
Whereas our actuaries, millerman
thought that through and said
yes, this is a good business
strategy, and that allowed us to
be the lowest or 2nd lowest in
the
Most popular products on the
exchange.
Thank you, Senator, both
senators.
Um, a yield, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
We are to do pass motion in a
second.
If you could call the roll
please.
Senator Block.
And her boon
Senator Charlie.
Senor Gallegos.
And
In our nova. Yes.
Pinto.
Scott.
Serio Lopez, yes.
And a hickey.
Yes. Lopez.
Yes, since you explain his vote,
Senator Black.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
thanks again, senators for
bringing this forward.
Um, I
I'm sure this is gonna come on
the Senate floor and we can chat
more about it before. I'm just
very interested in talking to
you, uh, doc, about the, uh, the
study uh before I
Make a final vote, so uh thank,
thank you for coming in.
Thank you and you have a you
pass motion.
Thank you, Madam.
6 to 3. Thank you.
Senator Stephanics, if you join
us up front when you're here for
Senate Bill 122.
Expand prescription drug
donation program.
Thank you, uh
Um
Sure, yes, we're gonna do that,
ma'am.
Good mor, uh, good afternoon,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, this is expanding
the prescription drug donation
program. We already have this in
statute or updating it and um.
There is an amendment.
That the board of pharmacy
requested that we put this, put
on this bill to make it more
feasible for them.
To monitor
And regulate
Thank you, Senator, and did you
already explain your bill? No,
uh, it's well to explain your
bill first and then we could do
the amendment.
Certainly, Madam Chair, um, this
came out of the legislative
Health and Human Services
Interim Committee.
And Senator Or TC Pino is uh
really behind this program but I
introduced it back in the 90s
when I had one term in the
Senate, and it was never really
uh utilized well where people
could donate unexpired drugs for
people who might need them. So
along came some other bills we
updated it and the regulation
licensing department has the
board of pharmacy that actually
is the entity that monitors
this.
entire thing.
We already have this in statute,
so this is updating it.
And uh specifically.
Madam Chair, the, uh, some of
the definitions have changed.
And that there's an expansion of
the definition of donor.
Um, we also have the.
Amendment that the
Board of Pharmacy gave.
And I could go through that.
On page 2.
right.
Line 22. Well, let me just
interrupt you, OK.
Um, for purposes of discussion,
um, we have to move the
amendment, certainly. So did
you, are you finished? I
finished. It's, it's an existing
program we're updating. OK,
Madam Chair, I move the
amendment for discussion
purposes, for purposes of
discussion, there's a motion
from senator Sah Lopez and a
second from Senator Block.
And then Senator Stephanics, if
you would go ahead and.
He
Keep going through your
amendment as you um.
Madam Chair, I'm talking about
0.231400.1.
Uh, on page 2.
We are striking line 22 and line
23.
It says a health care facility
licensed by the healthcare
authority pursuant to the
healthcare code.
And that's being struck.
Uh, on page.
6
Strike
Line one.
Strike the word publish.
And insert in lieu thereof make
available to the public.
And then on page 6 between line
14 and 15.
Insert
The board, meaning the board of
pharmacy may conduct inspections
of eligible recipients.
To ensure compliance with the
requirements of this section and
rules promulgated pursuant to
this section.
It's then re-lettering the the
succeeding subsections
accordingly.
On and on page 7.
Between lines.
5 and 6.
Insert an effective date of July
1, 2026.
And that's what the amendment
did.
We go to the audience. Is there
anyone in the audience's support
or in opposition to the
amendment.
The amendment, yes, ma'am. The
sales are.
Um, our FIR did have a requiry
of the Mandy.
So I just wanted to, um, point
that out, and we do appreciate
the granting of.
OK, thank you. Anyone else in
the
Is there anyone on Zoom?
Right, OK.
Again, this is on the amendment.
Are there any questions about
the amendment?
Senator Scott.
chair, Senator, you're
illuminating.
Health care facility is a
potential donor, why is that?
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
That is what the Board of
Pharmacy requested.
In the meantime, I had a letter
from Metie.
circle, which is an entity that
helps.
Collect and distribute.
unexpired uh prescription drugs.
To others, and they wanted to
keep it in.
So, I believe.
That might be a debatable.
Item.
OK.
I mean
So the amendment, madam I'm sure
senator is, is for the pleasure
of the board of Pharmacy.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you again on the
amendment. No further
discussions, so now there's a
motion to adopt the amendment
from Senator Pinto with a second
from Senator Senio Lopez.
It's called the ro
On the amendment.
The block
I
And her bone
Senator Charlie.
And our Gallegos
And her nova.
Senator Pinto
Senator Scott
Senator Serio Lopez, yes,
Senator Hickey.
Senor Lopez.
Yes, your amendment is adopted,
Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would stand for questions,
opposition support, OK.
Um, any more in opposition or in
support in the audience on the
amended bill.
See none anyone else on Zoom?
No.
I guess it's Friday night, huh?
I'm trying to make a joke. All
right, so we're on the bill. Are
there any questions on the bill
itself as amended.
I saw Senator Pinto, and then
we'll go to Senator Block.
Oh
OK, there's a motion for a due
pass from Senator Pinto with a
second from Senator Serio Lopez
and Senator Black for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
Senator, just, I just had a
couple basic
Questions here.
Um
On starting on this page.
Real quick on page one, you you
you struck out the uh clinic.
And, and I asked, uh, is that
Is clinical definition in other
bills that might be related to
healthcare pharmacies that
Um, are already in those bills,
but we struck it out here. Um,
Madam Chair, clinic has a very
specific, uh.
Uh
Uh, definition, it could be a
federally qualified clinic. It
could be a lookalike clinic. It
could be a private clinic. It
could be a variety. So the uh
the licensed healthcare facility
that was in
would cover a clinic.
If it had been kept in.
And the thinking was.
And that's why I said.
The the board of pharmacy, are
they here?
That could respond to this.
That the board of pharmacy is
the one who asked for this
amendment.
Licensed health care facilities
could have a large quantity of
unused unexpired drugs that
could be donated to this
program.
So, um,
By taking it out.
You're taking out clinics,
you're taking out other
facilities like nursing homes.
That might have a lot of.
prescription drugs. So,
The purpose here though is we do
need some cleanup language that
I think the debatable item.
Madam Chair, Senator might be
that licensed healthcare
facility.
Because that's why the clinic
was struck on the first page.
OK. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
On page 41 of the things that
We've
have discussed.
A lot, um, Senator Cedil Lopez
knows this, is in, you know,
instate and out of state uh type
care whether it's pharmacies or
healthcare facilities, so
On line two there says allow
in-state and out of state
pharmacies.
That are experienced in managing
donating prescription drugs. Um,
Is there, is there any issues
with
Uh, so you're telling me like
someone in Las Cruces goes to
A pharmacy in El Paso to or some
type of
Facility you were talking about.
Are there any issues with
licensing, uh, those type of.
Unused medications there out of
state in New Mexico and any
liability for or risk for a New
Mexican.
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator,
thank you for the question. From
what I understand, this, uh,
this letter that I got today and
I think it was sent to all of
your committee members earlier
today. This many circle.
Um
What is licensed.
To do this program, and it's uh
nationwide.
My prescriptions from my
healthcare system come from out
of state.
Express Scripts.
Most CBS prescriptions come from
out of state.
They have to be licensed.
To, uh, by our state to be
acceptable in terms of coming
into our state and the Food and
Drug Administration is the
entity overall for the country
that determines that uh entity
can be licensed.
In our state, our regulation and
licensing department and our
board of board of pharmacy
acknowledges.
Um
Entities that they will work
with.
For this program.
For just for this program. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So are there any, are
there any pharmacies or any
other of these facilities out of
state that uh New Mexico doesn't
recognize or do we recognize
this in all 49 other states or
territories. Uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, I couldn't answer that.
You know, the health, the health
insurance plans.
Use pharmacies.
Pharmaceutical companies all
over the country.
But for this particular program.
I don't know how many the board
of pharmacy works with. OK.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, going down page
4 line 14, it says a form to be
signed by the patient.
Specifying
You know, all that stuff there.
Where, where do they get?
The, the form is
Where's that form? It's um, are
they getting that from the
provider? Is that something, do
they have to go to a place to
get it cause I mean,
When I look at
5
So says a form to be signed
information required to be
provided.
I'm trying to remember where
that form comes from. Is there
something they can just
on their phones, they have to
travel somewhere they have to.
Sign it or mail it in. So, um,
Madam Chair, whether it's
electronic or whether it's
mailed in is uh a good question,
but the board of pharmacy is the
one who develops the form that
needs to be filled out and
accepted.
Right, so, Madam Chair, Senator,
how do they, how do they get
that form?
And who do they get it from? Do
they get from their own provider
or is it saying, hey, I want to
use these unused prescriptions
from
Whatever that was donated.
OK, so Madam Chair and senator,
there's two parts to this.
There's the.
Donner of the unused drugs and
then there's the recipient of
filling out the form.
So
The
Recipient is usually a patient
who has a particular need and
the costs are great.
And or it's on a continuous
basis because it's a chronic
condition and that's why they
would.
Seek to have some donated.
Pharmaceuticals, right, but
Madam Chair, Senator, where,
where do they get the form?
Is it, is it? I, I don't see it
in the bill. That's, that's the
only issue I got with that if.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
you're or Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
I think you're correct, it's not
clarified unless I'm totally
missing it.
about the handling fee.
That might be something to go
back and take a look at.
Certainly I can pull off the
entire statute and look at um
more detail.
All right, and then, um, Mr.
Chair and senator.
Um, right below that on line 19
says, you know, knowledge.
To donate prescription drugs
have been inspected prior.
Um, is there, how do, how does
the recipient know that? I guess
there's some type of
certification on the, on the
pill bottle or something. Yes,
and like I said, Mr. Chair, um,
Madam Chair and Senator, there
is, there are entities very
specific entities that receive
these donated drugs who verify
that um they are in uh unused
bottles and that they are
unexpired.
So you couldn't receive like one
half of a bottle of my pills.
That are leftover for blood
pressure. It'd have to be a
whole entire bottle. OK. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Real quick here, um,
The, it says on the top of page
6, line 1, the board shall
maintain.
Uh
A current listing of the
recipients, those are all that's
privacy data that the board will
keep confidential and and some
secure manner.
Yes, that's correct.
Again, the border of pharmacy
And lastly, Mr. Chair and
Senator, says effective July
1st, 2026. Is there a reason why
you don't wanna do that earlier,
you wanna wait.
The um
Or a pharmacy indicated.
That they would um.
Need time for rulemaking and
time to modify the online
licensing system.
Uh, OK, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Um.
Senator, I'll, I'll support the
bill, but if you can just go
back and and look at the form
process just curious how that
works. I will. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK, thank you. Are there other
questions?
And I do believe we're on a due
pass motion.
So if you could call the role,
please.
Senator Block.
Inner bone.
Senator Charlie, yeah.
Senator Gallegos and her nova.
Pinto
And Scott
Yeah.
Centerio Lopez, yes, Senator
Hickey.
Lopez
Yes.
By a vote of.
8 to 0. You have a due pass
motion, senator. Thank you.
Thank you.
And committee members, I had
said we were ending at 6 o'clock
tonight.
I'm sorry?
Yes, please.
Um
We will
We're finished for today. But
again Sunday at one o'clock,
please. We'll be meeting one
till about six-ish again on
Sunday, unless we can go really
fast, really faster, faster,
but.
1 o'clock on Sunday.
Have a good evening.
Go to the party and enjoy.
