terms of operating losses for
New Mexico residents so as right
and I think that is through the
interpretation that I would
yes.
Mr chair and Sarah if that's
your intention I.
I mean.
I I I get that
I don't think anyone's going to
be yeah I I.
I I just think that for example
in a in a
Eighty eight tourism community I
mean I mean some of those
whatever recalling health care
dollars I mean that there's
going to be going toward keeping
that place running right so I
don't.
I don't know how I feel about
that it it it seems to me that
I'd make it wider I'm gonna get
you're saying I I don't know if
we we don't get a lot of medical
tourism in New Mexico I mean so
no one's gonna start some place
in and people gonna fly in from
Kansas and Florida I mean I
don't see that happening so I
don't know if it's necessary
only that a few bad one point
point that out.
We will review that in our
discussions thank you Mr
chairman etcetera
Next line line ten newly
constructed with that include a
a renovation or an addition to
an existing facility.
Mr chair Senator other the bill
does not include a capital cost
so it would not include sort of
the renovation part of it it
would include it would sort of
covered that operating portion
of it so I think to the extent
that you're talking about three
of the need for capital funding
this bill does not include the
capital well it and Mr chair
Senator let me rephrase my
question if
The providing new service.
and they they renovate the
facility are they still eligible
for a grant.
Or would they say no you
renovated you didn't building
facilities are not all.
The Mr chair Senator I believe
it's the US.
First option would be that the
the renovation itself would be
covered but the expansion of the
service would be considered part
of the bill and it would be
considered an expanded service
which is exactly the intention
of the bill okay great.
Thank you Mr chair page three.
Line seven.
Mr chair Senator it says that
this is about the the
commitment.
And so these grants are awarded
year by year for up to five
years.
does that mean the new either
new provider or provider that
starting a new service
Well let's let's take this
example let's say it's a surgeon
who is now saying I'm gonna
offer these new services because
now we can do some more stuff
okay and are they gonna say but
let's say they've been there ten
years are they going to need to
then say well I'm going to
commit to being here three
additional years is that how
that would work.
Mr chair Senator.
I believe that that the
intention would be that the
service would be covered for
five years not so much that it's
a tax right okay the actual
provision of service whether
it's the you know you specialty
care example eccentric Care that
there would be a commitment to
continue to provide that such a
care for that duration of time
okay so Mister chair Senators so
the the funding is not attached
to the provider per se but they
have to it sounds like we have
to have a provider on board that
is saying that they are
committed to providing that
service to the area for X.
amount of time is that correct.
Mr chair Senator I believe that
the committee will be from the
facility or provider to on board
the provider I mean some of that
cost could be used to actually
hire the provider or recruit and
retain the provider so even if
they didn't have the provider on
board they would be able to use
that sort of as part of the
operating costs so Mr chair
Senator we could look at the
language there to see if
changing the to a service
provider so when we look at all
these recommendations will
consider that thank you Mr chair
Senate yeah because it to me
reading it looks like it was
tied to a particular provider
and so I in in that you know all
kinds of questions come in like
well what if they bring into
partners.
And they're I mean they're
committing as a group to provide
that service and then it's also
not clear to me that let's say
they commit for three years
I guess then they would the the
operating different it would be
ineligible for your four and
five is what it sounds like to
me but still if you're gonna
look at that I would maybe maybe
look at that wording to.
Be clear on that so and I also
don't know I mean just the
enforcement of it I mean is
everyone just gonna say I'm
committing to five years will
what if they leave after two
years how to how to they have.
I mean how are they please tell
they can't lever the the
findings and get pulled it
doesn't really say about about
scenario as well so you may want
to look at.
Mr chair Senator I think the
Human Services department would
enforce the bill and I think as
Senator Sedillo Lopez suggested
the rulemaking might help with
that sort of in terms of just
sort of creating some regulate
regulatory set around the
provisions of the program okay
Mr chair Senator at just a
couple other things
I can't remember what the other
issue was that we that this came
up.
but I want to raise the scenario
of a very maybe successful
corporation healthcare
corporation that is making
money.
And then they for massive city
here early that's losing money
and then the subsidiary owns
this facility so they're not
really having an operating cost
but they make it look like
they're having an operating loss
and in this very successful
company is saying poor us we
need state funding all of a
sudden well maybe they do maybe
it's great that they're making a
new facility in Union County
that's great but how can we
discuss that scenario and and
how would would we prevent that
type of scenario from occurring.
For not being too paranoid.
So
Mr chair I think I would let our
W. secretary and our director of
the hospital association if he
has any comments about it but
the Human Services department
would have expected that you
see.
Mr chair and Committee I would
also guide you do page three
line line where it discussed
defines allowable costs that's
the attempt to get what you're
protein here search committee is
allowable costs means necessary
and proper cost defined by rule
of the department based on
Medicare reimbursement
principles allowable costs does
not include transfers occur
corporations of any corporate
allocation is excluded from
those costs going down yeah not
entirely what you're seeking
after but it's part of that
mechanism that's attempted to be
prevent M. Mr chair yeah I I see
is not a fund transfer but it
could still exist it could still
be granted to a US subsidiary
looks like so yeah I see that
you may want to and my only come
all other coming on that issue
would be I I would love I would
just say I'd love to see in
statute rather than rules
because then we we.
okay let less thing is more of a
COVID in it's a frustration for
me.
but I'll say very briefly
because a lot of stakeholders in
the room and that is that you
know what what actuaries are
discussed this with another
stakeholder is that I think if
we want to really bolster health
care access in New Mexico we
need to abolish a gross receipts
taxation system and replace it
with the sales tax so if you pay
a medical bill to you and this
is no knock on you you send your
bills at least last time I
checked to Aurora Colorado you
know because of our G. R. T.
system like you know our our
health care big or small they
they suffer because of this
compounded problems and we say
we we want to help health care
but we we tax the heck out of it
in a system that compounds the
punishment for doing business in
New Mexico and that's including
people that are here to to
provide health care services and
so what did the big picture here
is and I I like this bill I love
the heart of the bill but what
we did last year is we raise
operating costs for all health
care providers with our
malpractice bill absolutely
atrocious and cruel and
oppressive to our state and my
patients are losing out big time
on that and it is so
frustrating.
And so we intentionally raised
operating costs and I'll get you
all the numbers I'm working on
I'm sorry a little late on that
I have the numbers.
Quick story single player the
solo pediatrician property cost
about twelve point five percent.
This is not a heads in the crowd
by the way is a solo
practitioner who had her husband
does heard like you know billing
is.
These the people again crush
right now hello you have left
the state so what have we done
is we've raise operating costs
and now we're taking two million
to to pay for those rising
operating costs I know this is
not often this bill but that's
the big picture what we're doing
in New Mexico and and it's it's
hurting so bad.
So thank you senator I support
the bill I wish big picture
would be doing something a
little bit different but I I I
do like to build look forty
hearing on Friday in of service
supported and happy to help with
any other changes.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
On that point Senator.
Someone presenting a bill to
correct that situation you're
talking about.
Mr chair it's my understanding
that the governor has promised a
veto on any malpractice changes
the session.
Okay thank you senator next up
the we have center and I just.
This is not working.
This.
Thank you senator thank you a
Centers onyx Mr chairman.
With regard to the amendments
that were suggested on page two.
On line eleven of Mr Chairman
us.
Senator Stefanics where it says
up Care facility or rural health
care facility.
you know newly constructed rural
health care facility for rural
health care facility that you
may want to say or rural health
care provider that.
And that that made that make
clear anyway give it a look
thank you the
The up.
With regards to
The op the definition of
operating losses Mr chairman
about of I'm a page three line
twenty one says operating losses
means the projected difference
between recognize revenue a lot
level costs for a grant request
period.
And then of course you know
they're going to be verified by
qualified auditors is there a
provision to.
To verify that on the back end.
The.
Whether those whether those
losses were defecting Kerr.
So Mr chair and senator on the
top of a start on the bottom of
the page two items for going to
the top of page three it does of
that can be verified by
qualified auditors and which
data are based on and then it
would be up to the department to
promulgate the rules on the
follow up.
Is that your question Senator
thank you Mr chairman Senator
products no I'm aware of that
I'm aware of that
That that the department is
going to set up rules that
they're gonna use adequate cost
data as defined by rule of the
department based on financial
assistance system over a curse
that can be verified by
qualified auditors I get that
but all of that is in the
context of these operating
losses which is defined by
projected difference between
recognize revenue on allowable
costs in other words.
Department these are my
projected revenues these are how
many folks on projected to treat
this my projected losses so
that's good I the money's going
to come in on the front end to
to maintain those those
operating expenses and to
maintain that build out I get
that but are they gonna be
verified on the back end.
Is my question.
So Mr chair I'm gonna let the W.
secretary answer but that's what
I was envisioning the department
would do but I'm I think the W.
secretary should answer Mr chair
Senator yes you can definitely
do that and what anticipate to
do that we actually review
hospital cost reports today we
have a contractor that does that
that's part of what the agency
currently does some pretty
familiar with those numbers so
yes I think you're asking to
verify that the grant amount
with the right now.
Correct.
Thank thank you very much and I
trust that that would happen
And it does say you know as
defined by rule of the
department
so that that rule could be
included or we can put it in
statute I'm not big on like just
giving chart by to the executive
branch even though I know the
executive branch is working
incredibly hard to build build
the state the with regards to Mr
Chairman said Senator fine
except the the films tax credit
you estimate how much it's gonna
cost.
They make the film they provide
receipts and get paid on the
back and this is better this
this is they get paid on the
front and because we we want to
have money to build out those
services we we need to have a.
The kitchen sink approach to
health care in rural areas of
New Mexico it's just it's just
are to be the most in port thing
we do this session so want to
thank you for bringing this idea
forward with regards to the
appropriation however
Mr chairman the
and I don't know if it's the
bill drafters or or if the if
it's the request of members but
it's like the third the third or
fourth bill I've seen do this
and it's just kind of different
to me it says a on but on page
four lines twenty one twenty
two.
You know two hundred million
dollars in fiscal year twenty
twenty four and subsequent
fiscal years I don't think we
can legally provide future
legislate tors to to do this but
and also in twenty thirty years
to our mills not gonna be the
same bang for the Buck so
and then also you know I was
here during the the banking
crisis during the oil price
crisis.
And so on page three the top of
page three that money shall not
revert.
I think it be good for us to
monitor this fund here to here
and and and appropriated
appropriately because we may
have to increase it from time to
time and if the money is not
spent it's not gonna go away we
just roll it back the next year
but that's just my.
Philosophy on that
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you centers to onyx.
Thank you.
Thank you senator up next on the
list is
Senator Hickey for second time.
Thank you Mr chair
Well we've been sitting here and
discussing the bills some very
smart people who were sitting
out there have emailed me a
couple of things and
and and I think they're worthy
of noting but not to take more
the committee's time is that my
understanding is my
understanding correct that this
is going to go be we work in
brought back Friday Mr chair
we're going to take your
recommendations from today and
go through the executive
determine what will go into an
amendment and bring back the
amendment to you on Friday.
So I would have an opportunity
to date also today I have to
bring this forward thank you
very much for that clarity of
I'm learning thank you otherwise
if you bring in on Friday and we
amended again.
Then it might not get passed on
that.
So that the suggestions have to
do with being sure that our
providers nurse practitioners
physicians and so forth have
clarity around what their their
costs are and and and being sure
and and again I'm gonna depend
on you to know this in the bill
but that health care startup
costs and the health care start
cost mean planning development
center others what I'm looking
for is that those who have the
courage to Mexico into an
independent new facility
practice or group in a rural
area are going to get access to
the fund up front
for the development of their
practice set of necessarily
having to go to a bank where
they might get some sort of
exorbitant the interest rate
loan.
With with with it is that the
case in the way it's already
worded do I need to put some
additional language in there Mr
chair I need to ask if that's
the intent of the bill.
Reading of cap.
To to.
A print in in support
of that's what the projections
for the.
Mr chair Senator Hickey the
intention of the bill is to
recover those things up front
that's why it's based on
projected operating losses and
not actual operating losses and
so I think that is the intention
of the bill is confined in for
those on the front end so Mr
chair and presenting proof so if
if they're laying out there pro
forma and they show they're
gonna come up short that would
be it's short on operating costs
which is also starting costs
because some of those are going
to be fixed cost rather than
recurring cost but from your
observation that would be
covered if a group of
practitioners decide to go into
practice and in a rural area Mr
chair Senator Hickey that's
correct thank you very much for
that clarification no need for
an additional amendments thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
and anyone any other members of
the committee have a question.
The question Senator.
Right now.
For oil.
And you don't.
So
So we'll wait for you to come
back on Friday look for you to
come back and thank you Mr we
will convene as a group to get
the amendment done and be
prepared
program by which drafters
Vereker Frank.
Derrick okay which analyst yep
good thank you very much thank
you thank you for thank you
committee.
Up you know Senator Padilla
wanted to be here for for this
bill of the these next two bills
the wanted to do this jointly is
he going to.
Do we know where he is.
Mr chair he had come.
Well let's get let's let's skip
over the the to the anesthesia
bills and go to SB thirty foot
is it's sixty four no life
sentence for juveniles.
Senator Sedillo Lopez
Representative Chasey and at all
okay.
For that matter the.
Seth.
He started.
Okay.
Senate bill sixty four go ahead
Senator we have zoom yet is
still working we have zoom we're
we're now being resumed once
again.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair hope
is the most important thing that
you can give to people who are
in desperate circumstances in
isolated circumstances without
hope people don't have any
motivation to move forward Mr
chair this is the third time
we've brought this bill before
this committee and it is that
past both times you have seen
it.
Indeed is also passed two
committees and that on the house
side but it's never quite made
it over the finish line.
One of the barriers that we've
had has been opposition by the
association of dust and
individual dust and the
understandable concerns of
victims that of.
That an inmate might be released
before or prematurely and so
with that in mind we negotiated
with the association of district
attorneys and made some changes
to the bill.
And with that I have before me
Mr Preston ship has an expert on
the bill he's going to describe
the changes I also have been
only will sit here who's been
working on this bill tirelessly
for the last three years
and I'd like Mr Shipp to
describe the changes to the bill
right thank you senator Mr Shipp
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members of so what the
bill originally did it was
modeled after a bill that passed
in West Virginia nine years ago
and it gave parole eligibility
after fifteen years to all
people who aren't were under the
age of eighteen at the time that
they committed their crime but
as as Senator Sedillo Lopez
mentioned the prosecutors
Association and and some victims
took issue with that fifteen
year parole eligibility and so
throughout the fall we
negotiated we've reached this
compromise that keeps the
fifteen year parole eligibility
for most things the exceptions
the too narrow exceptions are
first degree murder for it is
willful and deliberate and that
is twenty year parole
eligibility and then first
degree murder where there is
more than one victim would be
twenty five year parole
eligibility and so this tiered
review system is.
I'm sorry go ahead just
gesturing to Senator Padilla to
set up okay good okay thank you
this tiered review system is
something that some other states
have done Arkansas passed
something similar and twenty
seventeen and then the father
did something similar I believe
in the same year so hopefully
everyone feels like they're
concerns have been addressed you
know these these sorts of bills
have passed now in twenty six
different states some very
progressive some very
conservative Texas and Arkansas
and West Virginia and so this
bill is located you know within
and dramatic national trend away
from these sorts of extreme
sentences for kids it does not
guarantee release it is strictly
an opportunity for people who
were younger than the age of
eighteen to be reviewed by the
parole board and it's important
remember that and and so many
other facets of the law we treat
someone younger than eighteen is
very different from an adult
there's so many things that a
seventeen year old cannot do and
so it you know the majority of
the other states have concluded
that it does not make sense to
try to hold them to the same
exact criminal sentencing
standards that we would an
adult.
Thank you so much for your
consideration Mr chairman and
committee members thank you Sir
did you want to add something.
Not at this time and I'm I hear
chair and and members just to
answer any specific questions
about the the bill and its
impact on people here in New
Mexico it was all for very good
then we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience
here who wants to support this
bill yes please.
Good.
Come up close to so the bike can
pick you up for being zoomed in
it doesn't really pick up the
outer.
Reaches of the room also some
spoken that yeah you're so soft
spoken and.
The
chairman committee members my
name is Eric Alexander and you
have to keep the button pushed I
think yeah.
You may now yeah okay there we
are my name is Eric Alexander
not servicing your advocate for
the campaign for the fair
sentencing of you've you've
heard the tangible expects of
this bill now let's talk about
the intangibles I was once one
of the children in question it
ages seventeen that was with a
childhood friend who took the
life of a store clerk to avoid a
life sentence I accepted twenty
five years years I served ten
years of that time and I've been
home now for eighteen years
while in order to educate myself
I studied childhood bring
psychology which helped me
understand how I stood at the
going those four children I was
born into a household where my
dad was a very violent alcoholic
so children who commit these
type of offenses come from
broken homes they come from
broken community so they're
broken individuals but we spend
our time on inside educating our
sales learning from our mistakes
and desiring to be the best
people that we can be I made a
promise to myself in the
victim's family that that if I
was ever given a second chance
that I would dedicate the rest
of my life ensuring that no
other child would follow in my
footsteps I'm proud to stand
before you now eighteen years
later to say that I've done just
that are written you programs
organizations like the YMCA of
middle Tennessee of the public
school system where is that are
written use programs for clinics
today would you who join gangs
and teen pregnancies as mental
health issues because I
understood the community in
which I was born into and where
I came other youth around the
country because of these are
changes in other states over
nine hundred children who once
told that they would die in
prison have been released and
there's a less than one point
one forward point up recidivism
rate that's because these
individuals are taking time on
the inside to restore themselves
and are taken account for the
crimes that they committed and
they are terribly sorry I'm just
fortunate that I was released
early enough to stand here and
be an example to tell you that
these children are really
modeling themselves to be better
individuals one of the things
that I'm most proud of doing
since I've been home I helped to
co found a national action
network called I can't get over
two hundred these individuals
are part of the I can network it
is an acronym for the
incarcerated children's advocacy
network and we are group of.
And women who were sentenced yes
children into the door prison
system who came home to serve
our community in various ways so
let me give you a couple
examples before close of Mike is
one individual I met
under no circumstances did he
ever think that he will come
home but he began to study
braille while he was
incarcerated now he's released
home and he's interpreting
braille for blind individuals to
read books that's remarkable
another individual became a
minister while he was
incarcerated and now he has a
food desert serving over three
hundred individuals and I like
to give you a name of a young
lady that I met by the name of
Carissa McGee someone who lives
in your backyard she's a very
remarkable individual these are
the type of people that I'm
talking about coming home that
are not out of the state's not
everybody's going to come home.
You're not going to see a lot of
Ehrig Alexander's but those you
want across you want back in
your community.
You want them back to help
restore good.
So I'm here just part provide a
faced an example of the type of
children that we're talking
about thank you for your time is
one quick question for you do
you get you quoted the
recidivism rate could you give
that to us to get a little more
slowly and less than one point
one four percent.
Thank you.
Anybody else want to speak in
support of the bill yes ma'am.
If you could come up also.
Chair of the push.
Hear me yes good afternoon
chairman members of the
committee my name is Lucy like
temples I'm a policy director
with both futures and we stand
in full support of this bill we
know that as human beings we
continuously evolves learn and
grow.
And one thing that would like to
point out in this bill is that
this bill is not us that youth
do not face consequences for
their acts it is only asking for
people to have the opportunity
to stand before a board and see
if they are eligible for parole.
Thank you for your opportunity
to speak thank you thank you
Lucy.
Eight.
Yes it will it will will finish
up here in the audience and will
take some months of.
Thank okay yes than that I mean
just to just to end the call
money initiative Tina showcase
on the buses Ching Senator J. K.
on additional hello chair
members of the committee my name
is Nicole Martin I'm a community
organizer and I support this
bill because and I think about
the.
Matrix of jurisdiction and how.
How if you can commit of major
crimes Act how they would also
be under federal jurisdiction
rather than state jurisdiction
and so I think about indigenous
you who don't even have the
opportunity to be in like a
county jail who just get put
into a federal prison system I
think about the.
The reality of them not being
able to have parole at such a
young age when they get older
and they show you know.
But they can be
Like the rest of us.
Thank you thank you very much.
Then we'll go to the zoom.
We we have.
Okay up Lucas Herndon if you
could keep your all of you could
keep your comments brief and to
the point of we have look
concerned in first.
Yes hi thank you chair thank you
committee I stand in full
support of this bill I am a
registered lobbyist with
progress now New Mexico but I'm
here today of my own accord  as
a private citizen somebody who
was touched in my family
and sentenced as a juvenile and
spent more than thirty years in
prison and
Did attempt to build a solid
life for themselves somebody I
grew very close to and had the
opportunity to to love in no in
my youth who ultimately because
of his.
Incarceration and continued
exposure to the car serial
system took his own life and
deprived my family and and his
family of his presence
something that has continue to
do to touch me and my family for
all these years later and I I I
just think about how much his
life would have been different
if we had an opportunity sooner
rather than later to make those
changes in the outside part of
the world so I stand in full
support and hope you pass this
bill thank you thank you Lucas
Allison how to meal.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Allison economy I'm the pallet
training with the law offices of
the public defender I have
Representative many juveniles
sentenced to life in prison I'm
here to express the public
defender support of Senate bill
sixty four by providing an early
opportunity for parole and
explicitly and in the
possibility of life without
parole sentences for juveniles
the bill will do what twenty
five states and DC have already
done this bill would bring New
Mexico in line with current
brain science and psychology
which recognize that you are
different from adults in
important ways including
decision making impulsivity and
response to peer pressure youth
are also more capable of
rehabilitation the bill does not
allow for automatic release but
instead gives you the
opportunity for review it's time
for New Mexico to enact this
report thank you.
Thank you Allison next is
Michael rose.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
thank you are all members of the
committee.
I am speaking in support of and
I'm asking for your support of
Senate bill sixty four.
My son Jeremy is one of the
approximately over seventy five
people incarcerated under New
Mexico law serving a long adult
sentence for a crime committed
as a child.
Senate bill sixty four will and
life without parole as a
sentencing option.
For juveniles in New Mexico
twenty five states and
Washington DC have already ended
this practice.
We know that children are
capable of growth and maturity
Senate bill sixty four will also
provide developmentally meeting
full timing for parole
eligibility.
We're not asking for a get out
of free.
Get out of prison free bill we
know that time must be served
the consequences exist for
actions we're asking that
juveniles who were sentenced as
an adult at least to be given
this opportunity I just is
committee to adopt the statutory
fix to ensure that individuals
who are under age eighteen at
the time of their offense have a
meaningful opportunity for
release thank you Mr chair thank
you committee.
Thank you Mr rose and then last
we have merry no last name.
Merry.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee says merry crossed
I've been an advocate for
children and youth young adults
for over fifteen years I've
mentored young people who live
that's come from healthy homes
broken homes and those with
varied levels of physical sexual
or mental abuse and work with
individuals with addictions to
alcohol or illicit drug use when
a child finds himself in a
situation beyond what they feel
is in their control we look for
solutions that often land them
in compromising are harmful
situations but with supporting
guidance I've witnessed that
these young people can and do
change I've had the opportunity
to know many who have overcome
their personal struggles in
order rehabilitation often
emerging from time in prison as
compassionate individuals with a
passion to improve the
communities they live in it's
from this personal experience
that I support this bill thank
you thank you Mr cross okay now
let's see is there anyone here
in opposition to this bill.
How about on zoom anybody
opposed because of.
yes Mr razor if you want to make
a comment on the bill.
Yes I would get here Mr Chairman
go ahead yes I'm sorry I didn't
get my hand up and tied a good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee this is
current regular on the director
of lieutenant at the ministry of
New Mexico we also are here to
stay in the position of the New
Mexico congregations the
conference of churches
represents a thirteen major
Protestant denominations New
Mexico as well as a three
Catholic dioceses.
Both organizations strongly
support the passage of SB sixty
four you've heard compelling
stories and data already this
from supports the passage of
this bill insults simply state
unequivocally that we are here
to urge you to provide equal
opportunities for hope and
redemption for juveniles
incarcerated New Mexico by
supporting HSD sixty four thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to this afternoon thank you Mr
Reger okay members of the
committee what's what anybody
have questions we've heard this
bill as was mentioned three
times before three times the
price point four how many
this is third time's a charm
this is the third time okay.
Senator McKenna.
The motion for a due pass from
Senator McKenna seconded by
Senator Tallman and to any
discussed yes Senator Schmedes.
Thank Mister chair I do have one
quick question on.
page a.
Twenty year.
Yes so I I just I looked at that
statue so.
We're not doing all.
circle theories what they're
called but not doing all of
those options for first degree
murder there's one.
That middle option that we're
excluding can you tell me about
that please so why the felony
murder yes the felony murder I I
actually the Mr chair leave that
the that this that the felony
murder rule should officially be
changed what a felony murder is
is if somebody commits a crime
And you happen to be with them
the example of actually a youth
that is yeah I a young woman in
prison right now she was
carrying a gun in her purse to
sixteen years old dating someone
older and that person asked her
for.
The good she opened her purse
and gave him the gun that's a
felony murder and so that's what
we're trying to say that person
didn't have the intent to murder
she didn't even commit the act
but that's what felony murder
it's it's when you're you're.
Sometimes I say in the wrong
place at the wrong time but if
you're participating in the
commission of a crime and
someone is killed.
So we're excluding that from the
twenty years that would be a
fifty year.
Thank you that's it.
Any other discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Davis C. Senator
Gallegos on no he's not okay
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle no.
Senator my yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Congradulations century have a
due pass.
Thank you committee members.
Now we'll go to the much
anticipated.
Anastasia of Bill.
The two as.
yes if you Mr Chairman is
presenter built together with
with really thing out I think
that's a good idea yeah it's
still coming up here just don't
start breaking in to come by in
the middle.
Well let.
Tingling.
We have another chair with.
Right there we go.
Yeah.
So we have actually two
different bills we also have
apparently an amendment to
thirty five.
Senator Hickey of.
But we'll just wait and listen
to you and and and follow your
lead on this in New.
And then Mr chairman bill will
come with the amendment okay
make more sense rather than
talking about commas in
parentheses and extension
Mr Chairman fellow senators it's
it is really my privilege to be
able to sponsor this bill
relating to anesthesiology
assistance in assuring their
continuation of practice in the
state of New Mexico you may not
recall
but in twenty fifteen a of bill
was passed
allowing them actually they've
been working in the state since
two thousand and one right and
in twenty fifteen there was a
bill that codified a little bit
more of it but it also as it was
still somewhat of a new type of
anesthesia practice relative to
New Mexico would not widespread
and as at that time it's to
really took off at the
University of New Mexico a bill
was put in place with the
requirements and so forth
regarding the practice one of
those requirements was that that
bill in twenty fifteen with
sunset
in twenty twenty five I believe
it is is that right and
we we've had ample time and the
number of anesthesia assistants
a group from one to about thirty
four at that time in twenty
fifteen now to sixty four
something like that ten more
coming online the University of
New Mexico is establishing a
formal training program for them
as as they do for other about
mid level.
Professionals and so Census is
worked out so well we want to
eliminate that sunset also we
want to clarify that they will
only because in this bill they
must work under the supervision
not just within the facility one
of the COVID in papers talked
about within the facility I I
can't find that develop its
within the operating suite
that they work originally they
were on a ratio of three to one
but in seventeen other states
are except for West Virginia
sixteen other states where
anesthesia assistance our
license they have moved to a
ratio of four to one just been
approved by CMS in regards to
billing and what have you so we
then go to the the the forty one
the other thing that it codifies
in this new bill is that they
will only practice with
anesthesiologists again under
their direct supervision during
induction and emergence from
care they will work under the
direct supervision within the
area the the operating suite and
they will only do so in a
counties but in all a counties
so it's not just before when
they were primarily at the
university of New Mexico that's
Bernalillo but they're now in
Los crucis Dona Ana they're in
Representative FAA here is is
that at Christus and this would
also be clear that they were
going to be at Santa and San
Juan County.
Yeah that that would be in the
five counties I a counties but
they will not practice in the B.
counties and basically the
rationale there is that
anesthesiologist aren't working
in those rural hospitals so they
they don't have anyone there to
supervise and that could happen
some day that it's not likely
but we're in agreement that
really about what we want to be
sure is that there's the
capability to go forward No
sunsets in all a counties and at
a ratio of four to one and
that's basically the summary of
the bill right let's hear about
the certified registered.
sentences to say that ten times
so thank you very much Mr
chairman and thank you to the
committee and thank you for
allowing us to do this together
before I jump right into the to
the description Mr chairman I
wanna let you know that a lot of
offline work is occurred a lot
of sit downs meetings
discussions and I feel very
confident sitting next to this
gentleman to my right here and I
hope he feels the same way
sitting next to me I don't know
but I feel like we have a really
strong agreement now would they
have come with things that they
needed from our legislation we
come with things that they
needed from there's we we are
about eighty nine point nine
percent to ninety five percent
where everything needs to fall I
just want to let you know we're
working very well together now
and we are both actually gonna
be signing on to each other's
bills following this hearing
today as as co sponsors but
essentially I have Dr Alan
with me and she is is the
president of the certified work
for the registered nurse and at
this that's the system and she
is here with me today she will
speak at as we need and but I
want to know that SB eighty
really is an effort to to really
update the language of the nurse
practice act to reflect what's
going on currently in New Mexico
in in the certified registered
nurse anesthetists arena what
the bill accomplishes it updates
antiquated language and and in a
lot of various areas that that
really have been updated since
two thousand two and so we
really need to do some work here
this is been attempted and
actually made its way through
this committee a couple years
ago I want to remind the
committee that I know there are
some new faces on the committee
but it did make it through it
ensures that New Mexico State
enters siRNAs will continue to
work to their full obviously
training education competency
and it's going to ensure that
rural areas are going to
continue to have full access to
anesthesia care which is culture
important in on that I want to
let you know that we've got six
hundred fifty these folks in New
Mexico
in the rural portions of New
Mexico this is about ninety five
percent of the care that's
actually delivers I want I want
to make sure that the committee
is fully aware of that six
hundred and fifty six and fifty.
At the moment yeah and so that's
a huge chunk of health care in
New Mexico which is going to be
very important to continue going
down that road it includes
independent practice language
for all advanced A. P. R. A. P.
R. ends advanced practice
registered nurses on to try to
get all the acronyms that Mr
Chairman so C. N. A.'s siRNAs
are currently the only A. P. R.
ends that not to have clear
concise stating is that they're
independent practice in the New
Mexico in PA all the confusion
confusing language that was
there since two thousand two is
is is taken out of there and
actually in much better
condition out of facilitates
service so these are going to
continue to have a choice in
composition of anesthesia teams
and if they're siRNAs will work
independently or in
collaboration with the others
the bill also clarifies and
supports hearing aids working
according to the needs of the
hospital facilities we have
significant support for for SB
eighty and I know that now that
we've worked all this out I feel
like the most it's a mere for of
what what's going on thirty five
and that includes the New Mexico
board of nursing The New Mexico
Hospital Association the New
Mexico association of nurse
practitioners New Mexico State
University
and the New Mexico state
university's college of health
and social services ask doctor
Allen just to say a few brief
words and then we'll we'll move
to what I think they have an
amendment they need to do is
sure Mr chair and committee
members and Shannon Allen I am a
nurse anesthetist I am from Lee
County have been doing this
these are for about twenty three
years down there we are also
your any groups we work without
supervision of a physician
anesthesiologist we do
collaborate with all of the
professionals on our team once
in awhile there is times where
working alone that's pretty much
why the independent practice
portion of it and you know we've
really made great strides in
fill in that gap down in the
areas if you look at our chair
modifiers it'll show that from
two thousand ten until now under
QC billing which means billing
independently and do the work
independent.
Any we've gone from doing about
thirty nine percent
up to about seventy one percent
of the billing in New Mexico so.
We've been working hard for you
thank you doctor Allen and I
also want to let you know that
we've worked with various
legislators outside of the two
of us to kind of pull everything
together as well want to thank
doctors meeting centers we for
chiming in at different times to
give us various you know
feedback on things that we were
kind of hung up on so thank.
And senator if you
yes the Mr chair thank you and I
I was remiss in not introducing
Abaco mark who is the past past
president of the a As and I
would also like we have a number
of a representative you would
just kind of wave and who have
come here today to support the
built environment with knowledge
of them doing so thank you Mr
chair did you want to say
anything every.
Mr.
again my name is Mr Terence
members of the committee thank
you for allowing us to be here
today I am having a more I'm a
practicing CA a and Albuquerque
New Mexico I need immediate past
president of the New Mexico
Academy of anesthesiologist
assistants I'm happy to be here
before you today our build
really seeks to remove this on
that provision which we for you
just sort of a death sentence on
our profession back in twenty
fifteen when this compromise was
made but we felt that it was
appropriate to have a sort of
ten year trial period for As
outside of U. N. M. which would
be now Santa Fe and Los crucis
those hospitals those As have
been practicing well and safely
for the past almost ten years
now we've been about eight years
I believe and we're happy to
continue doing that I would like
to bring to the committee's
attention that it should this
sunset go through those
practices in Las Cruces and
Santa Fe would lose upwards of a
hundred percent of their non
physician staff that provides
anesthesia care and we really
want to make sure that our
fellow New Mexicans do have
access to care and that's a
priority for us and we're happy
to come along side and provide
anesthesia services for friends
and neighbors very very good Mr
chair just a quick addendum this
is all about.
Assuring health care to New
Mexicans in a time in which we
are losing health care
professionals hand over fist so
that's that's the work we're
we're all here for New Mexico
right now.
Senator is that right just on
behalf of the committee I just
this is great that the two of
you were able to sit down the
two groups sit down and work it
out in a way that that makes our
job a lot easier and that I
think guarantees the health of
the New Mexicans in a in a
really the substantive an
ongoing fashion so now do we
want to take your amendment up
yes and unforeseen I don't have
a copy of that here in my hand
said we'll give you a.
So.
I would like to amend the bill
and lied to on page one line
fourteen strike removing strike
all of the line fifteen and
strike line sixteen through the
semi colon.
Second piece is on page six line
twenty one remove the brackets
and the line through three.
practice only in a classic
County quote and after County
inservice semicolon.
And three numbers the succeeding
paragraphs.
So you move the amendment of the
amendment and is there a second
second Senator committees a
discussion of the amendment to
clear with what we're doing.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing will consider your bill
with the amendment attached to
it.
And so then let's go to the
audience and get a few comments
from the audience and you can
speak on.
either bill for both.
But do it fast please.
Of who's here in favor of this
measure a few hands go up all
right let's start in the back
for the hospital association
will come up to the.
Indecision assistance thank you
Mr chair and members of the
committee at.
Bring the two sides together we
stand and support bills this is
about access to care these two
different versions of the
surface of Anastasia are needed
throughout our state in our all
of our facilities in different
ways and so we commend that both
groups are coming together to
support one another there the
strongly support the passage of
both bills together great thank
you Mr Clark okay now we'll go
to some of the anesthesia
assistants that who wants to go
first or is somebody wanted the
spokesman for the entire group.
Okay.
Thank you yes Sir.
Right.
Four.
Our.
This came in.
Way back.
Collaboration.
Right thank you doctor thanks
for coming did you make the trip
just for this.
And good and skiing I guess yeah
that's good all right yes this
Scott.
said Skinner.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for the and Stacey
assistance and we say passed
both bills as Senator Padilla
said were ninety five point
eight percent of the time is
that about right ninety nine now
nine percent only comes up or
yeah you with the deal all the
anyway both sides have had some
interesting conversations but
we've had good conversations and
today was sort of a watershed I
think and so we appreciate your
support you're talking thank you
very good Chris.
Thank you Mr chairman crystals
on the Regis from this for the
New Mexico association of nurses
assessed on the separatists and
learning toward and I'm gonna
get a few years
we just want to say it as the
membership forty support SB
eighty we also support SB thirty
five and I just want to ask
what's up idea and senator he
can has stated on his part and
put our state and let it be here
after discussing and working
together and please I passed
both bills thank you right thank
you so much Chris anybody else
want to speak yes.
You guys.
Three years ago and I.
Finally.
Very good thank you doctor there
are some people on zoom who
wanted to speak the Maryland
Archambault.
You hear me yes.
Perfect thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee for
allowing me to talk I am joining
you from the east coast I used
to work at the university New
Mexico and I was the past New
Mexico
is easy I'll just assistance
president prior to Abigail
Morgan sitting in front of you I
wanted to say that I'm I'm very
pleased to hear that both the
nurse anesthetist and they ace
have found a common ground for
the New Mexico healthcare
population the state of New
Mexico is in dire need of
qualified health providers and
these bills will help to push
that forward so that we can
provide excellent care to our
outstanding population there and
I would like to also say that
through my tenure there and now
that I am on the national.
Stayed with the American academy
of anesthesiologist assistants
of which I'm a board member I
want to say that a ace provide
fantastic care compassionate
care and they are very valuable
within the insecurity model
thank you for give me a chance
to talk thank you very much of
the session both then the final
speaker on zoom is Chelsea
Canada.
Mr chairman and committee
members good afternoon my name
is Chelsea Canada and I'm the
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support Senate bill
thirty five our members believe
the health care workforce is key
to accessing timely affordable
health care services attention
must be made to training
recruiting and retaining New
Mexico's health care workforce
our members support retaining
current licensed health care
providers by protecting their
ability to practice in the state
thank you to our legislative
members and all of our providers
for working together on this
column.
Thank you very much now at
least.
You know to to follow important
we have to ask is there anyone
here it posed to this bill.
Or on zoom anybody propose no.
We almost have unanimous this is
good Senator Ingle let's go to
the committee.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I'm just curious on your the
anesthesiologist assistants that
but who takes care of your your
malpractice insurance.
Mr chair Senator about practice
insurance is often based on of
the.
Act so those at UNM and that a
practices covered through UNM
those at practices outside of U.
N. M. on those are purchased
through their anesthesia groups
what do the anesthesia purpose
okay and that's readily
available in for the for the
folks that are not certified
anesthesiologist there's a one
for passing this for the nurse
anesthesiologist they have a
good malpractice insurance
available there is malpractice
insurance available yes that's
correct okay and generally
speaking will this the hospital
pick that up orders the
individual if you're in a
hospital spent what.
miss Mister chairman Senator the
hospital for U. N. M. picks up
the mail party and for groups
outside of UNM that is up picked
up either individually or by the
and the seizure group that is
staffing the item is available.
To work efficiently to re not
gonna have a problem with this
no I have a problem with all
right thank you.
David else any other questions
what's the will of the
committee.
We have a motion for a do press
seconded by Senator Hickey will
let him session is on bill that
I.
And then I the secretary will
call the roll.
This is yes this is on the
Senate bill thirty five.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
That that sorry.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Very good now let's go to Senate
bill eighty is there any any
questions on Senate bill eighty
or with the will of the
committee I would like to move
pass we will have a motion from
Senator Hickey and seconded by
Senator.
We are all medical bills are.
Any discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Maestas yes.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Congratulations to both of you
and thank you for the work you
put you both put in this and all
of you put in on this thank you
very.
All right moving right alone now
we go to.
We're holding over fifty one if
anyone is here for fifty one
we're holding that over at the
request of the sponsor.
And I will go to senator Tom and
your bill six.
Appointed executive office
finalist Lewis.
Please.
Senator go ahead thank you thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you the center
for.
Schedule this bill in a timely
manner.
And
I have with me Mr chair of my
expert witness of.
Nick Estes who the former
general counsel for the
university of New Mexico.
So this.
Bill.
In one sentence or less Mister
chair if the limits the number
of
Two three the number of.
Finalises names to me mate
Pueblo.
The bottom line is that you.
So questions you get.
More better qualified candidates
if we enact this this bill.
Why is that we'll think about it
you know somebody is happy in
their job and they're doing a
great job in there well liked
and they
They are are high achievers.
It is not likely that they're
going to be answering.
Advertisements for jobs that's
why they hire head hunters.
They go after people who aren't
that's actively looking to some
of the best qualified people are
are not looking for a job so
that's why they hire head
hunters to go after people who
are doing very well there well
like to hire Cheever's that
necessarily looking so when they
find out.
Featured in their name is going
to be.
Made public.
Then.
Why would they apply they can go
to forty seven they can that
we're one of only five states
with this restriction and go to
forty five other states in the
look for.
Opportunities.
So.
Your.
This is the.
Not the only way to get can't
quite virtually no one is going
to do a job successfully
wherever else it if they have to
show their name they simply
won't do it so I challenge
everyone of you to find the one
person.
Who has been at a high level
jobs such as APS superintendent
of police chief of the
university of presidents who
have come here either from in
state or out of state I'm gonna
have to touch a terrific job
they went on to a better better
better and better job elsewhere
I can't think of anyone.
Which I think kind of proves the
point our basketball coach.
It went on to UCLA that was the
didn't do well he got fired
thousand of that I think I had a
guy he's back to the mountain
conference.
So he yeah well you're right
okay well I'm not talking about
sports.
So I I thank you for your
comments I can always count on
you center and go to it and some
levity to these discussions.
So here's.
So.
you know some people of.
Criticize this bill in the state
that
That we're hiding something and
this is going to be cronyism
involved well.
That that's a.
That's not true
It you know it's it's.
The.
Recently because it if the the.
Chris doing their job they can
ferret out this information
because it does that does happen
and they
And they can blow the whistle it
if this appears here recently
Two years ago.
Santa Fe last cruises in APS all
hired of superintendents.
And
Not they didn't get one
candidate from a school district
that was remotely in the same
size they're all very small
school districts.
So.
The end and.
The.
Well APS actually got a
candidate.
One candidate from accomplished
a comparably sized school
district.
That was Rochester New York.
Which three hundred fifty
thousand our district is up
pushing six hundred and he was
unemployed.
The recently fired so then APS
so last time they went out for
police chief they only got one
candidate from a large city and
that was Philadelphia and this
particular individual was in
charge of community relations
which has nothing to do with.
Hello I'm as regular police
work.
So.
Other states so I guess I states
that have done this I have a
quote from a Colorado
legislator.
Who
said that
Before they passed this law.
Of the Kennedys of fort many
candidates were differed from
applying it for most advocates.
It encourages and promotes
applicants to withdraw from
consideration and impair their
price privacy interest by and
imperiling their jobs and kind
of hurt them because they didn't
make it all the way so the end
of North Dakota they all the
time they passed this law the
thank a the legislature
Representative Mary Johnson said
the committee recommends this
bill because under current law
we are limiting the pool of
applicants of placing our state
and our very disadvantage just
advantage of this position
potential applicants that were
drawn their names were not
applied at all when they noticed
that their application is not
subject to open law and finally
Mr chair the third
representative from North
Carolina said we had testimony
from school superintendents from
all over the state park district
state agency chamber of commerce
this is an issue of our
political subdivisions not
getting the most qualified
people.
And as I've said we're one of
only of four five states that
have this current law there's
thirty eight states
reputations are confidential and
there's eight states.
were the the issue is unclear
which means to me that that I
doing my own thing and.
Lucy goosey and finally Mr chair
we have a multiple number of
organizations to support this
law this bill including New
Mexico minutes slowly Mexico
school board association The New
Mexico coalition of educational
leaders the council of
university presidents University
of New Mexico you have just and.
And the Albuquerque
Public of the school.
Albuquerque public schools.
As well as the city of right Rio
Rancho
So.
Mr chair.
Are we've we've this bill was
passed the Senate in two
thousand nineteen.
and then it got through to
committees in the house and then
we ran out of time on the house
floor.
So.
The.
hoping with the early start Mr
chair that we can get through to
this bill enacted in a before
the sixty day session runs out
thank you all for listening
thank you Mr chair that
concludes our remarks and this
might thanks for testimony wants
to make a comment.
Expert testimony did you want to
make comments thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee
it's a pleasure to be back here
again who have gone through this
a couple times before itself
it's always been interesting
this car I and I used to be the
general counsel of U. N. M. back
when dinosaurs ruled earth it
was quite awhile ago but I did
get to be an expert I think it's
fair to say in public records
laws property and we had had to
deal with several issues
involved in hiring a new
president and I well and we
wound up passing the statute
actually the deal just with that
one there part of this issue
university presidents requires
that five finalists B. of come
with that you have to come up
with five but the others are
confidential it was.
This this the situation we're in
now with respect to all other
public higher public leadership
jobs school superintendent
County manager city manager the
situation is that when they do a
search for something like a
school superintendent there is
no protection there's no
confidentiality at all to the
individuals who might apply and
they certainly the really good
ones will ask the people who are
not trying to get out of the job
there in the ten to once that
we're interested in will ask
will my name be confidential and
the way it is now we can't
guarantee that of in and as
senator Tom is a real thing that
got me interested in this was
back in twenty fifteen you APD
IPL's I'm sorry yes did a search
for new school superintendent
and the names of all the
candidates were in the
Albuquerque journal I just
happen to read that that's what
got me interested they were
forty three candidates that not
a single one was the sitting
current superintendent of the
school district anywhere near
the size of Albuquerque
Albuquerque says significant
school district in the country
and they re usually second in
command or people who were in
charge of some particular aspect
of schools or somebody coming
out from outside that field
altogether but you don't what
you don't get when the names are
going to be revealed if you
simply do not get someone who is
doing that job successfully some
morals and that's exactly the
kind of person that ours that
are boards ought to be able to
consider you to consider it
doesn't mean those are the only
good candidates absolutely not I
mean I think it's the schools of
Santa Fe Los crucis Albuquerque
all higher very good
superintendents in twenty twenty
one but the school boards did
not have the option of looking
at any candidates not a single
one who came from a column
school district and was
demonstrate.
Any success in doing this job
and to me the thing that's so
critical is that we're looking
for outstanding people we're not
we're not just looking for
someone who can do the job is
pretty good to fix our schools
and all the rest of our in you
know of our public
infrastructure ideally we want
people who do a bang up job and
those people in other
communities it could be in New
Mexico it could be outside of
the New Mexico but people who
are demonstrating that kind of
ability as senator Collins has
are not looking for another job
they're happy where they are
there's something about our job
that might intrigue the mid so
the best candidates it's the
challenge of the job that they
look forward to those of the
people that we want to attract
but if they are told that their
name will be of of made
available even if they're not a
finalist they will withdraw they
will not be candidates and so
you lose the sort of cream of
the crop again we could get good
people and we have gotten good
people but to be sure that we
have a chance of looking at
people who are doing a great job
in Fresno or Amarillo or
something like that you've got
to be able to assure some
confidentiality now at the end
you reveal three finalists names
on their resumes and you and and
this provides it that has to be
done ten days in advance and the
point is to give the community a
chance to get to know these
finals and the and that's good
and to get their input so that's
how this bill would work without
this bill we are left in the
situation where people who are
doing the job somewhere else
will not apply and that's just a
fact thank you Mr chairman thank
yous thank you senator thank you
Nick.
Okay let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wants to
speak in support of this bill
yes Sir.
Thank you Mr.
Members of the committee chairs
are on behalf of the municipally
I think the sponsor and our
expert here at the nail on the
head with local governments
often times struggle with hiring
specially in senior level
positions we believe this within
a broader and more qualified
applicant pool and we think this
sponsor for bring this for your
thank you Mr chair anybody else
anybody on zoom honest because
for.
Is there anyone here who wants
to speak in opposition to the
bill yes let's start with you
have to.
My name is Melanie makers on the
executive director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government since nineteen
seventy eight we have had one of
the best inspection of public
records act in the nation our
problem is compliance and when
Senator Tallman was reading off
the names of the folks who
supported this legislation it
reads like a low a rogue's list
of all the folks who have been
in hot water over there in front
noncompliance in the last two or
three years and I could tell you
numbers and dates and spend
extra on the folks who have not
been able to comply with and I'm
gonna tell you why we oppose
this legislation right now.
This is not necessary to get
excellent candidates in fact the
New Mexico court of appeals and
rejecting an effort by the city
of Santa Fe Farmington to keep
application for city managers
private found that there was no
reason to believe that the
speculative argument was true
the court held that it is not
intuitively obvious that most
well qualified potential
applicants for positions of
authority will be detoured from
applying by a public selection
process also New Mexicans should
not have to rely on the word of
public officials that are
choosing the best finalist the
public to get to see the pool
for themselves to make sure that
both fashion cronyism and even
discrimination are not part of
the process The New Mexico court
of appeals has made this clear
and the court's opinion New
Mexico policy of open government
is intended to protect the
public from happened to rely
solely on the representation of
public officials I have
questions about the logic behind
this bill and questions that you
may want to ask yourself as well
questions like what is the
sponsor want to make the hiring
process for the most important
jobs and in the city and state
more secretive violating the
public policy underlying the
inspection of public records act
a bedrock principle of democracy
is that citizens have the right
to know how their government is
being run or prefer perhaps what
empirical evidence is there to
show their closing off the
process results in a poor hiring
pool municipalities are.
How do you police departments
and school districts now being
headed up by a qualified and
capable executives what if an
agency announces finalists that
are white males and when the
public could reject a Jack's
asserts that these were all the
best candidates should the
public be able to test the
assertion these are just a few
of the questions I have as to
why this is a bad step for New
Mexico our state has long been
able to find qualified capable
executives through open searches
New Mexico has always done it
this way and hired many
successful leaders this bill
which would have a new exemption
to the inspection of public
records act has been brought to
you three times there's a reason
it hasn't passed and we hope
that you will also make sure it
doesn't pass today thank you
thank you yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of seven Lopez on the
executive director for the the
press association and we stand
against this bill of one of the
things when I first come on as a
executive director I want to
know what readers New Mexico
thought what voters thought when
your hand up you have a flyer
from a readership study that we
did and in seven out of ten you
Mexicans believe this bill
should not be.
They're they're your
constituents that are saying no
of we want we want open searches
and I was a publisher in
Farmington point when we sue the
city of Farmington to open those
those applications up and in the
city they had a certain group of
that was in charge of this and
they kind of created a different
level of citizenship they were
able to this group was able to
see the application general
public was so we brought that
to District Court and then the
city of while the appeal and we
wanted of course he's also so
this is become a tradition.
One.
Serve of forces.
Thank you for thank you Mr Lopez
yes my name
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Brian
Fallon Albuquerque journal I
guess first elective college
eyes for the sad state of
education health Kerr of the
publishing at which years ago
and chase away all the good
application we stand in favor of
this bill because we see it as
another attack on paper there
there are several every year
this is the third or fourth on
issues come up I've heard it
related to we can't hire good
coaches can't hire this hire
that higher whatever
it's all speculation is
important for regions that
someone is truly satisfied in
their jobs it's just speculation
that we're going to entice them
are we going to pay so much more
New Mexico to California or New
York or somewhere no if if
people really want to come to
New Mexico I'd love to come back
for if they really want to.
They will come here and and just
again and another attack on the
approach to keep people in New
Mexico in the dark is just not
acceptable thank you thank you
anybody anybody else anybody on
zoom.
Members of the committee.
Senator McKenna.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator Clemente I've got a
question and I've been read
through materials and have been
able to find a satisfactory
answer for myself why three
verses four verses to as far as
finalists.
Thank you for that question the.
That's my expert testimony as a
good is a good explanation for
that thank you.
Mr chair Senator McKenna it's
common in the other states that
have a provision requiring
finalists to be announced the
public three is the most common
number some don't just state
finalists and don't give a
number at all
some have all the other you know
two three four I don't think
there any that have more than
five but three is common and
when I got first and got
involved in this I talked to
several for three or four
experts around the country and
they said that three is a is a
good number that that's a good
number for the public to see
that kind of quality of the pool
to weigh in if you go with more
than three you begin to think of
it from the standpoint of a
really good candidate who's
thinking about moving to New
Mexico there think you do I the
best I can do here is get to be
one of some large number I may
not get the job if I'm one of
only three I feel pretty good
about myself and I think I stand
a good shot but that's
regardless of what the depressed
state that ways in people's
minds and the better they are in
the closer that the job is to
what we've got the more
seriously they take that sort of
thing they're happy where they
are they're thinking about
coming to New Mexico because it
looks like it an interesting and
worthwhile challenge they come
the best candidates come because
they want to serve the public
they're not coming for a higher
salary or so we don't want
people like that we want people
who care about the job and they
care but they care about the job
there is to and so to get them
to come here it's a close call
for them but eventually we hope
that we sell them on New Mexico
and they want to come in there
excited about it but they won't
come if their name is going to
come out and they will come out
come if their name is going to
be one of four five or six.
Does that answer your question I
hope Senator thank you chairman
thank you senator.
Anything else.
Yeah Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sierra job and the when you were
talking I.
and giving your your persuasive
rap I I.
I thought you were going to
On.
I thought the bill was to not
allow not allow names right not
allow names
And I think the crux of the bill
is on page two.
Lines eight and nine.
That
Except for the in the old energy
except for the three finalists
or except for finalises provided
the section common are exempt
from expect inspection pursuant
to the inspection of public
records act in other words.
Up currently Mr Chairman Senator
AUMENT.
Sam up I could list for twenty.
I guess my question Mr chairman
of sentiment.
If I'm a governmental entity
could I hire somebody.
And then people say well who are
the applicants and then I
release it the next day is there
anything in state law that
forces folks to put on their
website the applicant's.
The.
Senator and Mr chair
In the public record with the
except the exceptions is
available for inspection when
it's asked for and so if let's
say you were in advance of
hiring somebody and they and
anybody not just the media but
anybody asked to see the names
of people who are being
considered and if those are in
writing which they probably
would be yes those are available
for inspection so it it if it
becomes very formal there's a
search going on with this
perhaps with that usually with
the search committee everybody
knows who cares anyway that
there's a search going on is so
you anyone can ask at that point
I want to see the names of all
the people being considered.
That's the problem in most
states they can make such a
request will be denied because
it's an exception to their all
state to a public records act I
I understand Mister chairman
Senator Thomas so the answer is
no there is nothing in April
that requires governments from
disclosing who supply except for
someone to ask for the question
is I believe the question is no
Mr chairman Sierra but if no one
asks the no one knows and so
this actually is is I think it's
good government because it gives
ten days for the committee to
flesh out the to the top one or
two or three canisters in my
reading that correctly Mr Mr
Thomas.
Yes yes.
And then and then and nothing
would prohibit folks from
writing letters making phone
calls to the decision makers you
know in the event
no nothing would prohibit a ten
day democratic process from
flourishing given those three
candidates correct.
It could be more than three but
it's three minimal three is
required.
The body the school board or
whoever could decide we need
we've got four people we really
really like we can't decide
let's let the public weigh in on
but they have to come up with
three but you're absolutely
correct Senator there is nothing
right now and I think many many
times organization you know what
county you're single hirer
recount you Madam and you know
it's just it's it reported in
the newspaper that they hired so
and so but there was never any
discussion of who else was in
the pool because nobody ever
asked but if people ask but
under this bill yes they would
affirmatively have to come it
will remove the thank you I
would if they do a search and
that's normally it certainly
school boards most of these
organizations will put the word
you know if they put an ad out
there in the.
You know all over the country
usually and that the but those
names the way it is now they get
will the Farmington case they
had ninety so applicants in the
newspaper asked to see all of of
I also had to be released in you
know this is for people who I
think ahead Preciado their names
are going to be ousted chairman
gentlemen in that situation
where there's ninety Kandace
disclosed by the local media.
The folks don't know who the top
three or five it is right.
The community wouldn't know
who's rising to the top it
depends on when the request is
made right so instead of the
committee focusing on three or
five top candidates they could
theoretically be writing letters
or making phone calls for ninety
people eighty five of them don't
have it don't have a shot you
know that they have made the
shortlist Mr Chairman us Senator
AUMENT on on page two line
twenty two do we have a
definition for political
appointment.
Or or or is that is that based
an at will employee of the chief
executive to.
Senator now okay sharks so that
maybe prop you may want to think
of defining that or or adding a
few more words.
and the senator I mean I Mr
chair there is this illustration
which you know as a lawyer
helps.
In down the kind of person we
meet a cabinet secretary would
be a classic so I know Mr and
gentleman would yeah can do
illustrations in statute.
How to write the law we did our
best but I but I appreciate so I
would I would consider up.
We could it be more precise with
regards to political appointment
I I think you should do at will
employees something like that
something that's defined in
statute elsewhere
and then because those there's
there is no selection process I
mean the the chief of staff of
the guy of you know that's
that's the governor called type
thing but and then also the
the fact that that presidents of
universities has a different set
ups different statute it's a
similar policy and so I I
respect the the the the
opponents of this bill and and
respect their of opposition on
ideological grounds but just
from a practical standpoint
we have to recruit talent
whether it's from New Mexico or
outside in New Mexico and.
This is the practice of the vast
majority of states in this
country so so I appreciate you
bringing this point thank.
Then we just ask you a question
following up you said.
So is that true that it's the
president applicants for
presidency.
Are included in this bill.
Mmhm.
There is a separate statute
passed around twenty years ago
now the covers presidents of
public universities and and what
is it what is it do.
Same as this thing is it
accepted it there you have to
come up with five up okay.
Senator Sedillo Lopez here
you've got to.
To
The first litigation about this
issue.
It's too painful the.
So one of you and I were both at
the university so.
But I should have it's fine we
actually work together pretty
much with the press on that
because we there was litigation
and it was just wide open it
back to them as it is now and so
the regents
had to identify everybody they
were who had indicated a
willingness to be considered for
president and of the university
the region's tried to avoid that
but the court said no there's no
exception in the statute so we
went this is common in the state
so we went back to the
legislature and said this is an
unworkable situation we focused
on the university at that was my
employer and pass that that
statute which is just like this
except it is I.
Mister chair Mister chair I I.
Mexico.
And
Because if you write that you
give.
Section hi I am all for public
disclosure but I think it's
And it's modeled after.
Thank you senator anybody else
any other discussion what's the
will of the committee.
Yes we have a motion for a due
pass from Senators maybe
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Any other debate.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator karos yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Yes.
Senator my SS.
Thank you yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Smith yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino we have to pass.
Hey Santo Domingo again I just
would go with no not explained I
will thank you.
Senator Ingle no.
Senator yes.
You want to explain your vote
Senator going to do thank you Mr
I'm sorry I was late driving
traveling from home of the
heartburn that I have sort of
like what these people that I've
looked at it appears before I'm
on the school board and I'm
trying to understand their again
as late in the discussion why it
would even be a problem this
plan the name so does the reason
for my vote thank you for that.
Thank you you have a do pass
senator and on judiciary and
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee
consideration time.
Thank you so Senator goes we
will go to your bill now.
Mr if you don't mind calling the
roll you are pulled over yes I
just got here and I know you and
act I guess Senator Baca we
tried to funding we would come
to granted since I was here I go
and pull your deal brought
different but we'll do it Friday
it that's good for you that's
good it's going to give you time
to get ready to roll will rule
that the.
Right.
And then we'll go to our last
bill on the scheduled center so
if you want to get him in.
Well here is he's already came
and good.
Senate bill seventy five.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr
this is probably the shores
billion dealt with today.
And I need to give you a little
bit of background as to what
this is where it comes from this
committee I think actually heard
this bill two years ago during
the pandemic shut down of.
In let me give you a little bit
of background where it comes
from most people believe that we
got let out of our.
Motor vehicles are motor vehicle
fuel systems back in the
seventies we didn't in aviation
there is still technical lead
that is in aviation fuel called
one hundred local lad that about
seventy five percent of the
aviation fleet uses to fly are
out in the United States that's
four hundred thousand gallons of
avgas one hundred low level it
day in the US is burned.
Its down as about two grams of
tetra ethyl lead that doesn't
sound like much but that's a
total of seventeen hundred sixty
two pounds of lead a day that is
burned into the atmosphere of
the.
CDC has ruled that were
determines the PA I think it is
that no level of lead in the
atmosphere is safe for children
people or other things that we
continue to dump this into the
atmosphere of couple other
things just to put that into
perspective you go over here in
the United States we're dumping
three hundred twenty one and a
half tons attempt at the lead in
the atmosphere the most because
weigh about a ton think of three
hundred twenty one cars of this
highly toxic chemical that we
are dumping into the atmosphere
every year.
In most piston powered
airplanes.
Run on hundred low let.
Most of them would run fine on
non ninety octane Mobil gas
which is gasoline for motor
vehicles but that does not have
any alcohol get it it's
available at a few gas stations
in New Mexico.
The the the
It's not available at the I
don't think it's any airports in
New Mexico it is better for my
airplane I've last Miller please
many of you know my airplane
would prefer to run on that lead
in the gasoline bowels my spark
plugs making the engine have be
potentially more dangerous
because the engine produces less
power we're could even failed
due to felled spark plugs from
the lead that we put into the
airplanes but we have not gotten
the lead out and as a result and
let me back up to where this
actual bill comes about is.
Airports have exclusive.
Contracts with the fixed base
operator called FBOs usually
Phillips sixty six and shell and
the exclusive contract is they
are only allowed or will only
allow the operator to sell their
hundred low lead fuel they are
not allowed to contract with
anyone else to also offer.
The ninety octane move gas that
has no lead in it at all.
All this bill does is it would
prevent those exclusionary
contracts to prevent the sale of
unleaded fuel at airports.
I I can tell you a lot more
about aviation fuel about how
the hundred low led the team
covered one why we got rid of
the unleaded fuel for aviation
the federal government is in the
process of certifying new fuels
that would meet the octane
requirements of the turbine
powered for the turbo charge
piston ones that require higher
octane rating if you want to
know more.
All right.
Let's go to the audience with.
Those bills.
Right this bill proposes bill or
learn more about the service if
you want to learn more are you
one of those four of those
support for.
On behalf of we have the natural
resources defense council okay
so we're.
tools for jail for all the
reasons Senator just like at.
Our with.
Thanks for anybody else with
that opinion on this bill or
curiosity about the bill.
And
anybody on the zoom with the
curiosity or.
Okay members of the committee.
If.
Does it do other states have the
same restrictions at the airport
a few years back Mr Chairman a
few years back California had a
lawsuit by the some of the
pilots that would prefer to have
the most gas available for their
planes and couldn't get it there
was a lawsuit and as a result
California passed a law very
similar to this that.
Prevented Reese the the not
allowing the sale of unleaded
fuel at does this is almost a
double negative as it sounds.
And and so they have that and
the most gas is available with
lots of the rest of the country
where it's more readily
available and where there aren't
restrictions or exclusivity
contracts for the fixed base
operators.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez of
I think it's.
At most airports there's a
relatively there there's one
company some of the bigger ones
there might be two who have
exclusive contracts provide fuel
for airplanes that land that
that that airport and.
And so they because of that
their contract then with for
instance Phillips sixty six is
we only will allow you to sell
our fuel here.
Senator yes I was
That that's all I.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this bill very much
reading comprehension isn't too
good but.
The says you would not require
it the installation of such
systems which would cost the
hundred thousand dollars so.
You you could dispense this
unless you spend a hundred
thousand yes now.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and
yes to put in another if you'll
take there could cost that much
what happens in the number of
airports that do will have most
gas is the put essentially a
self service
up there sometimes attached
directly to a fuel.
Truck that when it runs out they
dry down they fill it up with
the most guests from almost the
gas station and drive it back
back up alright is there with
the self serve for pilots to put
this better fuel for again
seventy five percent or so of
the aviation fleet.
Thank you Mr just said I don't
support this is curious how many
states you save enacted this
something similar California has
a bill similar because they have
the same kind of problem it's
not nearly the problem across
the Midwest there lots more
small airports and unleaded
fuels without alcohol in them
are more common there than in
this area because they grow a
lot of corn Midwest.
Well but that's usually for the
alcohol but they don't like
putting Mr chair and and
etcetera they don't like putting
that in there tractors in their
cars in their boats and so it's
more readily available than it
is here there are few gas
stations in Los crucis when I'm
able to I carry in five gallon
jugs this better fuel out to my
airplane when I can that's not
real safe always either compared
to be able to do it right there
at the airport.
Average you're gonna exercise
occurring yeah.
Okay well of thank you thank you
for bringing this for that's all
I have sent a check Mr anybody
else Senator Gallegos.
Mr chair Senator appreciate this
I do believe that heard of
before just got a couple of
questions we heard in twenty one
tested show six zero so I'm just
a couple questions so in the
trucking world on diesel we've
gone to death is this similar to
what Jeff did suppose cleaner
fuel better fuel is that what
this is doing Mr chair Senator
that's not what this does
aviation fuel again has to
address the lead in it because
aviation engines some of the
higher performance ones require
the higher octane rating to
prevent pre ignition
in the past there were three
grades of aviation fuel when I
first learned to fly the company
said we're only gonna find one
and they settled on the one in
the middle so it's not as good
for the high compression once is
not as good for the low
compression ones that don't need
the higher octane rating and so
there are currently the federal
government after two decades of
dragging their feet have
approved I think it's called
swift fuels a unleaded high
octane fuel for the aviation
fleet but it's not very readily
available and there are no
incentives for these FBOs to
switch over to that and
currently would be more
expensive that's a little bit
more what you're talking about
is dealing with the building to
up the octane rating without
having lead in it.
Thanks for that center and Mr
chair the reason I have is of we
found a lot of times and and
when you're of state money
you're going on the road because
deaf it plugged up your lines
also get full over.
That's one thing if you're in a
plane yes something like that
it's like only way down this is
damn hard landing and so of the
it does my concern because I
know deaths had some issues for
us in the industry I just didn't
want to fall back on you but Mr
chair I'll go to my next
question then
and I appreciate you talked
about the three or twenty one
tons of lead in the atmosphere
ported you get that and reason
being is I keep looking up
Representative Scott years ago
show that we're New Mexico one
one thousand the climate change
issue here were acting life
we're going to solve climate
change and I just because you're
the first one I've heard that
have specific numbers and so in
educating me like that knows
wondering if I could get that
source I can look back on other
sources yes in and Mr chair in
center Gallegos I googled how
much hundred low that is sold
they've got a chart it used to
be about eight hundred thousand
gallons a day of Eid general
aviation has dropped off partly
because of the cost of fuel
hundred low lead when I go out
to buy fuel I've usually played
pay between six and seven
dollars a gallon and so that
cost is limited the general
aviation fleet it is now drop
down if they have a chart that
in twenty twenty is where this
number came from that the amount
of Abd as we're not talking
about the.
The turbine ones that are using
jet fuel or any of those so this
is just the avid gas is about
four hundred on their chart I
then looked up what the how much
tapped out the lead is in and
it's about point six grams per
liter which works out to about
two grams per gallon and then
some simple math you know just
start doing that the conversions
of how much a day and how many
pounds that is per year.
Thank you for that Mr chair
Senator a once again you're very
good educator so I'll have some
more research to do tonight so
my last question Mr chair in
center is if this is an issue
why is it taking if the FAA so
long to deal with this what what
is the reason they're dragging
their feet Mr chairman and
senator.
Because the environmentalists
didn't aren't aware most
environmentalists are aware that
we still are dumping led into
the atmosphere through aviation.
There is been no impetus to
change that they also are trying
to get an alternative fuel that
will run the high compression
turbo charged.
piston engine airplanes
requires and I'm this is a very
gets outside my ability on
chemistry as to what this new
fuel actually what its chemical
composition is or how they got
that but the temperatures ten to
twenty five percent of the fleet
that needs the high compression
or has high compression engines
that need the high octane fuel
there hasn't been an alternative
for them and the fuel companies
the shells in the Phillips sixty
six it said we're not making to.
Big one and this is what we've
gotten to you have some is gonna
work for everybody.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
center for those answers thank
you senator and so does it Jeff
you'll have fled in no jet fuel
is essential Mr chair W. was
essentially kerosene it's an
entirely different combustion
and engine process and things
than internal combustion
engines.
Anybody else with the will of
the committee.
Second seconded by Senator
Tallman.
Move by Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Clerk a secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Davis yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
species yes.
Center city of office yes
Senator AUMENT yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes congratulations
Centria depressed and members
that concludes our business
today we we do have to the work
carried over onto until Friday.
Further burdening an already
having calendar on Friday.
But we'll we'll make it through
some and the Senator Gallegos
I'm so sorry about your mother
we had a moment of silence
ordered this morning.
We only spend in on learning
something new in the
legislature.
Thank you.
The.
