Senate bill thirty five Senator
Duhigg and the expert witnesses
the justice the bacon and and we
want to welcome you justice and
thank you for coming thank you
Mr chair so of go ahead and and
introduced the bill have you
just expert witness speak about
it and then we'll get to your
amendment excellent thank you Mr
chair.
Okay all right thank you Mr Iraq
so we're here with Senate bill
thirty five in this is a bill
that address it make some
adjustments to our statutes that
deal with the pointing temporary
guardians and conservators
so that we can ensure that
but folks who are going through
that process are appropriately
protected and how and at the
time lines that are in place on.
protect their interests and
ensure that there's appropriate
oversight just as making those
far more about this area than I
do so I will largely defer to
her good thank you senator
justice thank you Mr chair thank
you senator do you have.
last year this body created a
new legislatively mandated
guardianship and conservatorship
Commission The shorthand for it
is wings it's the working
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders the
mouthful it's a national
movement and it essentially took
the supreme court's guardianship
and conservatorship steering
Committee and put it in in
statute it has twenty five
stakeholders at the table that
represent a variety of interests
from the judiciary the executive
branch individuals in the
community who are either under
guardianship or the parents of
individuals under guardianship
and the like so it's a big broad
based group of people coming
together to discuss
the future of guardianship
conservatorship and things that
can be improved Senate bill
thirty five is the first bit of
legislation being proposed by
the wings Commission Senator
Duhigg sits on that commission
is one of the legislative
members.
The legislation.
The legislation before you
today.
Focus is specifically on
temporary guardianships and
temporary conservatorship.
I'll give you a sense of what
happens today with these before
I talk about the changes because
I think it'll give some context
for it.
Currently under the statute an
individual can file a temporary
guardianship and you know to opt
in usually an attorney.
And they can ask the court to
appoint a guardian or
conservator without any notice
at all to the protected person.
For their family members.
So it's what we would call an ex
parte process.
And the way the statute is
drafted now and it's been
drafted this it's been in it on
the books for a very long time.
there's no timely hearing see
hearing that's much further down
the road there's no time we
court oversight and there's no
real deadlines that prevent
either of the petitioning party
or the judge from kind of
kicking the can down the road
and if you kick the can down the
road that's when bad things can
happen because there isn't
adequate oversight for what the
temporary guardian or
conservator is doing with
respect to the financial medical
and housing decisions being made
for the alleged incapacitated
person this is somebody who is
not yet been found to be
incapacitated.
This is somebody that alleged to
be incapacitated and this leads
to different kinds of abuse some
of the abuses just lack of
attention more in the collect
the abuse other times I I really
think it is it's true abuse
It's often used by rehab
facilities and nursing homes and
hospitals as a tool to what do
you what judges called turf
people they're not getting paid
they want the person out they
want to mount yesterday they go
to a court and they say oh they
need a temporary guardian to
make decisions for them and the
temporary garden yard and then
removes them from the facility.
Not a great reason to appoint a
temporary guardian.
the more egregious abuse of this
and I'll talk a very thirty
thousand foot level because I
don't want to give away any
confidentiality of a of a
protected person or their
family.
I'm aware of the temporary
guardianship appointment in a
judicial district in New Mexico
where there was no oversight and
the can was kicked down the road
because there was no hard
deadline no hard issues related
to reporting.
The guardian never made contact
with the alleged incapacitated
person until they were called by
the police because the alleged
incapacitated person had died.
Unattended in their home.
I will give you some assurance
at least in terms of my own
responsibilities when I learned
of this case I immediately
reported the facts of the
Attorney General.
The judicial standards
commission and the disciplinary
board because it involved.
Potentially criminal acts.
It involved a lawyer and it
involved a judge so I discharge
my obligations immediately to
report that and that's often my
role especially now that I'm on
the Supreme Court.
things come to my attention
where I have I have an ethical
obligation to engage in reported
that these are the kinds of
things that happened because the
statute the way it is draft
right now.
He's a very technical term is
very loosey goosey.
And we want to shore it up
tighten it up give more clear
directions to lawyers and judges
as they engage in assessing
whether a temporary guardianship
is required or not and how to
handle it in a timely and
professional manner.
So that's the backdrop for why
the changes so I walk you
through just a short laundry
list of the types of changes
that are found in Senate bill
thirty five.
It expands the reasons for a
temporary guardianship or
conservatorship to include
serious harm to the safety or
welfare of the alleged
incapacitated person it requires
a hearing no later than ten days
after the appointment.
It requires the immediate
appointment of a guardian Adlai
item which is a lawyer that is
engaged to assess the situation
and report back to the court.
It limits the the length of the
temporary guardianship to thirty
days and only allows for one
extension based on good cause
shown.
For an additional sixty days so
it's really ratcheting back how
long it temporary guardian or
conservator Committee in place.
It requires within twenty four
hours.
Notice and service upon the
alleged incapacitated person and
if they have a lawyer upon their
lawyer as well so it moves away
from that ex parte nature of the
proceeding giving somebody
noticed that somebody's actually
filed this proceeding.
It also and I think this one's
particularly important it
prohibits the temporary guardian
or conservator from selling or
disposing of the individuals
property whether it's real
property or the bank account so
you can't have somebody going to
drain a bank account.
the only way the temporary
guardian or conservator have
access in that manner is only
with the judge's blessing so
there would have to be some
proof provided to the judge we
need access to the checking
account so that we can pay the
individuals mortgage or they
needed to pay a doctor or
something like that it's much
more tightly controlled what
happens with those assets.
It requires the temporary
guardian to file an initial
report within fifteen days and a
final report within fifteen days
of the termination right now the
temporary guardian isn't
required to file any reporting
so you can have I could be
appointed as a temporary
guardian.
Eventually a court determines
that there needs to be a full
time guardian it gets handed off
to Senator Duhigg I don't have
to account for what I've done or
how I've spent money or disposed
of assets or made any decisions
that doesn't exist in the
probate code right now so that's
one of the additional years of
change.
So those are the highlights of
the changes that we're proposing
in Senate bill thirty five we
have some amendments and.
thank you Mr chair we have we
have three amendments which I
think you've been handed out yes
to to the to the committee thank
you for doing that Senator
Duhigg.
and these are to reflect to some
issues that have been identified
by individuals who had
communication either with the
senator with me and then also
one issue one small issue that
was raised by the Attorney
General so that's where these
come from.
So on page two line seven.
applause would be added that
would read the guardian Adlai
item shall file a report no
later than two days prior to the
hearing.
That way the judge has the
benefit of knowing what the
guardian Adlai item has
discovered before the hearing
occurs.
And that this report shall
include those items found in
NMSA.
section forty five dash five
three oh three point one eight
one three three and seven and
you're probably going I just a
speaking we have no idea what
you're talking about so I
brought the handy books so I can
be a little more specific.
in forty five five three oh
three point one and has the
duties of the guardian Adlai
item and it lists lots of
different duties when you have a
guardian Adlai item who just
thirty or sixty days to find a
report but because this is on
You know work speed.
it's a truncated version of that
so the guardian Adlai item will
have to interview the alleged
incapacitated person.
Present the alleged
incapacitated persons declared
position to the court how do
they feel about this what if I
think.
Identifying present all
available less restrictive
alternatives to guardianship.
Guardianship is should be the
final.
Hammer so to speak it should be
the last resort for anybody in
our community to have.
Dignity to be protected to be
cared for.
So when we talk about available
less restrictive alternatives
does the individual for example
still have testamentary capacity
meaning they know who they are
who their loved ones are and
what their assets are and if
they have that capacity and they
can decide on I want Senator
Duhigg to be my person.
And I'm gonna give them my power
of attorney.
That should be presented to the
court the power of attorney and
go down that path don't go down
the guardianship path
guardianship should be a last
What tools report shall include
those items found in forty five
five four oh four point one
eight one two one six.
so it's it's nearing that
language on the conservatorship
side.
Number two is a little the
second.
We just got word the zoom is not
working.
Homes.
We have to hold up it's okay.
To go.
Compact.
Yeah a couple of yes talking to
Frank has got one from Hank
Hughes.
A couple of contract.
Sure sure sure this could.
Funded.
Posted to the.
Right of it right.
And yet still high I myself the
other day I went somewhere.
And I was like.
Six six I just nine six I have a
my card yet to actually complete
the.
Still.
All right
Yes.
I see other people doing like.
Yes we have to push a button.
Thank you for.
Every single time I'm in
committee I get at least one
taxing on Community of cast.
Justice will of technology.
We've got for.
They can communicate the store
is.
It wasn't.
Charlie.
He.
The city was.
David.
It was going yeah I know how
terrible.
I agree with that
because.
This.
It is.
Good for you.
Okay.
Thank you senator.
Party.
Yes I think Senator good yeah
bring this there if they're not
that's a right that's better.
That's what they were telling.
Exactly.
The.
Yes
the report today.
This.
It's complicated.
I hope you citizen custom water
filter.
Yes.
Thank you thank you.
One.
As.
I
said you mentioned that.
The.
Again this is the other thing.
K. state here thank.
The longer be able to
get them back in session.
Stay here that is really nice
yes.
The the chief.
Six of.
Yes.
the people that we don't have
good time management.
Can you can you say no to a.
Is here.
In.
It says in progress on the
website Mr chair.
Now nope still not connected to.
I want you know.
I spoke if it's the.
We were in.
The Senate finance.
Four four four
eight million ways.
There are.
Now I I I can see it one hundred
and.
Hi techs.
Okay okay we're back up we're
live.
Here's Brian he can help you
me with.
So as you were saying we're a
number three on your amendment.
Thank you Mr chair so number
three but simply mirrors number
one it carries the same concept
into the conservatorship side of
Senate bill thirty five which is
going to be found on page five.
So we would insert the same kind
of language.
The other amendment is is number
two and it seems when you see it
on paper it seems simple but
it's a little more complicated
to explain.
We're proposing that we insert
online eight after the word
persons.
Inserting for minors.
And the reason for that change
is in the probate code over the
C. course of the last five or
six years we have been updating
language to say alleged
incapacitated percent not
protected person not
incapacitated person.
In the conservatorship world
there's this this interesting
twist to who is eligible for
conservatorship.
And alleged incapacitated person
is a minor can have a
conservatorship the only time
miners really come up in in this
context in the probate code.
Individuals who have
disappeared.
Not sure what that means but
individuals have disappeared.
individuals that are
incarcerated in individuals who
are being held by foreign
governments.
The very unique little twist to
the to the probate code.
We are purpose suggesting that
we should add or minors to the
emergency temporary process
because you can envision that
there may be the need for
temporary conserver for minors
whose parents suddenly or killed
or something of that nature.
We don't believe you need a
temporary for somebody who's
disappeared.
The urgency seems to not be
present somebody who is
incarcerated the same issue and
same with.
Somebody who's being held by a
foreign government although I
will tell you know judge in the
state of New Mexico has seen a
conservatorship triggered for
any of those last three
categories but we do recognize
and we we don't unintentionally
omitted miners to the revisions
to the temporary conservatorship
provision because we can easily
envision why there may be a need
there and not a need on the
person who is has disappeared
which my guess is is is fairly
arcane language in in the
probate code but we will cross
that bridge a different day okay
so those are the three
amendments well if it were
sensitive with the amendment and
any questions on the members
senators to fight.
Is there any debate any
opposition to adopting these
three amendments.
Seeing then Senator yes yes
Senator mechanical.
As.
First one right in front of you
there.
Yeah thank you chairman thank
you senator
Summary about the amendment what
I'm seeing in the bill I see
language of business days and
then just regular days and I'm
just wanting for this particular
amendment.
Is is just fine to have two days
versus business days.
And then the holidays question.
Mr chair Senator a very stupid
question the two days is very
intentional.
The way the
The way that civil procedure
works which makes lots of
lawsuits falsely.
But we we distinguish very
intentionally between business
days on a straight day count and
so we want the two days to be us
what we would call straight day
count because at the time is so
compressed
but it's it's a very astute
question because often times we
put business days in and we
train exclude holidays and
things like this but because
this is such an expedited
proceeding we really do just
mean two days a file on a
Saturday for a Monday morning
hearing very good thank you
chairman thank you senator thank
you senator McCain you just a
second thank you any any Senator
Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator justice I'm sure I was
trying to go through this as
five dash five as four seven
I guess my question is
Is there a procedure for
contacting parents or attempting
that or how long that.
Time frame goes until they give
up and go to this are you are
you thinking about the insertion
of of the minor to the
conservatorship process.
I'm I can I can only speculate
because I'd as a as a District
Court judge and I was a District
Court judge for almost ten years
I never had an application for
conservatorship from minor.
But the application itself will
have to set forth sufficient
facts in order to go down this
path which would include
governments from a licensed
attorney that the parents had
passed away and the
circumstances of that and that
there hasn't been a guardian
already appointed by the parents
in their estate planning or
otherwise all of those things
would be presented to the court
before the court ever even
considered granting the
temporary conservatorship so
there is there is some
the the petitioning Attorney or
the petitioning party has to set
those things forward the
guardian Adlai item then goes in
and will investigate and confirm
all of those facts before the
hearing occurs okay and Mr chair
Senator justice Bacon could the
minor.
Be the petitioner.
Mr chair Senator I think it
would depend on their age.
you know certainly a ten year
old would have a hard time being
the petitioner somebody on
behalf of the ten year old.
Could be a family friend could
be the you know could assist
them with that process a
grandparent something like that
somebody who's sixteen or
seventeen years old could file
the petition all by themselves
so it really is a really fact
dependent question Senator.
All right thank you I'm at Mr
chair and senator Justice bacon
on I guess what I'm what I'm
trying to think through is if
there is a family conflict.
And between the money or the
parents in the minor makes a
petition for some sort of a
financial.
Disagreement or something like
that that's kind of where I'm
going and so that's why I was
trying to ask the question Mr
chair Senator I I think that
that would end up being a
different kind of proceeding in
the and I would imagine if I
received a petition from a minor
who said.
I'm fighting with my parents
over money
that would get I would dismiss
that case that's a children's
court proceeding and there's a
whole emancipation of minors
process where those kinds of
distancing between parents and
minor minor children can happen
it's not this type of proceeding
so that the chances of that
moving forward my believer
would.
Thank you.
Senator good.
Mister chairman Senator here are
the served on the same line so
if I understand.
Also in those groups take care
the the children not in this
format.
Okay because I know they have
the at lions field you know for
for them to speak for the child
but that's a different purview
is right here Mr chair Senator
you're you're absolutely correct
the casa program really is
focused in in children's court
and juvenile proceedings this
very limited set of
circumstances would be something
that would fall outside of that
I think it's a it it's a very
low rate would be a very rare
occurrence in that I've I've
never seen it be employed it
would be if there were no safety
net measures put in place by the
parents and you have a minor the
needs access to a bank account
in order to keep a roof over
their heads and you know they
don't have that family support
that's where this would would be
triggered as opposed to an
emancipation type of proceeding
or where there's conflict
between parents and child.
Thank you for that that
clarifies that the way I look
this probably fifteen and above
and then everything else to help
so thank you for that Mr.
Thank you Senator Gallegos
Senator Stefanics Bill number on
the amendment we never have
adopted in the.
Any opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
three amendments to have been
made to the bill will go to the
audience for any comments on the
bill as amended anybody here
want to speak for or against
this bill.
The okay let's start here with
Mr Jackson.
Yeah you better come up because
we'll be able to hear what we
have.
Of.
Okay.
But then.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson here today
on behalf of disability rights
New Mexico and our agency is
been involved in guardianship
issues affecting people with
disabilities for decades and the
we appreciate the sponsor and
her expert witness moving
forward on this I'm here today
in support of this bill these
are really important issues but
I'll be really brief I just want
to touch on a couple of issues
this temporary guardianship
process he really is supposed to
be for emergency situations
unfortunately sometimes it's
been used to simply speed up the
process try to lock in the
appointment of a guardian and
set a whole things a series of
things in motion that can be
really problematic for the
alleged incapacitated person.
it's important for you all to
remember that even with the
changes that are the proposed in
Senate bill thirty five this is
this still is to some extent an
ex parte proceeding and by the
end and the point that I want to
make in that regard is that a
temporary guardian can be
appointed based solely on the
allegations in the petition and
the testimonial of the person
presenting it without an
opportunity for the alleged
incapacitated person to have
their say and so it's really
important that you adopt the
kind of changes that are being
proposed in Senate bill thirty
five in order to address the
potential for abuse of that kind
of an arrangement of for example
the bill does include that
A temporary guardian if they are
appointed still can't proposes
sale of property unless they
have a specific to a court the
permission to do that
we'd be happy to have that of
the bill further amended to make
sure that there wouldn't be any
change in placement of the
person without that kind of a
court order but it's those kinds
of limitations are important and
of course the the the part of a
major part of this bill is to
make sure that hearing is held
just as soon as possible because
these are all very critical
rights in the the effect of the
alleged incapacitated person.
In the long run our agency
thinks that the interests of an
allegedly incapacitated person
would be best served by simply
pointing an attorney for them
our current proceedings called
for a guardian Adlai item and
that's really helpful we think
that a person would be best
served to just simply have an
opt have their own attorney
looking out for them and
protecting their rights but
that's for another day and I
appreciate that the sponsor and
the expert are moving forward
with this important package of
the limitations on temporary
guardianships and we encourage
your support thank you thank you
Mr Jackson hello fines and
Marlys show to be next.
What Mr chairman members of the
committee Ellen pints
representing the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of persons with
disabilities of all types and as
Mr Jackson said these
guardianship proceedings and
conservatorship proceedings
frequently involve persons with
disabilities we strongly support
the changes proposed in this
bill because it really is a need
to continue the process that the
legislature has embarked on to
improve our guardianship
statutes bring them up to date
and increase the protections for
people who are subject to these
proceedings in addition to the
changes that justice Bacon
listed I did want to highlight
one that I don't think she
mentioned that we do support it
at the provision that in
addition to the alleged
incapacitated person and that
person's Council any interested
person can move to dissolve the
or modify the guardianship or
conservatorship and we think
that's really important
proficient I do want to echo
Mister Jackson's comment Justice
bacon actually in one of her her
comments highlighted an issue we
strongly support the provision
that there can't be a sale or
disposal of property by the
temporary guardian we would
really like to see some
protections for the kind of
situation she mentioned you know
that the person's placement
their their personal situation
in addition to their property
but that can I think be held
over for another day we do
support the bill as it stands
and we urge your support as well
thank you Ellen for is that
provision you you brought up
that that says anybody any
interested party can intervene
in the.
Thanks committee for.
Page three line twenty one in
the guardianship section and it
also appears I'm pretty sure in
the conservative short okay
thank you good.
Very good of mother showed.
S. chairman members of the
committee March of show time
here advocating on behalf of the
New Mexico Family guardianship
conservative coalition.
Full twenty families many of
which you probably read about
they had some high profile cases
they have been and believe they
have been very adversely
affected by the guardianship and
conservatorship practices in New
Mexico well we appreciate very
much the work done by wings Task
Force we ask from some
clarification in the following
areas one is that the alleged
incapacitated persons wishes are
prioritized and if there was due
diligence taken to determine who
is been determines as a
surrogate by the Election have
castigated person often times it
appears that the way it is now
this is done after the fact I
think the time lines in this
bill help us think question to
that but we still acts as a
clarification on how those
wishes for the alleged
fascinated person are
prioritized in this process.
Secondly if there is an alleged
financial explication we do and
it appears that this bill does a
single thirty five addresses and
some not but it goes back to
those freezing of assets of the
alleged compact incapacitated
persons and on top of that as
well maybe some clarification if
there it is alleged physical
abuse to the alleged it had
stated person it appears that
we're it seems that the forties
are not called immediately on
that
instead of temporary guardian is
put in place and we think that
should be reversed if you
thought you should be called
immediately upon alleged abuse
so those are comments thank you
for thank you more of okay there
are several people on the zoom
and we'll start with the the the
head of the office of
guardianship Ellis McCoy.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm also not quite
executive director of the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities council which
houses the offices are you ship
I'm also speaking on behalf of
rice pager CEO behavioral health
collaborative tend to.
The EDD council in behavioral
health collaborative are both
members and for economic
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders on
wings and we support Senate bill
I.
This administration work to
establish wins last year in New
Mexico lost so that experts
policy makers and people
affected by the guardianship
system including people under
guardianship and their families
could collaborate with the
courts and all works our state's
partnerships.
This bill is a small but
important step toward protecting
those funds local transportation
deeply hope that the work we
will result in greater works and
legislative proposals next year
and are grateful to the
judiciary person wearing
commitment to partnership thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
McCoy of the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness.
Okay.
And.
Okay go ahead.
I'm I'm here for another bills
thank you very much stuff.
Okay how about both the but let
me.
Okay hearing Mr chairman yes yes
we can.
Thank you thank you chairman RTZ
Pino and members of the
committee my name is Tianbao me
I'm the associate state director
for advocacy for a a RP in New
Mexico I A. R. P. New Mexico's
an appointed member of the New
Mexico wings stakeholder group
and that one of our volunteers
gene Hamrick is part of that and
we've endorsed and supported
these important reforms to New
Mexico's temporary guardianship
and conservatorship provisions
these changes will close
loopholes in the existing law
limiting temporary guardianship
to thirty days with only one
extension requiring that the
alleged incapacitated person and
their attorney be personally
served within twenty four hours
of the appointment of a
temporary guardian for nearly a
decade A. R. P. has been on the
forefront of guardianship reform
advocacy and will continue to
fight to protect vulnerable
older adults who rely on legal
guardians and others to help
make final decisions we are to
support this legislation thank
you thank you the.
Anastassiades Martin your next.
Good afternoon my name is
Anastasia Martin Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
the new general counsel for
aging long term Services
Department aging and long term
Services Department supports
this legislation specifically
I'd like to point out what is
our pin pointed out reiterate
this legislation does restrict
temporary guardians from selling
or disposing of property without
explicit authorization from the
point aging long term Services
Department leave that this will
reduce incidents exploitation
further it requires a written
report to support which allows
for much needed oversight in
this industry thank you.
Thank you miss Martin.
Okay we'll go now to the
committee and Senator Stefanics
you had your hand up first and
then Senator Sedillo Lopez okay
let's let's questions good thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senators and of.
Justice for being here the
question I have is could you
give me an example of why.
You would go as long as an
additional sixty days.
After the first period I can
said be it the initial period
lots of activity part excuse me
Mr chair Senator I can there's
there often times were lots of
activity is occurring in that
first thirty days but it can't
be completed and the the most
significant one of those is
reporting from a qualified
health care provider as you all
can imagine I don't know if any
of you have tried to make a
doctor's appointment these days.
I tried to make one last week
and they told me they could see
me in may and that that was like
moving a mountain.
So when you have somebody who
doesn't have those supports
around them and maybe doesn't
have a routine relationship with
the medical care provider that
particular piece of this process
can take additional time and
that's where you most often see
the need for that extension here
the important part is you have
to come back to the court and
explain why.
And there has to be good because
for the for the why it's not
simply we didn't get around to
it.
That's that's one of the things
we're trying to to eliminate
from this is is.
Laziness may be too harsh a word
but some of it you know I'm too
busy the lawyers to Ortiz there
needs to be good cause shown for
that extension and that would be
the primary reason for good
because of the conservatorship
side one of the challenges that
that guardians and conservators
had is interacting with
financial institutions.
Financial institutions often are
reticent to provide materials
documents bank account ledgers
to temporary for.
Permanent conservators so often
there it takes time for their
lawyers to review it and get
back and then for a judge to
intervene and say no you're
gonna do this so those are the
kinds of things the real life
examples boots on the ground for
why it might be extended but
that but that the threshold here
with the exchange has to be a
showing of good cause.
So Mr chair I understand what
you're saying that.
The first thirty days that then
adding another up to sixty days
that's a quarter of the year.
And if the person is of some
money.
That can be very.
Effective that can cause
depression that can cause acting
out that can cause a great deal
of other behavior.
When their life is being.
You know hung in the balance so
to me I understand you're saying
this fifty about health care.
I haven't seen banks take that
long.
maybe on the state but
in terms of getting to account
balances at cetera
so I'm just concerned that we're
talking about up to ninety days
here and that would be my only
concern otherwise I'm supporting
the changes thank you Mr chair
Senator I've personally seen the
the tension created by banks
when dealing with conservators
it's different than an attorney
who represents in the state
which can take some time in
addition banks are very
suspicious of people walking in
with conservatorship documents
and it often takes a long time I
also understand the effect some
but of preceding like this
hanging over somebody had has on
an individual's emotional and
psychological well being but if
somebody is of sound mind and
the judges had a hearing in ten
days the judge is going to stop
the whole proceeding.
They're not waiting I have seen
that individual come in and talk
to means why am I here I have a
job merry I have kids true
story.
There's no reason to have to
continue the proceeding at that
point.
When it gets continued its
because there is a question
about capacity at that point.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I am so
impressed by the by the
committee's work and and
tightening it up in this way it
just seems like the a really
great direction because we're
talking about somebody's liberty
and so I think this is these are
really great improvements I only
had a question I was I was glad
that one of the commentators
raised on page three of line.
Twenty one for interested person
is there is that to find
anywhere or is it simply that
the interested person would
state their interest in the
court would determine whether
the interest is sufficient just
thinking about neighbors and you
know I understand relatives
would have an interest but you
know sometimes people don't have
relatives relatives and I how
broad is the concept of
interested person Mr chair
Senator a fair question yes it
is been defined it's one of the
things that we worked really
hard on when we brought the
bigger the really big broad
changes to this process because
we wanted the neighbor the
friend from church.
To be able to come forward and
say something and then the judge
assesses when somebody comes
forward.
Are you here in good faith are
you truly an interested person
as opposed to somebody trying to
get somebody social security
number or bank account number it
really has expanded the types of
individuals who can come forward
not just in this context but
file grievances bring complaints
to the judge's attention because
we recognize that people have
support networks that are
broader than spouse and
children.
Most people have families of
choice at a certain point
whether to your best friend the
people you go to church with and
the like and they're the ones
who understand that but the Evan
flow of your a day to day
activities and how somebody's
doing and so we've always wanted
those types of people to be able
to come in and speak out and it
is defined in different
provisions of the probate code.
Thank you Mr chair I think
that's important because the
concept could be used to protect
the individual if the concerned
friend from church comes in and
waves of questions but also
could be abuse the the.
The boyfriend was not really the
boyfriend coming in and in doing
that so that was my my question
and I'm glad it is defined in
the probate code and I I am a.
like I said I think that this is
a really great revisions to the
to a process that can be
extremely abusive and as we all
know we read newspaper articles
about horrible horrible cases in
this I think this is really
designed to minimize that so I
appreciate the Sanchez for
bringing it and looking forward
to voting for thank you senator
thank you senator of McKenna.
And.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you justice Bacon.
Senator Sedillo Lopez just
referred to in article and I'm
curious chairman Senator and and
Justice have these changes been.
In statute.
With what happened to Mr or Ms
Hamilton been prevented.
that is the most recent story
that I read about it was in the
Santa Fe New Mexican the
Albuquerque journal.
And it what a nightmare she went
through and her son and I asked
that not only for the benefit
of.
My colleagues here but also to
relate to the folks watching on
webcast meaning.
Why this is so important to them
those watching this proceeding
today thank you.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question I have to be
slightly careful what I talk
about because I'm privy to
confidential information that I
can't share with this body
related to that case.
and.
When you look at what's reported
in the news it's it's part of
the story it's not a complete
picture of what happened there
but what I can say is that the
inability for example to dispose
of assets without court
authority would be one of the
safety measures
when we're done answering
questions I believe the sponsors
are going to propose an
additional amendment and if I
could be so bold that to talk
about it now because it goes
directly to your question
and it's something that Jim
Jackson brought up which was can
we also put in that we won't
change placement housing without
court oversight we think that is
a fantastic friendly amendment
because that would be very
squarely address some of the
issues that came up in the in
the Hamilton Matt.
Thank you just to speak thank
you senator thank you chairman.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Gallegos Mr chairman
thank you center your honor of
just really quick trying to
understand some of the tech
terminology so what are the
qualifications of guardian Adlai
item.
Mr chair Senator guardian ad
light items are lawyers by
training.
I'm so their license members of
the bar.
And they they gain experience in
a number of ways they're not
separately licensed.
Where is the guardians and
conservators here separately
licensed by a national
organization because they're not
lawyers but they're members of
the bar who engage in in this
kind of work
a member of the house of
representatives sent
Representative Chasey for
example serves as a guardian
Adlai item in children's cases
quite often you see the use of
jails in children's court cases
much more frequently than you do
in cases involving adults
because children are often
thought of as not being able to
speak for themselves but their
lawyers by training and and
that's the the base
qualification to be a guardian
ad light on there are a number
of individuals in the legal
community that they spend most
of their legal career devoted to
serving as guardians at at eight
AM from anything to to a very
simple cases to the most complex
kind of cases that but you can
imagine involving children and
other
incapacitated individuals thank
you for that Mister chairman
Senator your honor then it takes
me to my next question is
brought up earlier that this
temporary process may be used to
speed up a permanent
guardianship if you have an
attorney that this money was
coming from if you have an
attorney as a guardian Adlai
item how would that attorney use
the process.
In the wrong way.
Mr chair Senator there's two
different attorneys in this case
and I think that is what will
answer your question given the
petitioning attorney who is
representing it could be
representing a family member
who's petitioning the court it
could be Hospital petitioning
the court they're an attorney
kind of in that ad traditional
advocates role and those are the
types of attorneys that might
take advantage of the temporary
process to speed along the
guardian Adlai item is a
separately appointed attorney
and they're an arm of the court
they're appointed by the judge
and paid by the court.
For who pays them.
Mr chair Senator that that's
that's a good question it
depends.
If somebody has financial means
the a state there there a state
is paying for the guardian Adlai
item if there aren't financial
means they may be going through
the office of guardianship
agency McQuay's organization
that provides those services for
free.
And most guardian ad light items
I know do more pro bono work
than any other lawyer group in
the bar because there's such a
need for free guardian Adlai
item services so colleagues of
mine they rack up thousands of
hours.
Serving as guardian Adlai item
for free.
Mr chair Senators and.
your honor then I guess my
thought then is the
incapacitated person would have
won.
And the petitioner could have
the other attorney.
Mr chair Senator not quite it
goes to something that Ellen
planes brought up which is you
know hopefully some day will be
a place where every alleged
incapacitated person has a full
throated advocate attorney
representing their interests.
It's something that the state
needs to consider it will cost a
lot of money
and that's that's always been
the stumbling block to getting
there so the guardian Adlai item
have where's this interesting
dual hat there in arm of the
court they're investigating and
reporting back to the court has
just been judges to be clear
cannot investigate anything.
They are required to present to
the position of the alleged
incapacitated person but if in
that guardian ad light Ms
judgment.
They're going to make a
recommendation that the alleged
incapacitated person disagrees
with because they think it's in
their best interest.
They put forth the best interest
analysis so it's a slightly
different role than being a
traditional attorney for an
alleged incapacitated person at
this point okay thank you for
that and one of my concerns Mr
centers in your owners I have
power of attorney for my mother
on her care giver and in that I
could see princes I've only got
one brother and I selector are
for in the he could actually the
petition on something he didn't
agree with president control of
my mother and at that point the
guardian line would come in to
take observation control over
some thought process that as
usual with my mom would that be
correct.
Mr chair Senator the inner
that's maybe.
So one of the things that has to
the guardian Adlai item has to
present to the court and frankly
the petitioning Attorney is
required to present this to the
court is have that individual
who's the subject of the
proceeded have they declared
through like a power of attorney
who they want to make those
decisions for them and the court
has to give that pretty
significant consideration.
It's not controlling it's not
binding at that point all
explain why through real life
scenarios.
Mom twenty years ago says I want
Johnny W. mind my power of
attorney and make decisions for
me both financially and
medically.
Petition is filed and it it
bears out that Johnny is
stealing all of mom's money.
Or is not making reasonable
medical decisions for mom at
that point the judge has to say
I understand there's a power of
attorney but it's no longer in
the individual's best interest.
What the judge is required to do
in exercising their discretion
in doing their job in the
scenario you've presented is to
listen to both parties and if it
turns out it's a squabble over
reasonable decision making.
A temporary guardian will not be
appointed apply that's that's
the job of the judges to parse
out.
Reality.
Significant concerns because
there's lots of significant
concerns that can come up in
this context verses potentially
in fighting between siblings and
we see a fair amount as judges
of that in fighting between
siblings or fight over who mom
loves more.
And that leads into this process
quite a bit and it's really
important for the judge to suss
out.
What's really happening I
appreciate that Mr last comment.
So I can see my center and your
honor is that then the request
of the of the incapacitated
person are given top priority
but then just look at from third
party to see if it's to their
benefit and not that I'm
skewing.
And that gives them somewhat
oversight control even though
she give me the power of
attorney it's for the best for
the individual Mr chair Senator
that that that that's a good way
of describing it it has a lot of
weight that power of attorney
but it's not ultimately
handcuffs to what the judge can
do when they look at the whole
picture I I presided over a case
where Johnny.
Made up name for today's
purposes had been named many
many years prior and was for
leasing maam.
And to the detriment of all of
the other children and it was
very easy to connect those dots
of the power of attorney at that
point was no longer appropriate
or required me as the judge to
weigh all of the evidence and
hear from people to make that
decision before it happens I.
Thank you for that thank you for
educating Mr chair yield.
Senator committees here next
thank you Mr chair Senators and
Justice figure that
that we had a pretty big CYFD
bill a year to go we put in
these kind of time constraints
for court proceedings and thanks
so much my question pertains to
this if you clause worse as the
court shall hold this here
within ten days so what happens
if they can't in that capacity
issues or is there enforcement
is someone gonna sue the court
if that doesn't happen could you
just comment on that general
concept Mr chair Senator yes so
anytime you have a shall and the
judge shall do something
litigation can can spin off from
that it typically comes to us
through kind of a the Supreme
Court threw out some kind of
written mechanism where then we
take swift action to direct a
judge to take action that's
consistent with with the statute
most often shall language judges
responded that an understanding
that it that means it's
mandatory certainly we have all
learned during the era of COVID
that not all things are always
possible
Bernalillo county had a
ransomware attack in the ability
to have hearings at the jail.
Stop.
Because the whole system had to
be taken offline so there was a
at a brief window where those
hearings couldn't happen but
then the court system had to
quickly figure out the work
around move those inmates on a
one by one to children's court
so that they could interact with
their lawyers and have hearings
with the judges so there's a lot
there's always the possibility
for a true emergency scenarios
were something.
Happens.
But.
Using that example of what
happened in Bernalillo county
the judges immediately jumped
into action and came up with a
plan for that work around so
that there wasn't on necessary
delay.
I think that's the best way I
can describe it judges take
shall very seriously if the
judge doesn't the parties have
an Avenue to bring that to the
attention of a higher court
through an expedited process.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez
I am to go to give you a chance
to say anything about this if
you want to add anything Mr
chairman thank you I apologize
for being late but I'll just
they did a.
For privative but it just real
quickly to is more mentioning I
was writing some notes to do
justice
COVID brought a lot of different
instances of what we're talking
about the issue of minors I had
one constituent family where
their parents were immigrants
children are citizens and both
parents died of COVID.
So you had three high school
students who were left and we
have to figure out how to go
through this and take care of
the situation at hand so this
this virtually happened happens
thank you thank you.
Thank you I had a couple of
questions of my own
first.
Is there a is there a reason
why.
Representative maybe to put it
the other way.
Would it be more protective if
the guardian Adlai item.
Can the guarded let him ever
become a permanent guard.
Working the temporary guardian
ever become a permanent guard.
Mr chair a guardian Adlai item
rarely becomes Mr Senator but
that that the temporary card a
temporary guardian can become
that party in and often times.
The temporary guardians a family
member.
More family member guardianship
and conservatorship happen in
the state of New Mexico then we
don't we hear the big stories
about that the corporate
guardians and conservators the
very very small percentage of
the cases most of these are
family members so the family
member it may be a cousin it
could be a child you know any
number of that person is
appointed on a temporary basis
to take control of the situation
and they ultimately become the
permanent.
The it seems like one of the for
those few cases that are the
high profile cases where there's
been that the terrible abuses
been because the temporary
guardian became that the named
the use the temporary
guardianship to get in the door
and then became name the
permanent guardian and the and
the family felt locked out for
whatever reason
so.
But I could see if if it's going
to be a family member.
The still court oversight I
suppose so they still have to
come back for periodic reviews
of of of of of the guardianship
yes yes is it we're just dealing
with temporary here but but
Okay thank you Mr chairman in in
the big kind of more on the bus
changes that we made now I think
three years ago.
they'll actually longer than
that maybe five years ago one of
the two of the big changes that
go to directly what you're
asking about one is locking out
the family members the only way
a family member is locked out to
use to use your turn terminology
Mr chair is if a judge
affirmatively says no you cannot
have contact the guardian
doesn't get to make that
decision anymore.
Correct there's a very detailed
process of how that particular
issue is addressed and then on
the reporting side you'll recall
that we created these very very
big and robust annual reports
the everyone still hates but
they're very very necessary and
that really kind of robust
reporting happens every year is
reviewed every year we have an
entire unit at the
administrative office of the
courts that assist every judge
in the state in reviewing those
annual reports.
so there's lots of wrap around
now for reviewing those reports
and the deep level of detail
that goes into them so every
guardianship in the state of New
Mexico with top touched annually
no matter what and if that their
grievances filed the complaints
made its touched even more
frequently by the court and
often times in particularly
contentious cases I know that
I've done this to train Keeney
is done this I require the
parties I would require the
parties to come visit me once a
quarter.
So there's there's a lot more
oversight than there was you
know five years ago when lots of
the cases that you all are
familiar with really really
proceeding.
That I just wanted to bring a
preview of your attention in the
analysis that we got the act
Office of the Attorney General.
Raise an issue around that one.
For no of the court may extend
for no more than an additional
sixty days and there their
concern was the.
The it didn't preclude.
An additional extension for
another sixty days is what and
it just had to do I suppose with
the way it's worded is there any
way to word that it would make
clear that you're talking about.
I'm no more than sixty days no
more than ninety days consider
anybody ever be on a temporary
guardianship something like that
so Mr chair I was aware of of
that Clemente and I have an
opportunity to speak with
senator do you think about it
earlier today.
No more than sixty days is is
pretty darn clear so I'm not
sure I did I didn't really see
the necessity for saying we
really need it when we've
already set.
I mean certainly we we could say
and you know you know there's
always a better way to say
things you know as a Supreme
Court justice we spend untold
hours crafting language
painstakingly
but as we talked about it we
really didn't see that that was
really it a legitimate issue
raised by the Attorney General.
The suggestion was provided that
the total duration of the
temporary guardianship does not
exceed ninety days adding that
in that I I think I had the same
reaction will though we already
say that but you know.
There would be no room saying
it.
But it it really is kind of that
but we really need it okay so I
would leave it up I'll leave it
at that I'm sure it is it goes
to you go to Judiciary next and
those people are very NIT
pickers in judiciary Mr chair
judiciary would be so sad if
they have nothing changes.
That you had an amendment you're
going to propose one further one
ID Mr chair and as the justice
said this addresses the
excellent suggestion from Mr
Jackson.
And so this would be we're going
to do the same language in two
places and I can get this typed
up for your committee secretary
I think we can capture it.
Well enough
Okay yeah if you could give us a
written copy then that would be
good absolutely Mr you're adding
something on page four so yes on
page four line nine.
After the term incapacitated
person.
Insert a comma or make a change
to the housing or other
placement of the alleged
incapacitated person comma you
know how it would read overall
as a temporary guardian is
entitled to the care custody of
the alleged incapacitated person
but a temporary guardian may not
sell or dispose of any property
belonging to the alleged
incapacitated person or make a
change to the housing or other
placement of the alleged
incapacitated person without
specific authorization from the
court so we would make that
change their that we would make
the same change in the
conservatives that section.
Page eight line one.
Again after the term
incapacitated person we would
insert that same language there
so that in that concert of
temporary conservatorship
setting that same restriction
would be there on not making
those changes and and if there
was a situation where a change
was appropriate the court but we
would would grant authority to
do so do do conservatives
conservatives make decisions
about.
Living arrangement.
Mr chair they could in the sense
of if there's no money left.
and begs the question of whether
we can serving.
but you you can see you can see
a scenario where a concert
temporary conservatorship is
filed and they realize that the
assets are far outweighed by the
debt and they may be making a
recommendation for a change in
placement or housing because
there are no there's no
mechanism to keep them in that
in that location.
a judge would then have to weigh
in to save that's a legitimate
concern and let's do something
reasonable.
So so that amendment would be on
page eight online one yes this.
So so we'll get you the the the
exact where you got the exact
wording or okay we'll get it
we'll get it yes I will go to.
How about the committee with any
any discussion of the proposed
amendment does anybody want to
move it personal question yes.
so on that amendment.
Because of the pandemic and
because of different cities
rising costs.
That could potentially mean.
That if somebody was conserving
funds and they couldn't stay in
a particular place they can be
moved community.
Well and New Mexico wrecked Mr
chair Senator I think what this
would mean is that that would
not be happening without court
authors specific or others ation
to do so for I would be a level
of oversight there before
something like that happened
okay so my question really isn't
about the amendment it's really
to the.
Egolf question but I'm fine with
that thank okay good so who is
who you move the amendment okay
is there any other discussion of
of this amendment is a clear
would what they're doing.
Seeing no opposition will
amended one time further and
we'll move then to the action on
the amended bill I want to do
yes seconded by Senator McKenna.
Sedillo Lopez and we can and the
secretary will call the roll.
Both.
Ingle yes.
Thermic cannon yes thirty
minutes.
Citadel yes first fact yes.
Sierra yes thirty six PM yes and
you have a do pass Senators and
Justice thank thank the members
of wings for the work they've
done and and the little by
little we're getting a handle on
the situation thank you so much
Mr chair I will do that and
you've already said thank you to
two of the members who are the
the Sanchez and he but I will
pass the message along and thank
you all so much right thank you
members okay of will go then to
Senator Sedillo Lopez is built
to carry over Senate bill seven.
Thank you.
I.
And you have a committee seven
your bill in your a binder
members it's of.
It's after the analysis.
So we need a motion did you want
to make a motion on your bill
Senator Sedillo Lopez to.
Yes Mr chair yes Mr chair thank
you I ask that the that the
committee focus on the committee
sub.
The committee I do not.
Yes we got
yes this Mr chair on a movie do
not pass on the bill that was
submitted in the event of an
Senate bill seven and a do pass
on the committee substitute for
Senate bill seventy for purposes
discussing the purpose of
discussion okay.
you know what could we also
contact Senator Padilla because
I'd like him to lease to the
discussion he's got another
bill.
Coming up.
And and the DA of mine uses and
I finance federal field come.
Market would build together yeah
but the idea and then you also
the co sponsors I mean they both
responses of that of I thought
that you might be more
available.
Not finding it.
Oh that's right it's an.
Okay go ahead and.
Thank you thank you Mr chair has
you'll recall when we dealt with
this bill there were concerns
expressed from some of the
commentators about how far we
would go with contractors and
and one of the things that Mr
chair asked that we do was we
consider that and look how far
we wanted to go and so I spent
of the a bit of time working on
this with analysts and trying to
figure out
What was intended what I learned
is of course this would not not
affect any existing contracts
now it would only be moved it
will only go forward to future
contracts so this would be an
issue for the contracting agency
to consider and it's a policy
question for us has policymakers
whether we want to allow
contractors to pay less than
fifteen dollars an hour so the
question of how far would we go
is a policy question and I
finally concluded that any kind
of limitation of was unfair one
of the ideas Mr chair had was
that perhaps we would say
services to the state but in
discussing it with analysts
Would you could argue whether
somebody is driving up whether a
bus driver is serving the state
or serving the students they are
they are driving and this could
raise confusion among the
agencies and perhaps even
litigation.
So after exploring that I
finally concluded that.
It's a policy question and I
think the policy should question
should be answered the going
forward the state should we
should pay not only its
employees a minimum of fifteen
dollars an hour but also require
that contractors moving forward
also pay their employees a
minimum of fifteen dollars an
hour and the bill was also
clarified that it is not the
state that that the that the
appropriation here is not for
the private contractors to apply
for the money if this is
something that the contractors
would include in their fitting
and not of a you know we're not
competing for state agencies
with with the appropriate for
the appropriation the other
change that is in this committee
substitute is the change of
after that.
Where is it.
The.
Inspection the first page the
the the FIR was correct that it
turns out that there is a court
of appeals decision that stated
that public employees were not
considered state employees so we
inserted license no license
employee of a school district or
state charter charter school so
that was added to to make it
clear and I learned something
about.
About that issue and so this is
intended to cover state
employees by agencies.
Public employees in in school
districts as well has higher
education employees let me ask
you real the basic question.
You talked about the bidding
process and but for example
Medicaid pays.
You don't necessarily have a
contract with Medicaid what you
have is you've been certified.
To provide Medicaid finance
services would apply to people
in that the two agencies in that
situation.
You know who are who are
services that they see twelve
people today six of them or
Medicaid the other six are
commercial insurance or
whatever.
Would they have to would they be
covered by this.
I believe that they would be
because this is required
contractors to pay minimum wage
to their their employees and so
again that's a policy issue
I understand that reimbursement
rates are problematic and that
said this I think would be
another impetus to change the
reimbursement make right right
so that they are appropriate.
the other thing that I couldn't
find out yesterday about the
question is.
whether those.
corporations or other businesses
that provide those services have
a lot of employees that don't
get paid minimum wage what in
just the little in query that I
made and again we only had a few
hours to deal with this was most
of them do it I couldn't find
anyone who doesn't but I'm sure
there are out there somewhere
but it is a policy question for
this body and if we're talking
about nurses assistance if we're
talking about
attendance attendance if we're
talking about child care
providers they should all be
paid a living wage if you
somebody is getting a state
contract.
I believe that they should be
not undermining State Policy but
consistent with state policy to
ensure that people contracting
with the state and employees are
paid a living wage.
There was another issue that I
guess I'll just raise that was
discussed yesterday and that is
the issue of compaction.
Of the amount here you'll notice
of the amount appropriated here
is much greater than the amount
of that was suggested in the FIR
of what would this cost to
simply raise the minimum wage
now in my research and in the
analyst research it was very
difficult to predict how the
state would deal with compaction
issues so the appropriation is
generous and higher than of.
There is a minimum of just
raising the minimum wage but I
think it would be micro
management of us if we were to
tell the the introduce the
school districts the the
universities and the agencies
how to address the compassion
issues that's something that
they they should do I did have a
conversation with Mr Ricky Serna
who is the acting director of
both spoke and we're for
solution and he agreed with that
point they have developed the
plan in the but with the
governor's budget to raise all
state employees governed by both
and they have intentions of
dealing with the band issues
that we currently have and that
is a great thing for them to do
I don't think it's our
responsibility to do it and I
think if we tried we would be
micromanaging inappropriately.
Okay well let me throw it open
to the committee question center
for discussion of Senator
Stewart of other way I mean
senator Munoz said his bill one
twenty five years we should.
It's the same as this one it's
not.
This is the same I mean it all
he says is all state employees
get fifteen Bucks an hour.
And and that years is so much
more of the inclusive that for
the I would I would think though
that.
I I don't know what to do I mean
of all the committee discourages
that rolled over if we pass this
one out there's no reason to do
his.
The only reason even consider
his is if we reject this one as
far as I can see unless I'm
missing something.
Senator guys here to quit all Mr
I have a question on the server
I hope yes so my thought is.
If center Padilla were here the
only be able to understand what
the differences I'm not read his
I did look here well I didn't
look over the committee so.
Under the original bill
but it just however you want to
go with that I can ask question
my question on the committee
seventy if you mentioned well I
yeah I I I just throw that out
that we're not going to do with
one twenty five today.
Eleven hit hinges on on what
happens to this bill if this
bill fails today then we would
take up one twenty five there's
no reason to deal with one
twenty five of this one passes.
Okay is is that do this is to
the center I think that.
Mr chair I think that if we pass
this bill.
And we've has one twenty five
yeah we
Reconciled.
In the next.
Finance we did this
A couple years ago with senator
Clemente Sanchez and
representative of the LFC.
we sent both forward.
And that's the next committee
representative okay good I
charge Senator Gallegos your
question on the.
Mr chair and senator I I guess
one of my consideration of
questions for on how you're
doing you said you made a
statement that the compaction
issue that we're gonna be
generous so with your fifteen
percent raise to all employees
what did you mean as generous
and what does that do to the
rest of the raises that were
given seven to ten percent on
teachers in what are we doing
with superintendents and
principals community schools Mr
in center we have a really hard
time we only have the
superintendent three principles
the forty four teachers now this
would affect our our janitors
and all our service US employees
so as they move up in you talk
about just the compaction please
if everything moves up how do
you deal with the compaction on
your bill and what to do to the.
Opportunity if you were to have
seven to ten percent trick four
just Mr yield give me bear me
just a minute years ago I was in
Los crucis in Las Vegas you know
there's a gentleman there from
this of state highway department
and he asked us to consider
giving dollar amounts all the
way up the line.
He did wrote of he would pick up
the dead animals on the road and
he says the way we give money in
the state he is the smallest
portion and his bosses bosses
boss gets a huge amount.
Nobody wants his job.
But it's unfair to him to get
pennies were given hundreds of
dollars up here and I'm just and
in his view it's a different
view that compaction compaction
moves everyone up but in his
view should be straight lined
the you get a certain amount
here to here so that way it
doesn't to that compaction know
just wondering how you put that
in thank you Mr chair and thank
you senator guys that's an
excellent question when I was
the executive director of New
Mexico mentality I saw that
issue that when you give a three
percent raise the people at the
top got a lot more than the
people at the bottom so there
were years that we gave a flat
amount raised of perhaps a
thousand dollars to each one of
in each level of course I did
that with consultation with all
the employees and and and and
how this was you know why this
was a better way to do it
This this bill the extent to
which it deals with compaction
at all only deals with the issue
of state starting
starting of fifty eight fifteen
dollars an hour because on page
three see and we just discussed
this last time.
if.
Whatever is passed with regard
to the overall increases for
state employees would go into
effect after this bill goes into
effect pursuant to subsection
three on page three which says
of all of law if the law is
enacted during the second
session of the fifty fifth
legislature to provide salary
increases to state employees the
salary increases provided for in
section one of this act shall
take effect prior to the salary
increases provided for in that
law taking effect and so the
only issue compaction issue this
deals with is somebody who is
raised to fifteen dollars an
hour and then another person is
hired at fifteen dollars an hour
they would be making the same so
the idea here is the fifteen
dollars an hour would go into
effect for that individual and
then they would get the race and
then a new individual would come
in at fifteen dollars an hour
and so that's how we dealt with
that particular issue and that
is the only of issue the only
and I was very happy for figure
it out with with the analyst for
figuring out how to do that.
But that that is the only of
inter or the only guidance we're
giving with regard to the band's
so if an agency wanted to give
the raises that way and address
compaction in the way you said
they would have total discretion
to do it.
That's my only question Mr on
the so thank you Mr mills.
Thank you and by the way to
Senator Ingle has been asked by
senator Munoz to put on that
bill so we will hear it after
this one.
other questions for the yes
senator Tom.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator correct me if
I'm wrong but.
Do we have a handle on.
What's gonna cost to the.
Senator compression.
That's why it's important that
it is going to finance the
eighty five million that is the
appropriation in here.
Is it is intended to provide
agencies with flexibility and
with sufficient resources I have
to tell you since I am not a
member of the Senate finance
I can't give you the assurance
that this would deal with all
the compaction issues in all
honesty I I cannot it is greater
than the amount that the FY are
states is required
but I'm not positive again.
It's it's a lot of money and
hopefully the agencies would use
it in different appropriate ways
S. P. O. what what up Mr Ricky
Serna Secretary Mr Serna said to
me our acting secretary Mr Serna
is said is they have a plan and
that they would be happy to
share it with with the
universities and with public
education if
If if they wanted it but my
sense is that at least from
talking to individuals within
higher education is many of them
are we're trying to do this
anyway and trying to find funds
so this just gives additional
resources but I can't tell you
that this is sufficient to deal
with all the compaction issues
it really depends on how the
agencies choose to address those
compaction issues.
But this this does give them
quite a bit of resources I think
eighty five million dollars is
quite a bit of money certainly
more than the FIR describes as
just bringing somebody up to
fifteen thank you senator for
that answer thank you Mr also
same question regarding
Contractors we will have a
handle on what that's going to
cost what we know is it won't
cost anybody with an existing
contract anything so it'll have
to happen is the agencies will
have to figure out how to
include we're going to give
guidance they'll probably give
guidance that the the the
contract must have a minimum
must pay the contractor must pay
fifteen dollars an hour to
employees and that that should
be considered in their bids
it is I I couldn't tell you how
much that will be I hope is it
will have a ripple effect what
is happening right now is the
state has a very I said twenty
two percent last time and
somebody after the hearings that
the vacancy rate is much greater
than twenty two percent.
My understanding is we have a
very high vacancy rate in the
state and the primary reason for
that is because they can't find
people to fill a lot of these
essential positions of if you
can flip burgers at McDonald's
why would you take on one of
these difficult positions of
caring for somebody who is able
to.
Thank you for that answer and
The final comment I.
The worry about.
Yeah we have a whole lot when I
was federal money goes away and
oil and gas.
Because electrification of
everything I find ourselves in a
situation.
We're gonna have to lay off
people are going to have to cut
to pay hello.
I'm pretty well I I appreciate
what you're trying to.
There's so many things that.
No need to be taken care of we.
I need to worry about them
rather than to be there so
that's all I have Mister Mister
chair thank Mexico
Representative and sponsoring
this bill thank you Mr toman but
what we know about raises in
minimum wages if they tend to
bring more money into the system
and and more taxes are paid I
think that part of the reason we
were made a poor state is
because we intentionally made a
poor state of and so I think
that this is really.
It's fair it's the right thing
to do for the employees of the
state and for higher education
and public education but I also
think it's going to have
beneficial economic value that
would ripple through the state.
Well higher wages are part of
the cost of causing and
flotation.
The reason is because so I don't
know if it generating higher
higher a Texas.
But the thank you for.
Your passion.
New Mexico education to this
issue thank you thank you
senator Senator guidance of Mr
this present time and I
apologize sentiment brought
something up that I just
wondered if you'd consider so go
backwards in Hobbs area years
ago McDonald move there
then which up because of the
industry in the area.
I'm a creature of habit I would
be at their doorstep at six
o'clock every morning and get
breakfast new the people by
name.
Can I get there one morning.
And they're not open.
Session that the machine off my
horn finally she was made to the
window and Astorino with
problems because they don't want
races they figured out to get
subsidies they had a person put
their own hours you have
anything in here that would
prevent them from being the
system they basically took their
hours down to be able to have
their mouth that they needed for
of the social issues to get more
of food stamps and other items
and I'm just wondering if we're
not gonna push that in a point
that will lose more people or or
less hours they're still working
but they moved their self to
less hours yeah I just wondered
if that had been brought up at
all your reserves and just
telephones I had not thought
about that I would be very
disappointed if the state
because I think we should be
models for the state in terms of
providing
good working conditions and
providing good jobs and and good
pay and so if if the state
engage in that behaviour I'd be
very disappointed there's
nothing in this bill necessarily
that would prevent that
Thank you for the question Mr
chair thank you thank you Mr
you're you're breaking up the
cliff effect that we we we we
struggle with the the the one
we're the subsidy it.
Is it up that people really
might be inclined to do that is
housing if you're in in
subsidized housing
it might make sense for food
stamps I don't think it would
make a lot of sense to keep it
but but for housing it
definitely would thank
But we have a limited number of
people who get subsidize housing
to see any other discussion on
this with the will of the
committee.
For
the past seven.
OceanFirst due process the
second and second thank you we
need to do it all I could do not
have thank now let me ask
another question we have a
thorough discussion of this the
other day we haven't really.
Open it up to the public for
additional discussion I got two
people on zoom who said they
want to speak articles as you
want to speak several people
okay do we want to go through
the whole thing again which
we've already had once I because
the bill of.
Was not changed that
dramatically I I don't think
it's necessary but it meant Mr
chair this is your this is your
committee hearing.
I think we had a thorough
discussion we heard from a lot
of people who supported this and
we heard the concerns which I
very hard I am very diligently
work to address and and I spoke
with some of people who had
concerns and they're aware that
I of what I what we did with
this bill but here's what I'm
gonna do a I want to give people
in the audience one minute each
this to speak on this and then
we'll go to the two people in
zoom is there anymore if any
more people in rural.
The three people on zoom so once
you start are to Charlie jun
come on up be ready.
I don't I I don't want to be
dead horses just be very quick
yeah.
Mr chair members of the
committee we haven't seen the
committees we haven't been able
to see yes I did hear the
sponsors say that.
They remove the ability for the
private contractors to go to DFA
to try to get reimbursed out of
the eighty five million that was
originally in the bill.
When we were going to impact all
the private contractors but
that's been removed and that
this was essentially going to be
close to a statewide.
Minimum wage mandate a fifteen
dollars an hour by July of
twenty two we're currently
paying eleven fifty minimum
wage.
Right now it's going to go to
twelve in January and I'm
talking about providers of
childcare providers of durable
medical equipment in home health
care ambulance service I'm not a
lot of services provided by
private contractors and Mr chair
you and I both know that dollar
amount to the chief or close
that gap we've looked at parity
bills is in excess of fifty
million to eighty million just
on the private side.
We don't have an issue with what
the state wants to do with their
employees but this is so
expensive so expensive.
That it is going to be.
But a killer it we just won't be
able to it'll it'll.
We can't get to a fifteen dollar
minimum wage at your current
contract with where we're at
twelve but I think your point is
this would require the state to
increase the reimbursement
every.
We don't know okay yeah that's
alright thanks art Charlie.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charlie mark is on
behalf of number of client
groups I I think Mister hall
stated it clearly there are so
many unknowns with us that it's
hard to predict our ability to.
Impose this this and what is a
dramatic increase without sound
understanding of what the
availability of funding as and
whether or not that translates
into increases that.
These providers can count on.
Because under Medicaid as an
example they have no other
source of income.
That's what they use.
Senator shorted with that the
only way they make it up to
support services or cut staff.
And so that's the concern that
we have going forward.
Thank you K. Charles thank you
John.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee John with youth with
New Mexico federation of labor
labor AFL-CIO having not seen
the committees but hearing the
sponsor presented we are
certainly very very happy with
the changes that she is made
into the ethically support this
bill and thank the sponsor for
doing so although while we
haven't heard Senate bill one
twenty five yes we do understand
that it'll be in the same vein
with obviously some changes and
we really just hope that this
committee Wade very much
consider potentially passing
both bills and and possibly
working on
any kind of revision for virgin
down the line south thank you
very much okay thank you John
okay we'll go to the audience
and I would ask if you split of
most Carter.
The process.
Mr chairman I determined to make
a Charlie brown over there
Order bonding with past me Mr
chairman members of the
committee on we do continue to
support the bill and
specifically to address on the
concern of Senator grade this is
an thank you for bringing that
up because that happens a lot
with the deflect percentages the
people at the top or getting
making a hundred thousand you're
getting three times the amount
of some thirty three thousand so
thank you very much for this is
that the pay plan that's
supposed to come up with that
we've actually agreed to uses a
combination of cooperation or
pay bands so that the people in
the lower sections of the state
are going to end up getting a
higher percentage than the
people of the highlands people
tyrants will still be getting a
raise we have the money for this
year but on a Saturday yes thank
you so much for bringing that
because that is part of the
state's pay plan that were also
supported and tackle Mr look to
top one twenty five we are very
supportive of anything that
creates this minimum wage and we
know there's talking to be
hammered out and and house bill
two anyhow so we certainly
support anything that gets money
to the state employees I really
want to think of all the
sponsors of both bills for
bringing this forward thank you
thanks Carter.
We'll go to the people on the
zoom we'll start with the Miller
group idea please one minute no
more.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee can you all hear
me.
My name is Michael by the I'm
here on behalf of the nearly
sixteen hundred public workers
were represented by the
communications workers of
America who currently earn a
poverty wage will serve in our
state many of these workers
struggle to make ends meet and
they're often forced work
multiple jobs just to get I.
The public workers New Mexico
who have given more than twenty
years of service to the state
and still aren't just the
minimum wage of eleven fifty
that was mentioned earlier
I think I heard I heard I heard
a move like this call drastic we
need a drastic move in the state
for those people that think
they're working multiple jobs
they're breaking their backs to
try to feed their families it's
a travesty we can do better we
need to do better this bill
would send a clear message The
New Mexico values public
servants he would honestly
change the lives of these
workers we strongly support this
bill and we are committed to the
state thank you thank you Mr
Stewart at Rikki Lynn Massey.
No longer on the line Melissa
Fernandes.
No longer online take care.
Ellen Tway.
I.
I am with CW eight seven seven
six I want to echo what libro
yes ma'am about lotus the
workers.
The state government.
What we're.
this is almost more would be you
are free where the struggle for
for will be these are the people
the greatest the public.
We hardly support this
Bill and thank the sponsors of
this bill profusely thank you
thank you Mr try believe they
give a.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is to go out and
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty standing strong support
this bill I would just like to
note again that single adult
without children needs on
average thirty thousand thirty
thousand eight hundred fifty
five dollars per year what a
worker full time worker making
fifteen dollars per hour
approximately parents and the
need to achieve a modest
adequate standard of living in
New Mexico by increasing the
minimum wage to fifteen dollars
fifteen dollars per hour would
be helping at least twelve
hundred public workers and their
families finally we support and
most expensive version it's been
we trace this includes all
workers including those
contractors that do not make
enough to make it out of the
center we strongly supports the
in the Kurds thank you.
Thank you for the pay a under.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee joggers
with American federation of
teachers New Mexico wanted to
bring up to specific points in
the committee order that were
raised by the sponsor one we
very much appreciate the
clarification language around
licensed and non licensed K.
twelve staff I think that's
going to help clarify what the
bill aims to do and secondly and
and very importantly that
concept
directing contractors to include
a fifteen dollar wage within
their budget wall they're
working towards earning those
state contracts is a smart move
in a smart approach on
addressing this issue members of
the committee may be familiar
that there was a one day strike
among Los crucis transportation
workers directly tied to this
issue where well intentioned
compensation increases provided
by the legislature and the
governor we're not
we're not provided by the
contractor for which they work
on behalf of Las Cruces public
schools are approaching this
issue in this way as was
described would really go a long
way to help prevent that labor
unrest in the future so we do
appreciate those changes to the
committee substitute thank you
thank you John.
Members of the committee.
Discussion Senator McKenna.
We've motion actually chairman I
I wanted to revise my motion per
the direction of Senator
Stefanics.
I would like to make a move a do
not pass on Senate bill seven
but a do pass on Senate bill
seven committee substitute right
second.
Seconded by Stefanics.
Any other discussion Senator
goodness.
Mr apologized I didn't realize
we're already on the server so I
didn't capture that yesterday I
just had a couple more questions
Mr chair if you don't mind in
Could you give me an idea of
what the minimum wage years back
we had the tiered minimum wage
coming into effect can you tell
me where we are now compared to
other states.
In terms of what our minimum
wages correct I guess compared
to others to other states I know
that what I do know is the
average sellers in New Mexico
are much less than all
surrounding states Texas
Colorado Utah Arizona I don't
know specifically what their
minimum wages are but I do know
that our average wages are much
less I Mr chairman center years
ago of I've been on school board
way too long our teachers with
the bottom.
And now for years we've been
trying to get him up will
actually about third percentile
nationally I'm not talking I'm I
mean I was trying to figure out
if you looked at the math right
around us because what we do
heroes can affect them and vice
versa so I appreciate I would
love to have understood the
numbers last thing Mr and
Senator is
Being that we haven't sort of
Sen Clemente brought this up to
extra monies from old gas right
now and I know the wrong many
bills transient long Gastown you
know at what point this is
sustainable I know that the
women and us seller's coming up.
I don't think they pay the same
revenues as oil and gas and I'm
just trying to find out if we
have a ten year projection
twenty year projected because as
we add this to the budget for
instance in schools if we added
to the line item then later as
oil and gas drops we have to let
staff go.
I'm just wondering if we've done
that.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and thank
you for that question because it
really gives me an opportunity
to clear a a
Misperception about my desire to
shut tunnel hill and gas
the pas on fracking which is a
bill I introduced was never
going to shut oil and gas down
at the time I introduced it
there were a thousand and five
permits pending that had already
been granted so and and those
Pat permitted still not resulted
in in
In actual well so that they they
were they were it was never
going to shut the industry down
and I had no desire to shut the
industry down when I came here I
felt that and it it was true
there had not been an amendment
of the oil and gas that since
nineteen thirty five and of we
had engaged in extraordinary
activities with no regulation of
methane no regulation of per
produced water or anything else
even Texas had regulations on.
The on the books that we did not
have.
I am not introducing the bill
this session because the Lujan
Grisham administration has
adopted really good regulations
on oil and gas
dealing with produced water
issues and and the risk that
poses to our water
dealing with methane issues and
the contributions that makes to
climate change and also to the
health of our citizens so it is
never been my intent to shut the
industry down.
With regard to raises for state
employees has you said oil and
gas has been extremely volatile
over time and so our employees
have gone for many years with no
races and so this is an attempt
to now that oil and gas is at at
the level that it is up to make
it up.
for every time that I've been
here every every of here that
since I've been here our
revenues or all have always
exceeded with the projections
are
every single time and so it it's
been very disappointing to me
that we tell our state workers
no you can we can have a raise
now you can't we can't afford it
and then we end up with twenty
twenty five percent reserves
that has not been fair to our
workers and so I appreciate the
opportunity to address that
question thank you Mr chairman
and senator I appreciate it I I
wrote down because I'd like to
be able to June twenty years
when the industry is down and we
can relate back to here so I see
in Lee County Mr center right
now we've lost energy
independence the we had three
years ago and I correctly
related back to the policy so I
appreciate that but going back
to my original question do we
have a timeline that we think
that.
If if we do nothing it let's say
all guestrooms words that we we
continue forward with electric
in and solar and they start
building revenue.
Forced to choose that this would
be sustainable for ten years
twenty years the amount that
we're putting into the budget
now the eight point eight
billion dollars and think it
through your fifteen dollars
plus the seven ten percent of
tier of races I'm just wondering
how if anyone's done that math
to see with the protection would
look at ten of twenty years I
just want to another clip of I
would expect that the finance
committee is doing those kinds
of projections I myself have
have not been in all candor
however
There is a committee or what is
the commission that was created
by a believe it was Senate I
don't remember the number of
Senate bill ten maybe that Mimi
Stewart carried that required
all of the agencies to come
together and to talk about what
a just transition will look like
and so I would imagine and I'm
not a member of that group but I
think that I'm very interested
in the work of that group
because sustainability.
For I state is is absolutely
crucial.
And so that those calculations
need to be made.
And I agree with you about that
Mr and so the reason I was
asking a projection because I
don't reading your bills it it
it just for inflation.
So if you straight line for that
twenty years and and regards
what our industry does you're
gonna have to have some kind of
correction later but I was just
trying to see how much.
Thought was put into a long term
project and so with that all
yield for the final time thank
you Mr.
Absolutely Mr Mr chair thank you
for any other discussion of the
motion.
Thank you to clear the secretary
will call the roll.
Survivors no.
Ingle yes
for.
Yes Senator Ingle said yes
Senator Gallegos said nope thank
you Sir McKenna yes.
Session Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
First FedEx yes.
Tallman yes Sir to subpoena yes.
Okay so now we'll go to one
twenty five and and it let me
just say.
People are asking are we going
to get through the agenda
tonight my intention is to do
that the but after this one of
we'll take Senator Stefanics
built very quickly and then
we'll have the I wonder if you
would mind if we did the report
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance
before we get to years Justin of
on the other bill so and then
we'll get two years.
Written consent yeah we're going
to yes.
Senator Ingle thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
I'm in here force Senator moon
Jooss and Senator Padilla there
and finance and I'm told and
asked me if I would do this bill
for them and I said I would
because I know the committee
knows hearing this other bill we
need to hear this one too so of
this bill basically this bill
raises the minimum wage for all
state employees to fifteen
dollars an hour this increases
already in the budget timeline
for the state personnel office
salary increase plan.
The minimum wage bill is
targeted to lift up the people
who make state government work
it is meant to make us more
competitive in the job market by
providing our employees with a
living wage and a comprehensive
benefit package the difference
between Senate bill one twenty
five and Senate bill seven is is
Senate bill one twenty five is
targeted only for our employees
in the executive judicial and
legislative branch we're not
trying to mandate have fifteen
dollar an hour wage for anyone
else.
We knowledge of contractors and
other institutions are already
having to account for the
minimum wage increase to
thirteen fifty per hour the goes
into effect this summer.
This bill does not currently
addressed minimum wage for
higher ed or K. twelve school
employees those elements may be
amended and when the bill is in
Senate finance and there's money
that's can be accounted for in
the budget.
Higher it is yet to provide a
detailed breakdown of all of
full fiscal impact for raising
employees to fifteen dollars an
hour so we are waiting on that
information before changing the
statute.
K. twelve school employees are
not identified in this bill to
the nuances of how K. twelve
institution receive their
funding federal state and
funding formula on local.
And how that funding is targeted
for specific positions for
example school districts require
time to apply for an increase in
federal funding to meet some of
their employees compensation
expenses which are not covered
by the state we want to make
sure if we mandate school
districts to pay fifteen dollars
per hour minimum wage that they
will have the resources
available to do that without
cutting other parts of the year
your seven a.
I'm sorry down there now okay I
guess I just the buttons slip
there I apologize both higher ed
and K. twelve receive a seven
percent pay increase in this
year's budget regardless of the
outcome of either minimum wage
bill that's basically what this
bill does hand it's just a to
just applies to the to the state
to the state employees in the
state and state personnel office
that's what the differences in
the executive judicial and
legislative branches state
government what this bill
applies to that let's hear from
the audience anybody here in
support of this bill alright Mr
chairman members of the
committee corner on me really
fast and one fan federal.
Funds for for this forward thank
you Sir anybody else anybody
online on this bill.
Well while we're waiting for
them to come up.
I I don't understand that four
hundred dollars a month for
employees of.
Of the state educational
institutions.
Well there was I hi Paula Jones
there was a is is some
discussion on that and
It to in the in the F. I. R. and
basically I just think this bill
left that out because it wanted
to make sure what the schools
wanted to do with that before
they automatically put that in
okay.
Much much yes the only thing
that changes there is is the
underlying things higher ed
departments to the board of
educational finance that's
correct all right.
so we have three people online
let's start with the milagro
Padilla.
Mr chairman of the committee in
New Mexico the on behalf of the
communications workers of
America I just want to point out
that this bill would affect
about two hundred of our members
the executive branch of the
state that means that it would
leave out about fourteen hundred
people
who desperately need our do need
this increase have so you know
what we appreciate any attempt
to try to make sure that that
the public workers in the state
are getting at a living wage we
do feel that it leaves out a lot
of people thank you.
Thank you Mr president John
durch.
With that Mr thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee John to begin with AFP
New Mexico we are I'm sitting in
support of the goal of this bill
to raise the minimum wage
however we do feel that K.
twelve employees do need to be
included if they are explicitly
excluded at this point and we do
support the approach that was
suggested earlier in this
committee hearing two passed
both bills and then reconcile
them together once they are
before they're presented to the
finance committee so we do
support the goals of raising the
minimum wage jobs this bill
needs to be a little more in
terms of thank you.
Thank you John and finally Dan
Secrest.
Yes thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee I've
been Secrest the president of
the C. W. A. local seven zero
seven six
We also
we strongly support previous we
support the general intent is
this one we do not agree that
Z. student employees of higher
education should be excluded
from Venice especially the
graduate student assistants UNM
who are close allies of our we
also think that the public
school K. through twelve people
should definitely be included in
this is the other they haven't
passed over number of times
especially are higher and people
so we.
Don't as strongly support this
bill but we don't oppose it we
would like to see the best of
both bills
Worked out
going forward thank you thank
you Dan committee members
Senator Stefanics
I'm happy for discussion but I'm
moving past.
Senator Gallegos Mr chairman and
senator appreciate you just say
let's see there's a second.
Okay we have second from Tolman
Senator Gallegos thank you Mr do
have a couple of questions in
the consideration of this bill
to the previous bill you know
how it affects private
contractors different so years
aren't you're not looking at the
overall all state employees are
looking at specifics have you
done any kind of did they give
you any kind of research on what
it does to the yes our private
contractors in those segments.
When I understood this only
affects the state employees that
are aligned with the state
personnel office and executive
judicial and legislative
branches that to this that's
true this bill applies to Mr
chair and senator with that for
the
For the we bring in for the
legislature's that affect them
also.
I I had heard years ago Mister
chairman Senator that they're
probably the lowest paid people
in the state going to workforce
here current legislation I just
wondered if this applied to them
also.
Well I think some of those used
to be quite low butter they're
not anymore anyway I I this
would certainly apply to them so
I can assure you that okay last
question Mister chairman Senator
and I'm just wondering if
there's a way that we could look
at considering
In our in our work we do
construction and we're more of a
merit based pay so the more that
you do the more you make the
more opportunity you have
instead of just the straight
prospecting percent I'm just
wondering if anyone looked at
that as a basis on.
giving vote given the races
because I think what happens
you'll get into a point that
it'll affect your middle
managers the employees catching
up to them they have a lot look
larger load the operation on
them but if you don't again goes
back to this question are you
did thirty dollars brought
thirty dollars top it's a
straight line but if you do
percentage pretty soon someone's
losing or gaining has you're
going up so I just wondered if
that had any any topic like that
in in that of white paper.
Etcetera etcetera guy I guess I
do not see anything in this in
the paper the commission terming
else gave me pertaining to this
bill goes into effect on that
but we always have a problem
with that anytime we raise the
floor there's always people that
get closer to whatever the
floors lifted through and that's
a problem for the employer and
the employee to work out and the
manager of the state officer
judicial or executive office and
all of these things
In state government my years
here have always been something
that's a problem that has to be
solved by the various agencies
and what they want and course
none of this includes the forty
cents a dollar that for fringe
benefits are statewide years so
there's always more cost here
than than the than is actually
listed here as the fifteen
dollars an hour because the
budget in this state has with
its retirement and pay for help
Fe for medical insurance and
things like that are never never
actually put in the same bill
but there there and you know
these are all of costs that are
there and that's what to a great
extent what makes job for New
Mexico extremely good as we have
the best retirement program in
the nation.
Thank you that was senator and
Mr all yield with that any other
discussion.
Senator Sedillo thank you and I
and I supporting the bill
because it I agree with thanks
for the information I'm trying
to.
What makes me very happy about
this bill Mr chair is that the
the will to raise minimum wage
up for state employees so that
makes me quite happy but there
is something in the FIR about
this bill Mr chair and.
And I don't know what.
Why.
The federal.
Five percent of total personal
budget from the general fund and
other funding sources for forty
four percent based on for fifty
four.
Eight point two million for the
general fund.
Apart from the three point six
million
I just feel that
It is very important to
understand that this is not
going to be expensive has it
looks because of issues like
this this F. I. R. of thanks for
the general fund is only going
to be eight million for for this
bill which isn't pretty tiny
fraction of the budget and.
My question to you of Mr chair
and and senator is.
We actually have.
Good numbers to figure out what
the actual cost general fund.
Mister chairman Senator that
will be a at those cost figures
I'm sure will be found out in
the finance committee because
that's where it has to be put
together for the final budget
items and we're only twenty days
away from the end of the session
so those will be taken care of
in finance and looked at and see
if we can do to do the funding
on this this is the way all of
the wage bills are always
handled you have a bill that
says let's play this much and in
the finance committee gets it
and finishes up the the extra
benefits and the other package
though parts of the package to
go with it and I cannot tell you
for these are and I'd and I'm
sure that probably San Fermin
Yosef he would hear could do a
better job that I can but I want
to get both of these bill hard
and get into finance and and you
too can
Work together and I know that
you're good lead dancer I can
just tell and George will follow
you.
Thank thank thank you Mr chair I
I appreciate that I I really
learned a lot about the budget
going to the process and a very
much appreciate your insight.
Anything else secretary will
call the roll.
Of course the second senator Tom
sort of the quick I'm not trying
to encourage anybody to comment
is going to make a comment that.
For aging related to make a kind
of district is saying the same
thing is the thank you Mr
chairman thank you for bringing
this before it from saying the
same thing is Senator.
to the local the state hoping to
be such a difference between
eight million and eighty five
million I guess we'll find that
out the secretary here about the
national campaign for fifteen
dollars campaign you for that
every time I hear about that I
think.
Fifteen dollars go twice as far
click New Mexico.
The index finger Cisco very even
between twenty and Santa Fe.
Different so is that.
International equity if that is
what I think this is too late
for it is impossible to get them
order.
Having different wage levels
depending on where you live to
some the think about I don't
have the account that that maybe
we can talk about the hours too
late just want throw that out
thank you Mr chair.
Santa Fe has its own minimum
wage I think that's probably
higher than fifteen that they
passed as a city service they
can do it.
Okay.
maybe the two well let's go
ahead and take the vote then as
secretary will call the roll our
guide goes.
Ingle yes.
Yes.
for their workers yes.
Yes Tallman yes Sir to subpoena
yes and Senator Gallegos to
explain is the Mr chairman and
senator appreciated you almost
had a test when Sierra start
talking about the equity part of
it it made me think through the
because in Eunice
our cost of living is way way
reduce compared to Santa Fe but
I'm looking forward I I know our
employees need raises I just
don't know if this is a
mechanism but I look forward to
hearing and learning more on the
floor thank you Mr thank you
senator Gallagher's thank you
Senator Ingle thank you and I
plan to committee for letting me
do this and first and I don't
from yours and
it's as I say this applies to
executive legislative and
judicial employees not the
private sector.
Thank you.
Of we're gonna go now to Senate
bill eighty.
And
Senator pope you want to.
Is a co sponsor of this you want
to set up here.
Yeah.
And we're gonna have the the I
think we have the we have the
the offices superintendent on
the Russell told the
superintendent of insurance.
Thank you for that holiday
calling by okay.
Very good members this is a
bill.
This is civil appropriation bill
a million and a half to continue
the work that was begun last
year by the office of the
superintendent of insurance we
got junior money in the budget
last year.
And with that the much smaller
amount of money they were able
to begin the work of.
The the the the tedious and very
of technical work of figuring
out what kind of a structure for
the of Health Security Act would
actually work in New Mexico and
so that that process is the been
undertaken by the office through
some contract that we're let and
with the money last year's
budget the money we're asking
for this year would continue the
work leading up to a full blown
proposal that would come to the
legislature in January of this
year.
And with that I I'd like of of
to use this opportunity for Mr
bio to do a presentation on
what's been done so far calling.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for
calling bye with the top two for
intended of insurance we
actually do have the
superintendent on his name is
that playing as our full.
and if you could be brought in I
believe the the page two
Representative two the
committee.
Right thank you for calling of
Russell welcome.
With that.
Mr Russell folks open up Russell
can you on mute please.
Chair Mister chairman it's good
to be with you have to.
Even the members of the
committee and I appreciate the
time you.
Given us read you.
Didn't go too late tonight this
is my normal time to leave in
the office.
so
we have done a fair amount of
research on the chair of the
Health Security Act and condor
broke if you can.
The slides will run through
those fairly quickly.
We haven't printed out I think
of.
Yep that works time Mr.
So
As you see.
on slide two
We got money last year to.
Look at several things including
the Health Security Act and I
want to thank the.
The chairman and the actually
representative Armstrong.
From renewable kirke who put the
money in the budget above a
Guiding Light for us on this the
topics that were chosen for
study.
We agreed long before we let any
contracts.
And they were the priority
errors areas for the Health
Security Act applicants we have
some of the work in hand but we
intend to release everything
next Monday or tentative plans
because I think we'll have the
rest of the the reports we've
been waiting.
So they generally fall into
three categories you'll see on
slide three.
An analysis of federal laws what
the waivers authorize what they
don't what sort of funding might
be available.
the HSA folks asked us to look
at the analysis of.
Hi provider payment systems both
in the state sent overseas and
in particular look at analysis
of hospital global budget.
And we have done that.
We use multiple different
contractors and we reached out
to nationally recognized
experts in all of.
For example the analysis of
federal laws waivers and
funding.
we used a group from George
Washington.
That is led by Senator
Rosenbaum.
I first met Serra back in the
late seventies and early
eighties when we were are
working on Medicaid.
On Capitol Hill.
She was staff for one of the key
committee staff leave for one of
the key committees and she's
continued to be involved in
Medicaid and other such issues
through our long and
distinguished career.
So we're looking at a number of
fronts and we will publish
their.
The full report as I said next
week first of all the security
calls the central for all
employers to participate in the
plan.
But as you may know we do not
have the authority to regulate
self funded plants so funded
plans are known as a result
plans.
U. S. labor department that
regulates them does not have
statutory authority to grant
waivers.
To require self insured
businesses to participate.
I am the state run plan.
Protect the plan is fully
insured.
We know that there's nothing
that would preclude us.
From offering a plan offered
under the securities act to self
insurance so for German borders.
Just could not be made
mandatory.
So
Another option described the.
We could offer Security Act is a
public insurance option.
Plus we specifically asked her
to look on in terms of Medicaid
where the thirteen thirty two so
called thirteen thirty two
waivers.
They have a fair amount of
flexibility.
And we could offer them in a
manner that would include the
affordable Care market place
known in New Mexico as the well
and then.
And then you'll see on the next
slide.
With specific questions related
to Medicare and Medicaid.
The chair waivers today only
focus on alternative payment
methods they do not give states
a means of enrolling residents
in the state sponsored public
insurer plan in lieu of Medicare
and having premiums they're all
taxes paid directly to the
state.
And I might note that.
That Medicare is you probably
all know is the most popular
health plan in the country.
And so tampering with Medicare
would be dangerous dangerous
business.
On the medical side
again there are waivers this.
You know Mr chairman we have a
waiver in place for operation of
the Medicaid managed care
program centennial Care.
But those demonstration
authorities do not permit states
to replace Medicaid with a
completely new program.
We could offer.
Modifications to Medicaid where
would have to remain the
standalone separate source of
health insurance.
So in summary of the what George
Washington people found that the
guardrails place.
Would make a very challenging to
modify Medicaid to closely
resemble the Health Security Act
in no small part because
Medicaid coverage is much more
comprehensive.
Move on another study.
Was done by researchers at both
clever University.
Workers University of New Jersey
both distinguished researchers.
Their findings were that
Medicaid is the state employee
plans cover a significant share
of the state.
On the positive side gives the
state a lot of purchasing power.
This is true also because we
cover the school authorities and
other public entities of there
were.
Way to get a harness all that
purchasing power.
interesting entity.
The state would have a great
deal of control.
Roll over price.
But I would be quick to notice
the researchers jet that
There are limitations of store
whether or not these would allow
individual providers and
hospitals just thrived because
of Medicaid patients already
below chair.
On the other hand the
administrating administrative
savings could be fun.
The researchers noted that
uniform pricing does lead to
administrative savings
they did not effectively
quantify that something we
probably want to look at
further.
They noted that the
international suggests that
setting up uniform payment rates
that all insurers would have to.
What control health care costs.
I would note for the panel there
is a great service great to have
a very ability now in what
providers are paid depending on
the plan that they participate.
So there would be a great deal
of negotiation.
To try to figure out what a fair
cost would be in delivery
project goals particularly
services now I do want to note.
There are some.
A very small number of states
that have programs that.
surprising.
For hospital services on a
statewide basis Maryland of
course has been at this longer
than others but both New York
and Vermont to a version of that
so it is possible.
The researchers also noted that
we would have to adopt some
state policies to stabilize the
parliament Services provided
other uniformed prices prices.
So we would have the ability to
address these for specific
services for which we don't want
to encourage utilization or
which there would be expected.
volume increase.
There are examples of the states
that could be put in place in
that regard.
Fund House budgets in particular
we just Beth Landon.
News of legislation many of you
know who used to.
Do really solid work for the New
Mexico Hospital so ciation and
continues to do good work.
Individual projects across the
state.
She's terms of adoption of
hospital global budget.
We have to be very clear about
what our visions.
Hello that would drive
transformation.
From the traditional the for
service reimbursement to
hospital with global budgets and
again we have lessons from a few
other states.
The state would have to have a
very clear operational strategy
from the beginning of the effort
and this of course would require
engagement from state government
hospitals that are also would
require.
The high utilization of
information technology
capabilities.
I'm not something that's in
place today but we have a point
under way
registry and other places.
And included D. O. H. as we
develop the all payer claims
database that would give a sort
of some of what we need to.
But
the data systems in place give
us the information we need and
importantly to be able to
monitor and measure success.
Also on global budgets we were
able to get some very valuable
help from bill health bill it's
notable because there are made
up of folks who've done a lot of
work at the state level and
because they in particular has
worked with.
The states that are being
innovators on this whole issue
of global budgets so I'm not
going to read the power point to
you which you can see the key
questions that they identified
that we would need to make.
Decisions on.
Note that from my perspective
being clear about who's the
decision maker on such matters
new needs to be engaged on that
decision making is equally
credit.
And then finally on the last
slides.
We didn't right and gauge others
that we didn't have to.
Actually let a contract to
because of our working
relationship with them.
Dr Jim beaches some of you know
from New Mexico State University
was very helpful that
identifying key questions and
areas for starting.
The Commonwealth fund which I've
worked on and off with over the
years is known for their.
Analytical work in particular on
health systems in other
countries.
Dr Torrez rice's noted UCLA that
used to be at the university of
North Carolina he was there when
I was doing my graduate study
two hundred years ago
and extremely bright light and
he too made suggestions to us
about who to reach out to where
we needed to start a.
And all the rest of that.
I apologize Mr chairman if we go
on too long.
We've failed to answer some of
the questions but I want to
assure you and the committee
members that we really get this.
Diligent effort we'll try to
combine these research reports
to something that's usable and
summarized for the committee
members and we'll have that for
you early next week for anybody
else will be putting the actual
studies on our website.
Thank you thank you Mr till and
I wonder if the committee has
questions or needs and the
issues you want to raise with
the the superintendent.
The very.
Yes senator Tom.
You do to pass okay.
Well yeah we haven't really had
the billion so let me ask you Mr
told of the the question about
the bill.
You it is apparently here your
concern is that managing this is
taking a great many resources he
is the way the bill worded now
for next year this appropriation
were to come through.
Is it flexible enough that you
could hire part time staff
within your own office to to
manage this.
It's possible Mr chairman I
think for like three rivers find
a way to.
You know.
Vendor to do this work I don't I
don't think we have a our
current house.
sort of the proposed the
previous discretion we don't
have the salaries to attract
people to work on this so we
would have to let a contract but
we certainly could.
Do what the committee of the
legislature wants us to do using
that and I can just.
Thank you.
What's the will of the committee
so let's let's go to the
audience and
the.
John anybody else judge you're
you're it.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that with you for
the New Mexico federation of
labor AFL-CIO this is a matter
of fact we have the support of
for all the years that it's been
proposed in getting the study
going and so we think the
Sanchez for putting together and
stand for.
Very good thank you John anybody
else sign up the only one you
gave me so far as Mr till some
from.
Right Mr Moore another
enthusiastic supporter of the
Health Security Act.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee read more I am
a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
I would preface my remarks by by
stating I understand so
preparations bill Representative
usually that is the function of
the Senate finance committee to
look at bills a have been it's
members of consistently been
posed to the the Health Security
Act and of this bill thank
continues down a path that that
we have opposed in the past and
I would simply note for the
committee that last year the
legislature passed a very large
piece of legislation in Senate
bill three seventeen which had
to health care affordability act
that is not the responsibility
of the superintendent and it is
a it is a large shift in the way
of that health insurance
products you're tax to the way
that health insurance is
provided we would recommend that
the legislature focus on
implementation of losses in the
past in the health care
affordability fund see what the
impact of that is before you
continue to pursue the Health
Security Act which is another
monumental change and
fundamentally changes the way
that health insurance is
provided thank you Sir thank you
Representative there are three
people under zoom.
And we'll start with the health
security staff.
That's the that's the I need is
is is me Mary Feldblum.
Yeah I can see.
In here you yep.
I'm Mary Feldblum executive
director of the Health Security
for New Mexicans Campaign
coalition of over a hundred and
seventy organizations and
thousands of New Mexicans
thank you superintendent told
and calling because I know they
did humongous work on finding on
excellent consultants and one of
the work phrases I picked up on
your report superintendent is
on Fleek suggestions need to
study more what.
I think it is we have a problem
of of physician supply
physicians and providers are so
frustrated with our current
system we have problems with the
hospitals so there are pieces of
what you did and which I think
are going to really help figure
out ways to address serious
problems that we have and I I
will invite by kind of making a
point there's a well known
healthy con health departments
and portion passed away a couple
of years ago very wrong hard and
he he and many others have
talked about that we have the
most complicated system in the
world the biggest patchwork I
think the superintendent talked
about the complexity of the
different fees that are around
in that looking at what's called
an all payer payment system
might be of real interest and
what points out that out in his
book the health insurance system
that is this complex like the
United States to see who won
that complex makes incremental
healthcare reform challenging.
Changing the rules in one's self
in the system can easily have an
effect on other cells in the
system is designed process
allows you to look at the whole
picture figure out the pieces
and then ultimately decide do
you know how to put them
together and if you guys and if
you is legislators like what you
hear then you have to prove it
of course thank you so much.
Thank you merry a kind of pack.
Hi can you hear me yes we can.
Okay.
Mr chairman members of the
committee speaking.
Well I'd like to ask you to
please support this bill we have
to many people in New Mexico who
still don't have health coverage
over or under insured people who
aren't covered by an employer
Medicare have to play in
elaborate guessing game every
year to figure out whether they
qualify for an exchange plan or
Medicaid plan it's a confusing
expensive mess that leaves a lot
of people and covered the whole
security plan could in the end
Saturday but it needs a thorough
study so we're sure exactly how
it would work please do passed
SB eighty thank you.
Thank you a contact Alex
Williams.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Alex
Williams and I'm a health care
policy advocate at the New
Mexico Center online poverty
today we stand we misunderstand
of the port of at the eighty.
Everyone should have access to
health care in any serious
effort to fix our health care
system must have universal
coverage is involvement full
with gaps in federal law that
left over two hundred thousand
New Mexicans without health
insurance is our state's
responsibility excuse me.
To pursue a system that provides
universal access to health care
coverage is important for now
more than ever when the COVID
nineteen pandemic a shutdown has
shown that might that we must
make medical group with our
health care system.
we support SBHCs call setting
the feasibility of the universal
coverage plan proposed Health
Security Act the study's
findings will inform our
communities and health care
policy makers decision about how
to best improve our health care
system thank you for our hearing
from you today we are to do pass
on this bill thanks.
Thank you Alex the next we'll go
to district eleven ninety nine.
Good evening Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Eleanor
Chavis land the executive
director for the National Union
of Hospital and Health Care
employees district eleven ninety
nine Mexico we represent health
care workers and I hospitals
across the state of New Mexico
in our members on a daily basis
see the impacts of those who
have not had access to
healthcare
especially during the COVID kept
the pandemic which exposed
inequities for those communities
and people who had to
Put
Any kind of health care that
they may have needed we sent a
strong supporter of this bill we
believe that this is the way for
New Mexico to go in terms of
providing a universal system and
closing the gaps that currently
exist in health care in New
Mexico we ask that you voted
favor of SB eighty.
Thank you all enough genet's
wallet or keys.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I stand in full
support of Senate bill eighty I
am a retired professor from the
university I'm on Medicaid right
now I also have to pay an extra
hundred eighty dollars for
For supplemental to split my
chair because health care is a
right and not a privilege right
now only the wealthy in New
Mexico and in the entire United
States.
For to be and stay healthy.
That is immoral.
Health care for profit is a scam
and we all know it people suffer
and die every day because of it
and we can't wait for
incremental change why shouldn't
New Mexico lead the way.
to the rest of the country in
Washington.
Okay we lost you.
Are you back of.
Jennifer.
Not yet.
How about Stephanie strongly.
Hi this is Stephanie Shelly with
the New Mexico Public Health
Association I'm Policy Committee
co chair for an empty chair will
be speaking on their behalf
the analysis of the Health
Security plan conducted by KNG
in twenty twenty so that that
whole security plan would cost
less than our current broken
system while simultaneously
expanding healthcare access to
all New Mexicans the COVID
nineteen pandemic has made it in
undeniably clear that I'm going
to access to quality care across
the life course as a matter of
life and death I'd like to
highlight in particular that
even with the Indian health
service and Medicaid expansion
over ten percent of native and
indigenous New Mexicans remain
uninsured and lack adequate
access to affordable health care
we cannot wait the time is now
to shift our spending away from
ever growing costs of the
expensive and complicated
private insurance administrative
systems and towards the care for
individuals and communities
fully funding the design of HSD
which has been supported by over
a hundred seventy statewide
organizations including and PJ.
Well so.
The New Mexicans so New Mexicans
at the legislature is willing to
take bold steps to cut New
Mexican lives over profits thank
you.
Thank you Stephanie and Janet
well it Ortiz is back on did you
want to wrap it up please Janet.
After killing you if you could
err on mute please yes.
Yes I did and thank you so much
for some reason my my connection
was unstable I I'm I want to say
I'm in support if you didn't
hear that Senate bill eighty and
the reason for this is because.
New Mexico can lead the way.
And and prove to the rest of the
country.
And do you see that we have the
most carefully thought out an
immensely successful prototype
for health care that is free of
private insurance control which
is proving disastrous for most
pass what better way to spend
tax dollars earned from gas and
oil and hoping for the health of
our New Mexicans of every race
and class we absolutely need SB
eighty to move forward this is a
critical juncture in the time of
our.
We lost again no no Girardi.
No it can you and mute.
No no Girardi.
Can you on mute no not.
The computer.
Can you do.
Okay sorry we can't get you.
Committee members with through
the committee on this bill.
Your question Mr Senator
Gallegos.
Mr and senator I appreciate the.
The learning of this received of
I was not able to read this bill
last night and not a very
lengthy bills but it's still a
couple of questions so
in.
The report it's talking about a
study and and that are like that
it's study report finding the
false doctrine of the Health
Security Act I was wondering in
on page six of the handout the
gentleman went through with this
it talks about the note the
study is still under way we have
a time frame for the complete
report I think the secretary
said I mean the superintendent
said that he hopes by next week
the first three contracts that
were provided the final report
on them and then this money if
we if we pass this bill would
would set in motion another year
of continued work on other
issues yes and thank you for
that Mr Senator that brought me
to my next point because in the
FIR I thought we're going beyond
twenty three in their farms is
house bill two as introduced is
not include nonrecurring funding
for this purpose and it's chosen
the valves done Cumberbatch
remaining at the end of fiscal
twenty twenty three shall revert
to the general fund and I just
wondered if they're looking to
contractors if that is a.
Deadline a certain deadline for
the reporting.
Four because one point five
million dollars a lot of money I
I guess Mr chairman Senator you
know what we gave last year for
the study work can receive one
hundred fifty three hundred
thousand dollars so it's
considerably more they work for
three hundred thousand per year
we're gonna be able give us
report tomorrow or Monday now
we're doing.
And one point five million for
the same amount of time and
they're going to a contractor do
it and I just wondered there's
any dialogue and why the
escalated amount I think the
anticipation is these would be
much more
involved studies these next
phases and and would lead up to
actually of of the piece of
legislation for us.
Possibly lead up to the positive
to a piece of legislation for us
to consider in at the twenty
twenty three session.
Okay so Mister Senator that's
where the the possible adoption
to the Health Security Act would
be in twenty twenty three so
okay I was just a very
concerning the amount of money
between this year and next year
but with that are you thank you
thank you senator anybody else
Senator Stefanics.
Comment that.
in the.
Thanks at the yes or no money is
not going to the budget I
believe the individual from the
houses and I did put from junior
running in yes we might end up
with some amount as well yes.
Yep the we're trying to.
You understand the mechanism of
junior was supposed to be a
supplement to the budget now we
have to come up with that ahead
of time so this may give them an
excuse not to fund this is this
bill but we're gonna try.
Mr chair Senator in this it was
a five hundred seventy five
thousand from seven legislators
of twenty one last year.
Five seventy five.
Thank you.
And senator Clemente your quick
question.
Thank you Mr chairman.
yes or no answer.
Our page.
For we do one
for rivers if I the business's
Act.
That.
Provide for the needs of our
residents in the state.
Medicare programs we.
From.
Mexico is going to have a
significant impact on what we're
trying to do.
You mean Medicare.
These two things that will.
Let me try to answer unless you
want the hazardous of.
If you think of New Mexicos
population half of it almost is
on Medicaid Medicaid and then
we've got some.
Yeah we could change that I mean
what we could have a waiver that
would include some the problem
is that Medicaid is such a big
all encompassing program that if
you don't want to tamper with it
too much.
We also have about two hundred
thousand people that are covered
by state employee insurance it
public education employee
insurance.
Retirees of the education system
of the retirees both those I
back agencies could be made part
of this.
The chair piece is not likely
without some change in federal
legislation I I honestly don't
think the the the made a study
of it they didn't think it would
happen so what we're we're
reduced to doing is trying to
find a way to fund people off of
the of the market the health
insurance market by offering a
public option.
These are all the things that
the studies we do agree to give
us some ideas of what can you do
to cover all your population at
a savings.
Now the insurance companies
nobody can do cheaper than us
but it's pretty clear.
There's a lot of money spent
just in an individual doctors
office in hand trying to handle
sixteen different.
Two thousand different insurance
forms and and then the the the
when they turn you down the road
the appeals and the request it's
just it's a bureaucratic
nightmare so the thought is we
could stream light all of that.
But we can't mandate that people
that buy private insurance if
they want to the thing is we
think we get offers a better
plan cheaper.
Then the private insurance
companies cancel these funding
that's what we're hoping that
the findings you know if it if
they can't do that then why do
it.
If we're going to be more
expensive than a private
insurance companies why do it.
But but every study that we had
done previously show that we
would make significant savings
by doing this through so what
the difference between this
these studies and the ones are
done before these are actually
trying to figure here's how you
should do it in order to get to
where you want to get yes thank
you thank you Mr.
So there is is on primary.
We get to wrestle total has to
send it to so let's go to
superintendent first.
And then we'll go to Senator
committees.
Mr chairman I just wanted to
know that you know the studies
we've done so far.
Did not look at the most
critical part of the whole issue
and that is what could it cost
what should it cost and how
would you make that happen so.
Just sort of echoing your point
the.
That's the key next step that
needs to occur.
Right thank you superintendent
good point Senator Schmedes
wants to make your ask a
question or make a comment.
Yes thank you Mr chair my
apologies for stepping out the
did want to make a brief comment
I would actually echo some of
the superintendent toll said how
much should it cost and then we
can look at GDP you know it the
expenditures you know as a
percentage of GDP and all these
sorts of things and so I think
we do have some good metrics but
really just a couple of things I
You know this this topic comes
up I mean worse health care and
the the order of health care
being a right or a privilege
this was a question asked to me
during admission interview for
medical school actually so we
and a lot of us have been
thinking about this for a long
time but you know I I would like
just mainly even for the public
to consider this
you know if you were in very
poor country in sub Saharan
Africa.
How could you discuss.
That topic with a very poor
person has is about one surgeon
per every million people in
certain areas there and how
would you tell them that that is
a right to you.
when I when I hear you know this
discussion it seems that we are
demanding in almost an elitist
way that we have just this right
we can claim to health care and
I'm certainly especially after
practicing in Africa for two
years I am very very much in the
privileged role in in the in the
on the privilege side now with
one counties with one carrier
because I couldn't look any of
my patients in the eyes and
Cameron and tell them that it's
you know some right however.
when a nation.
Has the ability when nation has
the ability which I believe the
United States the US I believe
the United States is affluent
and.
To provide health care or to
ensure that people have have
health care
and so I think that's where the
debate comes in the United
States only but I think we
discussed this we cannot say
that it's universal or intrinsic
to being a human being that we
can all Amanda right for health
care
and so I want to make that point
I think it is something that
needs to continue to be
discussed and then lastly Mister
chair and and Senators
You know.
When when we talk about private
insurance companies you know I I
said a lot of I think very
critical things about private
insurance companies I think
they're very in general that
they're gatekeepers in fact I
don't really refer to them as
insurance at all because I don't
I don't even give them that much
credit they they really have the
COVID is no one's fault
necessarily I don't think it's
anything overly malicious
activity but they have truly
become the gatekeepers they have
driven a in a huge wedge in
between the physician and the
patient they disrupted the
patient filled physician
relationship and so might my
solution is not universal health
care but my solution would be in
which is why I'm opposed to this
bill but my solution would be
make insurance insurance again.
Make it where you only need
insurance if you get a big car
crash for your your baby has to
you know spend a week in the icy
or whatever insurance with
nobody should be using insurance
for routine medical costs for
all all these sorts of things if
you are able to do that people
have to disclose their prices
and then the the the people came
and I've I've said this before
I'll say it again people gain
the power because then they have
the money and the the office of
doctors offices and hospitals
there but looking at the six
person know they have to find
them good service because they
could go down the street they
know what their prices are
across the street and if they're
not treated.
Like a human being and they're
treated like a you know just
cattle moving in out I'll have
five minutes to be with you in
all that well they can go they
can go elsewhere because they've
heard from their friend that
such and such drive across the
street is is better and they and
they know that Hey there you
know ten dollars cheaper for an
office visit so I would like to
shifted away from you know
universal health care let's show
the people the prices and let's
not keep the people the six
people in the dark anymore take
the power away from insurance
companies and let the people can
beat those prices down and so
that's the other solution is to
go back to a place where the
insurance companies don't have
the power and they you only
kicking insurance when you
actually need you know what we
don't need we don't need
insurance for gasoline in order
to you know middle class because
of time middle class people
we we don't use insurance for
oil change or tire changes use
insurance of your car and I'll
get Culbert in a big in a big
car crash let's do that for
health care thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator committees.
What's the will of the committee
Senator Stefanics.
Second.
Any of the debate secretary will
call the roll that was Sedillo
Lopez.
Our guide growth number.
McKenna yes.
Committees is here first
meeting.
No.
city okay yes first fax yes Sir
Thomas yes six point level fifty
thirty three payment yes Senator
Tallman to explain his vote.
So far as I'm concerned the
insurance company has no
business being in health care
business Representative this
problem to get rid of the
companies.
Three thirty middle man despite
the overview of the no ma'am.
The the trend is toward.
To provide direct conflict yes.
Change their business model
since nineteen oh eight.
The unnecessary middleman.
Destroyed insurance companies
are in the.
I think totally disagree with
actors.
Okay we're.
Insurance.
Your with the.
What the buying a car is.
It doesn't matter it's so I'm
not against capitalism.
The health care doesn't lend
itself to capitalism because
it's
Sen deserves.
System does not work because if
we can we get this crazy system.
In order to solitary makes a
really major changes one of
which is a really insurance
company thank you.
Thank you senator and so let's
go then to Senator pope forty
five you're sitting there let's
do your bill real quickly Senate
bill forty five appropriate
procurement.
Thank you Mr chair in the I will
be real quick this is basically.
The the resident veteran
business and resident veteran
contractor.
procurement preference this was
originally the bill for.
House bill ninety seven that was
in the second session of twenty
twelve.
And what we're doing here is
basically it will it will
basically be repealed in July.
And it's not it was not a sunset
clause I guess in the original
bill it was just supposed to be
repealed on that date
right now just let everybody
know what this does
it gives veteran businesses the
opportunity for when the
Try to get on a contract the
will get five percent of point
total added to their bid.
it does not happen on any
federal contracts or federal
funding
they have to the business has to
be recognized by TRD beforehand
right now we have over seventeen
hundred a businesses in the
state that qualified for this.
And we just want to make sure
that this doesn't expire I will
also say that Senate bill thirty
nine Senator Shendo has also
covers this as well but it also
adds a native American
procurement preference as well.
So okay good good it is the
audience want to speak on this
bill.
Joan Dickerson wants to speak on
it on zoom.
Mr chair members of the
committee of the IAD and John
Dickerson in I am with the
veterans and military family
caucus and we fully support this
bill we believe it's necessary
to give our veterans a
competitive edge in procurement
thank you very much thank you
John Steve Hogan also on zoom.
Yes thank you.
Chairman Ortiz Pino and vice
chair common in distinguished
committee members I and I want
to thank senator pope for
bringing this forward my name is
Steve Hogan Senate district
eighteen and as a procurement
professional and a board member
of the New Mexico veterans
business advocates and also a
veteran business owner I want to
express my support for Senate
bill forty five to repeal the
sunset provisions of the
veterans preference to the for
procurement.
Thank you great thank you Mr
Hogan at dance Secrest.
We love the.
He got up okay sorry death all
right the members of the
committee senator Gaydos you up
first.
Mr chairman thank you Sir Paul
thank you for bringing this up
hello of the bill.
We're I was in the house in
Representative Bob we was
working on this and I remember
the discussion on the sunset and
sometimes are good something
like this it's not needed
because what you've done for our
nation we continue to benefit
from it so I remember
Representative mccamly always
wanting to set the sunset date
in there I appreciate you bring
this back in correcting that
because I think what our our
veterans have done for our
nation the the lady on the
thanks to the best that they
need to have that kind of the.
Lane field and this does that so
I appreciate you bringing this
point I'll have something to
vote yes on Mr good we can even
let you make the motion of
thanks when appropriate I would
think it's appropriate yes after
dinner I wonder if I could add
something and this bill would
make this permanent so they want
to be a clause in this one so I
just wanted to mention sensitive
it's we have continuous gonna
make a motion Mr and make the
best option okay well it's still
make a motion and and you want
to seconded.
Thank you yes okay seconded by
Senator Stefanics and then this
a question debate buddies
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr chair.
Just for my education what's the
purpose of the census.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez I
I still do not know this guy has
a as of of the committee on that
air I was in many meetings about
this and it was thought that we
had to go back to review.
The options that we had and that
would make us go back and review
it something's I see that has
value in but this here's no
nonsense bill I mean it's it's
just a fairness issue for
veterans so I appreciate that it
doesn't have a subset because we
don't need to keep discussing
this it's something should be in
statute just there and let them
go back to work so with that I
hope that helps thank.
Good answer I think that's it.
Anything else any other
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Wirth yes ma'am thermic
cannon yes.
I believe.
Correct.
There's no open yes first the
panics yet Homer yes
yes.
Your patience is rewarded
Senator well thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee
members Senator Stefanics you
have for bills on our on our
Grid and there's in the moon
over.
Okay well if you pass out the
list is taken in order then
sixty two we have an amendment
yep there in here okay.
Thank.
And I.
Sure okay on Senate bill sixty
two it adds a word.
After its senior and disabled
on both in both the title and
the bill.
This this is to extend the sixty
three since this is my last I'm
gonna wait to ready.
Here is.
The vote you okay you'll find
this.
They're putting things in the
book in the order they're going
to appear in the agenda note on
in numeric order.
All.
So what's your what is the use
of the amendment Mr chair
members of the committee is
after senior in both the title
and the bill and the words and
disabled okay this nap program
supplemental nutrition
assistance program is for both
senior and disabled in the Human
Services Department this bill
going to move the amendment I
move it.
And is there any discussion on
the amendment any opposition to
the amendment.
Seeing none will will it will
adopt that amendment thank you
and I'll provide a signed copy
then of Mr chair members of the
committee this adds ten million
dollars to the general fund
because some of our seniors.
Even at the point level receive
twenty four dollars and ninety
nine cents a month in snap
benefits to eat on.
This will increase the amount of
money for this step benefits
subsidized by the general fund.
Of course ten dollars or ten
dollars ten million dollars is a
request
the Senate finance committee
will decide if you can fit into
this the state budget and how
much the supplement is that
that'll be up to the to the
Human Services Department if it
was to run out for ten years.
It could in fact give them
another.
It's in here it's in the FIR
let's see here well I can read
it myself and thank you.
It could be at twenty Bucks
that's right after ten years.
For ten years for up to ten
years so then that's one thing
the Senate finance committee if
they were going to include in
the state budget could work with
Human Services to see how many.
Years that they would be
interested in doing this the
many years ago of members we did
this for two or three years
under governor bill Richardson.
Very good any any any debate on
the bill as amended.
If you fall Senator gave us.
We have a due pass from senators
Sedillo Lopez for the second
from Senators defects in debate
on the bill Senator got a Mr
etcetera thank you for bringing
this forward so hoping to get to
the point that I can go forward
on on the floor but I do have a
couple of questions so we're
doing ten million reoccurring in
And I know that this year we've
got seven percent inflation its
highest ever since nineteen
eighty two I guess but I'm
trying to figure out is the the
ten million reoccurring.
Is that I guess I don't
understand every year ten
million you for falling
inflation I would have thought
we had a.
The difference in amounts every
year.
Mr chair Senator gave us that's
a great question and that's why
I'm not going to propose to
intrude I think it's going to be
left to Senate finance if they
in fact accept this request and
determine the appropriate
amount.
So this is a request that came
through I just the Human
Services department to work this
up for me back in the interim I
was carrying this for the health
and Human Services interim
committee I just the snap
program of the health and Human
Services to come up with the
amount of money that would be
needed to cover this for ten
years out and that's what they
came up with so again Sir I
would have to defer to Senate
finance for the actual amount if
they consider this request but I
appreciate that and and it's
because sustainability for me
the vote no on it here
Representative love to hear the
resolution from Senate finance
and on the Senate floor so thank
you for that thank you Mr.
Any of the debate.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
One of.
mechanic yes.
Is.
The vote yes.
Piece of.
I have a.
That.
Yes.
Yes to see can a yes so we have
a due pass on sixty to have a
sixty three okay sixty three
Mister chair members of the
committee has no amendment and
it is making an approach
appropriation for the Human
Services Department for a
homeless shelter support
services and this is for two
million dollars this is for
supplemental housing is for
right behavioral health it's
goes to the Human Services
Department.
This would be a supplement to
what they get in federal money.
It is matched by federal money
that's for it is separate from
the housing money that it is
available it is more behavioral
health services food and it I'm
carrying it for the health and
Human Services infinity any any
your questions or debate.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chairman thank you and
Senator appreciate it I did read
this one last night and I love
it when they're small bills like
this I didn't get to the end but
just a couple of questions on
support services what does that
entail.
At thank you Mr chair Senator of
support services is primarily B.
Hey rural health services so
that there would be social
worker there might be
transportation for example right
now the Veterans Services
Department is trying to find
social work and transportation
services to medical appointments
so that people don't miss some
it might be medication until
they get their budget
identified you might be paying
for a post office box so that
they have a permanent address in
order to get state benefits
because that is required in
order to get benefits.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator out no the question
is do we know what our client
numbers would be statewide for
homeless population.
Mr chair Senator I'm looking.
At the analyses.
I know that Hank Hughes was on
he is on and and we could ask
Hank okay Hank Hughes is the
director of the coalition for
foam Business and services here
in the state perhaps Hank could
you for the month thank.
I.
Okay thank you with we think
you're on can you tell us the
answer to that question.
Just say that you may need to on
mute.
I.
Is just to.
For you and your tank.
Be a second can you hear me now
yes you can we can do I can you
answer Senator Gallegos
question.
Yes
in recent years has about twenty
thousand people in New Mexico
per year who experienced
homelessness I think that was
the question yes.
Thank you for that Hey stay on
Hank stay on because we want to
hear from you.
Ask questions there's a
gentleman and in center is the
Max amount so this two million
dollars what is a but at.
So Mister chair I'm going to
ask thank you he could
attentive I what matching funds
there are four
home services homeless services.
Yes thank you
Give me
the emergency solutions grant
what matches the.
The emergency solutions grant is
what matches the state funding.
and it's a set amount of about a
million dollars a year that we
get from Hyde.
For emergency shelter.
Thank you for that Mr in center
all you very regional support is
also worried about the
presented yesterday to a.
Senator office is very
important.
Damage part able health care
about that I think a lot of
people in our our friend
multiple issues in this.
R. one segment for the most.
So with that I think thank you
Senator is good point thank you
had signed up to make a comment
tonight neglected to go to you
what how would you like to
comment.
Well I just want to speak in
support of this bill
It's very important that we
increase I'm sorry for my.
Hi to all of them to the wrong
way that was all.
I don't have because it.
Currently about million dollars
goes to the shelters from the
the federal a hand.
State funding and this would
increase that a great deal only
about eighteen our shelters are
able to take care chair of the
funding so far
Many of the smaller shelters
don't bother to apply because
you know it's not worth the work
Mr small amount of money.
If we were able to support more
of the smaller shelters it would
help places like Gallup in
Espanola.
As well as to assist the
shelters in our larger
communities that are also
struggling.
And
I think that was about all I I
really wanted to say is just
encourage you to to pass this
and unless you have other
questions for me thank you thank
you very much thank next is
Maria Griego.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is it's actually Wendy Cutler
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and we also think the sponsor
for this bill and and and
underscore that the testimony of
Mr Hughes New Mexico has been
heavily in the rest of housing
prices for for sept for many
years noted we have the highest
increase in rates of
homelessness the country between
twenty eighteen to twenty
nineteen an increase of twenty
seven percent even before the
pandemic support for children so
much is so important now more
than ever and and so we stand in
strong support of of the bill
and thank thank the sponsor
thank you Mr chairman great
thank you Maria.
Committee members any any
further discussion what's the
will of the committee Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you Mr and senator just
couple questions in I understand
that this isn't the the money at
the end of fiscal year shall not
revert to the general fund do
you know if they have the five
million dollars a lot of money
you know what your thoughts are
two million we have to agree all
I am so sorry sixty three I
apologize I got.
Want to monitor the okay.
Well and let's finish up on
sixty three then before we go to
sixty four in the past thank.
Seconded by Senator news
secretary will call the roll.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes proponents yes.
Yes.
Now we'll move to Senate bill
sixty four the device violence
support services this wanted
that you if you had a comment
about senator going to explain
it Senator said.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee this bill is
for the health and Human
Services interim committee it's
a appropriation to CYFD children
youth and families department
for domestic violence support
services because they manage
domestic violence services it's
five million dollars for
domestic violence support
services and it will it shall
not revert at the end of the
year.
The of money Mr chair.
Members of the committee would
help stabilize and enhance
domestic violence survivors
support services through
increases to the salary and
benefits of advocates by helping
domestic violence programs to
hire and retain skilled
supervisors and administrators
and through the enhancement of
survivor Services survivors
survivors service enhancements
include the development of
alternative safe shelter that
reduces the risk of congregate
setting such as the current
in such as in the current
pandemic expansion of child
focused services.
Taxable direction of assisted
survivors survivors that meet
their immediate needs
enhancement of counseling and
case management services and
community outreach and education
bill domestic violence inform
systems and I believe there
might be somebody on wanted
Rivera is here for CYFD okay.
Did you can you.
The go ahead Mr.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David
reference to miss balance
program manager for children I'm
sorry I.
That's okay.
and I'm here to happy to answer
any questions that the committee
members have.
Okay Senator Gallegos has a
question.
At that might is there anybody
else online the two women I have
anybody else.
No yes right.
Mr I'll be brief than thank you
Mr chairman Senator and David
river I appreciate you being on
a just a couple of questions on
the FIR it talks about the LFC
recommendations for the
department in house bill two
includes increase of four
million to see widespread
protests domestic violence
services includes three million
from the general fund and one
million early childhood care
fund has just wondering what the
difference was why we're asking
for five percent so if he's
looking at for.
I did not the department had
discussions on that Mr thank you
for the question I is that the
answer that's above my pay grade
I'm very happy to refer that to
my leadership to get back to you
so I'm not sure the best way to
get more funding to domestic
violence but I can assure you
that there's a great need to
stabilize services and senator I
think senators to fund it says a
response though Mr chair Senator
gate goes thank you for the
question remember this came from
the health and Human Services
interim committee so the
domestic violence shelters made
this request this past summer.
And that is how we came up with
the amount at that time that was
prior to any special sessions or
to any negotiations between the
LFC and DFA.
The deal with thank you for that
of.
Mr Chairman since the on that
point I I serve on that
committee as well and the the
need is is generally there so I
think this is really appropriate
for.
To try to address the need and
in this time when we have
resources to do so.
I appreciate that Miss Mister
chair of center and center I
guess my thing is just to if the
house bill two comes without it
will be adjusting the numbers
but my final question is if
Mister river would be able to
explain to me what
of the support services that
will receive for this I I put a
junior monies into domestic
violence shelter in Lee County
and I just wondered what other
kind of support services that
CYFD provides.
Mr river.
The us to a new so you have to
and you to again so while he's
getting on Mr chair Senator I
also put in some money for the
coordinated community response
system the C. C. R. because
that's outside of their regular
support services cell I don't
I'd be interested Mr reverse
responses well Mr river you can
you can speak if you're you're
on mute thank you sorry about
that.
So they.
The per providers answer crisis
calls over twenty thousand last
year they do crisis intervention
victim advocacy whether
connecting survivors to lots of
community resources there is
financial education and advocacy
there's counseling individual
counseling and group counseling
legal advocacy helping survivors
with medical appointments
transportation so there's a
there's a fire very wide range
of us with the support of
services means involved.
Thank you.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
Senator and Mr chairman I'll
yield I appreciate the dialogue
of somebody named Jason New.
Is also online wanted to make a
comment the Jason you can unmute
yourself.
Thank you Mr chair I'm actually
just staying online for the
actually the next bill okay
thank you.
So.
What we're I think we have a
motion to have a motion we don't
budget.
Motion moved by Senator Sedillo
Lopez seconded by Senator
Tallman the secretary will call
the roll.
Territorials.
There McKenna yes.
Yes.
CENIC's yes Tallman yes.
Yes Senator Gallegos to explain
his vote thank you Mr I'm hoping
that when this gets to the
Senate floor that will have the
a number fried as far as what
LESC thinks.
And so that I can vote for their
I think the five million just
little much of their again goes
to sustainability on downturn of
oil and gas but I thank you for
the option.
Thank you senator and finally we
have a Senate bill sixty five
the state food banks and there's
an amendment to this one at
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
It was brought to my attention.
That HSD does not buy food or
deliver food.
So it is
The words were struck.
From the title for additional
food purchase and delivery and
of it the money is going from
HSD to food bank Fund.
So that it's a administrative
cleanup of language HSD does not
purchase food they do not
deliver food it's the food banks
that do so that's what the
amendment does it is that food
banks fund or food bank fund
food bank Fund I have a couple
extra of the amendment I signed
one and I believe I gave to
I have a fund everybody has one
okay so the word banks has to be
switched to a bank.
Well the the state.
The staffers did it upstairs.
Maybe it's food banks fund and I
believe we all must be.
Okay.
Is the amendment clear any
any questions on the amendment.
Some of the
remote.
The amendment second is there
any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
bills have been amended.
And the USA see more about it we
have several people on the
online I want to speak about it
yes
Mr chair at the committee
members the.
Food banks floral.
Distributes food to the food
pantries they also distribute
food directly to individuals
through lines of people driving
through and the lower the number
of people in our state who have
more Adam Travis who had
children at home.
Who had unique circumstances all
of a sudden brought the number
of people up who were in fact
asking for food here in Santa Fe
the my the line was two miles
long.
Every week that they did food
distribution of cars lined up
and the food distribution and
one main category was twice a
month and then they went out the
small communities I know that
the Roadrunner food bank in
Albuquerque had as many people
of course because it's a larger
city and their food banks came
forward and said we need to buy
more food we need help with the
cost of delivery they also have
some capital request which is
not in this bill and that is for
some vehicles and cold storage
so I believe that our food banks
right now are in fact pushing
the envelope and trying to take
care of people in our state.
And I don't know who else is on
line three yeah well let's go to
the let's go to the audience on
soon then we'll start with you
Mr New.
From the New Mexico department
of agriculture.
yeah of thank you Mr chair
members the committee made
fundraising new almost as a
director with the marketing and
development division New Mexico
department of agriculture
I was asked to be online and
answer any questions are
available for comment from the
committee members we did
contribute and analysis and our
our contribution stated that
hunger and food access programs
support local agriculture
community and add up to civic
significant reliable economic
economic opportunities for New
Mexico producers.
Keeping for families land and
water production well supporting
our local economies together
twenty four thousand eight
hundred New Mexico family farms
produced on about three billion
dollars in economic value in
twenty twenty for the state and
Well this bill did not
specifically stipulate New
Mexico origin foods on food
banks to help integrate locally
produced foods and local
communities.
Which enhance food security in
the state.
In addition to supporting the
state's agricultural economy
programs such as supplemental
nutrition program double up food
Bucks WIC senior farmers market
nutrition programs Mexico road
approved supplier programs.
Food banks and fresh R. X. also
support proved additional
opportunities for fresh state
locally grown article to drugs
low income families statewide.
There by helping prevent disease
and reduce long term health care
costs thank you thank you Mr new
the Allison Smith.
If you if you go ahead and
speak.
Yes Sir thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee at registered lobbyist
Allison Smith registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of food banks we
thank the sponsor of very much
for bringing this forward the I
food food banks around the state
of New Mexico service all thirty
three counties in the state and
through this pandemic we have
definitely done a yeoman's job
of trying to get food delivered
this appropriation would go a
long way towards addressing that
the needs that are still out
there throughout the pandemic as
well as the added of food and
fuel costs that the food banks
are experiencing we again thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward and really hope this
committee will advance this
appropriation thank you so much
for your time thank you Allison.
Roy.
Mr chairman and committee
members camera I am here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
and also in support of this bill
as the rocky mountain farmers
union and we went thank Senator
Stefanics for bringing this bill
forward we work very closely
with the food banks through this
pandemic and with our food
assistance programs and I would
say the same in addition to what
my colleagues who have shared
with you I would say is as we
see food prices increasing and
now six percent certainly our
seniors and many who need food
assistance we can secure our
feeling those effects even more
and answer strengths mentioned
with our food depot here in
Santa Fe I got a chance to
really see hands on not only in
those lines but also our food
banks participated insisting at
senior centers providing extra
extra food for seniors for
coming during the curbside
pickups and things like that so
they do more than the line up as
well they're really out in the
community helping into the fifty
interest well so we really
appreciate Senators and springs
board and look forward to the
supporters Committee.
Thank you Pam and finally Maria
Griego.
Good evening and Mr chairman my
name is actually with the color
of the Center online poverty and
we think the sponsor for the
third time this evening to read
this bill we send in strong
support because everyone in our
state deserves enough food to
eat and to New Mexicans are
going from the everyday food
insecurity New Mexico is among
the worst in the country and
that's especially in the rural
parts of our state our food
banks in New Mexico provided a
vital link to food security is
as mentioned by it by other
individuals doing public comment
especially for snap participants
who typically run out snap
benefits after the second or
third week of the month and
without food support that food
banks provide these families go
hungry every month so we very
much think the sponsor brings
the Senate's rocks for.
Thank you Maria members of the
committee.
Senator drivers.
Mister chairman Senator just a
couple of questions and an
option I'm I understand that
they're overwhelmed by COVID.
And I'm just wondering do we
have any number of this building
in the budget.
At this point.
I had just to
Mr chair Senator Donny is places
who's working with Senator
Lingus about this and there is a
much smaller number like I think
it's like four five million four
million is food from the number
I had in my mind that I that
because out I had asked in
advance when I was thinking
about my junior money and I
think that she indicated that it
was the four five million range.
Thank you for that and and that
would have made me a lot more
comparable say yes right now I
would look forward to that being
the number on the floor but in
just a thought and I'm I'm not
proposing this right now but
just thought these are the type
of bills that mccamley
Representative family would put
a sunset on because of the
unknowns of the
revenues for years now it would
give you a good chance to look
at it bring for the committee
again and see if that number of
four million is enough or too
much but I'm not going to
propose that right now I just
want to tell you that's what the
original thought of Santa Claus
was a vote no.
But if we get to forming on the
floor the government of so Mr
chair left I'd like to respond a
minute I don't think any of
these bills get to the floor
they go to Senate finance of the
how to make it there and finance
put it into the pot stirrers it
and decides if any of them get
into the budget we vote for the
budget it's included in the much
less we won't see it again I see
yes or sell that's why I'm
saying the request that we're
coming through with today.
And as you asked about the LFC
in the DFA
recommendations.
It's it's a request and it just
allows this lawn to Senate
finance but I don't believe
these individual bills will ever
get to the floor okay and I
appreciate that in the I recall
that I've got a question just
technical care question would
you feel comfortable amendment
to the for me now.
The four million is already in
the budget the that of that this
request I guess from my vote I'm
on a no on the twelve if we
amended it to four on the yes
and not that that's going to
matter unless numbers unless
House Appropriations.
She takes it down which kind of
how do we do bills in there and
and with this bill would do
movie to add a little emphasis
to saying wanted to take a look
at raising that figure maybe as
much as twelve up to get it up
to twelve
we get six I think we would be
delighted to the you know
whatever we can get Mr chair I'm
looking at at this Hey that was
given to everybody today on the
floor.
And it was from
Kendall who is working for the
governor who is heading up for
the coordination of eight
different state agencies working
on food initiative.
The.
The state agency budget request
for food banks is five million
and the executive recommendation
is six million.
So that's why the LESC then give
the LFC they didn't give the LFC
I think that's where I had the
four million but I may well
actually there is a call here
this is zero.
It's.
From LFC and you know.
But zero for everything so I
don't think it's the right and
then.
Mr Chairman.
The LFC budget for for food
banks.
Mr chairman my understanding
rules for the food farms and
hunger portion of the of the LFC
budget was zero.
Zero.
The Dow was specific to the who
farms and hunger's fortune of
the of the budget request that
was as centers to panic said I
actually a comprehend more
comprehensive approach to
aligning food farming and hunter
initiatives here in the state
in that portion yep.
So that that makes that gives
this even extra though Mr chair
I'd I don't know that we know
that for sure because if you
look at this document the last
comment is LFC recommendation
and every single solitary line
sissy row.
It's not.
The identifying amounts so we
will do that we can to get a
we'll find out what's in within
the it well we could look it up
now if I had my computer the
House Bill to looking for work
land I'd have to Mr Chairman
Senator just so we don't delay
that I think in the in the
overall
because we're looking at half
the amount of we're asking in
the governor's request that all
the flexible to be able to get
on it because that's my original
intent is just to go straight
down to something that we could
Re look at later and and try to
live with so you've answered my
question thank you for your time
good thank Senator Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator phonics two things
I did observe last gosh yeah
last year
because we were in my day job I
was collaborating with
Roadrunner Food Bank.
I we were helping folks in need
qualify apply and qualify for
rental assistance and Justice
Senator Stefanics pointed out in
Santa Fe there are long lines
also when the Roadrunner Food
Bank have the event at the state
fairgrounds.
Will.
It was it was just incredible
how calmly they waited and they
waited for hours to get a box of
food stuff so I know the need is
critical and I know people that
were in their vehicles had to
take off work to get this loan
so it's really great that
they're allowing for delivery so
that's my comment and then I do
have a question about the bill
I've seen this quite a bit is
how.
Any unexpended or unencumbered
balance remaining at the end of
the fiscal year shall revert to
the general fund and in this
bill it's shall not revert and I
was curious chairman and senator
wide why it's not going to go
back to the general fund if it's
been unexpended or unencumbered
Mr chair and senator thank you
for the question when the funds
are non reverting it will allow
Human Services Department to
leverage the funds with federal
funds.
If it reverts back and it's
expended then it's not available
to utilize so they're able to
take what ever gets if it's not
reverting they can take whatever
gets funded and match it with
federal funds if reverts back
then they get into a situation
where they have to return
federal funds and that is not an
easy situation for the state to
do.
Okay thank you chairman thank
you senator you learn something
every day.
But so will the committee.
Yes amendment is passed from
Senator Sedillo Lopez as amended
and second we did up the
amendment right yes okay.
Give me yes we are both I.
Good we did okay.
The money blurs after seven
thirty nine.
Secretary will call the roll.
Cerebri angles yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
X. yes.
Sir Tom yes to subpoena yes
that's right the the members
that.
Wording changing the title.
Members of the committee thank
you for in a very long days
worth appreciate your your your
energy thank you.
Thank you is that I.
Thank
