The first time this session.
Drug tragically we've watched
this last week an impeachment
proceeding in the video of
what that took place in our
country over the last several
months and.
We we saw.
Our elected officials being
threatened with the hanging
death assassination bullet that
it cetera.
We've also unfortunately
although far removed from
Washington DC had.
At least one Senate member feel
very strongly that he had been
threatened and that is likely
been threatened for his position
on a political issue I think
that we need to have a law in
place to address Representative
selected officials and so there
consequence to that.
We don't have an impeachment
proceeding.
But we but but but one now we
see Washington DC people
building a gallows and the news.
Referring to the vice president
United States or the speaker of
the house of there should be a
law.
And the and that this bill
proposes to do that to make that
a criminal offense.
Thank you Mr.
And I don't have any.
But you for or against it on
the.
The list of people who requests
to speak today.
There is somebody who wants to
speak on it would you raise your
hand known will recognize you
for a couple of minutes of
public comment.
We'll go to the committee.
In the committee with a question
Senator Gallegos.
Sturbridge Senator appreciate
the dialogue on this I did have
just questions I know the public
defender's administration office
of the courts thought this bill
is too vague thank you know
visit with you on some possible
language changes or what they
thought ones making the
discussion.
Senator Gallegos all answer
carefully I don't believe they
have I say I don't believe so
because like the rest of you
I've received hundreds and
thousands of him tell regarding
couple of other subjects so far
this session and so if folks
sent me an email sometimes I'm
the first to acknowledge they
may get lost in that blizzard
but but I I don't believe
they've a.
How do we with specific
questions or concerns I I would
know the bill goes to the
Judiciary Committee and that's
not to suggest that you all
would not have good ideas for
changes here by way of amendment
but but I would encourage those
who may expressed those concerns
to let me know if the bill
advances before judiciary or
come to this committee are
that's partly I was kinda hoping
today would have some of those
concerns of any expressed by
people here today so we can work
on the bill.
Mr and and Senator that was my
main concern and it's not just
them I mean there's department
public safety there's quite a
few people that some questions
but I'm just going to highlight
those and historically I vote no
because I'd rather fix in our
committee of but it just it goes
to that point I believe that in
Judiciary your group would have
for the legal aspect that the
with that I will wait for
further testimony to decide you
know you all my time thank you.
Senator Gallegos did you want to
identify some of the issues that
the A. O. C. raised during the.
Public defender.
Okay let me see if I can get
through to were ahead of
This from AOC the languages SB
one eighty two is vague with
respect to the provision that no
person shall threaten a public
official with the intent to
three prevent interrupt the
ability to carry out the public
officials job duties because the
provision does not define what
conduct would be considered
prevention or interruption long
may be entered interpreted to
include unintended conduct.
Mister would you like me to go
on to different departments well
I think I didn't know if it's a
Senator run to send scene the
the comments from the AOC
thank.
Did you ever respond Senator
services to the in the COVID.
Couple of things first of all I
do appreciate Center guy goes
and all of you on this committee
for always trying then bills
when you can before they get to
us that that doesn't amber
things it cuts back on our
workload happy about that number
number one more important that
again you're hearing it we had
the AOC here today we have
public defenders here today I
could ask them about specific
changes specific language
specific amendments which we
could then work on now or have
prepared for Judiciary but other
than the the analysis that was
read
by their guy go say that the
language is vague then and I
don't know how to really make
meaningful progress with that
other than that that that that
criticism.
No not sure Senator Gallegos
when there is
Did you have did you have any
thoughts all of Senator
Gallegos.
Mr chairman and senator it's
also we're just talk about it in
each one of the categories about
the will of working being vague
so.
I did find
The FIR is to can.
But I just thought it was just
to bring that to his attention
because as I go forward I would
hope that they would get with
the different entities that this
would be
As far as you know public
Department public safety
administration of supports
public defender's office
Attorney General in the
sentencing commission the ones
that had given the questions on
you know the.
What the bill actually does to
them so that's all I have Mister
just want to bring that to the
center's attention thank you
thank you senator guidance we
have several other committee
members come in senators so the
lotus.
Thank you Mr chair
I you know all of I understand
of the vagueness argument a
little bit although I very much
appreciate the bill but I wanted
to just to kind of go through
the bill with you.
In in the sense of a thread that
I got.
So I got an email saying that
That they were going to go after
me with hammer and tongue with
tongue misspelled.
T. U. N. G. but it was grossly
misspelled.
And I and then I got some other
some other threats and I
forwarded them to our
Legislative Council who then
reported them to the police and
the police now have the the
threats so going to the bill no
person shall shell presents so
there has to be a threat so we
have to figure out whether this
you know that whether I should
be.
That they would go after me with
hammer and tongue whether that's
a threat then I'm a public
official under the definitions
with the intent so you have to
look at that person's mindset to
figure out whether they caught
cause actual harm.
Probably I'm hoping not to cause
actual harm but then the second
one because a public official in
fear to be.
To place the public official in
fear of great bodily harm so so
so that's an element that is two
fold they intended to scare me
and then was.
That the intent whether the
intent was to fear me or whether
I actually was scared
You know when and so that's what
I think is a is a little bit
difficult when you're the
prosecutor if you were trying to
prosecute someone for this
is is what exactly is meant for
to prevent or interrupt ability
to carry out the public
officials job duties
again that.
I think the intent was to try to
express themselves and I think
there's a first amendment
argument that they would make
that they're expressing
displeasure with legislation
that I proposed so I guess what
I'm suggesting is and and I I
think you're right that of.
The judiciary is probably the
best place to do it is that when
you break it down to look at the
elements I think it is a little
bit.
A little bit vague although I
very much appreciate what you're
trying to do
But on if yes the intent
especially if the intent is to
discourage this kind of behavior
but I don't think that it.
I think that people would be
confused about what exactly.
Is the behavior that you're
trying to discourage.
but like I said I I I'm going to
support the bill because I think
that judiciary is perfectly
capable of addressing of the the
vagueness concerns that were
raised in the FIR and and as I
said I walked to the bill to
show you that I think that
I'm not positive that your
intent is to part is to have
someone be guilty of a crime who
sent an email like the email
that I received.
I don't know if you have a
response senator initial Senator
the first of all disclaimer I've
never done in the criminal law
of defense work before and very
little prosecution so it's not
my area of expertise but I but I
would tell you that you will now
every law of the criminal nature
requires an intent there's a
very low various levels of what
lawyers call scienter I believe
which is the the mental that's
right at the right then again
another way of for the non
lawyers are saying you have to
you have to demonstrate improved
the intent of the person to
commit the crime it can be an
accidental commission of a crime
we have to show the intent that
that's a burden that every
prosecutor has and I would
imagine it's a difficult one
they have to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt to a jury.
How they do that
Senator you know there's
probably any number of ways that
they would do it based on the
facts and circumstances of the
if they don't feel they could
prove it then they presumably
don't prosecuted those I'll give
you a couple of contrast we had
one of our colleagues get a a
phone message you all probably
remember the video well and so
forth there was a the nature of
a threat in there we're going to
get you out of going to get you
one way or the other something
along those lines that may be
tough to show an intent of
actual harm to that particular
Senator let me give you a
contrast in simple the governor
of Michigan had two or three
people who had a plan to kidnap
her of not kill her and it was
very very detailed data it was
in writing they had to assemble
their arms bombs all kinds of
other things plans of an attack
in that case I don't think it's
would be very hard for a
prosecutor to prove there was as
an intent to cause actual harm
to the governor of Michigan so I
I think ultimately
unfortunately some of these
awards in criminal statutes are
are are going to be less than a
precise perhaps a little bit of
a.
But that's true even in our tort
law center city Lopez you know
what I as a as a tort lawyer
after show that somebody's
contact was not reasonable well
who gets to say what's
reasonable or not that's what a
jury gets the side so we have a
agency and our live try
everything I can to get out
centers but is here you know
that is is the recipient of that
often I'm always looking for
ways to get
no we're not we're not.
I was looking for the chance to
avoid ambiguity but but I'll be
the first one the minutes it's
throughout our law here and and
there may be some ambiguity here
but but I'm open to any
suggestions to make it less
ambiguous otherwise it's
probably like a lot of our
criminal law the prosecutors
going to decide can they prove
beyond a reasonable doubt there
was an intent to cause actual
harm to you in that circumstance
or was it just somebody blowing
off steam and then realize we
have the same issue at the
national level we had a we just
had an impeachment of the
president where the defense was
has a first amendment right to
freedom of expression Russian
that he if he truly intend to do
harm well the Senate could agree
on that.
Yes yes I appreciate that and
then and then it's just a it's a
petty misdemeanor and Mr chair a
petty misdemeanor are usually
those kind of low intemperance
and this has a very high
specific intent of so it that
that was just interesting to me
I like I said I I appreciate
the.
The intent of this bill and
mainly I think perhaps the most
important thing is it will give
the forty two police to
investigate the matter because
then because they're not this
isn't just of.
It's no crime and so that they
will investigate the matter and
then make the determination as
you said because there's a place
for bigness of the law just as
you pointed out and the the
discretion given here would be
to the police department
determined whether this look
like it was a serious thing and
then of course to the prosecutor
to determine whether this would
be appropriate to prosecute so I
appreciate you bringing the bill
I think of it's really
unfortunate that we needed at
this time very unfortunate but I
intend to vote for it.
Thank you senator Mr chairman I
know you're trying to move
things but if the if the members
go will refer to the significant
issues in your FIR what you'll
see there is the sentencing
commission notes that Rhode
Island Florida New Hampshire
Washington have the the same
Larson law in those cases it's a
felony as opposed to hear a
petty misdemeanor and in
Maryland has a law with a
misdemeanor Colorado as the
crime as well too so we made it
the look center good good
suggestion we made that they
look at something more than a
petty misdemeanor.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
of Senators committees followed
by Senator Stuart thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator yeah I would just second
that should of the.
what what a prosecutor with
think of what what would be the
actual usability of this bill
as as only a rate estimator
because it is kind of a serious
thing threatening the judge your
or you know legislators the
governor but we also just my two
cents there
Question on number two the
placing the public official in
here
and back along the lines a
question of how do you how do
you prove this in a court of law
how do you you know conspiracy
isn't a motion.
And so how are we gonna gonna
prove that somebody was was
fearful.
Good question is it is it is the
biggest but let me tell you that
that would that language comes
right out of our existing law
that deals with assault and
battery so to define what is an
assault or battery you have to
prove that the person who is
being threatened with the
battery was in M. and fear of
imminent harm or injury and and
again I don't do enough law to
criminal law to go into detail
about that but this language is
is pretty much in our existing
law.
And then the so that you know
the definition was somebody
threatens to give you a bad
adjusted to batter you threatens
to hit you in the face to slap
you to strike you why does it
become a crime and the proof of
that is you you that you had a
reasonable belief that are sure
that you were in imminent harm
and and that's that's is is
precisely worded as it is and so
you're you're not you're not I
don't is good it's a it's a
matter proven that intent and
there's a reasonableness
standard so the judge or jury
could have a look at what the
conduct was and say was a
reasonable that you thought you
were going to be injured by
whatever it was they were doing
on that point.
As I understand the bill and
maybe this is the interpretation
issue I guess.
It's the intent is to put fear
the prosecutor would have to the
intent of the individual making
the threat.
In the end it is attending the
victim to be fearful not whether
the victim was actually fearful.
I agree with Senator that's
that's that's what I read the
bill that's right.
Okay.
Mr chairman and and and senator
yeah that yeah and and that's
how I read as well I I just a is
more a curiosity question and
last and I I'm I'm fully
supportive of the bill
last question number one cause
actual harm so
the definition of harm I mean
this could be I guess.
You know political harm
financial harm emotional harm or
is it are we talking physical
are we're we're does that need
to be brought out more.
Senator I think it's a very good
question and I think that's
probably an amendment we should
at I think the goal of my bill
here is to cause harm physical
harm.
To the to the person rather than
you know you called me names
during the campaign.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator yeah I I just
Because the because we can.
We can hire this is of course
kind of disturbing to think
about but you can.
You can you can come up with
different ways to harm somebody
you know you could threaten up
well what you could threaten
their their family member I
recall it very disturbing story
in New Jersey where a judge's
order I think is his wide for
his son was was murdered in the
home during the trial as as as
you know someone poses a FedEx
delivery person was and it was
just a terrible story so you
know for me and I mean that that
constitutes harm you're not
actually physically harming the
public official but your your
army one of their immediate
family members and so so just a
suggestion there of of you know
maybe we need to look at what
kind of hard but but otherwise I
I I definitely support bill
today so thank you.
You.
My cutting L. no I admit I am
okay I just wanted to ask you if
you wanted to make an amendment
Senator.
Mr chairman I I mean I I don't
have a specific language I mean
if we want to have the work
physical harm to the public
official yeah and and that is
the bill Sanchez intense I I
certainly have no problem with
that if if the Sanchez thank to
very helpful getting the bill to
move forward which which would
be what I would like to see but
I would also like I said raise
the discussion of what about
physical harm to someone so you
know Stallis our children I mean
that that might maybe the
sponsor wants to include
something like that so I don't
want to over over complicate
things.
Senator lunches for using
Senator I think the idea of the
physical of the good amendment I
understand the Senators concern
that the bill was made a to
encompass family members and I
know the case he's referring to
work in fact a federal judge had
a disgruntled the litigant come
to our front door as a fed ex
person and kill her son all her
adult son on the on the spot
sheeter has been at the same
time tragic story but but I I'm
not attending at this time
trying to capture a threat of
harm to a public official's
family member although that may
be in our future and maybe
something for Senator today
introduces as well but I didn't
I didn't draft the bill to go
quite that far and and I'm not
prepared to try and fix the bill
to do that to go that broadly at
this time.
So I would I would discourage
the committee from trying to do
so to to allow us to go to a
threat to family members because
that again that we get into the
debate of how close a family
member has to be before that
threat would be of something
actionable as a crime you know
so family member to cousins away
somebody living out of state at
cetera because of the becomes a
complicated issue.
Okay.
Chair it.
Yes M. and so Mister chair if if
it is helpful to the sponsor
and if it's a friendly amendment
I I would have the problem of
moving to amend the work
physical front part if that's
helpful.
One nine twenty two.
After the word actual insert
physical.
Find eight which is a better
word Senator on yes you're right
senator Ortiz minutes probably
bodily.
So the show cause actual bodily
harm to the public official.
A second that if if it's a
friendly one because of
religion.
It is and you'll see the bodily
harm is is used online twenty
four yeah because as a you're
right that's the right word.
Okay do you have the thank you
very.
I'm sure front does he's
following.
Well.
Is it Mr chairman I have that I
was having difficulty getting
back on the website.
all right thanks so so you got
the amendment is in it's a
simple insertion of a single
word.
Yes.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment.
See none will consider your
bills in amended to Senator
Hernandez and we'll go now are
you senator Senator communities.
Yes Mr chairman I I I think
that's it you know we we talk
about harm to a family member
but I'll tell you if if someone
if I received a threat that
someone was going to harm one of
my family members that would
certainly prevent or interrupt
my ability to carry out my job
duties so I I did that that even
might be somewhat included in
this bill anyway so no that's
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator then we go to
Senator Stefanics followed by
Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Baca is I think that the
one thing I would suggest that
you look at it says a person
elected or appointed to a
political subdivisions political
subdivisions covers
it's very wide and vast
and in my.
Thank you as in the mutual Water
domestic associations which can
be considered political
subdivisions for capital outlay.
these entities oftentimes get
over water disputes and
threatening each other.
I'm not sure if you're wanting
to go that far so that would be
my only comment in terms of this
bill and I will support it
especially since it's at the
misdemeanor level thank you very
much.
Thank you Senators brings to
mind the old New Mexico saying
that whiskey is for drinking.
The water is for fighting.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator survived just for being
with us this afternoon and what
Mr your legislation.
The discussion was going about
the amendment and please let me
know if I'm out of place when it
comes to
Rules of order in the light
I couldn't help but think about
mental anguish when we were
talking about bodily harm.
I I think if any one of us
anyone is threatened.
I'm it bothers our psyche it
bothers us emotionally and so I
I wanted to get your thoughts
on.
Perhaps thinking about adding
mental anguish or if there's
other language that gets to.
How someone feels when they are
physically.
I'm physically threatened or
their by their families
specifically threatened thank
you.
Thank you senator McCain did you
want to respond Senator
Hernandez center once again a
good suggestion for perhaps of
the bill for you to bring down
the road right now if you look
at the bills subparagraph two
aim to requires to prove this
crime to the public official had
to be if in fear of of great
bodily harm so the bill even
before the amendment of this
committee was already intended
to run address those
circumstances were as I pointed
out earlier vice president is
threatened with hanging that
speaker of the house is
threatened with the the bullet
to her head the the the the the
the the this goal is in this
bill is intended.
I agree with you that
metalanguage and and and the
other emotional attacks are are
potentially very harmful to
people but I'm not prepared to
try and define what those may be
or how to how to make those a
crime as well too and I would
invite you to do so.
Here I'm trying to address here
I'm trying to address somebody
who's threatened with physical
violence.
I'm I'm I'm gonna steep learning
curve it's just when there's a
threat like this I I think about
the emotional and mental so
thank you for explaining that.
Well in.
And thank you Senator McKenna
for bringing that up I am
reminded about the the situation
our colleague went through
earlier this year.
When the threat was I suppose
the police intermittent.
Or and the Wesley than he did.
But it certainly caused a great
deal of mental anguish and
So that is maybe something to
deal with another in another
piece of legislation.
With that is what's the will of
the committee regarding Senate
bill one eighty two as amended.
Impasse Senator losing to press
zero second.
Senator Sedillo the second.
Any other major discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
With the amended version yes
ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Third is.
Yes.
Lopez yes there's.
Yes Tallman.
Yes.
Thirty.
Yes.
Regulation Senator US Senate
bill one eighty two and get to
do passes amended and we'll go
to Senate bill two twenty the
bill you have for exceptions for
body camera use by law
enforcement.
Thank you senator to committee
members.
For those who were not part of
the Senate yet in June of this
year we came into a special
session once again in the midst
of a great deal of national
outcry for law enforcement
practices and in part of my
response at the governor's
request to help her passed
legislation requiring the use of
body cameras as a matter of
state policy and law
and and I I trust most of you
are familiar that that but at
the time in June most law
enforcement as they were already
using body cameras but there
were a couple that were holdouts
and some of them pretty
strenuous doing so so we passed
the bills of the it took some
doing but to be very County we
were here at a special session
we were here in June couple
weeks after the election most of
us were probably still in a
state of post traumatic stress
and so we pass this bill
quickly.
And and they're worth of
exceptions that we didn't
consider the time because of the
speed with which we did it did
so but the the bill in front you
today is intended to address a
couple of exceptions and and I
expect I'm already starting to
hear from some lobbyists and
others the state police others
who may have other suggested.
Exceptions that we may want to
put into the bill that we did
not consider in June but the
exceptions that are before us
today
and I'm not aware of any other
amendments that have yet been
prepared for this really yield
principally with.
On page three a new a specific
exceptions.
Which is to not have to record
the notification to to among
members of the public of a death
so when a law enforcement
officer has to report the death
of an individual the thinking
here is that that that moment of
privacy is probably so great
that it's something we wouldn't
feel the need to record so that
that exception has been
requested the second part of
that exception makes eminent
sense to me as well to which is
under cover operations so a law
enforcement officers operating
under cover of we don't want to
have them wearing a body camera
that in the end the equipment
obviously putting them and their
entire mission in jeopardy so
those are the two exceptions in
front of you here today I know
there are some groups that are
that are discussing although
they have not yet proposed an
amendment to to me to exam of
certain things like perhaps
domestic violence incidents or
the dealing with individuals
with mental health issues and
not recording those and there
are some there are some
discussion about not making the
videotape publicly available so
the these are discussions are
ongoing but they're not in front
of me they're not represented me
at or to this committee but I I
want to let you know that that
the we're still working on this.
Rightfully so I think it's
sections out for the right now
make imminent sense.
And I don't think anybody would
argue that we should be
recording of course officers
delivering news of the death or
or having undercover agents
expected to wear body cameras.
And I think we have somebody
signed up to speak in opposition
to this bill.
is for non renew online with us.
I don't see him.
Okay well.
Is there anybody in the audience
who wanted to speak to didn't
notify us at a time.
Seeing none will go to the
committee.
And we have Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Senator schmidti
signed a.
Thank thank you Mr chair I think
that these are exceptions make a
lot of sense and I really
commend you for coming to to the
legislature with you know fixing
a bill that was was passed very
I I agree with you very quickly
but was necessary given given
the time so I'm glad you did and
and I think already good things
are coming from it my only of
point that I'd like to make is
to caution you against too many
exceptions are I think these are
absolute procreate don't get me
wrong but we could instead of
the exceptions for example
domestic violence as you said or
or other kinds of of.
Difficult circumstances instead
it have the recording but not
have it released to the public
and so make it an exception to
release rather than an exception
to recording and the reason I
think that's important is
because one of the things that
body cameras do is it affects
the or the data shows in the
state so it affects police
behavior and conduct and the the
handling of domestic violence
cases I think those are of very
very tricky and police officers
often need better training and
how they handle them and and I
think it would be very important
to have those recorded not
necessarily released because of
the confidentiality issues that
you describe and so there is
certainly I guess my my
suggestion to you is to look at
it has confidentiality and not
having them released to the
public as opposed to not
recording them at all because
then I'm worried that the
exception will call a couple of
the role but with that I think
this is a a great bill like
commend you for bringing it
forward and I intend to vote
for.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator also.
For the bill
and now I I I recall this bill
very well from
my time in the house and I on
the house floor I I called this
bill the end of community
policing Act of twenty twenty
obviously with some disdain
but I I I I do see the value
of the body cameras I just
wanted to see our police our law
enforcement to to be able to
exercise discretion and I did
bring up this issue on house for
I talked about the under cover
operations and and I actually
spent more time and what I want
to ask ask you Senator want to
is is on on the other side of
things so not with under cover
operations but what yes
What if someone comes to
approaches a peace officer.
And and and it wants to remain
confidential
and the the Senator are brought
up last year was
A a confidential informant of
gang activity where we have a
game that has a certain presence
or influence over particular
neighborhood and they want
people to stay quiet and and not
really report anything they say
Hey we find out you're talking
to the cops
come get you so as.
Your chair and etcetera what
what do you think about that
about trying to not
This way
are on the table informants.
I would probably go back to the
position that senators should be
Lopez advocated which is that we
should be recording all of these
things and then the the real by
question should be than what we
do with the recordings
afterwards in who we make them
available to under what
circumstances and ultimately she
she doesn't come up but Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Is with the judge I have a great
deal of confidence with judges
their ability to to hear of
people coming to the Corman said
this is lit up videotape we need
to have here's the reasons why
our happy was it is reason why
this videotape should not be
released to the public.
To Senator a to the this is
center actually so well point
here I would have been note it's
concerns in the house if you
look on page one sub subsection
a you'll know that when we wrote
the law.
December the last the last
Senator says law enforcement
agencies shall adopt policies
and procedures governing the use
of these cameras so even then we
recognized some level of
deference to the law enforcement
agencies to drive policies and
procedures we're doing this but
all echo what Senator Sedillo
Lopez said already we we have
the largest law enforcement
agency of the state I believe
certainly one of the largest and
and Bernalillo county sheriff's
office that was adamantly
opposed to this and I've been
read the papers like you they've
we passed a law they've done it
I think that's a good thing so
Senator okay that answers your
question I don't think we
brought an end to put community
policing up to it to say that we
would record confidential
informants the problem with is
always it's always gonna be that
one interaction that an officer
thinks is not going to go bad
and then it goes bad and then
you you think of that I should
have my camera on and and you
know you're not gonna figure
that out till after the fact
still is too late so it seems to
me the better practice is to
have the camera recording and
then worry about what happens
from the videotape later.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator yeah I I completely
agree with you that and I've had
a lot of feedback from law
enforcement that this state this
is a this that having some of
these recordings you know what
when the when a cop is is
accused of doing some is no
outlook your bank right here
didn't happen that way and so
this can be viewed as very
protective for our law
enforcement so I I certainly get
that and I back to the the point
of Senator Sedillo Lopez
absolutely absolutely that when
these cameras are warranted it's
going to change behavior um and
I I certainly get that but it's
it's not just going to change
the behavior of law enforcement
it's going to change the
behavior of the community that
they're trying to establish
relationships with and so that's
why I brought up the the
community policing.
Issue which I think is a great
model but you know I mean who
wants to come talk to somebody
about very intimate sayings or
very delicate issues when
there's a video right there you
know it's it's just you know how
how can you develop a
relationship with with someone
when you are under threat of
domestic violence or gang
violence I just think it it gets
in the way and I I really wish I
know this is you know that sort
of thing is eight probably are
we trying to do I just don't
support this but I just if we're
if we're.
Thinking about under cover
operations I just think we need
to.
You know for you know for
example if if someone asks the
police officer Hey I I want to
tell you some it's really
sensitive maybe it's something
about their own family it's you
know some of the other
situations are brought up that
that there there should be some
degree of discretion over
facilitate better relationships
between communities and their
law enforcement if we really
believe in the community based
model which I I think most
people on this committee
probably do we need to to really
think about how how body cameras
are using yes absolutely I I
agree that that most of the
times to be very helpful and so
I I applaud the sponsor the bill
to bringing some of these
exceptions but I I really I
really really hope we can take a
look at the community based as
well as some of the other
sensitive areas
and so what happens for the bill
but I hope we can do more so
thank you Mr thank you.
Go ahead senators want to speak
I know you got a long agenda I
tell you all I don't do criminal
law that there's an exception I
have done prosecutions in the
past for the town of messages
cause us to do all their legal
work so occasionally I get a
prosecution of the Debbie I've
got to tell you when the police
officer has a video Missy is
been there for a very long time
the prosecution's are very
simple that the police officers
show that they acted
appropriately they followed all
the standard protocols for field
sobriety testing they were
respectful and you usually see
the impaired driver of
demonstrate that level of
impairment the the videos very
often times do exactly what you
said they show the law
enforcement officers to be
courteous professional and and
and people we can be proud of.
Thank you senator.
Sir Senator Davis you have a
question or comment.
Senator sorry.
Is that any better.
So Mister chairman Senator just
a few questions and one has to
do with the timing of in and I
understand that they have to
have the camera on whenever
they're out but if they're out
in a of the situation for hours
and the camera goes dead is it
still their liability if there
of timeliness at the is at the
scene overruns the battery time.
Senator so what I'll all go back
to the language that I cited
earlier which is that even we
pass this bill initially we left
discretion the law enforcement
agencies some level of
discretion and we said they
needed to adopt policies and
procedures governing that use
that we put some limitations on
that so on page two of the
existing law always said that
they have to have the activation
when responding to a call in in
the encounter with the officer
and a member the public yeah we
going to put in some of the
other very specific requirements
are the key to your at a
question is subparagraph B.
which says a police officer who
fails to comply with the
policies and procedures that are
adopted by their own agency so
when the officer fails to follow
those policies and procedures I
presume that would including
officers not checking to make
sure the battery is is charged
for in your case it takes a very
long time in the battery runs
dead.
The issue here ultimately comes
to a judge and and that the
officer can show the judge look
I was on the scene for sixteen
hours I've got a eight hour
battery my battery explains why
don't have a video of a certain
event that that is a good faith
explanation to a judge and I
think a judge would understand
that if the officer is is there
in his first fifteen minutes and
he says his battery's dead the
judge is going to I think the
fall to some of the other
language we have here which is
to assume that the officer was
not acting in good faith.
Why and Mr chairman and senator
I guess item being page to
provide twenty twenty five as
well but gives me heartburn and
I've heard a lot of the if the
law enforcement agencies a look
at that as a
really hard thing to swallow and
and you know that's why I was
getting to that point even if
you or there for the sixteen
hours you still have to go
before judge to prove your
innocence and there was nothing
that you did because that I mean
it it would look to me like that
would be between me and my
supervisor to discern if I had
done that on purpose or if it's
just a time lag due to the eight
hour battery.
That's one area stated that I've
heard that there's been some
some
Hardship on is that section B.
the other
Thing is is is Mr chairman
Senator is the automatically
assuming that the leos acting in
bad faith.
And turning off the camera how
do we get to the point that and
I guess you know I look at
historically a police officer
has been a leader in the
community we we look up to
eleven teachers and also in
their in the point of because of
a few bad apples also all more
characterized as being problems
in the community and I'm just
wondering because I I know there
have been a hard time keeping
the respect level up.
and I look at this bill
especially in that second be
the pain hardship form if you
had any other discussion with
any of the other department
state police for any the of law
enforcement organizations.
I've not Senator have not been
approached about making changes
to that subsection B. the the
what we have been doing this
sessions mostly focusing on the
exceptions in the to be added
although I'll repeat when you're
looking at that subsection B. I
hope you'll focus for a moment
with a on the way that section
begins which is this presumption
of bad faith the presumption
officer purposefully was
avoiding this law begins with
that first part of that of that
paragraph which reads retreats
peace officers who fail to
comply with the policies and
procedures required to be
adopted remember these are
policies and procedures to be
adopted by their own law
enforcement supervisor HSD
society pointed out this should
be a matter between an officer
and a supervisor here right
that's what this language says
it then the the off the officer
finds himself in bad faith and
and and and some level of
trouble when he fails to follow
the policies and procedures
adopted by its own law
enforcement agency so you know
that they they still have a
great deal of discretion and
control over the concerns that
you're expressing here does well
I presume perhaps I don't know
how these cameras work with
enough detail but I presume one
of the policies and procedures
of a law enforcement agency is
that an officer Kerry not only
three or four extra magazines of
ammunition body carry extra
battery when I take out my
digital camera and go out taking
photographs I take an extra
battery.
I could see that Mr after a
while the only backpacks but
those are my main question I
just know that there's a little
bit of heartburn with that up
but I will talk to about like
twenty one on page two because
of that gives them the
opportunity to to adopt that
internally and not be penalized
externally then that may be able
to give them the the comfort
that they need to go with that
are you thank you.
Thank you senator go use with
some of the committee regarding.
Senate bill two twenty.
I'm moving to pass Senator
Sedillo Lopez moves into past
seconded by.
Second seconded by Senator
Stefanics any other debate or
discussion.
The secretary will those include
you have something you want to
say.
Yeah Mr chairman is this so.
I'm just gonna show this Senator
on to show how many other states
about a doctor.
A law similar to this.
center are well I'm sorry that I
don't know the answer that now I
know I do the executive drive.
I I don't know yet.
All right thank you.
But.
Many of the discussion.
Secretary will call the roll
when you were.
Senator I didn't catch it
this noise in the background.
Past thank.
although yes for the time being
I'm not sure if this gets to the
floor how about.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The guy across.
I'll vote no and I'd like to
explain my vote thirteen you
know.
Yes Senator Gallegos to explain
as well.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm voting
no I hope that it comes out as a
corrected version something that
all law enforcement can look at
when we get to the Senate floor
my theory is my fear is that
where you're making them out to
be the bad guys again for the
sake of water to
that apple's been equipped.
I just want to make sure they
have their peers and their
concerns resolved before I voted
in a positive thank you Mr.
Thank you thank you Senator want
to say you to do faster under
the Canadian today.
Here Muniz Senator.
Okay will now move to Senate
Bill.
One million.
Which is a developmental
disabilities planning council we
roll this over and we have a
committee so and we have a
Sanchez who was as welcome
center Correa Hemphill thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm honored to be here
today thanks for being so
flexible with many and giving me
this opportunity to sponsor an
introduced Senate bill one
ninety which is relating to
disability amending repealing
and enacting sections of the
developmental disabilities act
to make changes to the
disability or developmental
disabilities planning council
membership and the purpose and
the duties and renaming the
developmental disabilities
planning council as the
developmental disabilities
council I have my expert witness
with me today Allen's loop
McAulay
and the reason I am sponsoring
this bill is I am a school
psychologist this is my twenty
six year in education and I'm
also the mother of a son who was
born with multiple disabilities
he was born with a rare genetic
syndrome called Rothman Thompson
and it was he receive special
education services he's
currently on the DD waiver and I
know how important it is to use
support of language when talking
about people with disabilities
and I also understand how
important it is we take make
efforts to empower our people
with disabilities and and be as
supportive as possible so that
they can advocate for themselves
and their needs and it's also
respectful for those with
disabilities when we use this
for support of language and
encourages people in the
community to also be respectful
and using people first language
the purpose of this update is
just to.
align the state developmental
disability act with the federal
statute and adopt those word of
language and the council
requirements outlined in the
federal statute additionally
federal law requires a DD
Council instead of a Planning
Council in each state so New
Mexico is one of only three
remaining state including
Arizona and Nebraska that still
has a Planning Council so this
update will remain the Planning
Council to New Mexico
developmental disabilities
council thank you Mr chairman
I'd like to yield to Alice Liu
McQuay.
Welcome to the committee.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee.
My name is also required the
executive director of the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning council
thank you for this opportunity
present this important long
overdue now.
Developmental disabilities
councils or do councils were
created and are governed by the
federal developmental
disabilities assistance and bill
of rights act two thousand or
what is commonly referred to as
the federal DD Act.
Federal DD Act replaced an older
federal statute which was
repealed in two thousand the
older federal statute
established ET Planning Council
to require states to begin
planning for individuals living
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities
current federal DD Act
recognized over twenty years ago
that's states were far beyond
initial planning stages and
should evolve to focus on
advocacy systems change capacity
building our duty communities
Mexico has failed for decades to
update our state DD Act to
reflect these important changes
our state is now as as Senator
Hemphill mentioned only one of
three states that still has a
Planning Council their duties
and responsibilities outlined in
our outdated the state law that
I'll write complex with the
federal do at.
Senate bill one ninety will
rename that are DTC to New
Mexico developmental
disabilities council and will
update our state on the line
with the current federal do.
The most important purpose of
this legislation is stated in
the.
To ensure that individuals with
developmental disabilities and
their families participate in
the design and have access to
needed community services
individualized supports and
other forms of assistance that
promote self determination
independence productivity and
integration and inclusion in all
facets of community wide
culturally competent programs
this bill directs the council to
engage in advocacy systems
changing capacity building
activities updates council
membership requirements to
ensure that people with PED are
well represented and require
state agencies to report
information and data annually on
all services and activities that
affected communities with these
changes the council will be
required to give people living
with DD a strong voice the state
government and the council will
be entitled to the information
and data we need to advocate for
evidence based on.
The purpose of this bill is not
to restate verbatim in its
entirety every provision of the
federal do act do you councils
are ready obligated to comply
with federal law the purpose of
the bill is to eliminate the
conflicts between the state and
federal laws and send a clear
signal to the people of New
Mexico that our state is
prioritizing the needs of DD
communities and empowering New
Mexicans living with
developmental disabilities to
take part in shaping the
services and supports that
affect them many self advocates
who have worked with the county
hopes that the policy.
Nothing about us without us
enacting this bill is crucial
step in that direction thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee I now stand for
questions.
Thank you very much.
Senator did you have any other
experience that we wanted to
testify.
I don't believe we have any
other Mr chairman I don't
believe there are any other
expert witnesses but we stand
for questions Mr chair will
public first then we have we do
have a committee sub today.
So can I ask you members of the
committee to make a motion to do
not pass Senate bill one ninety
but to.
Yes.
Committee substitute Senator
Stefanics.
I move a do not pass on Senate
bill one ninety and I do pass on
can on the staff committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety.
Okay very good and
I do have down
Well let's do this.
I was gonna go to the public but
the Senator could you explain
the changes in their and many
corporate into the committee so.
And Mr Chairman I also wanted to
speak to there is a change that
we wanted to make to page nine.
Online.
Line I for for what plan for yes
I'm gonna yell to my expert
witness issue you can explain
because I.
My notes are somehow thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair I'm so that
SunTrust initial question about
what a substitute changes we out
received feedback from the
community that they wanted to
see more of the language from
the federal law in the state law
and so we did incorporate some
more of that but again as I
stated earlier we are trying to
copy and paste the federalized
state law we just wanted to make
sure we addressed the the
discrepancies between the two
and then add that amendment that
Senator Campos proposing today
for the committee is out on page
nine Nibert I'm.
Yes for the word representatives
adding that phrase at all times
so it would read representatives
at all times of local and non
governmental agencies and so I I
believe that is that amendment
that center handles for passing
so dizzy at all times come
before representatives or after
and after so it would read
representatives at all times of
local and non.
Okay.
Thank you very.
Yes.
Okay.
Well let's see if we if we can
to adopt the amendment that's
the only amendment you have
Senator of Korea and bill.
Mr chairman that's correct okay.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment to.
The chairman will move the
adoption of the amendment as
proposed by the sponsor is there
a second to Senator McKenna
second second
Okay is there any opposition to
this amendment.
Okay seeing none will consider
the committee seven two minutes
into amended and then we have
several people who signed up in
advance to speak in support of
your bill so I'd like to start
with the secretary of the aging
and long term services
department secretary Trina ocean
lotus.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Katrina wholesome Lopez I am the
cabinet secretary for aging and
long term services eight in a
long term services doesn't to
just focus on individuals sixty
and older we also focus on
individuals and adults with
disabilities and and these
changes that that Alice's worked
on and that the senator
sponsoring today are much needed
and we are in full support of
this bill and just thank the
sponsor for for bringing this
forward thank you.
Thank you very much.
Madam secretary then we have the
panelists staffers of the arch
in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairperson and
members of the committee a dark
New Mexico stands in support of
this bill we build it it's over
overdue to update the language
we think the language is
appropriate and person centered
and so we stand strong support
thank you.
Thank you.
Jim Jackson disability rights
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Jim Jackson
with disability rights New
Mexico and I think that the ms
McCoy and the senator has
explained this bill well it
aligned state law with the
current federal law the it in a
way that should be really
helpful because the current
provisions are actually quite a
in conflict with the current
federal mandates for the
developmental disabilities
council
and there are in fact some
references to the federal
statute in the bill which I
think is helpful in clarifying
the intent of some of the
language
there are in fact also if you
provisions that we need to
continue to include in state law
that are in the federal law but
that those are helpful and and
we support does the inclusion of
things like a read an annual
report to the legislature we
think is a very helpful for the
council to do and very helpful
for you legislators so I agree
with everybody else this is a
long overdue change and I
encourage the committee to give
the do pass and I'm speaking
today on behalf of the
disability rights New Mexico
thanks.
Thank you Jim.
Matt Ellen pines disability
coalition.
Thank you Mr chairman as
numerous other speakers have
already said this change is long
overdue when this law was
adopted initially it was
attended to and excuse me to
align with the federal statute
and since that time there's been
a pretty significant divergence
between federal and state law so
for that reason and just
generally to modernize New
Mexico lost in this area has a
fault we very much support this
measure thank you.
Thank you.
House.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm in support of this
bill because I'm.
DD PC they've been able to help
me but I would just like the
language to change as well to
that we we can get guided the
services that we need and be
able to get the things that we
need with the with the council
and so therefore I support them
thank you.
Thank you.
Karen would like.
Chairman members of the
committee we want to thank the
sponsors Senator for a career.
bringing this bill and we
approve of just want don't want
to believe it believe it is but
we want to think that the
council for all of the good work
that they do and updating those
statutes to complement federal
law thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay in nobody signed up in
opposition is there anybody in
the audience who wanted to raise
questions over.
stand in opposition to this
bill.
Seeing.
The members of the committee to
questions or.
Anything you want to raise about
the measure.
Mr chair Senator Cervantes when
you're ready for.
I'll make it I think we're
ready.
Right now I'm creating a do not
pass on Senate bill one ninety
two passed on committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety from staff.
As amended yes but since we
haven't opted it's still a
committee substitute for staff
yeah.
Okay.
I second the motion okay any
other debater discussion I want
to raise one question with you
and that is we we did I did
receive a communication from
some of the people of sensually
Robert caygle and Joel Davis who
raised questions on the original
version the end into the
affected they still had some
doubts I encourage them to come
they have income but I would I
would hope between now and the
next committee they would be in
touch with you and I'm not sure
what their doubts
or or concerns continue to be
but
If there is if you have the
opportunity yes Frank you and do
you have something more
substantive.
What were you all and Robert
Robert at the action which are
so he wasn't able to attend
today but he said that he has
worked with the sponsor Sanchez
iterations not to adopt this
charge and and then today the
care of the last earns.
Where are.
Thank you Frank.
Okay secretary will call the
roll.
Someone will committee
subsection for one ninety.
Yes ma'am.
Senator.
To Senator Ingle letters yes
here you yeah although yes how
are you voting yes Sir.
Yes.
Third.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Sir Thomas.
Yes.
You know.
Yes.
Congratulations Senator you do
pass and to translate to smooth
sailing adding forward.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you to Alice Lee microwave
for your hard work on this bill
I really appreciate it and my
son really appreciate that thank
you so much thank you and thank
you is a cabinet secretary
Hosemann lotus is well.
Now we'll go to Senate bill two
twenty one.
Senator VS Bill on financial
crimes against vulnerable.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me yes.
Thank you so much thank you
madam vice chair members of the
committee continue coming to
today was unable to twenty one I
I seem to be here every other
meeting that you hold so I
appreciate your time essentially
this piece of legislation was
brought to me as a priority
piece of legislation for a a RP
New Mexico and I've carried
multiple pieces of their
legislation along the way when
they approached me on this one
it made it made sense to me but
essentially it affects the
financial crimes against the
elderly disabled and vulnerable
adults and and and and what it
does is it creates two new
crimes in that area of law which
is a number one is financial
exploitation of the elderly
disabled in involved in a
vulnerable adults page two is
that deprivation by a fiduciary
of an elderly disabled or
vulnerable adults property or
their financial dollars in
resources that they may have
available or the use of deceit
trickery duress and coercion I'm
sure we're gonna have a lot of
fun this defining those items as
a committee here but by a non
fiduciary to acquire control the
elderly or disabled vulnerable
adults property or resources or
to induce a elderly or disabled
person wonderful adult to
perform services against their
will the second crime is no
unlawful use of a power of
attorney for that same intended
purposes that I just mentioned
the Act This criminalize these
crimes as a third degree felony
for the first offense and a
second degree felony for a
second or substance subsequent
offense
I do have three expert witnesses
well before you do that let me
just to say that the there is no
appropriation for this bill the
office of the administer office
the AOC excuse me states that
there will be minimal
administrative costs statewide
to implement this I do have
three individuals and I'm gonna
ask them each to keep their
comments very succinct to about
that two to three minutes
apiece.
St chairman they're they're
experts in this area first is
Kevin Graham he's the deputy
general counsel for the office
of the superintendent at the New
Mexico regulation licensing
department we also have markets
Montoya he's the eighth judicial
district attorney and that
covers tiles Colfax and union
counties and Ellen white circle
is up counsel to the senior
citizens law office incorporated
in Albuquerque and I do want to
let the committee know that we
did have two documents sent to
you.
Yesterday one of them is a fact
sheet on Senate bill two twenty
one which is a criminal bill
obviously to prevent the
financial abuse of elders and
adults with disabilities clearly
outlines
elders and adults living with
disability and how this bill
applies to them and then the
second fact sheet was
essentially similar information
but front primarily focusing on
elders and and the need for
action why we need to do this
and other responses that you're
gonna have their this is eight a
criminal offense bills but I
would like to have these three
individuals Mr chairman
introduce themselves and say a
few words as we begin this
discussion so why don't we if
it's alright with you Mr
chairman and we if we can start
with that Kevin Graham who is
the deputy general counsel for
the office of the superintendent
of the regulation licensing
department.
Mr M..
Yes.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I am pleased with
present for you today as David
pointed out I am sure also for
the regular licensing department
also financial institutions
division apartment from actually
here today and in my personal
capacity as a result of the task
force that was formed by senior
citizens office to look through
this issue I V. as in my
grassy it's council for the
regulation licensing department
on that task force but in my
personal president and on time
prosecutor the great majority of
my career was spent with
district attorneys offices and
twenty general offices
prosecuting the only difference
is local levels also I am
parents of a now dole's
you hear daughter through a
situation brings its own very
clearly to me first of all the
type of crimes that these two
crimes were proposing are tended
to appropriately punished in in
outlook's the yes our that was
compiled by the the citizens law
office in spring twenty twenty
as you mentioned.
The multiple representatives
from multiple state agencies
that are come across the the
board of state agencies that
will be drawn to this topic of
exploitation of.
Dole servicing citizens it also
have members in for multiple
practice divisions of New Mexico
state are the courts district
attorneys the guardianship
Association banks credit unions
and so many others on this list
is immediate materials been
handed out to you and to give us
just look at this to see the the
level of professional
involvement receive all
developing because ozil's why is
this bill so important well
because of my career as a
prosecutor and then now the last
several years as a financial
institutions regulators.
The unfortunate
it was seeing multiple
instances of these types of
crimes throughout the years.
Often it seems when we we think
of financial crime visions some
of Wall Street the that was
created to you know still a
bunch of money from this company
or maybe somebody more local
level some company invests going
from your company and the bank
of those as crimes we're but he
got hurt it is yes it was money
but nobody's bleeding nobody
died and having been in the in
the trenches prosecutor for many
years and look those files many
times over the years I have
taken that approach and
oppressed because so often the
types of requests that you're
looking at when you're compared
thanks murder in and and other
programs to financial current
you look at it and think well
you know I I got a bit more
resources on something more
important.
The financial crimes that
somebody would think of.
What you're talking about just
summon embezzling from their
company the are crimes against
disabled and vulnerable adults
better troops impact their lives
that can destroy their ability
to to be able to keep their own
homes to afford the medication
they need to be able to live
their lives in peace but people
who intentionally preyed on and
victim of individuals they know
our phone.
yeah we're not just talking
about again about the use of
Georgians were somebody stole
grandma's jewelry works
intrusions that would be covered
by these crimes where somebody
access to vulnerable adults bank
accounts.
That we're precluded those bank
accounts for trust funds would
be fully intentional and.
Resulted in great walking a long
lasting harm to would it be
individuals who were impacted.
The cases aren't just about
money though they're also about
of course trust and horn
Veterans collected on the
victims we have to focus here on
the victims as far only levels
that were sent out and I think
so little of the witnesses will
testify about this.
Degree and family and second
rebuttal is we treat those from
looking at states achieved
regarding children because we're
talking about vulnerable
citizens here are these are
those who are able to protect
themselves many areas in the law
isn't here all know we create
crimes that affect.
It's set certain penalties and
and certain elements of those
grams because it's a child and
we say that's a more vulnerable
individual unable to protect
themselves and so we set up a
special crime in the special
committee level is this right
with the fact that the victim
here is so vulnerable.
We do have something to do with
a symbol to twenty one in seven
phone levels here the cursing
was drums if you look at the
abandonment or abuse of a child
statute which is thirty their
six there's one.
Abandonment or abuse of the
child that does not result in
great bodily harm or death to a
child so when when I'm trying to
compare you know you to
somewhere where someone kills a
child or someone seriously
injures child.
The more comparable type of
since you're aware of the damage
that's done is long
traditionally long lasting very
harmful but at a similar type of
level comparing apples to apples
with vulnerable victim to
vulnerable victim and important
to type of form just totally the
penalty and if you look at that
crime at those levels you'll see
that it's a third degree felony
for first offense second degree
felony for second or subsequent
offenses thank you this year is
critical thank you Mr Gramm and
I know we're gonna get into some
of this I sincerely appreciate
the very detailed address I do
want to ask you about district
thank you Mr Mr Gramm I want to
give the district attorney
Marcus Montoya the ability to
introduce himself as well and
give us a little bit of insight
before we head over to the
slicer Mr do it.
Chairman.
Members of the committee thank
you for allowing us to present
here this afternoon thank you
Senator Padilla for sponsoring
and presenting this bill today I
will be brief to come maybe
maybe just get into that nuts
and bolts I did hear you know
Senator Sedillo Lopez and US
senators of this talking earlier
about why the difference in
families versus petty
misdemeanors misdemeanors and
for those of you who do not
regularly practicing criminal
component
Mr Graham they do a great job of
explaining why but on the
practical of you know in the
courtroom consequences we need
accountability for restitution
and time jurisdiction over that
offender to pay that restitution
and to be held accountable and
not to re offend for a third
degree felony we have three
years we do have some positional
on.
Prosecuted for these crimes.
oftentimes they don't have
criminal history if the right
take early account offer them
pre prosecution diversion we can
maneuvering to misdemeanor
fourth degree plea agreements we
can give them conditional this
charges so it's not about
incarceration it's about
accountability and the time
necessary to hold these
individuals accountable.
There is not just the familial
and leaving elders of our will
individuals desolate there is
also the component of
investigating and a lot of
district attorney offices and
police law enforcement agencies
do not have the resources
necessary to adequately
investigate prepare for
prosecution these types of
crimes that's why with all of
the leg work and and
investigation time and resources
we felt adequate that'd be also
practically a third degree
felony for a first offense
Thank you I'll try to keep it at
that and I will stand for
questions thank you senator
hatch chair committee members
thank you.
And Miss lights replace.
And I hope I'm saying that right
now and
I'm not.
You Mr chairman and members the
committee Senator D. at all to
senior citizens law office that
provides direct services to
people seniors sixty and older
in central Mexico we are
systemic advocacy such as
initiating this legislation
actually affects seniors and
other vulnerable populations
statewide
the reason that we four of the
task force in twenty.
Was to address serial offenders
that senior citizens office was
in had observed in central New
Mexico that's the eight year
Santa tour since early in
counties we have two cases in
which there were serial
offenders and there was nobody
stopping them from in one
instance one man basically got
deeds to houses of women who
were cognitively impaired even
for Act about it to the director
of the nursing home where his
latest victim our client was
residing.
In another case
we have a a woman who would be
friends then at senior centers
and then basically take all of
their money and our client she
took us seventy thousand dollars
and she couldn't pay his rent
unfortunately there was a very
sympathetic apartment manager
who we were able to work with
and not I think ten
and she she has cognitive
impairment but is looking pretty
well on his own it turns out
this same woman adult protective
services had seen him acting up
her acting in
With three other cases and there
was nothing really stopping her
from continuing
to victimize men and and the way
she did of course was to promise
relationship and sex and that
never happened to our client but
he did lose seventy thousand
dollars and I is reduce not just
living on his monthly social
security and VA benefits so in
short there are all these
stories out there statewide and
we really feel like that this
Senate bill two to one which is
a criminal bill and we have a
companion bills being heard
tomorrow in a different
committee that says Civil bill
so we we basically the task
force that was multi our agency
broad based stakeholder Task
Force felt that these two bills
that we drafted that it been
perfected I Legislative Council
Service who really helped so
many arctic terms
of financial exploitation Mexico
thank you.
You Ellen and Mr chairman and R.
as you can see how complicated
the matter this is and I know
that we're all you all heard the
stories that's why I thought I
would bring an entire lot from
with me to help me answer these
questions because I'm sure
there's going to be some really
good ones and I rely heavily on
them on technical I think that's
our opening statement Mr
chairman I do know that the
madam secretary is with us today
I think she may have comments as
well I don't want to hold her up
so it's at all possible after
public comment we could maybe
ask her to say a few words as
well whenever you'd like Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator yeah we're
gonna start with the secretary
of.
How rural lotus of secretary the
aging a long term Services
Department.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee and thank you
Senator Padilla for bringing
this important bill forward you
got a remarkable team that's
helping you with this and we're
so proud to be able to support
this
there's a couple of things you
know by twenty thirty we're
gonna have New Mexico's gonna
have the fourth highest senior
population in the country per
capita and we're seeing
exploitation and abuse you know
rise in the state of New Mexico
and I think that we're about at
you know between thirteen and
sixteen percent of the just the
cases that we know about that
are reported to adult protective
services that are substantiated
every year on on on exploitation
and that's huge and those
numbers can continue to rise
what we know about this
population is that they're
embarrassed to report that
they've been exploited and so a
lot of times are not willing to
to bring these sorts of things
forward and so a lot it allows
the perpetrator to continue to
prey on victims and so we
believe that these that this
this bill is absolutely
necessary and needed the other
thing is when you have an elder
person I think it's really
important for people to
understand that when you have a
care giver or somebody that's
paying attention to you already
have a hierarchy in terms of
care and so somebody's being
here for in paying for a service
but they know that if that
person doesn't show up that day
they don't get the care and so
you know exploitation can start
out small and then really become
big and large and a problematic
issue for are very vulnerable
seniors and the story on a whole
population so thank you again
for bringing this forward we we
completely support the spell
and happy to be part as of
testifying and and champion
Senator thank you again Senator
Padilla for bringing this
forward and the committee.
Thank you madam secretary.
We have several people signed up
to speak on this and we'll start
with Phillies rails.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Felice
frail and the private attorney
in Albuquerque New Mexico and I
am very proud to represent the
rights of an advocate for the
rights of elderly people and
disabled people I wanted to just
mention a couple of pieces that
I've had one way to keep the
case several years ago arising
out of Espanola where I
Representative a grandmother
she's granddaughter and
grandmother had dementia the
granddaughter got her to sign a
power of attorney and she used
that to add herself to the
grandmother's bank accounts and
wipe out that the grandmother's
entire life savings it was over
a hundred thousand dollars I'm
thanks to some very savvy judges
or a judge or judge we were able
to claw back about twenty three
thousand dollars but that ran
out very fast because the
grandmother needed care and then
her family members and you're
not having to pay for that care
because a grandmother no longer
had access to the bank to the
funds that she had saved for her
entire life
right now I have another case
involving a retired doctor and
there was a what an Albuquerque
woman who agreed to be at care
giver for the doctor and he's
disabled by within a matter of
four months the woman had
transferred literally millions
of dollars in assets into her
own name and we had a lawsuit we
have a lawsuit pending right now
but the woman who stole the
money basically went to Hawaii
and went on an extravagant
shopping spree and she now has
cars and so forth I think that
this bill is important because
you know effectively there was
no consequences against that
granddaughter.
And I don't see that they're
going to be any consequences
against this woman who took in
this retired doctors entire life
savings and and and it's
frustrating to me because I
think that there needs to be
some form of deterrent in the
civil system I mean I think it
does a reasonably good job with
what you do but but I think we
need to be more serious
consequences thank you so much
for allowing me the time to
speak.
Thank you mistras we have the
Lisa millage.
Lisa Miller.
We'll go to.
Jim Jackson.
Mr chair Jim Johnson on the
health of disability rights New
Mexico alone elders and people
with disabilities are
unfortunately enrollment goal to
the this kind of exploitation
and unfortunately it often takes
place at the hands of of friends
families caregivers and other
folks that are close to those
people and that they really
ought to be able to trust.
Our agency is usually not
terribly supportive of making
new crimes
But the unfortunate reality is
that us all too often and with
this kind of financial
exploitation takes place as the
previous speakers indicated the
money's gone sometimes the
property is gone and there's no
is there is very little recovery
that's available so in this case
we agree that the the potential
at least for deterring this
because there's criminal
penalties that can be involved
as well as recruitment efforts
may have a beneficial effect in
limiting the number of cases
like this and so we do support
the we support this as we are
supporting the companion bill
around civil penalties thank you
Mr chair thank you thank you Jim
Ellen finds.
Thank you Mr chairman of COVID.
Ezzell.
Yes well and Sierra.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee on the
Valencia I'm the advocacy
director of eight European New
Mexico with our over two hundred
and forty eight thousand members
statewide we're in strong
support at this legislation
would like to thank the sponsor
for carrying it for us and for
the task force that I was a
member of and part of that work
for several months to get this
just right we believe that this
legislation will reduce the
financial abuse of elders and as
an attorney I can tell you I
think it's very important to
create some sort of legislative
framework for imposing criminal
penalties for these types of
crimes so again we think you
when we stand in strong support
thank you well I see server and
has a list with this terror and
you have a brief comment.
Yeah I'm.
I support this bill is
the thank.
Having this bill I just don't
like being my friend than people
and myself being taken advantage
of.
And I like to add to also I'm
keep in mind that there thank
and Schardin predators out there
as well that they deceive you
and then I see in them so it
kind of messes things up
but I just won the bill.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to the committee
then we'll start with let me
just preface it by saying it is
just hard for me to believe that
there are laws against this sort
of thing there are to be a lot.
And to so thank you Senator for
the into this.
I I guess I just assumed there
was.
We already had some way of
protecting people against the
this kind of thing that
obviously not rules we wouldn't
have this before so Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair and that this
kind of stuff just absolutely
outrageous me so I thank I thank
you so much for for highlighting
the the issue.
but is actually built on on
Senator T. C. Pinos point.
We do read in the paper about
people being convicted of of.
Of stealing from anyone so there
are larceny there are there are
statutes that cover this so I'm
interested in understanding what
this specifically covers that
are existing laws don't and I
share this with you because
that's the question you're going
to get in Judiciary so maybe
that's a little bit of a trial
run for Judiciary so anyway the
thank you Mr chair I I curious I
I'm interested in that response.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez and I have the
same questions too by the way I
have read the FIR and and I know
you don't need Senator Sedillo
Lopez to read FIR to to quote
person to into to test your your
life long career you know the
training attorneys and and and
as a professor so I have it but
I think that the to underscore
the importance of this piece of
legislation is the owner all the
the disabled the you know that
those are where where we don't
necessarily call that out in law
and I do want the law firm of
Graham Montoya and lights for
that I brought with me to help
you with this a little bit more
but that that was what jumped
out to me right away and but the
fact that we don't call out the
vulnerable to just disable the
you know whatever and so this
our our a population that are in
my opinion yeah even more you
know need to be more protections
in place for them so you Mr
Gramm ones why our lights or
would like to chime in for about
two to three minute response
please.
I would I and I I your explained
a little bit of money opening
statements about the issues of
the ability to focus on a
vulnerable victim and then
Senator proprio wheels of
currently and specifically in
that crime to just those
vulnerable victim cases most we
do with children you're you're
right there are larceny offenses
there's a bustle offenses.
There are other crimes out there
in many of these cases could be
applied to these cases
unfortunately for most of those
offenses you're looking at
maximum for three felony and in
many cases only a misdemeanor
penalty.
There are two three important
areas to consider what exactly
what Marcus Montoya diem Toyota
brought up for giving us the
tools as prosecutors but we need
to be able to have a stiffen
also only to use the full range
of tools in our toolbox because
of the primary things were after
years trying to get restitution
for the state of the last
portion of the bill is a
restitution guaranteed just
reminding basically the courts
to order restitution in these
cases unless you have also only
locally and really a level three
or higher only to give enough
time to be able to pulled over
somebody while they're on
probation because this is
football are not going to prison
it is not as Marcus the real
goal here is to be to get enough
of the committee to hold over
them to get them to actually
paid restitution instances where
you can so the following levels
there are important specificity
of the crime need to justify
using that will be for the cases
where it's really to serve one
is truly vulnerable victim being
taken advantage of not just you
know the local business the lost
the money and so I I give Marcus
opportunity as well.
Mr.
Carriages being no members of
the committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez thank you yes much like
it's been outlined by Senator by
the and Mr Gramm.
We as prosecutors Alan mentally
by uniformed jury instructions
or statute we typically do not
have the opportunity to pursue
prosecution or charge based on
the offenders and their
relationship with the those who
were targets or victims so
typically DA's office I would
say that's a civil matter it's
not criminal good luck go get em
in civil court again with no
real T. now if there's a
criminal component we do get to
take this on if a lot of the
statutory elements are met
and so
we do get to dice out elderly
disabled and vulnerable as part
of those who need to be
protected and and now vendors to
be prosecuted when targeting
these types of of individuals
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair which is that
I mean I think that that's very
important that your looking at
the vulnerable victim which is
defined has somebody was sixty
years and older somebody who has
been diagnosed with the physical
and mental disability so we're
gonna need to figure out who
diagnosed the physical and
mental disability.
And then we're going to have to
And then the other person is a
vulnerable adult which means a
person eighteen years or older I
am able to protect oneself from
financial exploitation do there
to a physical or mental
impairment that affects a
person's judgment so that's what
they're going to they're going
to have to figure out how to
prove that the individual was a
victim and I of.
I'm just suggest you need to
just because I'm gonna support
this bill but I'm suggesting
that before
Before you get to Judiciary you
might want to look for a little
bit more clarity in in those
definitions in the terms of
making it easier for the
prosecutors to like the only one
that's really easy that somebody
sixty years or older that you
just have to introduce evidence
as to that but the other
diagnosed
physical or mental disability.
It was
by whom when and then unable to
protect oneself due to a
physical or mental impairment
again your you know how I think
it would be easier for
prosecutors if that was very
clear it like where they
diagnosed in school with you
know or or.
What do you mean by that is
somebody right with the lower I.
Q. you know what what exactly is
is meant by that just to help
the prosecutor prove the case in
a in an easier way I think and
then
You sure you have a different
thing for fiduciaries and then
you have the so fiduciaries
have.
The responsibility to not
deprive a person of their own
real property that results in
the collect.
Could you give me an example of
of their own real property that
results in the collect what what
is meant by that could you here
you have to prove that there was
a deprivation the property
belong to the individual and
then you have to prove neglect.
And so and what what examples
are are seen here just trying to
picture how this case would go.
Thank you senator and that Mr
chairman and and I think maybe
we want to go to Ellen for this
one hello my teacher I thank you
so
for a specific example can you
call out a case Mr DA that you
prosecuted possibly or.
No thank you and chair committee
members Senator Sedillo Lopez I
think it the nail on the head we
spent the more probably the most
time constructing the vulnerable
adult but as a hypothetical
because these don't exist now
this is why we can't bring
charges against individuals for
offenses like this is let's say
you've got
Like Mr Israel explained to us
one of her current cases had of
that individual that creativity
sure license yet it's an elder
individual who needs transport
to and from medical appointments
and the offender whether be a
great niece nephew Nibert a pool
boy and taking the vehicle and
then the they they gain an
interest in the vehicle and
they're using for the personal
uses and now the the moral adult
disabled adult elder adult can
no longer now we transported I
need my writer my medical
appointment I need to go see my
lawyer I need to go but I need
to go get groceries and the
vehicle is affected been coming
here against a very simplistic
example and as you can imagine
there's going to be us.
Hundreds of different types of
scenarios where we would be able
to prosecute as far Gallegos as
Senator Sedillo Lopez diagnoses
are just coming what we have to
prove now on a lot of other
prosecution such as the mental
anguish approved.
Only the harms.
But diagnoses testimony in
trials so it would equate to
something of that nature so.
Thank you.
Thank you I very much appreciate
that explanation but the problem
is what are the what would be in
a fiduciary relationship and so
that statute refers to somebody
in a fiduciary relationship.
The the the pool boy would be
under the second part to talk
about and do influence deceit
trickery harassment enquiring
requiring the property which
which would be a violation of
the second part but I'm curious
about the fiduciary relationship
because those are the ones that
really angered me when somebody
is supposed to be taking care of
someone and then they steal and
we read in the paper of several
of guardians and and several
fiduciaries trustees that have
done that in recent years
systematically they did end up
getting getting prosecuted so
just curious how the fiduciary
because if we if we do have a
fiduciary obligation that that's
pretty of.
Pretty significant.
Mr chair what I'm worried about
is this resulting in the neglect
of an adult actually imposes
more of the of the need to prove
something they just breaching
fiduciary duties and and so
that's why I'm asking for
example but I appreciate the
pool boy simple that I think
would be covered under under a
section be.
Mr chair.
Chairman Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I want the experts to speak but
but I just wanted at the front
of the jury I actually have had
a situation of my own family for
the session occurred and one of
the ways that it was proven if I
recall correctly is
The fiduciary has the ability to
sign on bank accounts has the
ability to buy goods and
services that apply to that
particular individual the
individual that was aware or
ought
things for themselves the cat
that did not apply to needs and
services for the person with the
fiduciary for so that was pretty
easy to prove that they were
utilizing that person's bank
account for in inappropriate
reasons but again I don't know
if that's with but the experts
would say but I know that that's
how we proved that at that time
but under this statute you have
to also prove that that resulted
in the fiduciaries neglect so so
I so my question is like say
somebody was wealthy and and
their fiduciary stole money but
if it did result in the collect
would you not be able to
prosecute under this.
I will again Mister chairman
Senator Sedillo Lopez in this
particular case that I bring to
your attention now the purchases
were made for things that were
clearly not for that particular
individual and where the neglect
came in there were no longer
funds available to pay for the
needed services by the the
individual that they were the
fiduciary up and so that would
be one way but I don't know if
my experts have any additional
examples that like to provide
but that's one way that I could
see it in accomplished.
Yes Senator Lopez
I am missing the during what I
currently do is look for
regulation licensing department
and I have been the attorney
representing financial
institutions Division Department
for Leicester about five and a
half years financial assistance
division is the government
entities that uncovered the
matter with desert state life
management Trust Company.
In in our folks just in the
course of the regular duties and
in doing a regular exam of the
company cover that the terrible
situation it was taken but is
there
have you to number of hours or
less years working on the matter
most of the clients of the
company were.
Serbians are over there for the
the beneficiaries of special
needs trust but trust that was
set up to help cover the costs
and expenses that don't get
covered by Medicaid or other
government programs is like
being able to go see their
family or to get specialist
across Europe would be covered
by Medicaid for specialized.
Equipment like to list cheers
reporter less rather but this is
that their houses that maybe
Medicaid wouldn't cover.
Hello store the the CEO of the
company who is now in federal
prison for what he did.
Was stealing from those
individuals stealing from those
trusts the new Zachary who was
stealing from they were
incredibly vulnerable adults the
the effect of his taking that
money for his own purposes.
Result exactly what Senator
Padilla was just say we're we're
no longer funds available to do
things like thank you for that
necessary replacement of a
lift chair or two or the schools
that are listed at for some of
these individuals multiple folks
to you're not you're listening
and that they needed and you
know just things like not being
able to travel to the
trampolines or not being able to
afford any kind of.
Entertainment you know just it
makes our lives more enjoyable
so what we tried to craft that
language to the mineral we we
work trying to reopen yeah just
any situation where somebody
stole from a family member
reporter trying to make it for a
a specialized type of victim
thank you know you may have
identified an area where we
could broaden language or take
that requirement out at the gym
develop went there V. consider
whether we met maybe want to
narrow so what we're really was
really intended to do.
Thank you Mr chair I just asked
that because it seems harder to
prove the case against a
fiduciary that a non fiduciary
and that seems.
backward to me it seems like a
fiduciary should be held to a
higher standard and so that's
because you had to prove that it
resulted in the collect we don't
have to prove that in subsection
B. and so up you just might want
to consider it before you get to
Judiciary and then I just up of
of a good faith effort
to assist or it the defense I
guess you call the defenses
maybe on page six subsection
date of.
Nothing in this section shall be
construed.
So yes it is thank you.
I.
Of.
Actually did I.
Nothing the session so it's on
page five nothing in this
section shall be construed to
impose criminal liability are
person who makes a good faith
effort to assist in a person in
the management of their funds
which effort falls through okay
makes a good faith effort to
provide for the care of the
elderly but through no fault of
that person has been unable to
provide that care so the Stewart
case is proven and then this is
a defense I just I worry a
little bit but I I I understand
exactly what you're trying to do
and we are trying to perfect a
project which is you know family
members who are good faith but
they're they're not trying to
steal the just make mistakes in
managing the property
And so I I think that's
important that the defense the
narrow so that it's not it
doesn't swallow up the rule but
I very much appreciate this I I
apologize they kind of got to
legalistic probably that's
better than Judiciary but this
is very very important and I I
wish you the best in in passing
it because especially would you
describe those kinds of cases
that they do escape the criminal
law
you know we did read a lot about
that that desert of.
Is it right for the dinosaur
been and how they are visible
have there in prison and they
should be
but.
I think that this captures
people who maybe are are not
quite at that agree just level
and I really appreciate the
point you made about fourth
degree felonies you might want
to consider again before
Judiciary to think about the the
enhancement where you you know
they hit enhancements.
That you can apply in the
criminal law when you do
something against a available
person or protected person
and and and think about how to
how to
Distinguish this from those
cases and I think that the point
you made about another tool for
the district attorney it is is
very important which is why I
think it should be easy and
clear for the district attorney
to prove because we don't want
to pass a statute that actually
makes it harder for the district
attorney to prove the case and
that's why I asked you so much
about that neglect provision but
I compliment I complete a
compliment everybody for this
work
it's it's very horrible when you
see.
Vulnerable people being taken
advantage of by by fiduciaries
were there to support them and
or by family members or
acquaintances or even non
acquaintances that come come in
so I commend you for the work
and I.
Just kind of giving you a heads
up for what I see coming in
Judiciary but I'm gonna vote for
it anyway I'm not gonna be
righted or anything I'm just
going to share that with you.
We intend to take this forward
and and re what should we get
your.
Is there anybody else on the
committee was any questions or
debate on this.
Seeing none what so will the
committee.
Tom and moves.
Second.
Gentleman moves into seconded by
Senator Stuart thanks many of
the debate.
Secretary will call the roll.
Twenty one center guided goes.
Yes.
Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
Thermacare.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes one.
Yes.
You know.
Yes.
Education center you do pass
election Judiciary.
If you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you to the expert witnesses M.
A. R. T. thank you center city
Lopez we're gonna work on a
couple of minutes and if it's
alright with you at and Mister
chairman I'm gonna bring them
for you to take a look at them
since you're in the office next
to me.
Thank you Sir.
All right committee members will
move now to Senate bill two
twenty two Senator Hickey health
information system definitions.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I have been in another committee
testifying on a bill and back
and forth so can you hear me OK
yes ma'am thank you very much
the long discussions day round
bills Mr chairman and senators
and I hope that we're bringing
you the easy one to go home with
tonight and this is really not a
bill to you any major
substantive changes to a bill
it's rather just the statutory
cleanup and I do have
a number of experts will keep it
very short to go into the detail
of the bill it's basically
changing some words so that the
intent will actually in the long
will follow with the fan
the last just a little bit of
history in terms of my interest
in this area is this something
for the department of health as
you may or may not know I have
spent a long time around
medical information I started
with the health information
exchange back in two thousand
and three that the day is
synchronized and now a
thirty million dollar grant from
the US government to go way up
and so that's moving but at the
same time we now have the
ability to get what's called an
all payer claims database so
that we can merge clinical
information in the digital
information along with the
planes information and that is
just like having bold to work
with
in terms of data and then from
that we know exactly where we
will be able to
Target our priorities in the
state in terms of health so with
that I'm going to ask a here it
Ryan Sauers who's had a policy
with our equipment out and
expert and Jeter I do I.
And also I believe there's
someone here from the OSI to go
into the details and given the
our hope we can keep it very
short thank you very much and
thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator thank you.
Your chair members of the
committee I am hearing showers
policy director of the
department of health sh and
we're here also with Canada Dr
Kenneth Jeter he was providing
expertise on the on behalf of
the department for just feet to
twenty two
the bill is really truly chess
the statutory cleanup bill it's
following in amendments to
health information systems act
that passed in two thousand and
fifteen which allows for their
forty of aggregate data
and since then we have to notice
that there was some
inconsistency and those
definitions and so we brought
this bill to just get things
consistent in the act so that we
can move forward with the
collection the staff so I will
turn it over to
the senator or two can Jeter's
to explain any details that they
might want to find the committee
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman we have
Mister Jeter a doctor here is
our expert.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you very much
I'm can deter and the bureau
chief for the committee and
health systems and immunology
bureau at the department of
health and as Aaron was saying
the two thousand fifteen
amendment to the hits Act
allowed us to to aggregate data
by a hospital or health care
provider and we noticed when we
were drafting the rules for the
all payer claims database that
are the definitions in the exact
did not work completely
congruent with with that that
that intent so we this bill
proposes to remove the words
provider from the aggregate data
definition which would let us
after that to be able to
aggregate data pipe by providers
and also amends the definition
of record level data.
Moving provider hospital because
we never we never police record
level data that identify
particular individuals but in
that definition of the word
provider and hospital there
which just confuse the issue and
make that think that that the
record number the data is in the
hospital which is not.
And and I'll stand for questions
thank you thank you Mr Peter of
miss ours if you have any other
extras that you would like to
comment before we go to.
Nope that is it Kenneth drive
connect here is here as our
primary expert on the bill thank
you.
Thank you.
So we yield the floor back Mr
chair to.
In terms of for support
opposition.
Thank you.
Mr chair you are muted.
Thank you we we will go to the
audience and we don't have
anybody who signed up at a time
to speak on this bill.
But.
Weinberg is here from OSI.
Okay good let's hear from miss
winder.
I thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me here today I am duly
Weinberg and I am the director
of the life and health services
division at the office of the
state.
Insurance superintendent total
couldn't attend the hearing any
asked me to represent the OSI
here to say that the size
strongly supports this bill the
OSI is on the APCD steering
committee and his secretary by
three committee and we recognize
the values that the APCD will
bring to the state.
It to regulators to policy
makers researchers purchasers
providers insurers and consumers
well without knowing which
providers are linked to the data
users will be unable to fully
understand the performance of
our health system or making
important decisions about health
care purchases you know just I
look forward to having the PCD
to better regulate of the
carriers insurance carriers that
we oversee a better understand
adequacy of their networks
utilization of services adequacy
of rates and the affordability
of premiums I'm having providers
associated with that data will
certainly make that job much
more effective for us so again
L. as size fully supports this
bill thank you for your time.
Thank you anybody else.
Anybody in opposition to the
bill.
We'll go to the committee.
Chairman.
Thank you Mr removed we do pass.
We have just a second from
Senator panics many any
discussion or questions from
yes.
It's great Jerry Weinberg back.
Thank you very much I'm happy to
be home.
This is actually thank you Mr
chair is good to see you too
doing the good work.
Any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Twenty two Senator Gallegos yes
ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you Lopez yes the FedEx
yes there Tallman.
Yes thirty C. panel yes.
Legislation center press.
Thank you Mr chair and this bill
along with working with the
health information which is when
I called is going to move this.
The ability of of the department
in the state to go well into the
twenty first century from the
healthcare rings around all
payer claims database were all
for it thank you so much.
Thank you.
Members of the committee will
move now to Senate bill two
twenty three.
Senator Candelaria and the
cigarette tax distribution.
Thank you can you hear me yes.
Thank you Mr chairman Senate
bill two twenty three it is a
concept that was developed over
the interim and proposed by the
legislative finance committee as
a pretty clear path to funding
the phase two expansion at the
UNM comprehensive cancer center
I will introduce Mr chairman at
the onset my expert witness the
director of the UNM
comprehensive cancer center Dr
Cheryl Willman who is really a
treasure and a credit to our
state and so doctor woman are
you on the line yes I am Senator
Candelaria Mr chair thank you so
much for being here so Mister
chairman I'm gonna give the
college try at explaining just
essentially as a lawyer can
what is going on in this bill
and then drive woman if you can
please share with the committee
why this expansion is so
important and in turn what the
legislation will mean for the
cancer center so Mister chairman
under current law the
legislature years ago dedicated
a portion of separate cigarette
tax revenue to fund account very
large capital renovation
essentially building of the UNM
comprehensive cancer center
pursuant to that distribution
under existing law the UNM
comprehensive cancer center are
maybe I'll call you in and see
cute
receives approximately and three
year running average in recent
history six point nine seven
million dollars in cigarette tax
revenue a portion of that is
used to service debt on the
bonds that were used to build
the cancer center as I was
discussing a moment ago and
another portion of that goes to
the actual provision of care and
the operation of the cancer
center which as we all now
doesn't just serve people in
Albuquerque the only center of
its kind in the entire state and
is a tremendous.
Resource to all patients across
New Mexico under existing law
the.
Revenue that is pledged to the
bonds will sunset in a few years
what Senate bill two twenty
three does is it extends that
sunsets
And allows for the New Mexico
finance authority to issue bonds
against that revenue to build
the second phase of the UNM
comprehensive cancer center on
that second phase I'm sure
doctor woman will we'll we'll
then we'll explain in more
detail why these funds are
necessary and why floating these
bonds or continuing the pledge
of this revenue to support these
bonds is a good idea for the
state but and the top level
these funds would be used to
fund an expansion of the new
radiation oncology treatment
program would be used to build a
new good manufacturing practice
lavoratori for targeted radio
isotopes which is really cutting
edge care that as I understand
it New Mexicans cannot really
receive in state or it's very
very difficult for them to
receive in state they need to go
to Texas Arizona Colorado for
this kind of treatment thirdly
the capital phase two would
Funding GMP lavoratori for stem
cell and bone marrow
transplantation and cell based
products and vaccines for cancer
immunotherapy so essentially Mr
chairman with the bill does is
instead of allowing revenue
bonds to sunset we extend them
and leverage that revenue to
build out what is and it's very
needed and exciting development
for the cancer center and with
that Mr chairman I will yield to
my expert witness for any common
should like to make at this time
to the committee thank you
doctor will welcome thank you
chair to the piano and members
of the committee and thank you
senator Candelaria I actually
think you could pastor in cat
exam and be a physician you did
really well with that
explanation so I noticed hours
late and all go very quickly as
senator Candelaria said
we have to special needs as as
you know the cancer center at
the university of New Mexico was
actually started by the state
legislature back in the early
nineteen seventies and we're
funded in part as the state.
Surgeons public service project.
And a second funding streams of
the status of
allowed us to have it is greatly
supported the center statewide
expansion as an allocation of
the cigarette tax revenue as a
senator Candelaria explained and
that the other aspect that's
important here as we are as you
guys know one of the nation's
fifty one on national Cancer
Institute comprehensive cancer
centers the top cancer centers
in the United States and because
of that federal designation
which we hold we receive another
nearly fifty two million dollars
a year of matching federal
funding.
We are now going through our
federal review for our and see I
designation renewal in our
federal funding renewal and
really important parameter tied
to that is our level of state
support so one of the challenges
that this bill Sauls is as
senator Candelaria said this
part of the cigarette tax stream
that would suit in sunset and
and twenty twenty five actually
as part of our recurring state
support and secondly we have a
really critical need for a new
facility expansion currently
fifty two percent of our
patients are from the for County
central in New Mexico the
remainder of our patients come
from every county in New Mexico
and most of you know we have
outreach programs in Los crucis
over city Santa Fe and we're
opening a new cancer screening
clinic actually in Gallup with
the Gallup Indian Medical Center
which is sorely needed the new
facility that senator Candelaria
described very well will give us
more radiation oncology
treatment space currently we
have space for seventy five
patients per day our volume is
ninety five patients a day
that's a huge challenge and a
senator Candelaria said we've
brought to new cancer treatment
programs to New Mexico the will
be supported by this facility
most radiation oncology is given
to patients through machines
that give you external beams but
the newly evolving field of
radiotherapy is actually to give
isotopes internally through the
bloodstream or in the body
cavities that are targeted to
specifically go to human cancers
hi we want New Mexicans to have
access to this program finally
New Mexico has never had a
federally accredited bone marrow
and stem cell transplant program
so any patients with leukemia
lymphoma or other diseases we've
had a you.
The state Medicare Medicaid
dollars another funding to send
patients to Arizona Seattle
Denver we just haven't had these
treatments available in our
state and that's been a real
hardship so we're really
thrilled to let you know that a
year ago we received
accreditation.
Adoration for these kind of
therapies and not accreditation
is actually.
Essential for the new cellular
immunotherapies so the
facilities that we have will
allow us to continue to expand
these programs I want to let you
know we've done now over seventy
bone marrow transplants in the
state of the last two years and
we just did our first allogeneic
transplant from an unrelated
donor to an elderly man with
leukaemia that was quite
successful so what this bill
does is extend the existing
allocation that the health
Science Center in cancer center
already has and as senator
Candelaria indicated it was a
really creative mechanism
developed by the LFC and AGD to
fund the project without
impacting the state budget so by
sustaining the cigarette tax
stream to us we don't need to
see capital funds for the
project or other sources of
recurring funding for the center
that would come from the general
fund so we're very appreciative
and closing of this really
creative mechanism from the LFC
in AGD to simply extend the
existing allocation to us and
allow that money to be used for
bonds by the NMFA thank you
Senator UP chairman for cheesy
piano and members of the
committee I'd be glad to take
any questions thank you members
of the committee we will yield
of course to the committee and
to your good graces thank you
seven our trials I a little
loopy.
So we're it would explain that
correctly all right thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
Candelaria and we do have doctor
Daman we like to say something
about this measure.
Thank you so much I share a
cheesy Pino and members of the
committee and thank you again
senator account a lot of effort.
On through this force my name is
Barbara damn right I'm the chief
governor license officer at the
university New Mexico where I'm
also a professor and a
registered lobbyist for UNM I'm
here Representative all of you
including president Garnett
Stokes in strong support of this
this is our number one priority
bill this entire session for you
and them doctor well known as
well explain to you the need for
this to save lives in our state
in the region of the only type
of treatment like this available
here in the state I also think
LFC staff and H. E. D. staff is
has been said several times here
they worked is there ideas they
work with us quite a bit from
last fall going forward on this
bill so I very sincerely as the
committee to consider positively
this very important bills to
save the lives of all folks here
in New Mexico thank you very
much chairman R. T. easy can you
thank you Mr chairman and madam
on US did you want to add
anything.
Mr chairman I did hear they at
the port roll allied doctor
Wilson are backed by a
guaranteed ma'am.
Thank you thank you madam.
The members of the is there
anyone in the and the public to
want to comment on this.
All.
Seeing none will go to the
committee.
And Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm thank you Mr chair I it Mr
chair to this goes to finance
next right correct.
I when you're ready for a motion
I'm.
I think with I think we're ready
nobody else on the committee is
raised a hand.
I move it to pass.
Madam seconds Senator Tallman
seconds any other discussion or
debate.
Call the roll.
Senate bill two twenty three
Senator Gallegos.
It goes.
This.
All.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle I'm sorry yes
ma'am
you Senator I'm sorry.
Senator Schmedes are you there.
I think you excuse left is
rejoining said okay that.
Thank.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
How.
She she.
Yes.
Mr I'd like to vote also.
Senator Jay those please.
Yes ma'am.
I had your vote and your vote is
I don't know that are that your
vote yes I didn't vote.
RTC piano.
Yes.
Did everybody.
What what was tell you have a on
our virtual meeting here today
thank yes Center guy angle
Senator Ingle centers community
centers to do Lopez centers the
panics Center Thoman and Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes and Senator
McKenna had to leave early
because of a prior engagement.
I haven't Senator thank you.
Asian senator Candelaria I hope
you when you're quartile you won
your bill presentation if you
well we'll see in thirty days.
No members that I need to have
an honest and Frank exchange
with you all about this next
bill coming up.
Very controversial bill we have
over thirty people signed up to
speak I'm going to limit.
The number of people who can
speak for and against it but
it's very late in the hour.
I mean it's very late hours in
the day and I want I want honest
discussion from the committee.
Should we roll this over to my
until Friday's session.
We start early in the afternoon
on Friday we won't have a floor
session and so give us an
opportunity to hear what I
intend to do is ask the side to
select no more than than ten
people just.
No more than ten minutes to
speak on the bill in the side.
Over one minute each or you know
the we could employ the Ingle
rule of one person for ten
minutes but either way them ten
minutes so.
What one question feeling should
we try to do it now or you want
to roll it over to
To.
To roll over I savor rollover.
Okay Senator guy a guy who's
twenty what's your feeling on
this.
Vote to roll.
Well let's let's let's do that
again I was just looking to see
if we had some less
controversial bill and we have
Senator posts Bill we try to
squeeze in one last bill today.
Sure yes okay so we have maybe
two cells I'm sorry.
Two thirty one Senate bill two
thirty one homeowners
association changes Senators pro
and Representative Garrett.
So Mr chair what we do here bill
and post bill.
Well let's see if we can finish
it quickly then we'll we'll try
to squeeze money another all
rural money over to Freddie I'll
tell you mine is a second
referral anyhow so there's no
great rush okay it's already
been through his first
committee.
Okay okay thank you.
The audience in the sitting here
patiently for two hours two and
a half hours waiting to speak on
the
This firearm securing bill we'll
do that Friday at one thirty
it'll be the first bill on the
agenda and.
Keep in mind what I'm saying
about not hearing from thirty
people for for two or three
minutes for hearing from no more
than ten people any side.
And with we'll go notice senator
dole region present your bill
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
I'm presenting Senate bill two
thirty one homeowners homeowners
homeowners association changes
online right now I have.
Elisabeth Smith chapters will be
at an expert and I would allow
her a few minutes to speak after
I start this presentation of the
bill proposed here makes an
amendment to forty seven dash
one six dash zero eight and it
provides that masters these are
treated the same as other
planned communities with regard
to the right from homeowners to
control the board of the H. away
one seventy five percent of the
lots are sold.
Some of the issues and why we're
bringing this bill forward are
there are no legitimate reason
to treat homeowners and a master
planned community different from
the homeowners and other plant
communities.
Number two under current law the
developer has one hundred
percent control over every
aspect of the operations and
maintenance of the community
until the last lot is sold.
Number three at the beginning of
the development the developer
has a legitimate interest in
controlling the operations of
the H. away what is more more
lots are sold the interest in
the risks why abilities of the
homeowners become stronger by
the time seventy five percent of
the lots are sold these
interests outweigh the interests
of the developer.
And number for the developers
troll can lead to the following
problems because the homeowners
are staying disadvantage and
their property legal rights can
become impaired so Mr chair
committee this bill will provide
equity to homeowners in master
planned communities and giving
their H. aways the same
treatment as planned committees
so right now I'd like to pass it
over to Elizabeth Smith Chavis.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman and committee and
senator Poe just as background
I'll let you know what I spent
thirty five years of practicing
real property litigation usually
representing developers and I've
seen some of the things that
happened on and there are a lot
of potential and actual
problems with the current
situation where a master planned
community is treated different
from a regular community as far
as when the H. away gets control
one of the things is that the
developer can force the
homeowners in the board to
accept
Committee improvements and
amenities when they're not in
any shape to be transferred when
the developer may have caused
damage to them from construction
equipment or from lack of
maintenance but the result is
the developer can cram those
down to the board and then the
homeowners for the rest of of
the project the rest of their
lives are responsible for paying
for those repairs and dealing
with that
the developer can also enter
into long term contracts with
terms that are for not to the
benefit of the homeowners and
yet the H. away is bound to
those contracts long after the
developers gone and those
contracts are usually entered
into with little or no input
from the homeowners who may not
even know about the contractor
about its terms of the developer
combined combined the H. away to
contracts entered into with
without request for proposal or
any transparency as to what the
terms lot of sweetheart deals
happen as a result of that and
the developer has I'm sorry
somebody say something.
The developer has no incentive
to be transparent in its
operations so the homeowners
have real difficulty obtaining
details finding out what is
going on
it with things that will end up
with long term problems and
liabilities to the homeowners
there may be a finance committee
but the committee has no power
to get the information from the
developer or even to see the
bills no ability to control
decisions they act Advisory only
and the advice is based on
information that the developer
chooses to provide to the
homeowner
the developers long as they're
in control of the of the board
hires the manager hires all of
the contractors
can hire its own employees can
hire related entities without
any disclosure and the loyalty
of those.
Providers is to the developer
not to the homeowner should be
very different priorities
If you remember that the
homeowners are the ones who are
paying most of the assessments
once you get up to seventy five
percent the developers putting
very little money little money
into the project
the whole more than other
problem that comes up and I've
seen this happen the developer
can rid of because the
conditions covenants and
restrictions the CCN ours to be
amended
of without any input from the
homeowners.
One is but property thank you.
Well for this is not responsible
for that and then the developer
changes that that's happened in
in one instance that I know
where the developer change the
CCN ours after seventy five
percent of the lots have been
sold to move responsibility for
certain areas maintenance and
repairs to the individual
homeowners contrary to what the
original CCN ours has of
required.
Want to take too much time
the homeowners are the ones who
are providing the money in the
developer who often isn't out of
state entity is the one who
decides how to spend it the
result is the homeowners assume
risks and liabilities and pay
for operations but they if they
have no input and no ability to
determine whether the money is
even being spent on this
particular community
It that there is no reason for
the a master planned community
which could last a lot longer
and cost more problems to be
treated differently than a
the other community that is
required under current law is
required to.
Transfer control of the board to
the of residence One seventy
five percent of the amendment is
simply to take out one sentence
that provides an exception for
master planned community
and would would protect
residents and taxpayers from
potential malfeasance by
developers
There's a reason for that the
distinction thank you.
Thank you Senator told anybody
else.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I do not that our representative
joy Garrett is a co sponsor of
this bill as well
we are ready for public comment
any questions from the
committee.
Is there someone named Margaret
Shoukry on the.
On the webcast I mean on the.
Call.
That's the only name I had
listed is there anybody else who
wants to speak on this bill.
my name is Cynthia Gifford and I
had signed up to speak okay
please go ahead.
I live in one of these master
planned communities and it is
the issue as as Elizabeth
described it it is a big issue
where the residents are ignored
we do not know how money is
being spent we have had
contracts signed that will make
us pay more than we should on
certain things and we just want
to be treated the same as every
other development and so with
the point that we're at seventy
five percent we wanted you want
to have control of our money.
Thank you Mr.
Anyone else.
Let's go to the committee to.
One more comment.
The only occurred to West Side
coalition of neighborhood
associations has voted to
support this unanimously so
there is support for this.
Thank you so much.
Is there anyone in opposition to
this bill do we have anybody
speaking incident.
Somebody named Donald Trump
signed up to get into the room.
But I refused to admit him but
he made me how I don't know.
with that we'll go to the
committee and are there
committee members with questions
or debate on this measure.
Seeing none was the will of the
committee.
Just
wanted to make a comment Mr
chair and then if you have no
other
people I can make a mention but
I think we have to keep in mind
that homeowners associations are
not only in large urban areas.
And that this affects everyone
and we I I'm supportive of the
bill but I just want us to be
aware because every time I've
heard a homeowner's association
bill people think it's only
related to Albuquerque and
that's.
Much broader thank you.
Thank you senator.
Anybody else on the committee
one commenter question or
debate.
We'll go to you then Senator
thanks for the motion.
Would you pass.
Second seconded by Senator
Sedillo Lopez anybody else.
The secretary will call the
roll.
I'm.
Thirty one percent of the value
goes yes ma'am.
Thank all.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Yes thanks yes.
Yes.
Or TCP.
Yes.
The.
Will conclude the meeting today
senator Paul congradulations you
into this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members.
So.
We're gonna roll over to twenty
four.
The.
A fire arm secure your firearm
from securely.
Keeping firearm secured
the institutional racism in
state agencies bill two thirty
and the rural library
definitions build to Friday.
to seventy three.
It's being no six o'clock and I
think Senator Ingle is
indicating he would like to have
dinner at this time so.
We will.
Call the meeting adjourned is
there any any final issues and
we left something undone.
Yes for money as as us there
stay online okay but are we are
we are the webcast.
Are we off what cast.
Just waiting for confirmation.
