An income limit.
And they would be thrown off the
snap a snap the supplemental
nutritional assistance program
it is the new name for the old
food stamp program.
And people read actually receive
a little snap debit card
aplastic ATM card that can be
used for food approved for.
So this in the past there has
been comments from individuals
that perhaps people.
Won't take a job.
Because their income limit will
throw them off of public
benefits in particular food and
this is Senator Gallegos was
making that point the other
night if you're in pain and this
bill would actually provide
three months only of
transitional snap benefits for
somebody who had a higher income
limit.
I came up with the amount of
money with assistance from the
Human Services Department.
This is not part of the Human
Services Department request
but they are aware of my bill
and when I had the opportunity
to work at the Human Services
Department we didn't do this
under a different governor.
So that's why I think the idea
we should do enough.
And I would stand for support
opposition.
And I do not believe I have an
expert here on this bill and
this is all general fund there's
no Matt is.
It would be all general fund
thank let's see if there is
there anyone in the audience who
wanted to speak in support of
this measure or against it.
Anybody on the we have two
people of the.
On soon so we'll we'll wait for
their names to.
Okay then maybe another one too
so the first one is the Teague
Gonzalez.
They are here on so go ahead and
start.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Tina
Gonzalez with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we
thank the sponsor for bringing
the this legislation we stand in
support of this bill because
every New Mexicans should have
the necessary funds to provide
for their families and all New
Mexicans should have enough to
eat.
HSD in LFC have already
determined the harmful impact of
cliff in fact to families when
they earn over the income
eligibility guidelines for
public benefits like snap and
likely continue to experience
food insecurity but can't get
benefits.
A family of four can qualify for
up to eight hundred thirty five
dollars in food assistance but
when the same family earns over
three thousand six hundred forty
four dollars a month they become
ineligible to receive even the
minimum in food assistance of
twenty dollars per month.
This bill will support families
as they transition from losing
their staff benefits earning
more income.
Easing the cliff effect by three
months will help families
increase financial stability so
they can provide more income for
their families thank you and we
urge you to pass on SB sixty six
thank you very much agency
requests so this Dr Larry
Schindler.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Larry
Chandler a long term
pediatrician in Santa Fe in here
representing New Mexico
pediatric society the state
chapter of the American academy
of pediatrics and we strongly
support as P. sixty six.
Before the COVID pandemic food
insecurity was a significant
problem for the children of New
Mexico.
Food insecurity can be
associated with poor physical
health including the development
of obesity from taking in
calories with little traditional
value.
Developmental delays mental
health problems in poor
educational outcomes just as we
have had an educational gap
learning gap from the pandemic
we've also had the traditional
gap which further exacerbates
the learning gap.
Having the.
This pandemic potential captains
to increase food insecurity
which has led to a greater
learning gap.
To help end this nutritional
gap.
Help our children the.
This close this pandemic
learning gap New Mexico
pediatric society strongly
supports SB sixty six thank you
thank you Dr Chandler next
someone who is a on the line
named cat she.
Thank you chairs and members of
the committee my name is Cat
Sanchez and I'm a policy manager
with cold futures we are a
statewide organization led by
and for black indigenous women
and people of color we know that
individuals utilizing government
assistance have declined
promotions and opportunities to
grow in their jobs because it
may mean a sudden drop of
assistance that they need to
support their families three
months of transitional
assistance could make all the
difference in the world for many
New Mexicans to not just survive
but to thrive we urge support of
SB sixty six thank you thank you
Mr just and finally we have
Karen candidate.
On chairman members of the
committee chairman lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter we
stand in strong support of this
bill anything we can do to
ameliorate the cliff effect is a
good thing thank you very much
thank you Karen.
Members of the committee will go
to them for questions or
comments or of of yes senator
Senator comment Mr chair Senator
yep off Austin on the cliff
effect in a
as says before us said Dale
since there's some stakeholders
here as I I think we should
certainly in this transitional
period subsidize behaviors that
are getting out so once again
getting the raise getting still
working working full time job if
they're doing that doesn't
matter what their income is
going to be because it if they
do that activity or that
behavior it's going to get them
out of of poverty or the
situation there at so don't
don't limit them on their on
their income and don't
completely based on their income
start to base it off of those
behaviors and then they get
phased out and doesn't matter
because they got a good job
estimates that income so yeah
very happy to support thank you.
Anybody else on the committee
with a question or comment is
there a motion from the
committee.
Seconded by motion by Senator
Sedillo Lopez seconded by
Senator McKenna any further
discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Thurman.
Yes.
You're welcome yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes we have a due pass senator
sixty six how about sixty seven
thank you Mr chair at sixty
seven would expand school based
health clinics and again this
bill is for the health and Human
Services interim committee it's
two million dollars
there is a possibility that if
that was this is funded some of
the two million not all but some
of it might be able to be
matched five Medicaid it just
depends so delay age has
indicated that
To stimulate if T. seventy five
thousand dollars annually would
be needed to assist with the
added administrative
requirements for a few years ago
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Well we were we didn't have as
much budget as we have now and
our governor at that time and
the department of health cut
thirteen school based health
clinics around the state and
three of them were in some of my
rural areas and so it was felt
pretty strongly
the school based health clinics.
Can really address some of the
issues for our use that would go
unnoticed
for example if someone comes in
is a victim of abuse if somebody
comes in their malnourished if
somebody comes to school and
they're not taking their
medications for asthma or
diabetes there are several
things that could be identified
and taking care of in the
schoolbased clinic as well as
mental health depression and
substance abuse so my intent
here is to build back up the
system of school based health
clinics thank you very much res
on the and Nancy Rodriguez from
the New Mexico association of
school based health clinics is
on this film she your expert
witness she is now okay very
good so let's put Nancy
Rodriguez a.
This is a different Nancy
Rodriguez this is not senator
Nancy Rodriguez.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
thank yous Sanchez Senator
Stefanics for this opportunity
to talk about school based
health centers we're really
excited and urged support of
Senate bill sixty seven to add
an additional two million
dollars to the Department of
Health budget for school based
health centers I wanted to share
a couple of facts with the group
that highlight the need for
these services I know many of
you have heard me come before
you and ask for funding in the
last several years and
unfortunately the department of
health budget for school based
health centers additional map
not back up to where we were
before the recession so we are
hoping we can have a greater
general fund investments to
support the health care needs of
children and families firstly we
wanted to share with you that we
have a growing list of more than
a dozen communities and schools
to reach out to us into the
department of health hoping to
open a new schoolbased health
care in their community or
school and I'm sure you guys
understand there's a growing
understanding on the part of
communities in schools that the
intersection of education and
health are critical during the
pandemic more than ever so we
think this is driving the
numbers of areas we get the
other thing driving the number
of queries we're getting from
schools and communities is the
growth of the community schools
movement I know some of your
involved in Education Committee
and you know that the state
public education department in
previous years and in this
year's requested budget have a
growing investment in community
schools access to primary and
behavioral health care is one of
the pillars of the community
schools model and the growth of
community schools and that
investment that you're making
from the general fund will not
be as successful if there's not
also expanded access to health
care services for those children
and family so we think this dual
investment is a good
collaboration to meet the needs
of New Mexicos vulnerable
children and families.
Early we want to inform you that
because of some additional
investment the department of
health has made our organization
is going to be offering in
twenty twenty two planning
requests for the first time ever
there many states around the
country that offer one time
planning grants for communities
who want a school based health
center to assess need to
determine if they have health
care partner that can provide
the providers that they need to
offer the service and will be
offering Planning requests for
to around ten different
communities this year but if we
don't have an additional
investment in the department of
health program with those folks
get on with their planning
process there won't be any
operating dollars to offer them
to continue the services that
they work so hard to plan.
And lastly it we also know that
many of you are aware of and
supportive of the efforts at PED
and HSD to be involved with
Medicaid free care role reversal
so that students without IEPs
can get healthcare in their
school and that can be
reimbursed through Medicaid
we're involved in that
initiative and we think an
expanded number of schoolbased
health centers can support that
and make sure we have providers
in the right places particularly
behavioral health providers to
make sure that we can capitalize
on those and Medicaid federal
dollars so we strongly urge this
committee to support SB sixty
seven we thank you for your time
and attention to this issue we
are ready and that there is yes
to provide the technical
assistance that schools and
communities need to expand for
school based health care model
and I'm happy to help Senator
satanic answer any questions you
may have thank you all thank you
very much Nancy let's start with
the the audience in the
committee room is there anyone
here who wants to speak either
in favor of or in opposition to
SB sixty seven.
Yes Linda.
Members of the committee thank
you Representative disco.
This is our youth program for
them but also represent the
school nurses and there is this
really a great relationship in
most schools that have school
based health clinics with their
school nurses because the nurses
are able to identify issues that
come up with with kids and and
when appropriate or for
referring them to the school
based health clinics so it's
really a good relationship and
we need to have what number
thank you great thank you thank
you is there anyone besides
Kathleen Moseley at.
So we'll go next to the to the
audience on zoom in the first
name I have is Kathleen Moseley.
She up.
Go ahead Kathleen.
Yes thank you my name is Suman
RTZ Pino members and of the
committee my name is Kathy
mostly retired registered nurse
and of preventive medicine
masters in member of the New
Mexico Public Health Association
or an anti HA X. SB sixty seven
expanding schoolbased health is
a priority for an anti HA.
based health centers are key
safety net in New Mexico along
with school nurses were almost
all our counties are designated
as provider shortage areas on
its system it supports help
access and health equity and
also wanted to share that during
the last nine years of my career
working to optimize as in the
best practices in New Mexico
schoolbased health centers were
a strong partner they helped us
action plans for providers
junction for spirometry taught
inhaler technique in just
somebody mentioned us as one of
the leading causes of school
absences so they tell gaps for
behavioral health and I know as
well during the COVID many
provided vaccines and other
needed here so please do
consider voting it to pass on
this bill thank you very much
thank you is mostly a next will
go to
Thank it's a Kathleen Sanchez.
Recapped his Kathleen.
That's on this is there a chair
and members of the committee
once again Cat Sanchez with full
teachers as an advocacy
organization for black
indigenous women and people of
color in New Mexico one aspect
of our work is advocating for
youth access to health care and
the resources they need to grow
and become healthy and strong
adults for some use in rural and
frontier areas of school based
health center is the only
consistent medical care they
might have access to investing
in that access to health care is
vital for future generations and
in our case my partner and I we
relied on the school based
health center and Oregon
mountain high school which is
critical for our son who is
diabetic we urge your support on
SB sixty seven thank you.
Thank you Mr Jess the Karen
Kennedy would look.
With us.
Can you unmuted please.
Yes I just did thank you
chairman members of the
committee Karen with Bach with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand strong
support of behavioral health
school be school based health
centers
social workers often find with
wraparound services and
behavioral health services in
the school based health centers
and licensed social workers in
fact are able to bill Medicaid
for the services so it helps to
it helps to
get a bunch obtained some
reimbursement to be put back
into the schools
again we are in strong support
of this bill thank you very much
thank you Karen Sebastian
hearing.
Mr chair and committee members
my name is Sebastian hearing I
am a nurse a UNM student and
part of Planned Parenthood
generation action chapter on my
campus when I was in high school
I did not have proper access to
medical or behavioral care I had
a respiratory infection for
several weeks at one point I had
I had access to care at school I
could have received treatment
earlier I urge you to support SB
sixty seven for students alike
thank you.
Thank you Sebastian that Patsy
Nelson.
Good afternoon this is passing
Nelson I'm a former school nurse
and Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm a former school
nurse school based health center
director and public health
professional and I can say from
a personal point of view that
school based health centers make
a difference for students the
integrated model of physical and
behavioral health services in
one place is best for anyone but
especially for our most
vulnerable young people who are
the least capable of obtaining
appropriate care for many of
their very complicated health
and social issues we know the
pandemic made a huge difference
court a young people this year
and school staffs our students
come back to school with anxiety
depression experiences of trauma
and domestic violence and
physical and behavioral
conditions that had not been
addressed during the pandemic.
Schoolbased health centers in
addition to the other things
that you've heard about find on
Sir site services that reduce
out of school time and improve
attendance in and encourage
young people to enter the health
professions and we know that
nursing is critical now and
there are many young people who
attend school based health
centers who have said they are
interested in becoming nurses or
health professionals as a result
of having those mentors on site
so I think Senators fan experts
sponsoring Senate bill sixty
seven and urged the committee to
support the additional recurring
funding for school based health
centers that would be provided
under this bill thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you Pat
Melissa Candelaria.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the on scene
clinics in the office Martinez
lawsuit we strongly support this
bill for the students in the in
the for student groups addressed
in the lawsuit who have faced
the deepest deepest inequities
access to physical and
behavioral and mental health
services are fundamental to
their academics access and
quality of life studies have
shown improved school attendance
grades and graduation rates as a
result of school based health
center intervention
unfortunately due to lack of
funding not all schools can
afford to operate health centers
this bill will provide funding
for new schoolbased health
centers in areas with the least
access to health care especially
in schools located in rural and
tribal areas serving our most
vulnerable children for these
reasons we urge the committee to
support and pass this
legislation thank you thank you
Melissa Kurt rigor with Lutheran
Office of governmental
administrative.
Afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee this is
Kurt writer director with an
epic scene mystery of New Mexico
we're also here advocating on
behalf of Mexican friends
churches and both organizations
support passage of SB sixty
seven critical services are
provided by a school based
health clinics access to health
care wherever it's available is
critical in schools are perfect
entry point for that care thank
you to Senator Stefanics for
commitment to rebuilding our
school based.
Our school based health centers
located throughout New Mexico
and we certainly urged support
for SB sixty seven thanks for
the opportunity to speak thank
you Kurt Paul Gibson.
Transaction declined need if you
could unmuted Paul.
Sorry I thought I had
thank you
Chairman and committee members
my name is Paul Gibson co
founder Project Amaker city for
I'm my wife and I moved to New
Mexico I was a health consultant
in the bay area San Francisco
Bay Area and in that context I
research to developed over
thirty school based health
healthy start programs healthy
start is basically what you're
talking about here the
integrated health social service
academic and family services
collect called located at one
school side greatly facilitated
parent engagement and
children's lives at school but
it also was a great health
education program
and I can't strong we evaluated
many of these programs and it
had multiple ripple effects that
went well beyond health your
reserves related to graduation
attendance in school
and absence of involvement in
the juvenile justice system I
strongly endorse this proposal.
Very good thank you Paul and
then a Charles good marker who's
here wanted to say something on
this bill as well.
Chairman members of the
committee Charles good marker
register of this for the New
Mexico Public Health Association
you heard from one of our
members earlier I wanted to say
personally what are.
I visited many school based
health centers in my prior
experience as a national
education association
Representative found so many of
them are just totally
understaffed under under funded
either don't have enough
supplies and then they do it's
true what was said about the
full range of issues and the
impacts of these centers have on
people's lives.
Urge yes my thank you great
thank you Charles welcome
Senator gave us four of Senator
Stefanics there was one other
person Senator crystal diamond
came to me on the floor and said
her mother is a retired school
nurse who we strongly believes
in school based health clinics
and she wanted to throw that in
today right did you hear that
Senators maybe.
The
how you vote on this bill.
Members of the committee.
Any.
Yes Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator and I.
Learn something from Senator
Stefano X. recently and I just
want to confirm that
That understanding is reflected
in this FIR as well and that is
the remaining balance at the end
of fiscal year shall not revert
to the general fund and is that
to leverage other federal
funding later.
It is so Mr chair and Senator
thank you for that comment if
you in fact have recurring funds
and you don't revert you can
match it with federal funds but
if you have funds that reverted
back and you have federal funds
left over you have to it's very
complicated to return it to the
federal government so that's why
this language gets into some of
our bills.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator good anything else from
the committee.
With the will of the co Senator
Tallman go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this for with.
Answered this but.
Of.
Did you is this you present this
at this time because you
couldn't get in the the budget
or you were late no Mr chair
Senator this is being presented
on behalf of the Legislative
Health and Human Services
interim committee that takes
bill requests throughout the
summer and then endorses at the
end of the term.
So.
State that the approach LFC that
yes they did the chairs the
chair and the vice chair of the
health and Human Services
Committee did actually have the
opportunity to make requests to
the LFC.
Mr chairman and LESC didn't put
in a budget I would leave that
to the chair because he was the.
I hear that committee I think
you Senator the the the dilemma
is we we do our work at the same
time they're preparing their
budget.
There it wasn't finalized by the
time we made a presentation but
it was going to be very
difficult to shoe horn in
anything new to it yeah we were
basically to it but but I think
this is actually useful because
if we can't rule we have a
chance because there's more
money now than they they knew
about so maybe we can get it put
in as an amendment to house bill
two when it comes across okay
thank you thank thank you Mr
thank you again for bringing
this much needed bill forward.
They do have a motion for a do
pass and the secretary it is the
second from.
Senator just a second it often
seconded by Senator Tallman and
Senator Gallegos to discuss Mr
Chairman center thank you for
this I apologize for being late
I'm gonna have to leave early of
that dental appointment at a
sort of emergency but I was just
going to ask on this for other
expanding school health based
health based clinics now does
any of this money go to those
that are existing or these all
just for brand new Mr chair
thank you senator thank you for
the question it would be for
expansion of new clinics there
are as according to Nancy
Rodriguez who's with the New
Mexico association of school
based health centers there's
twelve schools that have
requested to open clinics such
as this and they all have to be
approved by school boards.
Mr Chairman is Senator do you
have a list of those.
Mr chair I'd have to refer back
to Nancy if you still on the
zoom at a Nancy are you still
on.
I am yes Mr chair and Senator we
do have a running list I'm sorry
to say I do not have that in
front of me but I will tell you
that I can't I can actually if
you want to ask me about a
particular district probably
remember if they were on the
list there are several in Los
crucis and several in
Albuquerque but the rest of them
are in rural communities where
the entire community does not
have a school based health
center so Cimarron eagles manis
clear of
there's a consortium the R. von
of schools that want mobile
services and I should mention in
my earlier comments that some of
the existing operators to answer
part of your question are
interested in opening in smaller
more rural communities where a
brick and mortar clinic is not
possible but if they could
expand through telehealth and
mobile services they could serve
much smaller rural communities
with those types of school based
health centers and so some of
those that are on that list and
and actually more than a dozen
it's almost twenty now
they could maybe see them one
day a week because they're so
small they can't sustain a full
time school based health center
on a brick and mortar basically.
Your question regardless of
follow up on that Mr Mr in
center of it is the Albuquerque
and Los crucis group more than
half for less than half of the
total
no need.
thank you Mr chair Senator are
you talking about the new need
yes Representative okay so Nancy
did you hear that question.
Yes thank you Senator Stefanics
Mr chair Senator guy a ghosts at
this point they are less than
half that have reached out to us
but I will say we haven't made a
formal announcement about a
planning grants and as soon as
we do that I expect that to
double the number of community
schools that are expanding in
Los crucis in Albuquerque I
think could drive that up over
half depending on how many more
community schools grants the
public education department puts
out in the next year but it but
I think it will be about even
between rural frontier and and
urban districts.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
etcetera etcetera the reason I
was asking in my district we've
done it without government
government we didn't wait on a
program we just did it in house
and I I like the idea of it
being rural I just have a whole
lot of problem with the amount
of this pain programs that are
you thank you.
Thank you senator I just make a
couple of points of before you
take the vote of.
And it was appointed that one of
our zoom witnesses testified to
and that is to me this is one of
the best ways of responding to
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit if
we can show that we are we're
serious about expanding the ways
that we can help kids in school
especially minority kids in
schools do better this is really
one of the best ways we can we
can demonstrate to the court
that we're serious about that
secondly the school based health
centers really prop up a lot of
the overall health care system I
mean if you've tried to get to a
doctor lately you know that the
wages very long if there were of
the you know school kids lined
up in there that that we're
trying to go to the same doctor
in the same clinic if it this is
really an overall benefit to the
to the entire system so thank
you senator for bringing these
for any other discussion.
So the secretary will call the
roll Senator Gallegos.
Irma cannot.
Yes committee no to explain
fifty.
Video okay yes thanks yes
chairman yes
yes and senator committees to
explain to Senator Diamond where
you didn't vote.
Sure.
Mr chair I I really appreciate
you you do a very good job and
and I love how you keep things
life and you're very fair and
you do a great job how did you
know.
yes so this is a big issue for
my constituents and so if I
remain silent on this issue it's
it's a problem I'm not doing a
good job so my constituents are
very concerned about
transparency in schools very
very hot issue Nelson we've come
a national issue and and I would
be a firm yes on this because
the school based clinics are
great in general Nancy does a
wonderful job but they're
providing contraception for
teenage girls without parental
involvement in abortion and
unfortunately I can't do that
when we're driving a wedge
between kids and parents it's
just a huge issue for parents in
my district they're very
concerned about that and I'm I'm
very sad to be in on this bill
but but that's that's why that's
why and thank you all have heard
that before so I don't think
Senator can make it Mr chair can
make a comment
I was unclear about the COVID
you're making Senator committees
and we have this presentation by
the department of health up at
our Las Vegas interim committee
meeting.
And I asked the question two or
three times and I was told the
services provided in the school
based health clinics are totally
dependent upon what the local
school board approves because I
thought it was going to be
everything that's what I would
like but I was told that's not
true it's what the school board
approves self.
Whether that happens that's what
we were told by the department
are remember the testimony yes
so I just wanted to respond
thank you everyone for your
attention to this good very good
then we'll move to Senator Lopez
for your to bill Senator will
start with.
But we have seventy up there
twice yeah should I will do
seventy and ninety two.
Thank you Mr chairman.
We'll start the sentence Senate
bill seventy yes okay Mr
chairman I know in the chat room
we have reverted I am.
We could also should be.
During a short so you have to be
expert witness please and thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm here in front of
you with Senate bill seventy and
it's entitled resiliency through
youth programming.
it's a simple appropriation
Mr chairman of several years
back
The state of New Mexico used to
support youth
organizations are organizations
that would work with our youth
from across the state of New
Mexico providing training
opportunities and when I say
training is training and
leadership development learning
how to you know it community
because together and just kind
of the process is that many of
us engage in our communities of
those items were zeroed out
after a few years and there's
there's been no support really
for you for quite awhile.
So we have begun Mr chairman
members the committee to put
money back into those line items
in the department of health and
this is an attempt Mr Chairman
just to continue to add more
money into the pot there are a
lot of wonderful youth across
the state not just in the mail
Rio Grande quarter but in rural
parts of our state that can
benefit and if I could Mr
chairman allow Mr rail to say a
few words right yes river rail
are you on.
They set out to you and you.
Can you please revert.
I'm.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me to speak today
Senator Lopez thank you so much
for these are committed to our
young people
just echoing what senator Lois's
said
I've been working with young
people for twenty six years in
our beautiful state and I have
seen the times when we have
invested in our young people in
their leadership development in
their training engaging them in
our communities engaging them in
the in our government in our
systems and how that makes the
difference to the leadership of
New Mexico and I've seen the
times when we have not invested
and we are coming out of one of
those times now and we're coming
through this pandemic with young
people really needing to have
investment in their leadership
in their ability to to build
critical thinking skills in
their ability to communicate
with us and each other
so that we are building the
leadership that New Mexico is
yours and that their
grandchildren the server so this
type of investment is something
I think that we cannot step away
from the have to lean and fit
I'm happy to answer any
questions as well.
Thank you great thank you revert
to.
That's it Mr chairman let's go
to the audience and see is there
anyone here who wants to speak
about this bill either for or
against.
Then anybody on soon.
Nobody members of the committee.
And
promotion for due process from
Senator Sedillo Lopez seconded
by Senator Stefanics Senator
gravers.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
this bill I just got a quick
question we wouldn't on millions
of dollars out.
What is this one only two and
fifty thousand if if we've not
supported him in the last few
years was it counting so small
and all the other are there are
built in I've been voting no on
the I'm gonna go yes on this
because I think it's for a good
purpose I'm just trying to
understand the math behind
your building two hundred fifty
thousand one all the other major
in the millions.
Mister chairman Senator Gallegos
if you'd like to Amanda.
More than happy to say that the
from the amendment.
Appreciate the opportunity but
also the front of the building.
Thank you Mr chairman in all
sincerity
We've been able to build it up
over the last couple of years
for the have about two hundred
thousand dollars but that's
still not sufficient to to
really expand so for able to get
this money that again it allows
and continues to build
with their outrage at the
department of health can do.
Thank you for that and Mister
chairman Senator do we know how
many groups this will I guess in
the statewide view how many of
programs as we go to I'm Mr
chairman of mistrial would you
happen to have a number.
On the number of organizations
that this supports.
Yes I do thank you so much
Senator Lopez and
Senator thank us
Hi it goes yes
I we're looking at right now
about seven to ten groups with
we would love to expand and this
the groups do include rural New
Mexico and frontier New Mexico
as well as of the the
Albuquerque us Santa Fe area.
One thank you for that one final
question for Mr center if you
don't mind and I'm trying to
figure out how we prove the
efficiency of these as as far as
as they grow up are we.
Watching them as they leave the
program for the leadership
skills and things were training
with.
If I may Senator Gallegos and
and
Senator charity C. Pino yes we
have tried
again with these programs in the
past there is a broader network
of young people who are now
leaders in New Mexico and
outside of New Mexico it'd gone
through the previous leadership
of programs that we help to of
that we've helped to have in New
Mexico in this current iteration
we do have the plans to do a pre
assessment in a sense of where
the people are in their skill
development as well as in their
ability to have critical
thinking and we will also be
doing some post is yes ma'am and
the young people as they go
through the program so we have a
sense of their skills and if
they are staying in New Mexico
for school or frequently some of
them are already college age if
they're staying in New Mexico
after graduating from college.
Thank you for that Mr chair
Senator an expert that's sort of
what I was trying to get to is
in education we wait till
graduation to evaluate our
children I think a lot of times
we need to have a two three five
year picture afterwards to see
that we've accomplished our goal
so I appreciate what you're
doing with that are you.
Q. Senator graders any other
discussion.
Seeing none will ask the
secretary to call the roll
third day off.
Senate cannot.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes yes
yes.
Yes thirteen enough yes you do
pass on seventy Senator you want
to try your luck at ninety two
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee next I
have Senate bill ninety two
and Senator title is Special
Olympics funding
Mr chairman I think I have my
expert witness here I also have
a constituent in a parent
teachers also maybe can say a
few words this is Oscar so lease
if you like to say a few words
because it much better than I
can determine Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is officer
lease and the operations
director for the law enforcement
torch run for Special Olympics I
work for special affects and I'm
honored to be here to ask for
your support this bill Senate
bill ninety two.
What you gonna do with the money
so we're asking for the money
one because there's been three
major impacts to our special
McAfee's twenty twenty and
twenty twenty one were very big
affects our athletes for one
they lost their sense of ability
to to develop physical fitness
and Special Olympics this is a
lot this is often times the only
source of physical activity that
our athletes across the state
benefit from the competing
Olympic type sports year round
statewide so the keeping him off
the couch and making sure that
they're staying active number
two is that their sense of
dignity comes from earning
medals and awards when they're
competing so we often take for
granted all the opportunities
that we have to develop that
sense of dignity and for
athletes this is where it comes
from number three the biggest
thing that they lost was the the
friendships so when the COVID
shut everything down for Special
Olympics and twenty twenty and
then also part of twenty twenty
one socialized to at social
distancing for most of us was
social isolation for a lot of
our athletes SO Special Olympics
is asking for this money to
bring in you know the
competitions back for athletes
we had a four corners
invitational last August and it
we were only operating at forty
five percent the money also goes
back into the economy so when
our athletes travel to these
tournaments for example four
corners was in Farmington we
spent forty thousand dollars in
Farmington because at forty five
percent of our capacity as we
modified our state games so this
money is not only to benefit our
athletes to make sure they can
compete with no cost to them
getting them back their physical
fitness the dignity and their
friends but allows Farmington
and other communities like Los
crucis in Santa Fe New we're in
over a hundred communities in
New Mexico allowing these
athletes to travel not just
practice in their backyards.
Thank.
Very good and did you want to
say something Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee my name is Ruiz more
and I'm a parent and coach of
the special again.
My son is a thirty four year old
special needs adult anyplace
Special Olympics when possible
of course the twenty twenty and
twenty one we inflate.
He's been playing since he was
eighteen years old.
we also have a COVID team called
the next page as individuals who
have every type of disability
and ability that you can think
of.
And that we play in four
different sports across the
state will be here.
And we have.
I presented best they've lost
all that we're trying to get all
that back but the other part of
that is the the special a big
piece of any type any type of
special ed funding that comes
out of this legislative body
besides being thankful for it
assist us with our with three
initiative between Special
Olympics everybody is aware of
the games portion but there's
two other questions to this is
like a pyramid document type of
thing we have the health
initiatives which at the games
transpires into these
individuals some of them don't
have the ability it's almost
like that school site wholesaler
thank they don't have the
ability to have any type of
health care so what we've done
is within the games we provide.
The volunteer doctors
optometrists that dentist dental
technician of the year
specialist thank you very get
your checks they get I checked
stated that blood pressure
checked the gate you know
different type of health
screenings to get their teeth
checked Senator so some of these
individuals who live in homes
are with the family member case
workers are not family members
say they don't have the ability
to do that so we help them out
that way and then there's the
third portion which is our
school our school programs and
in those school programs we have
initiatives of instilling a
sense most of the state which
based on the boards and stuff
there's bacteria that have to be
met but we have to do actual
special teams for within the
structure that of that school.
Miss America like you know
there's a high school boys
basketball team we have a
special a big boys basketball
team or our team there that
actually we don't do boys and we
do everything boys and girls are
next so you know they are there
in that school.
There's not a state that are so
that's what this is all about.
We have we have a we do have
some money that comes to the
tourism department to the next
page invented partnership
program but we we actually need
to make.
Senator Lopez has been
thank you and I appreciate your
support thank you thank you very
much Mr Zamora you you really of
expanded my understanding of
what Special Olympics those
thank you so much to.
Anybody in the audience want to
speak on on this bill yes.
Thank you Mr chairman ladies and
gentlemen committee my name is
crystal right the public policy
officer and registered lobbyist
for the art of New Mexico we
strongly support this bill as a
profit center location thank you
for you Mr I spent the last
thirty five years often on
police Special Olympics I see
what impacted has on all that
we cannot leave the motion we
complement so we're well
socially with other athletes.
Correct of funding work that
organizations have.
From that the forecast thank you
great thank you anybody else in
the audience here.
On zoom we have the the head of
the developmental disabilities
planning council Ellis McCoy.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I am
Alice Lucroy executive director
of the NM developmental
disabilities council DTC support
Senate bill ninety two EDCs
primary purpose is to empower
New Mexicans with and no actual
and developmental disabilities
to lead full meaningful self
directed lives and to provide a
platform for self advocates to
lead policy decisions that
affect their lives are some
advocates resoundingly support
the Special Olympics program
which is providing life changing
opportunities to improve their
health builder confidence and
strength in their communities
the C. urges the legislature to
adequately fund the special
index either in hospital to our
through Senate bill ninety two
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you Mr McCoy
and we have Karen would look on
zoom.
Members of the committee Karen
would walk with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and for all
the reasons stated we stand
strong support of this
legislation thank you very good
thank you Karen anybody else
members of the committee.
Senator gave us Mr thank you
Senator this another bill that I
think is more funding but I like
this program I likely does I've
got families special needs but
my only question to you is what
is your relationship with
tourism why is it not PED or
higher and.
Good please give me a you know
what we we've gotten a notice it
when you speak from the audience
you come up and use the use of
hand held Mike and and and and
they couldn't the other I did
too but that they could pick you
up on zoom apparently.
Houses can you hear me now.
The whole time like that yeah
okay.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Gallegos for that question
I can give a little bit of
history as to why we're in
tourism department that's the
best I can do in terms of
knowledge about this as a parent
coach and the reason I actually
start paying off advocate for
this is under the prior
administration we were.
Funneled to the state in terms
of whenever Representative the
former Representative Kiki
surveys are used to ask for
funding for Special Olympics it
would be elected to the health
and Human Services Department.
And in that prior year they
basically did away with us they
stopped our funding spent the
time our portion and send it
somewhere else somebody at the
same time I believe is with the
last bill you had
they basically took away so as a
parent coach I got kind of upset
and I that Special Olympic know
that as a former lobbyist of
organized labor I would step up
and try and advocates a more.
And I've been doing it since but
that's kind of where we're at so
in that.
Conversation with the the
legislative body in and the the
administration currently and
even then we've got we were
handed over to tourism as a our.
I passed to per se finance year
type of thing so they put us
within their budget and the New
Mexico to ban a partnership but
manner and because that's what
we do you know as especially
when we travel the state we
actually bring dollars and
tourism dollars and and things
to in the state of New Mexico so
that because sometimes we have.
Team from a passel of teams up
in Colorado we play in
Farmington the come from Utah's
four corners the plane crucis
accompanied by so in other
places.
And up so that's how we we were
ended up in tourism basically
we're but there.
Mr chair Senator would just one
final question and I like what
you guys do I've worked with
make a wish foundation prolong
trying trying to get a license
plate but what my thought is in
tourism is are we publicizing
what we do for our kids is it.
I understand bringing dollars
into Los crucis when you're
having an event but do we
actually think in terrorism do
we actually let people know how
we treat our special in pants do
we do I think publicly with the
Mr chair Senator Gallegos thank
you for that question and
absolutely we publicize our
partnership with Mexico true is
about getting the story out of
our special big athletes their
lives their families the needs
and the capability so we work
with local convention bureaus
around the state to make sure
that we're helping get the word
out about these needs and the
capabilities of our athletes and
their families so that
absolutely happens and so we're
we're our partnership with New
Mexico true has been wonderful
about the stories of our New
Mexicans but I've New Mexicans
to have intellectual
disabilities and their families
so it's a wonderful partnership
that way the deal thank you for
that I just wanna say in closing
Mr center actually there small
started they're hard to see them
accomplish something it just
makes my day so I just want to
do just was question ninety of
thank you did you want to make a
motion Senator.
I'll make motion to this.
Thank you.
Motion FOR do best.
Yes second from Senator Sedillo
Lopez many of the debate.
Secretary call the roll.
Pterodactyls semacam yes
committee yes Sedillo Lopez yes
first fax yes Sierra yes
thirteen seed pandemic yes.
Over to center your betting one
thousand.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you thank
you.
Sure this.
Okay next we're gonna hear.
A presentation by Senator.
Over to the panel Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Senate bill seventy nine.
And and I do hope you have a
chance to read the FIR on is it
gives a good explanation for why
this is such a crucial Services
of family.
Of family peer support service
is a way to to to deal with what
we often run into that is the
state has a program.
And the families that most are
in need of the that program
can't figure out how to access
it.
And even if they access the
entrance to it they sometimes
get put off by some of the
requirements were the
difficulties in transportation
or other reasons why they don't
fully utilize the service that
is available so family peer
support does a couple of things.
First of all these are families
who have themselves been through
the system.
Maybe they had a child with
special needs maybe that a child
who was a.
Of in trouble with the law maybe
they had a child who was
suspected at one time of being
of neglected they had to
negotiate the child welfare the
foster care system the familiar
with the system and they know
how to deal with it and so this
service is one in which the
state
provides of a contract to an
organization and they're Senator
to do this.
To provide peer support to
families who are trying to
utilize the services of the
state.
And this is the there is a line
item in their budget now this to
be a supplement to that the
three hundred thousand dollars.
Thank you Senator NMAA one of
the audience
The support of this bill.
Here and then we'll move on to
anyone in the audience and.
Interested who sleep well okay
yeah I don't know that I don't
know if they got on us is there
anybody in the chat room.
Support.
People raise their hands of
their enemies.
Thank you.
the first person gonna hear from
and support is concerned no what
are.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of this legislation
these families need access to
services and it does become
overwhelming and such a burden
to them to actually access the
services peer support
specialists are Medicaid
reimbursable and are able to
help these people navigate the
system.
Again we're in strong support
this legislation thank you this
would not thanks for being here
for from March.
Sherri Rosen.
For showing you can't read it.
Miss Mister.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is sherry
Britton I am the state secretary
of the Nemi Alliance on mental
illness and Representative the
legislative committee I stand in
support of SB seventy nine I
would like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this important
legislation to your committee SB
seventy nine provide support and
referrals to families with
children in need of behavioral
health services in supporting
this bill we're supporting
employment opportunities for
certified family peer support
workers this vital service
offers powerful lifeline to help
families understand and manage
symptoms navigator complicated
child serving systems and feel
supported by a community that
cares this is expressly true
when family supports reflect the
diversity of the communities
they serve family peer support
spans from prevention to
intervention and is one of the
only services that approaches
the needs of children and
families with the true sense of
urgency SB seventy nine is
important to me because.
Someone was there for me when I
needed it most our family moved
to New Mexico over seven years
ago even with thirty years
experience working in and around
the mental health field I was
not prepared for the barriers
are family would face resolved
revolving around services for my
two children.
I watched my children regress as
we struggle to provide support
and services many of these
barriers we face are still
issues today in our state
however once our family was
referred for family appears
services we received the support
we needed to make positive
change for our family they
helped me to better advocate for
my family's needs and provide
alternatives for the barriers we
were facing.
I was no longer alone and I had
the guidance I needed to make
better informed decisions in all
areas of our lives family peer
support has been key to our
families quality of life family
peer support is a very valuable
service for our families and by
passing this bill we help to
broaden the number of families
we're supporting here in New
Mexico Mr chairman thank you for
the opportunity to speak with
you today and please support
just be seventy nine.
Thank you for your testimony and
next we're gonna solicit
testimony from those who may be
in opposition.
Anyone in the audience in
opposition.
By hearing I'll move on to the
chat room.
A one of the chat room wishing
to speak.
An opposition.
That no okay.
open up to of.
Members of the committee as
senator of right of this chair
in center thank you for this
just a couple real quick
questions
you know if any the mental
health options are gonna be
telehealth I know there's a.
We had a really bad time during
the COVID in southeast our kids
just needing and not receiving
mental health in others a
gentleman down there is trying
to work on the telehealth
program and I just wondered if
that was when the option used in
this
supporters
of Mister chairman Senator
Gallegos of I I think what we're
seeing all over the state right
now is a broadening of
telehealth
it's turned out to during the
the pandemic the federal
government permitted Medicaid
reimbursement for a pretty broad
variety of telehealth approaches
and now there is a recognition
that that worked it was a good
way of reaching people and so
your what we're going to see now
I think is a as we go forward
more and more of the services
will be reimbursable if they're
if they're telehealth provided
this particular services one
that relies on a personal
contact between the family of
like like miss Rhoden said when
they came here that just
figuring out where to go of
which department head which
services which office said which
departments all of those things
are.
There is not really clear to
somebody new to the system and
so if a family reaches out to
you and and and and and can help
you walk through the system but
also give you some tips about
how to handle your kid yourself
of that personal contact is what
appears support really
strengthens I suppose it can be
done to be a telehealth after
you've initially establish that
relationship but it's kind of
hard to establish should be a
telehealth initially.
Thank you for that and I agree
the in person face space is
pretty important just last
question is do we know
inefficiency on this and how
it's measured to monitor is
Department help look into that
are who who would be over that
the of this Mr chairman and and
Senator Gallegos the services
are are actually provided
through the Human Services
Department some years ago we
moved behavioral health over the
Human Services Department so
that's where it's house and and
and see why if you find some of
the funding right now the the
the thought is.
That
For
of all this is fairly new so we
we we all we know now is
anecdotal testimony from people
have benefited from it but
nationally there's been some
studies on their side in the.
In the.
FIR there been some national
studies that show that the
efficacy of this approach and
and again the key is the
relationship once the family
knows there's somebody they can
turn to it makes it all the that
makes all the difference in the
world and finding the right
service for their child.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
and Mr of the are you.
Thank you senator anyone any
other member of the committee
wishing to speak on this issue I
moved to pass a second.
We have a.
The motion and a second.
And when you're ready we'll call
the roll.
I think excuse me okay I thought
did you have a question Senator.
Well.
From
yes ma'am.
Yes.
Thank you okay yes thanks yes
Tallman yes.
TCP yes thank you Mr chairman
you have a new path
congratulations.
As announced to the.
I'm sorry.
What do we get Senator.
The vote.
What I'm sorry.
You voted yes I will yes thank
you Senator Gonzales is here
that somebody could notify
Senator Rodriguez.
If they have.
Great yeah that's fine I think
this will take a while.
Welcome Senator Gonzales thank
you.
I mean the couple.
Your call workers.
Senator Gonzales is here with.
Senate bill one twelve.
Really Mr chairman yes please go
ahead thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of Senate
bill makes the changes to the
retiree health care fund
contribution.
Of the eight the legislation
would increase so from a one
percent salary to the one point
seven.
In the first of Mr chairman I
might mention that all of non
non enhance retirement plan is
so enhance our police officers
correctional officers
firefighters and judges and non
enhanced as everyone else.
And this contribution you know
would be.
You know on the current on the
nineteen hands from up to
percent to a two point three
three which is an increase of
point three three.
And then on the eight that's
sort of the employer the
employee would be one percent to
a one point one seven an
increase of a one point seven to
the enhanced retirement plan the
current rate is two point five
zero and it would go to two
point nine three which is a loss
of point four three and the
employee would be one point two
five currently tool one point
four Madam which is a plus point
two to.
And the well Mister Mr chairman
and members of.
Well if this bill was to pass on
this would stabilize the program
during the period of investment
volatility and reduce the
deficit spending period it would
member member nice the required
increased to retirees well
continuing to provide access to
quality and affordable Care this
will decrease the programs fund
liability reduce liability for
participating employers it would
ensure that the program mixes
for current employees.
Contributed today by providing
some pre funding for those
employees for the future Mr
chairman members so before I
yield to my expert witnesses.
Is so.
This is help so many retirees
utility to having the a much
more affordable cost you know to
health care and the you know
this is fund that was created of
you know home it's been a quite
a few years so we have have it
at a place and though this is
not on statutory so this is a
fund that we have with the state
that has been employees metal
the important part is that he
has really helped as far as the
range that can be provided to
retirees and with that I will
yield to my witnesses and
Committee introduce yourself
yes.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity also I think our
sponsor Senator Gonzales my name
is no keeper I am the interim
executive director for the
retiree health care thirty if I
could just have a few brief
moments to talk a little bit
about our organization and a
little bit of what this impact
would have to employees as well
as even to that employers kind
of just looking as as based on
the rates that the results to
the state the impact that it
would have on a employee who was
earning forty thousand annually
is we would see where they would
go from the fifteen dollars and
thirty eight cents that they are
currently contribute to the
program to about eighteen
dollars per pay period.
That would translate into about
sixty dollars annually is what
the increase would be for the
employer we would see about a
hundred and thirty two dollar
increase annually.
We know that the impact as far
as the retiree health care of
forty would help minimize the
use of those investment earnings
to support these benefits it
would further extend our
solvency beyond the thirty year
projection period it would
increase our status of funding
status over fifty percent it
would lower reported gas B. OPEB
liabilities and LP fund those
benefits as stated for future
employees such as myself and my
colleagues.
As far as a retiree health
authority a little background we
were established in nineteen
ninety of we were not pre funded
we did start paying benefits on
January first nineteen ninety
one for over fifteen thousand
members.
Of our barked Authority is
governed by a eleven member
board of directors they
represent different
organizations for the retiree
Health Care Act which are the
members that come into the
retiree health care authority
our purpose is always been to
provide health care benefits for
medical dental vision and life
we know as far as a medical we
bridge the gap for individuals
who are not Medicare eligible
yet by providing the very
important pre Medicare benefits
to them and then when they do
become Medicare eligible we
provide additional benefits and
prescription benefits that
original Medicare parts a and B.
don't offer you that there are
supplement plans or by offering
Medicare advantage plans knowing
that there's different needs for
all of our members.
As far as for any participating
entities or employees as we are
actively working we are
contributing to this program
with the expectation that this
benefit would be there would we
do retire we also know that as
retirees as long as we've had
five years of service receiving
a pension they are eligible to
participate in this program.
And they would continue to pay
premiums based on their years of
service for the benefits that
they do elect this for the
retiree Health Care Act of
nineteen ninety couple things I
do want to point out is of in
nineteen ninety the purpose was
to provide comprehensive core
group health insurance for
person to have retired for
certain public service in New
Mexico.
We do know at that time when
there was a legislative findings
for it the public employees were
facing a severe problem in
securing medical insurance
they're also citing medic
medical care inflation.
In regards to the the act
there's nothing prohibiting the
legislative from increasing or
decreasing a participating
employer and employee
contributions.
As far as our board's duties
they do do the administration of
the program they evaluate as far
as the need for any premium
increases plan design changes
are procurement they also look
at of the eligibility.
Thank the service requirements
of the affordable things that I
will say that that came up
recently where we did and still
a minimum age of fifty five for
anybody to receive a full to
receive a full subsidy would be
to be at least fifty five years
of age and twenty five years of
service not including anybody
that is part of that enhance
plant as they would only be
required for the twenty years
versus the twenty five and not
apply to the minimum age a
factor.
I think the participation we do
have over ninety two thousand
active members contribute to
this plan we have over sixty
five thousand retirees.
And and their dependents of
retirees about the over forty
one thousand spouses we have
over eleven thousand for
domestic partners and dependent
children which we have seen a
decline but we're around about
fifteen hundred the average age
upon retirement is sixty.
And as far as for our funding
sources of how we get our
revenue it does come from these
employee employer contributions
that we're discussing in this
bill we also receive the retiree
contributions as they did state
that the members do pay into to
continue to have their budget as
part of their elections receive
money for the tax expense fund
we get to miscellaneous funding
we get some of the rebates and
items just for being a part D.
Medicare provider for
prescriptions we also get some
performance guarantees for any
of our vendors to put did not
meet our expectations that make
going to this miscellaneous
funds as well as some interest
earnings.
We do have investments that are
held are held by the state
investment council we do do a
bi annual asset allocation
review just to make sure that we
are constantly reviewing that
and taking any necessary
necessary changes that we need
to take.
But I will also point out those
parts are participation we
continue to see a growth in our
chair of the enrollment of
looking back to the fiscal year
twenty thirteen where we had
about twenty nine thousand
members on our Medicare plans
today we have over forty
thousand we've seen a a decrease
actually are pretty chair of
about seventeen thousand back in
FY thirteen to about fourteen
thousand this year.
And for our voluntary benefits
being our dental vision and life
we have seen growth from fiscal
year twenty thirteen about forty
four over four thousand members
members to I was about ten
thousand members for twenty
twenty two.
As far as the plans we do offer
for pre Medicare we do have a
premier plan that monthly
premium is about three hundred
and ten dollars for somebody who
is receiving the maximum subsidy
the deductible is a hundred with
the forty five hundred annual
out of pocket maximum.
We also have our value option
plans that are H. M. O.'s.
That premium is two hundred
forty two dollars a month with a
fifty dollar deductible and a
fifty five hundred annual up
annual out of pocket maximum.
Regards to a Medicare for
Medicare supplement that with
the benefit is about two hundred
thirty six dollars we have a
Medicare advantage plans that do
range from zero dollars which
would actually see a decrease
and one of our plans this year
on up to sixty to fifteen.
For voluntary coverages we do
offer a delta dental at eighteen
fourteen up to thirty seven oh
one to depending if they pick a
basic or comprehensive plan as
well as vision four dollars
sixty two cents and then our
life insurance does have a range
based on the election of of
either two thousand all the way
up to sixty thousand where their
premiums can range based on age
from sixty nine cents up two
hundred sixty nine dollars.
One thing that we do do is
always a solvency analysis is
performed annually.
We analyze our future cash
inflows and outflows and we also
use this for strategic planning
purposes to really look at
exactly what are designed a
changes as far as the effects
they would have a day or so to
levels contribution rates as
well as annual investment return
looking at the medical and
prescription trends and then
make any necessary changes in
order to keep up with any of the
medical cost trends.
For twenty twenty one are
projected your deficit would be
spending in twenty twenty eight
and we know that our
expenditures would exceed our
revenues during that time but by
ten point two million dollars.
Regards start trust fund
insolvency period we know back
in twenty twelve we had two
hundred and thirty two million
dollars we were projected have a
solvency of seventeen years.
We've actually grown since then
that we do have over one billion
dollars and we are projected to
actually go the past twenty
fifty two.
Who is that without this
increase.
That is currently we're we're
are Trust Fund stands correct.
that is but the growth that we
have seen through over the ten
years Mr chairman that has been
through a combination of things
that has been through a
combination of contributions
that we as the organization of
put it aside knowing that we
want to make sure that there's
teacher benefits for active
employees of
We will start
All
Eight investment counsel and
while I'm not opposed to this
bill was not discussed there so
that's the reason I'm asking
thank you very much and finished
with Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair in the and I
support the bill I just think
that technical questions that I
maybe we could kind of pick up
and clarify here it says.
That know the V. S. P. O. office
state personnel office said
He's note that in the context of
state employees the term
probation and parole officer
encompasses both probation and
parole officer for the
corrections department and
juvenile probation and parole
officers with the children youth
and families department if SB
twelve did not include intend to
include both of those employees
that need to be clarified and
probation and parole officer
defined do we need to
clarification or or are both are
both intended Mr chair Mr chair
Senator Sedillo Lopez based as
far as for our realization we do
follow when it comes to their
status as far as who is in a
enhanced retirement plan so
anybody that has been up it has
is participating in the enhanced
retirement plan we do follow
that of one of the most recent
ones to was a motor
transportation division there
was some action taken during
last unless there's session of
moving them into the nine times
retirement plan so they are
participants of its operational
I believe are part of that based
on presented and so they would
be exit and has planned with
retiree health care authority as
well with CYFD is what.
I don't believe Mr chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez I don't believe
that CYFD and I don't know
specific this specific breakdown
of the organization or who it
would really depend if they fall
into that enhanced retirement
plan was just stated based on
payroll in the retirement plans
they offer we would kind of
follow along that suit.
Well Mr chair my suggestion is
is the result that before before
it goes forward because the
point is they don't think that
you intend to include CYFD
employees has excluded because I
guess what what I'm interpreting
this to mean is they don't think
that those are enhanced
retirement if there with CYFD so
you so deal with that by saying
adult probation and parole
officers.
It is the best deal with it Mr
chair of disabilities act if you
look at our bill I do believe it
actually does signal probation
parole
the last page of.
Forty five it does kind of get
into as far as describing what
the enhanced retirement
individuals are.
That says it just says and
probation and parole officers
and I think that's the point
those making to Senator is that
correct that's what I understand
the point to me maybe it's on
page six line fifty.
So do should we include should
we insert.
Mr chair of health that is the
Lopez yes yes I would like to
refer back to parent as long as
they are part of their it has
retirement plan they would be
part of ours so we can
definitely clear that up and
ensure that that is incorporated
if they are under well one of
those three years question is
are they yeah I don't know
whether they are not I I
apologize I don't know off top
of my head Mister chair Mister
Lopez and and that's why I was
asked to get back to you in
letting you know if they are
part of it but we would be
following you know the
requirements as far as to me to
thank you all right off the top
of our our it seems to me that
the.
Bill correctional officers.
Up to a lawsuit that that no not
striking them I mean adding a
dealt with relation and parole
but they struck adult
correctional officer officer
member and then they inserted in
probation and parole officer.
Mr chairman of those facilities
I believe part of that was based
on the bill from last year as
far as parent the way they named
it so I think we were just
trying to stay in accordance
with the way it was named but
I'll be more than happy to go
back and and verify.
Well since I don't know whether
they're excluded whether they're
in the enhanced or not I would
hesitate to make any kind of
motion but my suggestion is is
before it goes forward you find
that information out and clear
clarify it has both has both
suggested because otherwise our
voice was stated it could open
it up to the communications.
In person office raise that
issue.
In in the in the for their
analysis in there in the
analysis and then of.
Then the other
and I you know I always just
care about this house is going
to affect the lowest paid
employees how much are they
going to have to pay into this
because it's not graduated you
know it's just a flat fee
increase of just wondering Mr
chair Senator Sedillo Lopez this
is based off one of one percent
for employees so it really based
on their their income is is what
is going to need to their factor
so you know with a higher paid
employees they are could you be
more out of their paycheck into
the program and for individual
that is making a little less of
an annual salary would be still
contribute about percent but it
would be a lower premium that
are lower contribution we would
be receiving for them also build
a more proportionate to them but
it does provide benefits to a in
retirement to help them and I
know if we look at the open
market of somebody was not
receiving a subsidy or some
other benefit it could be
definitely costly to them so I
think we we bridge that gap by
helping provide some affordable
benefits to those members that
have been working and giving
back to to many years of service
to the public entities thank
thank you Mr chairman that was
my point it is it's not lower
for the lower paid employees and
higher for the higher rate it's
a flat rate all the way through
so and I understand lower rate
make lower
of less money so it would be
less absolutely but because they
make less it would be it would
be a bigger hit and so my my
question I guess that just of.
And I know they endorsed it I
know I know the retirees
association endorsed it but my
question is a little bit
different it's what the because
current employees were at the
lowest levels many of whom do
don't do don't even make fifteen
dollars an hour has I've made
the point.
Of pretty dramatically.
How's it going to affect them in
ways that discussion with the
discussion of making it a lower
percentage for them and a higher
percentage.
For the higher paid employees.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
there was nothing specific as
far as discussion that I know of
of looking at and somebody maybe
in that lower bracket in
changing our percentage
we've always tried to look at
the benefit and we do try to be
as fair as possible and making
sure that that this is available
to all of our members and that
is inclusive however we have not
looked at as far as any change
in that percentage of within a
threshold as far as for what you
would see an active employees I
do know for many active
employers you may see different
ratios of eighty twenty percent
based on salary anywhere from
seventy thirty to sixty forty
based on the states
salary brackets and so I know
sometimes they do tear that off
but we don't we based our comics
off the payroll calculation and
right now it has been like I
said the one percent but I
haven't heard any discussions as
far as modifying that thank you
Mr chair I I think we may have
an answer to your earlier
question it if you're because
very full DFA's on the line with
the.
Okay you want to view it well
what is the answer.
Vereker you on.
I'm sorry Mr chair.
He's up.
We had very briefly.
And there is a.
Where is the university comes.
And and I I want to share with
you that if it'd gone type and I
support the bill don't don't get
me wrong I support the bill but
if it has gone to I popped I am
on I pocket this is a question I
would have asked fan.
just because I'm always
concerned with the lower state
people in in our system so
And then we don't know about the
other issue.
I guess well I guess not a very
was on duties of.
Okay yeah we don't can you can
you text him and have him to
text me with the fix the answers
Senator are you through Senator
yes we will work on getting you
an answer for the thank you
Senator Gallegos Mr Chairman
center thank you for this just
had a couple of questions and
I'm wondering on the insurance
pool if it's a state or national
poll the reason for that is a
question on your discount rate
in twenty twenty minutes six
point eight now you're twenty
twenty two at three point two
six there must be a dramatic
change in something in the
healthcare field to be able to
drop that kind of right
are we just a statewide poll are
we looking National as far as
our membership is all state
employees or teachers we do have
individuals from universities of
Mr chair sorry and senator does
I got schedules but we do have
our representative is from the
state so it is anyway that's
provided service to the state
it to the schools state or local
government counties who have
elected to participate with us
thank you for that Mr Chairman.
Center and
Mr kill for thank you for
what do you know what because
that discount rate to drop.
nearly three points.
Twenty two to twenty this is the
twenty year and an integer guy
goes part of that was new
updated data for our health care
capital costs we do know that
also to there and you know
looking at our our trust fund
balances going up lower
liabilities part of the
calculation is they do use our
seven percent of expected
investment return and looking at
when we would be having that
change due to six Austin some of
our funds that's when they
actually go to more this blended
rate by using some of the
municipal bonds on top of that
and that's where they get the
factor that three point six
blended rate so as a do a couple
of those factors and how they
calculated that.
thank you for that Mr chair and
senator Mitchell I for us so the
way I understand this so next
year does public education of
employees that are engaged in
teacher we have para and then we
have you all if they ever looked
at pulling all of us for a
broader pool as you increase the
poll your liabilities decreased
in theory the less yes something
cash flow cash drop it that's
going to cause the increase but
I just wondered if you got three
separate little entities with
outlook and that may be a
discussion for another day but I
I'm just trying to figure out
how I'm pretty impressed
I know right decrease as I have
seen in Mencia only rate
increases so but food for
thought if you can get back with
him the Senate Mr chairman and
Senator Gallegos actually with
us at the retiree health care
thirty we do work through the I.
back also known as the inter
agency budget committee so we
work hand in hand with
Albuquerque public schools New
Mexico public schools insurance
authority and state in Mexico
General Services Department so
we do leverage our full
membership that does exceed the
hundred in around hundred fifty
thousand of all the different
participants from our retirees
to act employees to make sure
that we are getting the best
rates that we can to procurement
I will state that currently we
have gone out to our P. for our
pharmacy benefit manager all
four of us have job going out to
our people that will also state
to that the University of New
Mexico actually joined us in
this R. P. to to further
leverage that buying power as
all being members of the it is
agency of pharmaceutical
purchasing that was passed
before for the organization part
of that goal was to bring more
entities together to go out to
bid and leverage our size of a
better buying power so we do try
to practice that through the
organ.
Ation and seeing the addition of
the university is as helped us
but for this particular RP.
Thank you.
I'm we we have a one of our
analysts is working from home
today Barrick will.
He dropped.
Yeah I think that yeah.
Derek you have an answer for us.
I I really just don't know that
information at all I'm sorry.
Okay the the issue really is it
boils down to this as I
understand it.
There are two different types of
probation and parole officers
adult which we know are
enhanced.
And juvenile witcher's CYFD
employees and we don't know if
you consider them an answer not.
So if you consider them enhanced
we don't need to change this.
If you don't consider them
enhanced and they wouldn't be
paying the extra money.
Then we do need to change it
otherwise a wind up getting paid
extra money because this this
we're just says provision adult
it does this is provision for
legislative bills or to.
The excludes them from
participation and so that so far
or not and I think it I think
you just excludes them from
participating in New Hampshire.
Yes but they still are our
projects they just would pay a
different rate in the employer
to differ I think that's where
that works Mr chair as long as
they are participants are as
enhanced plan and I apologize I
don't know what they are with
the president's plan but if they
are in Paris in hands plan then
they are ultimately covered
under us as being under the
enhanced plan as well I think we
may have somebody with
information that is valuable to
us.
We're not.
So.
Forty five.
Thank you for.
Question implies to me that they
are not they're not enhanced
development enhances CYFD that's
how I understand this but
they're still in the still would
be in the insurance plan Mr
chair if I could briefly just
say something from New Mexico
current dot org in response to
the question it is asking if I
may juvenile correctional
officer employed by CA FD.
Is it true juvenile correctional
adult and juvenile probation and
parole officers will be moved
into the state police and adult
correctional officer plan one it
does state yes juvenile
correctional adult and juvenile
probation and parole officers
will be consolidated into the
newly created state police
correctional officer member and
probation and parole officer
member coverage plan one okay
and it doesn't matter the
language.
We don't need to make any
change.
As of what date.
I believe this was passed last
session this is.
the new coverage was from S. P.
seventy two.
I do believe that based on the
one I I know of because that we
did have an appropriation
request out there that kind of
the council that was regards to
last year's regular session and
I believe they were already I
think they are part of the poll
now my understanding.
July one twenty twenty Mr chair
Senator Stefanics is what my
colleague engine councils told
me.
So just to clarify it enhanced
membership this is a little
richer plan little different
early retirement or something
or.
Mr chair is yes it is it does
have some different provisions
as far as for enhanced members
whether be police or in this
case to do and I'll they do not
follow the requirement of the
minimum age of fifty five and as
far as the years of service
they're only required for twenty
years to receive the maximum
subsidy versus somebody like
myself was under a general plan
I would be required to meet the
minimum age fifty five and have
twenty five years of service to
me have the maximum subsidy so
it does have a different
criteria with the change to move
all those juvenile correctional
officers and probation and
parole into the and hence the
needed to probably is the only
way you can make those positions
attractive.
And so that happened last year.
It was part of a this isn't Mr
chairman and Senator Lopez it
was part of the bill that was
for power last year where they
were doing that yes.
In his quest the questions that
follow have.
No we don't do that and then the
I.
Properly listed as being from
participating in.
Mr chair Senator yes they are
being listed based on that
retirement plan because they
were incorporated into it.
Thank.
Thanks for Mr will prove this
coach center or you still have
the floor I guess I never did
leave you today correct okay
then we'll go to centers
committee we got interrupted but
I want to double for that so Mr
chairman and Senator you put
your hand up like you have a
little bit more information for
me on the program well Mister
chairman of the Senate revivals
with the I was going to mention
is that all in fact both will
senator Tom and myself have been
working on that to how can we
can merge you know to bring that
one cost.
And although three expenses so
we are working on it I
appreciate that because I see
some value in that in the the
other thing is take out the
highs and lows will give us
better product for in place so
with that are you thank you
senator Senator Schmedes.
Of Mr chairman and senator I
just have a good another
question about the corrections
people bring them and is is
bring them in affecting solvency
at all.
Mr chair Senator committee there
is there is some affect you know
by bring somebody and and we
would be covering over the under
the plan for a longer point of
time of being a based on the
fact that they did not follow
the minimum age and require the
twenty or so yes you know them
coming into the plan we would
incur more costs so we do
recognize that it could have
some effect on the solvency.
Okay but you know and I Mr chair
and senator I I in a support the
bill I just it's a I guess
I mean we I don't think we heard
from any corrections people as a
little surprising to me amazing
you know but I I just those seem
to be at odds with each other
right I mean if the goal of the
bill is to create solvency.
And that's the main goal once
again I'm not Nestle against
bring people at all I'm just
saying that these two things
seem to be at odds with each
other so
I'm just trying to resolve that
I don't know if maybe I'm
missing something but well there
in the plan already they're
they're they're they're covered
by the plan.
This is to add them to the
enhanced category which will pay
more they have to pay more yeah
so so you'll have more money
coming in and I would suppose
theoretically that's how you
reached your rates by deciding
what would be what would it take
to keep us from becoming
insolvent by adding them right
yeah and so Mister chancy and
that's what I was getting at is
is is it just a neutral is it
you know you brought them in so
you raise those rates and it's
kind of a net neutral I mean
that's that's with the heart of
Mike my question really Mr chair
and senator Senator committee
last year there was some money
that was appropriated for the
change specific to like mortar
of transportation division when
they did come to the program
that was not our full actuarial
value so and one of our special
appropriations that we did
request this year we were asking
for the difference of that
because by statute anybody that
comes into our program does not
have a present value a present
actuarial value does determine
what that cost would be a point
that we did not receive the full
of the proportion last year that
was directly appropriated to
based on our actuarial
consultants calculations as we
know that was part of it but I
do understand the part of this
benefit to I guess on a side
note is really to help you know
provide benefits to our our
employees to to retain talent
and really attract talent
hopefully keeping you know in
police from leaving are to leave
in other states hopefully you
know getting to work for for the
state and other public entities
so well I know it's it's
something that we do have to
manage and be very diligent
about and we do take that into
account when we do our solvency
study on a yearly basis of any
changes that would affect
affected we understand the the
benefit of this too and how it
helps all public employer
organizations.
Thank you and then and so we
have a committee members Senator
Candelaria on zoom.
Disappeared it is now.
I found we had him temporarily
Senator Candelaria if you want
to get on with the with the
question or any comment you're
just get logged back on wheels
will pick you up at that point.
Do you give back on.
Okay.
All right but we had an briefly
there for awhile.
any other questions I I I I just
had a group of men a real basic
question I understand.
You know the concern about the
long range solvency but it did
seem like over the last several
years.
What we what we're doing
currently is improving your
solvency.
It is the because the
investments are coming in or
because you know it it's being
managed really well or whatever
for whatever reason you you've
done your reduce the.
Hello the particular you've
extended the the point at which
you become insolvent.
So why do we have to do the
wouldn't that continue isn't the
isn't the the reason to.
This means the Mr chair what
thing I would point out is
volatility so well this was a
great year and are funded status
to go up if we look at last year
is sixteen I could potentially
site prior to that where we had
the did so it's gone up and down
our liabilities and and an
addition to our trust fund
balances so we had some great
investments this year that is
really been helping us but we
understand that the the right
that we've been achieving it is
really unsustainable and when
there is a correction which
which we know that particularly
in this month of January we've
seen some of us miss hits us
well we've we've if you know
crossed the threshold of that
one billion dollars we do know
that that is subject to some of
the investments that we do
manage it to trend insure that
that we're kind of diversified
through our asset allocation but
it is very volatile and we also
do know that there could be many
changes within health care as as
this is not just a a statewide
but if of federal topic that any
changes could affect us a couple
things that affect us has been
COVID we know that as far as
additional testing additional
mandates as far as things that
we do have to cover that is a
cost to us there was a recent
bill last year to that was
passed by Senator I believe
picking regarding mental
behavior health that was some
additional costs that there
would be no cost share from our
members of once again that is
going to be an impact to this
organization as a bit additional
dollars that we would have to
make up for so well we for the
board I commend them first for
everything they've done in the
hard choices it has not been
easy it's definitely come at
some of the cost of our retirees
in trying to keep it affordable
but every year as we continue to
keep up with medical cost trend
it does affect them into the and
it does little bit more burden
on us we're just looking to
really spread out some of that
that cost affect not only to our
retirees but us also some of our
employees and employers to help
with a bird and I do the
volatility of the the state will
be paying.
Over half the cost of this.
Well not all the all the all the
governmental entities that
belong to the.
Gentleman yes there would be
realized our schools make up
about fifty percent of our our
population that comes into us
twenty five comes in the state
and the other twenty five
percent is from local
governments
what is the tax suspense Fund.
Of the tax has been funded is is
is additional dollars that are
up by that I've been dedicated
to us so does actually for money
we've we've we receive it from
the state so it's another
funding source that we do
receive.
So it it it it doesn't have to
be appropriate of you're just an
automatic flow right into your
how much is the years Mr chair
of the doctor to the I believe
this year was was thirty six but
it does have a twelve percent of
factor to it so we do get
additional money on a year to
year basis us I believe for
fiscal year twenty two will
probably be around thirty nine.
Thirty nine million dollars this
correct Mr.
Is that oil and gas through what
is a.
Mr chair I I apologize that I
don't know exactly of what goes
into that that tax expense fund
but I will state that that as it
has grown now it wasn't too long
ago with as B. seven back in two
thousand nine where they
actually had made changes to it
where they had stopped the the
dollars coming to us I believe
around twenty seven million for
a few years they also do I take
in the three million that would
also dedicated to us back at
that time and it's had a
compounded effect of about three
hundred fifty to four hundred
million honest to the the the
loss of revenue that happened
back then during the special
session with SB seven.
Yeah that's when we were in such
a gem we we rated every every
closet every shell food we could
find money in.
Okay.
What's the will of the
committee.
Senator Stefanics.
Mo a motion to table is non
debatable.
Secretary will call the roll.
Methadone Senator Candelaria.
They're gonna go for the win.
Thurman McKenna.
House.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I support the bill so I don't
know.
That's a no no I was thinking a
lot of this.
First fax yes thank you play
five of their town.
Notice that the.
There are two C. Pena a limit to
pass yeah I cannot.
Okay this is the table right.
Yes.
There's more.
Yes.
Thirty three PM yes.
So we've table that did you
explain your vote.
Mr chair we hear a lot about
respect for the committees and I
think this is a major change
it's another expense.
The interim committee and that's
why I feel like it needs to
reprogram.
Thank you senator thank you Mr.
Keeper yes thank you thank you
Mr thank you members of the
committee thank you members.
Hey members will go now to
Senate bill one sixteen county
court go to.
Yes it is county courthouses you
want to start with that one.
We just missed the boat.
Thank you this time Mr chairman
have had.
Okay.
All there are.
Thank you C..
Species protected.
Thank you.
All right.
For a second okay.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I have Steve Kopelman here from
the association of counties and
Senator Griggs here with me and
that let me just explain Mr
Chairman a little bit of the
bill.
Yes this bill creates a new fund
the county courthouse buildings
Fund that's absolutely necessary
because the counties are can I
say it roughly here saddled with
the responsibility and and
unfunded mandate at least one
on funded mandates that it's
just difficult for them to come
up with the funding to be able
to meet the statute and the
requirements one of those
requirements is that they have
to maintain provide maintain
provide security you name it all
the full spectrum of services
for the court and when you see
the judicial complexes for
example you know that the
counties are maintaining those
well they don't have the funds
to do that it puts in and the
normais stress on them to be
able to keep these buildings
maintained so basically what
this bill does.
Is it provides twenty million
dollars to start off with it's
not a lot but it's enough to at
least get some something started
here to help the counties and
maintain these buildings this
these twenty million dollars are
already in house bill two as a
recommendation the and Senator
Griggs had been working on this
for a while in the past so I
have to give him some credit
with the counties has been very
involved trying to get some
funding but was never able to
get it through because of the
lack of funding this time
there's some appropriation
recommendation of twenty million
in the house bill two so all
this will do with it find the
funding to the administrative
office of the courts and they
will set the rules to distribute
these funds based on a on a one
hundred percent match basically
so the county still have to
maintain and provide some
funding but at least they have
on but they have some state
funding to help I'm here with
this match that's what it does
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
So I just want to get before you
go to your expert witness is yes
in the FIR it says LFC is
nonrecurring framework.
Includes twenty million dollars
for a county courthouse Fund
contingent at this bill passes
exactly you say its in house
bill two is only if this bill
passes exactly the funding isn't
house bill two but it needs a
language in the bill to pass
very good thank you Mr couple
murdered Senator let let's go to
Senator first to co sponsor
thank you Mr chairman and you
know this bill is is certainly
necessary for the county the
thing is as Senator Rodriguez
pointed out there charged with
building and maintaining the
facilities most of the
facilities that are exist
statewide or old now so the
costs to to build a new facility
were model has gone you know up
quite a bit the only way
counties can ultimately afford
the air to raise taxes on on
their on their constituent for
instance Terrel county has done
exactly that with the deal with
the hold harmless taxes that
were available they raised all
three eight so they could then
fund yes as well as their
detention center the detention
center have the come first
because of issues out there and
so the the revenue that the
county has and laughed in order
to do this we're we're
substantially reduced show
Terrel County needs help if you
look at the less that I provided
you up there usually every
single county all mold on that
list that is looking at some
sort of of issue as it relates
to court funding and and we just
would appreciate this if you
look at this bill to give it
your full consideration and and
give it a do pass so we can move
this on and help these cuts
these counties build the
facilities so thank you Mr thank
you Senator Griggs Mr couple.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I think Senator
Rodriguez and Senator Griggs
waited out real well this is a
massive unfunded mandate that
counties actually have to find a
quarters for state District
Court judges and so this is a
way of trying to really assist
to some extent counties and just
to give you an idea of the
magnitude Santa Fe County bill
had to build a new courthouse
about within the last ten years
because some sixty five million
dollars.
And that's a lot of money so
this would be a starting point
for the state to help counties
and it would especially it's
specially important because you
know it involves our state
District Court judges their
issues of security these are old
buildings and so we respectfully
ask this committee to to please
support this bill.
It is it is a priority for New
Mexico association of counties
let's go first to the
administrative office of the
courts and see what they want to
say about this bill.
Mrs remembers a committee of
this.
So are you are you are you on
the hand held Mike there that
all.
I.
I forget we're on television
yeah
This bill is an Indian I
graduated but I am authorized to
express our support for the bill
recently happy to undertake the
minor administrative burdens
that would involve.
Thank you a number of folks
Bernalillo county here it's
unlikely with the funding modest
funding it's in here it's going
to help you much with your
family court project down there
that's going to be a very
expensive one but there are a
lot of counties that this could
help substantially for twenty
million which is really forty
million with the match are you
get a lot of work done in places
like cleaning you County I'm all
the places on the list and we'd
be really happy to partner with
the the counties to get that
done or where they can at least
come up with a matching funds so
we have the expertise to do the
planning and to get the
construction done in those
places and just for the record
if you could I forgot to ask you
to introduce yourself to so I Mr
chairman of the committee are
dependent on the director of the
administrative office of the
courts on the director referred
to in the bill who would be
spending your money they.
Okay let's go to the audience
and see is there anyone yes Mr
rent.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee Larry around
registered lobbyist for Santa Fe
County this is the timing is
perfect and I'll make a pitch
since next week is funding week
Sandoval County is actually
undertaking a twelve million
dollar project for expansion of
the courthouse so the expansion
for just three court rooms let's
just over twelve million so
Senator Smendes Senator McKenna
I'll be coming to talk about
this but since I'm first in line
anyone else who might have any
extra capital take it and also I
would indicates Mr Pippen maybe
this will qualify as the first
application because we could use
those matching funds so it's
very expensive in Santa Fe
County courthouse is not that
old but with the increased need
for judges and increased
training in our judicial system
as we're talking about criminal
justice reform particularly the
session it's it's very timely
this is very good program would
be very helpful of the county so
thank you Mr chairman to clarify
you're suggesting that state
legislative appropriations would
could comprise some of the match
that I don't know I don't know
if the if capital outlay would
work for that probably would
have to be County fund would be
matched typically you cannot use
capital outlay to meet for
matching for other state funds
but you could use it for if
there's a federal funds
available over the you probably
have to use county funds okay
good but will probably together
if you if you have any X. I can
take some capital Sir.
If I have any left after all of
your other regressive and.
Thank you.
Anybody else is yes please.
Yes come up and and use the
handheld because it is hard to
hear on the zoom without it yes
Sir thank you chairman and
committee members my name is
Kathy Elliott and I'm a
registered lobbyist for play and
you counties so we do appreciate
your comments earlier both of
these counties have very
majestic courthouses that are
considerably aged at this point
and we would highly recommend to
pass on this position because we
can use all the funding matching
funding to possibly get and we
do appreciate you bringing this
to us but my sister in law is
your judge and you can.
The list a list of.
Anybody else.
Okay let's go to the zoom and
we'll start with barber Romo.
Thank you for this next bill.
You're on it Barbara go ahead
and unmute yourself and and give
us your ideas.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
actually on for the last deal of
the day so our policies okay
we'll hold your name.
I.
Else.
yes judge of Snyder.
Thank you.
Members of the committee and I
want to thank Senator Rodriguez
and and senator requests for
right now good afternoon
everyone I'm interested in I am
the chief judge for the twelfth
judicial district that is a
recount and Lincoln counties and
I know across the state that
feelings issues with houses in
terms of safety our physical
safety fifteen Representative
provided to.
With with with a specimen and
then and those kinds of issues
and just simple functionality
adequate houses in in terms of
our corpsman in the transfer to
the twelfth judicial district
we've got some serious issues
with.
Senator County.
Issues from one of the reasons
that we're still.
And and this is is could be a
game changer in that regard to
help hoping to cross the state
with the match funding to help
counties relieve some of that
burden and so I I'm here in
strong support of it and I just
really appreciate our centers
for bringing this bill to all of
you today thank you so much.
Very good thank you judge Snyder
next Jason class.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jason
clack on the director of port
operations for the
administrative office of the
courts
and I want to thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill and I
stand in strong support of this
it would really help the courts
and counties provide
for much needed renovations and
improvements to our aging court
facilities thank you.
Thank you Mr quest anybody else.
Okay members of the committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and then
Senator Stefanics.
I.
Probably over disclose but I
just want to disclose I know
this isn't helping my husband
personally me personally at all
but my husband is a district
judge and I can just say from
personal experience this is a
great bill.
All right testimony of Senators
the fed ex I move it to pass.
Senator is the second question
the second from Senator Sedillo
Lopez and a question from
Sierra.
Thank you Senator for bringing
this forward why would be a
cheaper.
In some cases to demolish the
building and build new.
Mr Chairman Senator Thoman he
could be some some courthouses
are extremely dilapidated and
old but those are decisions that
would come individually you know
by the by the counties they're
the ones that are vested with
the responsibility statutorily
to keep these buildings up or
make those decisions along of
course working closely with the
administrative office of the
courts but again Senator this is
a only twelve I should say only
it's twenty minutes a lot of
money but it's not nearly the
amount that they they use or
that they need it cost the
county is a lot of money and
they can't keep these buildings
up you know sometimes they get
mold I was there as a county
commissioner and county manager
during the time when hours I
remember a long time ago
I was getting so much mold in
the bottom of the basement that
I'll never forget just to have
those pictures in my head it was
literally sinking in and the
county just couldn't afford it
we don't know where to get the
money to fix it but yet the
statute required us to do it and
so this is a you know a
beginning a fund to be able to
start helping and get and still
having the counties find the
full one hundred percent amount
that they now do but they'll get
a little match from the state
and then if as we continue to
work with this hopefully we can
put more money into it in the
future as time goes by but those
determinations to build will be
there.
Thank you for that.
Thank you very.
The court Africans in eighty
County is that you know it is
one of those court had and when
you see pictures of court have
your very you know what it is
like have buildings yeah and and
show the judicial capability
sometimes just don't.
No I mean that court just can't
handle it show in order for them
to find the port facilities
they're going to have to build a
whole new facility if you see on
their list they're talking about
a seventy million dollar court
facility show
it's just an expensive
undertaking and the the half and
half appeal is a is a real
reasonable approach for the
state and the county to to take
care of this business.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that answer centered in one
other quick question I.
If I confusing.
With the weather that federal
funds are not available or yes
thank you Mr chairman senator
Tom and yes the funds are
already in house bill two
recommended and that was vetted
by LFC throughout the summer and
determined that it would be a
good amount to put in there at
least for now to help to get
these buildings at least
borrowing and and safe and so
all we need need now is the
language because the funding is
contingent upon this language.
That he was a you are asking a
federal funds and federal you
know I didn't hear the with
federal and so he future
somebody had mentioned federal
funds might be available for
some projects but off it yes the
what yes what if they could be
available you know as part of
the the arpa funds or or some
other federal stimulus dollars
you know and that's something
that definitely we keep looking
for in the LFC during the summer
to see what else is available to
be able to augment funds like
these so we will keep looking
for that thank you thank you Mr
thank you doctor call vote for
if you promise to look into that
no of course I'll be looking for
many different funds I was there
with to see all these buildings
thank you.
Anybody else on the committee.
Seeing no debate no further
debate the secretary will call
the roll.
This.
Thermic cannon.
Yes.
Yes.
city Lopez yes first fax yes
Tallman yes to subpoena yes give
it to pass on that one senator
thank you senator right away to
your next one one thirty four
thank you yes appreciate that
okay now.
But I do but I can somebody can
let me a pencil or pen that
would be great so you can take
your life no you take your CS
thank you Mr chairman
you're welcome thank you okay Mr
chairman members of the
committee I do have another bill
this is a very important bill
for me also I and I is the
Hernandez for the director of
the mortgage finance authority
and Rebecca who is the senior
director of policy and planning
for the mortgage finance
authority this is a housing bill
that hopefully as I mentioned
this one briefly the last time I
was here for another bill but
this one here would be the
transformational
time that we've been waiting for
and talking about for many many
years that we would be able to
have some sustainable recurring
funding finally that would going
to the housing trust fund for
New Mexico and this bill here
would take two and a half
percent from the severance tax
bonding capacity and here market
specifically for the housing
trust fund to build to renovate
it would be able to they would
be able to use it based on a
bill we all passed last year
unanimously they would be able
to do weather is ation rental
assistance build
affordable housing and comply
with the American disabilities
act and so on this fund is
actually a revolving fund and so
it generates twenty nine to one
in return and that on an average
and I've always used the word
it's a no brainer that we
continue to provide funding to
help even for you know for just
many other things that we we
talked about for example even
with homeless shelters you know
for renovations and and just
United.
But it's in their self I just
thought I would bring this
fourth because if we can get
this bill passed we can generate
approximately based on some some
projections just wanted to and a
half percent we would generate
in fiscal year twenty three for
example we would generate twenty
seven million dollars for
affordable housing and
weatherization repairs and and
on and on and then twenty in
fiscal year twenty four it would
be twenty five million in the
fiscal year twenty five you will
be twenty four million and on
and on and so basically the need
for affordable housing in New
Mexico is huge and exacerbated
now with this pandemic even more
and so we need to find a
sustainable form Mr chairman
every year we come to beg for
funding literally begging for
one mated to made us sometimes
we get zero so we lose out on
being able to build more
affordable housing and that this
year would really help finally
have a source to continue to
build the MFA in a nut shell has
approximately seventy million
dollars shovel ready projects
ready to go but they don't have
any funding to get these through
and it's sad because you see
many people that don't have it
cannot afford to to build a home
or to have a home so I'll make
that that's it Mr chairman
because I don't want to speak
for too long and I really did I
think so you
The
Chairman and members of the
committee right thank you is the
and did you want to add
We had about
Triple
Creasing that
And developing their
General opposition funds twenty
fifteen we allocated forty
million through that in twenty
