Bill or in hearing the house
version of the right next door
and when they come over go to
will go to fifteen sixteen but
will start with seventeen since
senators to fantasies here and
so.
No no because we're going to be
a stephanie
so this there are two handouts
for senator seventeen.
The.
We provided him to the staff.
We have the handouts for for
senate bill seventy.
There's two of them.
It all help explain that process
of the funding.
The.
We just need to make sure the
senator mechanism is actually
on.
Let me limit center.
I'm delayed because having
kickups logging in
she's trying to log in back.
You'll be able to see when she
logs in.
So i'll tell her you're a forum.
Anything yet.
The.
So the first bill we're going to
take up this morning senator is
senate bill seventeen.
And that is senator stephanics
bill regarding the health care
delivery in accessor so please
if you explain though
thank you mister care this is a
bipartisan bill it's myself a
representative of doring goes
under michael pidea
representative jason herper and
senator martin so it is an
assessment bill that would bring
in more money it's an assessment
on hospitals that would bring in
more money because it would be
match with medicaid funds with
me today I have troy clark who
is the director executive
director of the new mexico
Mr chair members of the
committee
the health care authority would
issue rules for the health care
delivery and access act and this
would carry out the provisions
and they would have to seek a
waiver or state plan amendment
which is not immediate so even
if we passed us they have to go
through a process which through
experience could take at the
minimum six months at the
maximum eighteen to twenty four
months so this is not in a media
feel good money bill this really
would take a while
to proceed the whole idea here
is money of this delivery and
access fund would come from an
assessment.
Of occupied non medicare in
patient hospital bed days and
net revenue from non medicare
outpatient hospital services
provided by the hospitals the
idea is that there would be an
assessment on the beds and the
services that are not medicare
and that would be matched
matched by federal medicaid
dollars and it would increase
the funding that would be
available for the medicaid
program and also for the
hospitals in our secretary will
discuss that but i'd like to
turn over to mr clark for just a
few comments
welcome mr clark thank you
mister chair thank you senator
again troy clark presidency of
the new mexico hospital
association so please to be here
today I think as we've talked
many times over the last few
years we'll recognize there's a
issue with access to carer in
the stated new mexico and we
have an opportunity through this
bill to address one of the
drivers of that access to care
issue both by making our
hospitals both urban and rural
sustainable in the future not
having to look to how they keep
the doors open every day but how
can they invest in services to
expand the care that's offered
in their communities
i'll hit on a couple of the high
points I believe uh.
The secretary designate we'll
talk about some of the more
details of the bill but I want
to highlight that the assessment
of the to the hospitals.
Is intended and written that it
cannot increase cost of care to
the patience or to the insurer
so the total cost of care does
not increase this as a hospitals
putting up money to get matched
to come back.
Cannot be put on any individual
patient bill or claim to an
insurance company
additionally
this is a a bill that is written
on the assessment peace to be
able to preferentially benefit
our rural facilities as you know
and have heard over interim
sessions over the years our role
facility struggle that low
volume this brings additional
dollars for them to be able to
not only keep their doors open
but provide those services on a
consistent basis within their
communities with the support of
all of our hospitals including
the urban hospitals.
Last thing I think i'll point
out and before I hand it over is
we have a provision in the bill
that aims to keep these dollars
in the state in the mexico as
the purpose of this bill as I
mentioned led off with access
we've got provisions in there
that while we know operationally
their expenses that we purchase
from outside the state in
supplies or in some of the
pharmaceuticals or some of the
labor that we get on a temporary
basis whatever provision in the
bill that requires seventy five
percent of the net increase for
every facility evidence.
Then it was expenditure in the
state whether that's in labor in
capital improvements in growth
of services which we feel is a
real key components we've talked
to many of you in ensuring it as
the intense of let's get it in
the bill and we put that in
there so with that mister chair
I will pause and wait for
questions later
in secretary welcome good
morning mr chair members that
the committee thank you for
having us here and thank you to
you at the senator's response
reading this important bell
which really will have an
enormous impact on the health
care system here in new mexico
and on our the stability of our
hospitals I wanted to highlight
that the health care delivery in
access act is actually modeled
on existing successful
legislation here in new mexico
called the health care quality
surcharge and that's a program
that has allowed to see to
optimise hundreds of millions in
federal funding for nursing
facilities that help to create
financial stability and measure
and improve quality of care in
those facilities and we've seen
a great success with that i've
heard a dabil was so successful
that the legislature revolted to
make it permanent during the
twenty twenty two legislative
session I think you thank you
mister chair for your
sponsorship on that
senate bill seventeen
essentially does the same thing
for new mexico's hospitals
taking advantage of a new
opportunity allowed in federal
regulation to increase medicaid
payments to hospitals up to
what's called the average
commercial rate.
The bill essentially charges
hospitals in assessment on their
impatient is an outpatient
revenue those assessments are
deposited into a fund that is
then used as the state's share
to optimise approximately one
point three billion in federal
medicaid matching funds the
health care authority would then
use those funds to increase
medicaid reimbursement to
hospitals entire portion of the
increase payments to quality and
performance bonuses.
So you are have a one page sheet
that illustrates in simple terms
with senator seventeen will do
looks like this
first the bill will create a
stable funding source for our
rural hospitals out of new
mexico's twenty eight rural
hospitals eight or currently at
risk of closure and at least one
is at risk of closing a stores
imminently these hospitals are
critically important health care
access points for new mexicans
living in our rural communities
and they also provide an
important source of economic
stability and jobs in rural new
mexico this bill will net about
one point one billion and new
funding for our hospital system
second the bill will improve
hospital called performance and
quality forty percent of the
payments made through the
program will be tied to quality
metrics which we've been working
on with the hospitals for
several years and you can see
what those eight agreed upon
metrics are going to be for the
program rollout at the bottom of
your sheet i'm really pleased to
point out that the mattress
include two for improving
behavior a whole screening and
follow up care.
And third the bill will require
that seventy five percent of the
payments made to hospitals will
be re invested in the state of
new mexico through work force
expansions salaries for direct
care workers capital
reinvestments and the expansion
of new services that are not
available in many of our
communities today such as
obstatric care or cancer
treatment and you can see in the
map on your sheet how far new
mexicans currently have to drive
to get cancelled treatment today
and closing I just want to
reiterate the seriousness of the
financial situation for many of
our rural hospitals and new
mexico and i'd like to think
them for their patience we've
been looking for the right
solution for years then new
mexico now has the opportunity
to not only stabilise our
facilities but to accelerate
investments in access to
treatment and care for new
mexicans and about seventeen is
a smart solution and for a seat
and I ask for your support today
thank you mister chair.
So mr chair you would stand for
a support opposition questions
and comments from committee
thank you madame chair thank you
matthews senator stephanie and
still we were here a little late
last night
let's go to the audience first
by show of hands whose here in
support of this bill.
Oh my gosh.
Is there anybody who dares.
Express opposition to this bill
in the light of that them
display.
Okay we will take let's take.
Four five comments from
supporters.
Trying to repeat things that
other people have said do we
have anybody on line either for
poor again anybody again
everybody's for it
this is one big happy party this
morning no no no we're not gonna
take all of you
yet for four five
four okay four and none repeat
none repetitive please go ahead
sir introduce yourself good
morning mister chairman members
of the committee thank you for
hair here in this bill my name's
frank corporate and the ceos
you're a vista hospital and
truth acconsequences and
standard strong supporters bill
thank you thank you
came don't repeat anything he
said is a mischairman
good morning my name is mike
miller richard blobby is for
northeast general in lovington
and rose about general
importance is bills critical to
our rule hospitals
sustainability these hospitals
it also will allow us to support
programs that him.
Traditionally low margins such
as period pediatric and be able
health ill also support
community based programs to
prove health population a health
health programs for the
vulnerable population thank you
thank you make.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee my name is neither
bush i'm government relations
director at the university of
new mexico
just wanted to chime in on our
support our supplemental
directed payments are handled
differently from this particular
process but it because we are a
government hospital this
legislation builds on a model
that we have already used to try
to maximize available federal
funding for you in app so this
is for the other hospitals that
are not the public hospital in
new mexico so strongly support
this where a member of the
mexican hospital association and
we really appreciate your
support this is going to take
pressure off of our hospital
because we're already at a
hundred thirty percent of
sensors right now so to the
extent that are rural hospitals
can be high functioning
hospitals we we certainly sort
of support this legislation
thank you even even though you
and wouldn't directly
participate in this okay I get
correct correct we are we are
not part of legislation thank
you chairman thank you good
morning miss chairman of members
of the committee my name is
market gonzalez and I represent
mckinney county I think it's
fair to say that the secretary's
reference to the hospital that
would be imminently closest one
in rmch it's critically
important this is a a vidle
component to the future survival
of rural hospitals the county
has had to invest millions of
dollars into the local hospital
just to keep it alive there
other components passing through
the legislature to help rural
hospitals but this is a
necessary component for it for
their longterm future we support
the bill and think the sponsor
and the sector for working on
these issues thank you mister
tremony members thank you thank
you.
Mister chairman members of the
committee i'm stephanie starting
clark and the secretary of the
tax station and revenue
department it won't be
repetitive i'll be the only
person speaking about tax I
really just want to emphasize
that my department stands ready
to partner with the health care
authority to implement this and
referencing the work we've
already done on the health care
quality surcharge this stands to
be another very efficient and
effective way to use the tax
system to bring in this
assessment money basically we
share data about the hospitals
we pre populate the return so
that it's very easy and we have
a hundred percent compliance on
the collection so we're ready to
go and ask your support thank
you thank you madame secretary
thank you.
Mister chair and other members
of the committee and my name is
denies convolute and i'm here
representing physicians
providers and the patients that
we treat
i'm here today after my night
shift I came straight over
because I thought that this was
very important to express our
support i'm a native new mexican
from donate county I went to
medical school at you and m have
practiced the new mexico for
sixteen years and i've worked in
albuquerque espanola redo so
santa fe clovis i've trained a
last cruise and someone park so
you're going to hear all over
the state and this is true of
not just myself but there are
many of us who are dedicated to
the state i've met with
providers from all over
including farmington grants and
gallop thousand saquaro and I
i've learned that we are
industrious when we take care of
our fellow new mexicans we find
ways to deliver the best and
personalized care to our
patience.
This focus on our communities
and our patience drives us but
can you imagine what we could do
for the health of new mexicans
if we had adequate resources
this bill will help new mexico
beyond par with other states
that have already tapped into
these federal funds this bill
can help health care by allowing
critical access hospitals and
rural clinics remains solvent
this bill will allow us to
better recruit providers to our
land of enchantment I always
keep my mom gloria gonzalez who
lives in chambering is a state
retiree and on medicare at the
center of my purpose this bill
can help people like my mom stay
healthy and to stay in their
communities with providers who
know them and are equally
connected to the communities
they serve it can help us care
for new mexicans when we're and
how they want to be cared for
thank you very much and we
standed support physicians
providers and citizens of new
mexico for the spell very good
thank you doctor okay we have
three on line or did you want to
say
okay we have to be online
christina campus from whether
loop
while the big county hospital.
Good morning senator of calling
from center roads and new mexico
and one hundred percent and
support of this are very
important
put them like closer turn it up
a little we're having a hard
time hearing.
All right is that a little bit
better that is thank you just so
calling in from someone's new
mexico and want to express one
hundred one hundred percent
support for this bill this will
help my new rule emergency in
hospitals to be sustainable
throughout the future of a
report to my hospital into all
the role hospitals in new mexico
thank you all thank you casino
then we have tammy stump from
union county general hospital.
The.
The.
Then john harris.
From last cruises memorial
medical center.
The.
Mr can you hear me yes very
nicely thank you very good.
My name is john herres mister
chair members of the committee
of his pleasure to be with you
today and see your memorial
medical center which is the
largest cube medical surgical
hospital in southern new mexico.
I strongly support senate girls
seventeen because passage of
senate bill seventeen like so
many others have have stated
will help us did you or jobs in
taking care of patience
throughout the the great stated
new mexico.
Most importantly it will improve
access to care.
An equally important it will
help us to care for new mexicans
in new mexico and it will
State please pass senate bill
seventeen.
Thank you john.
Okay members of the senator I
just wanted to mention mr
chairman members that secretary
allen petric allen is here from
the department of health as well
and that this is not attacks it
is an assessment so we just need
to clarify language there's a
difference thank you.
Members of the committee.
Senator neighbor
thank you mister chair and thank
you senator for bringing this.
Having heard
from
medical providers in my
community as well as attending
uh an event where ceo's from
rural hospitals around the state
we need to do everything we
possibly can to address the.
Crisis that that exist in
particularly are very small
communities and so mister
chaired senator could you talk
Time with having to possibly
close their doors and
discontinue service
in those communities mr chair
senator I think you know several
the individuals who spoke
realizes significance but I am
going to turn to the secretary
designate for her expertise on
this.
Mr terror senator neighbor thank
you for the question I think
what we're seeing today is that
hospitals are just barely barely
getting by there were some
changes in the way that medicaid
payments were allowed or
authorized under what used to be
called the safety net care pull
those payments have kind of
shrunk over the years because of
federal changes in federal rules
the hospitals had been pretty
reliant on those dollars and as
those have gone away we also
kind of went through a pandemic
really hospitals were at the
front line of that they've seen
their costs go up especially in
rural communities where they
have high fixed costs and low
volume this is going to net this
is going to net them new money
and again that will allow them
to invest in new treatments for
that community I would like to
see investments in more
maternity in opera behavioral
house things like cancer
treatment that just aren't
provided in communities today
and so mexicans living in those
communities have to drive far
distances and so this is getting
that and kind of net new money
into these communities and so
we've we've done the math and it
really looks good and positive
for every virtually every
hospital in new mexico.
Mr chair and
madame secretary of the.
The two issues that they brought
up where the reimbursement rates
were not sufficient to meet
their cost and then you
identified the other one and
that is low volume and the
extra cost they have to bear to
bring doctors and nurses and
other medical professionals to
their community to to provide
those services and so this this
money done impact either of
those but it helps bring in new
money.
To offset those may be low
reimbursement rates and the fact
that they're having to pay
higher costs to bring these
medical professionals in it and
my understanding that
mr chair senator neighbor that
is correct under existing
medicaid rules are traditionally
we've been capped at being we've
been unable to pay hospitals
above what's called the medicare
upper payment limit so today our
hospitals are actually largely
at that upper payment limit
there is new flexibility allowed
to under federal regulations
that this is really trying to
take advantage of which allows
states to use with car directed
payments to raise the
reimbursement rates for medicaid
up to that average commercial
rates are really kind of taking
that from what what is really of
that lower reimbursement rate
and putting it up higher to be
on power more with what average
commercial pairs are paying so
that's really the differences
there is a change in federal
rules that allows that
additional flexibility to raise
those medicaid reimbursement
rates which have kind of been
capped traditionally so this is
really taking advantage of that
and finding the state general
fund source for that
and mr chair madam secretary of
if we don't do this we're
leaving.
Federal dollars on the table
number one and number two
do we have any other.
Things in the hopper to try to
address those critical needs in
those rural hospitals that are
on the brink.
Mr chair senator neighbor I
think we we do have other
strategies but I think they have
been more piece meal they
haven't been quite as bride or
wide ranging as the one this
will be very impactful because
as you mentioned the net is
going to be one point one
billion and federal funding to
the state and mexico which will
largely stay in new mexico to
invest in the health care system
that's really what we need it's
we've raised the reimbursement
rates kind of to where we can
under the existing federal rules
without being able to take
advantage of this initiative and
so I think this really kind of
finishes that investment in new
mexico we obviously have other
strategy is including the rural
health care find which is
investing in
you know start up costs for new
mexico were all communities
health care but this is really
going to be the infusion of
investment that our hospitals
need to stop sort of
doing that to have a scraping by
and so that they can really
stand up and expand to our rural
communities
mister chairman senator madame
secretary that thank you for
bringing this uh you know we've
heard the cries uh from our
communities in in uh role the
mexico and i'm pleased to see
that you're doing everything we
can to try to address those goes
concerns because they did
express very blunt terms the
financial condition that their
facing and.
Choice of.
Either closing their doors are
having to significantly cut back
services in small hospitals
around the state and that leaves
those citizens with having to
travel one hundred to two
hundred miles to see medical
care and that uh that would be
very difficult for many people
in our.
Thank you I think this is a nice
and bill and i'm done really
excited that you know and happy
that you're working on this
I just reading that fire
so apparently the attorney
general's office is concerned
there's some kind of state
constitutional issue because
we're expanding the powers of a
constitutionally created agency
and I had a colleague chris
fritz
unm who wrote a whole book on
state constitutions are you just
think that's wrong madam chair
senator are you reading for
seventeen seventeen oh okay I
think I think that's written in
a different fire okay thank you
it's too early never mind
would it kill the rep all right
furniture masters will go to
senator hickey thank you mister
chairman onyx
for
Spill for some time so on to
thank you for your work i'm just
curious about the implementation
date
and just making sure that
everything is driving
simultaneously so so mister
chairman center's funnics on the
last page twenty six it talks
about it you know easily either
either bills either bills of
kick in ninety days after the
session or criminal bills kick
in july first this one kicks in.
Sections one through eleven of
the section become effective on
the first day of the month
subsequent to the health care
authority department.
Receiving the necessary better
authorization so my question is
if if this is it law yet
is this is this bill necessary
in the application process
toward the federal government if
you could explain how this
happened simultaneously.
Um.
And and the reasons behind them
so before I turn it to the
secretary to get into the
details the first payments of
this bill would be expected
around march twenty twenty five
and so the secretary can explain
about the process for
applying to the federal
government thank you
mister terra senator masters are
yes the bill is necessary we
have to have statutory authority
to make the application for the
assessment add to apply that we
have to get approval by the
federal government the centers
for medicare and medicaid
services because they're the
federal thunder so they have to
approve it we also have to have
the appropriation of the state
share so we have to have the
ability to say that we will be
able to meet our commitment with
the state general fund which is
what the assessment is for and
what the find creates and so we
have to have that and we have to
prove to them and we submit that
application that we have both
the statutory authority and the
appropriate okay thank you
mister chairman
exactly but so are you telling
them the federal government in
your application hey we passed
this bill it's going to be come
law when you approve us cause
it's not like
mr chair send the remains as
that's correct so they would see
that we have the authority to
make the application for the tax
and then obviously the bill sort
of.
Makes everything contention on
that federal approval
historical experience with the
health care quality surcharge we
were elizabeth secure approval
pretty quickly on that so that
has worked out really well any
we if they are aware of a
federal regulator is aware that
we're working on this okay thank
you thank you mister sector so
in other words.
The up.
The applicate you know the
reality is that this.
That this is in the works it's
we're gonna have the statutory
framework I just think it's it's
not not criticizing I think it's
fantastic leadership cause
theoretically this will not be
law until.
Until the pen say yes but the
fact that we pass this in its
and it's going to kick in when
they say yes one of the reasons
they're gonna say yes.
One mister terror senator
masters I think we have to be
make sure that it gets a proved
in order to
you know we don't want to
obligate this date to your
payments that we are not
federally authorized and sell I
think that's the reason that
continues so mister chair
senator this department and
other departments usually talk
with the federal government in
advance of any ideas to
determine whether or not they
will pass muster with the rules
and the application I just came
from another bill on the federal
meat inspection that had the
same thing so you do the other
pre footwork and then you come
in to ask for the state
authority to go in and do the
application earlier I mention
that even when you do a an
application or a steep plan
amendment the minimum amount of
time it would take a six months
it could go up to eighteen
months or twenty four months to
be accomplished so the
department has done their
footwork but now it's time for
us to step up thank you thank
you and mister chairman that are
the up this bill refers to.
The.
This bill refer.
So this will make reference to
the.
What's the department's new name
health care through yeah so this
bill mister chairman refers to
the health care authority
and there is no health care
three
hsd no mister chair in twenty
twenty three we passed the bill
the legislature that made the
human services department the
health care authority
department.
The big bill that you heard from
me yesterday
is setting up all the parameters
of that department but we passed
the change in name and authority
last year okay thank you mister
chairman things that are less
than the folks at home last
night we did the clean up bill
where we scratched out
department and put health care
authority.
So that was where that came from
thank you mister thank you
senator senator hicki.
Thank you mister chaira just
like to say dead or to a number
of my colleagues here.
Amazingly creative and
desperately needed and thank you
for putting it together and way
and I also want to commend you
by bringing in all the
stakeholders as you did it and
did it over time and not a last
minute piece so thank you so
much for that.
Okay I had a couple of questions
real quickly
um first cms has it approved
similar programs in another
states rate caused we went
through a bad experience with
the bed tax years ago you'll
remember that but that they've
seemed to change their tunan on
this approach to financing
healthcare and and they're okay
with this as far as we can tell
they've done it with other
states mister that's cracked
there are there strict rules
around it it's not just free
money we have there are
regulations around it we can you
know get into those if needed
but there we you know we think
have the experience now through
the sercharge and this was
really model on other states as
well as that surcharge bill that
we've implemented previously
and and I noticed in the fire I
I had when I read the bill first
I didn't realize that there
would be some changes in some of
the existing hospital support
programs like the dish and the
will I basically go away then
this the the but they let's dish
then for.
Eh
share hospitals.
Is that going to go away now
thank you mister chair yes we've
actually bottled in and the
numbers that we've given you the
assumption that dish will go
away dishes a program that you
will qualify but we believe this
will raise our rates high enough
that most if not all hospitals
were no longer qualified for the
dish so we've made the
assumption in the modeling and
numbers that all dish will go
away if there are some hospitals
that still happen to qualify
those numbers would be in
addition to but the other one
that you didn't mention by name
but when you said a couple we
currently have a supplemental
payment program that the
secretary in our team works very
long and are done called hbp the
value based purchasing
that will fold into this program
for the reason that one of the
many rules that secretary
mentioned you cannot have the
same quality metrics in two
different supplemental payment
programs and we worked very hard
on that in those of the eight
measures that the secretary
called out and so by rolling him
into this program we can still
use those and the other effort
that went into creating the
program as well as the efforts
that have started by the
hospitals under that program and
and the other one that I wanted
to ask you about is.
And I and I always forget the
name but it's the safety net the
solvency hospitals whatever it
which is a real name of that and
then is that going to leave
mister terra the safety net care
poll actually doesn't exist
anymore it went away under
federal rules a couple of years
ago that now has folded into the
hospital a value based
purchasing program so there's
been evolution of these payments
said that is what is going to be
wrapped in to this program so
the safety net care pool the
hospital access payment
and the hospital value based
purchasing program will be kind
of one program at this point it
will just be all in this health
care delivery is this is the
safety net care pool that that
the counties paid into will they
still be paying into something
what is that something they're
paying into
yes mister chairman armed thank
you for that question so because
we're folded we're using the
temp folding the industry
dollars will continue to come
the one twelve portion is what
you're referring to from the
counties and the existing state
general fund dollars however to
be clear what we're asking for
is no new general fund so the
existing dollars into the
programs of all the end will be
argumented by the assessment
from the hospitals which
generates that three hundred and
fifty four million dollars of
state portion of then get
matched to get up to the one
point six dollars if the county
payments in the hospital
assessment become the match
yesterday to figure factored all
day.
Okay.
That's it for me anybody want to
make a motion.
The senator tommon makes motion
senator hicky seconds it for a
two percent is that your motion.
The.
You pass.
And don't forget mechanic.
The.
Mechanism yeah.
Did you have any questions that
your mechanic.
A chairman can you hear me
yes yeah we can hear you.
Okay I know we're supposed to
show our screen when we're about
to vote i'm having trouble doing
that right now.
Well you can just I don't have
any questions
the voice voda I just answer yes
you you know how you vote on
this will cut will include you
in the roll call okay very good
I don't have any questions
chairman thank you
thank you okay senator hecky
senator he give out yes center
mayor stuff yes said or my
establishment yes senator my
curtain so my car generally sent
a mechanic.
Yes center mechanic votes yes
senator neighbor senator
neighborhoods yes centers
meetings centers that you're not
best yes there said he allowed
his votes yes senator man
senator man wrotes yes center
teasing pino yes said it is it
been over yes.
By an act in the affirmative
zero in the negative you have to
do past center thank you very
much mister chairman members of
the committee.
We're gonna ask senator for
senator doing to come in and
while we're waiting for that
when we take up.
We can do.
The.
The.
Can we do goods all
you can do it.
Oh wait we have the expert
witnesses for the other bill
let's go to that one senator
when it turned over to you by
time.
The.
Thank you mister chairman and I
believe the supreme court
justice more design as well she
had she charity.
Commission that took a look at
this issue and the results of
much of their work is
incorporated into this bill.
This this issue.
And he says she can't hear
anything she's on we know she's
on.
But she says she can't hear.
The.
This is sixteen.
Yeah.
The.
Well we have a soon.
Or you're passing at the suburb
fifteen yeah because we don't
have a sub for this
we don't have a sub for this one
we do.
Then I have a coffee.
The this is me explain what we
don't do saturday morning
hearings very often.
So mister chairman were told
that the
supreme court justice can hear
and participate now and we're
ready when it's her appropriate
for her to do so.
So mister chairman i'm gonna ask
my course through
this
representative tara lauhan to
speak first because she has to
leave immediately to her put on
a bill in another committee.
Thank you mister chair thank you
committee I think before as we
have a bill that is how we were
the the bills about most
importance is something that we
have been working on for decades
and reform that is much needed
and.
The goal here is
increasing access to mental
health services for those with
behavioral health challenges.
The recycling in and out of the
court systems without care.
We know the the tragedies we
know the history of our
behavioral house system in our
states.
We are in crisis
and we are now working with new
ideas within the structure of
our laws to address those
issues.
Whole heartedly.
This is a topic as we know that
is.
There has been discussed
throughout many of our our
committees
and this particular
piece of
the statute that we are
attempting to amend has not been
addressed open in I think over
four decades.
It's time that we do that is
time that we take a closer look
at how we do things differently
because when we do not do things
differently when we do not open
that scope we are only going to
have the same outcomes and if
not worse and without mister
mister chair and into a response
or cosponsor thank you for the
time to speak
and to those listening thank you
for all your time in we look to
get this done here in committee
today thank you.
Thank you representative and
mister chairman members of the
committee.
Senator representative looking
and I were members of the
commission that took a look at
this.
As was the other expert witness
here a doctor bronde when
necessarily say forensic
psychologist and
it was her expertise that we
relied on heavily in the
drafting of this bill.
The issue that that this bill is
attempting to address.
Is one that is all too familiar
particularly I I imagine it's in
every city in the in the state
to some extent but it's
absolutely
an avoidable to the notice in
alva.
This is the situation in which
people many of whom are are
minimally ill ridiculed to
substances.
We're alcoholic and
living in either on the streets
are in very substandard
conditions.
For whatever reason are arrested
on.
Mister meiner charges.
Or nine violent felony charges
and brought before the court.
The police arrest them because
the public is of is a guest that
somebody would take off their
clothes at a public park with
their little children there.
Where the public is a guest that
somebody would in the middle of
the night start yelling at the
moon while wondering down a
residential neighborhood.
Where the public is a guest that
food would be taken off the
plates of people eating at a
sidewalk restaurant and consumed
wealth of diners are just
sitting there watching it these
are all the kinds of crimes that
lead people to believe that
we've got out of control crime
in alba.
There's a lot of other crime as
well but these are the kind of
things that are so visible that
you can escape them and they're
visible because when the police
arrest somebody and bring them
to court for these offences the
court determines they're not
competent to stand trial and has
no alternative but to release
them so they're back out in the
street in a matter of hours.
And back out in the streets for
they again.
Take food from diners yell at
the moon take off their clothes
in public or whatever the the
offence it was that they were
arrested for in time the police
stopped responding.
I had a constituency and a man
come right into my front yard
take my garden hose take off his
clothes and take a bath with the
garden hose and when I call the
cops they said all that so and
so he does that don't worry
we'll go away any did.
But I still found it very you
know appalling and the police
just stopped responding because
they know if they take him to
court.
They will be released because
they're not confident to stand
trial the heart of the matter is
this when a court says somebody
is competent they don't mean
they're not mentally ill they
don't mean they're not addicted
and the brick and the substances
of effected their brain
functioning they don't mean that
they're not alcoholic and they
are not making good decisions
that are doing things they can't
even remember about because
they're blacked out.
They mean they don't understand
what's going on in a court room
they can't communicate with
their lawyer or the judge
effectively and so we have no
choice but not to deal with them
in the court and they release
them legal definition of
competency and the clinical
definition of needing help or
two different things and that's
where these this this bill in
representative thorough lance
building the house.
Bump into each other that's what
we're trying to deal with now
i've look around the committee
and I I was going to use center
merry cape paper as an example
but there was nobody here on
this committee
when I was fighting here to send
nail and her attempts to passing
mandated outpatient treatment.
She finally succeeded I find the
knuckled under.
Uh jim jackson is still
disappointed in me I think about
that but.
I knuckled under and we passed
men dated out patient treatment
because we put in their
provision that you couldn't go
to jail if you didn't comply.
In there I think that's the
nerve of it and that's part of
this bill to we can't send you
to jail if you don't.
Participate in the treatment.
But we try to structure it so
that you have a fighting chance
of making a decision about
whether or not you want to go
into treatment when you are able
to make that decision.
When your mentally ill to say do
you want to go into dream no I
don't the voices are telling me
that that's bad things happen of
course you're not going to go in
the tree.
When you're under the influence
of a substance and we say would
you like to go into diction
tremendous man I got sent no
waiting for me in the park.
When your alcoholic do you want
to go into treatment brother I
just I just need to drink.
You're not able to make good
decisions about whether or not
to go into treatment then but if
you're in court and the judge
says you've got to go into
treatment.
Even though the bill clearly
says if he says if he goes to
the treatment and he then he
doesn't complete the treatment
walks away from it after a few
days we we can arrest him we
can't force him.
We just want to get a little bit
of the handle we want to give
the judge is another tool in
there and their equivalent to be
able to deal with with what's
going on on the streets of
albuquerque and santa fe and
probably every city maybe not to
the extent that it is in
electricity but it's class it's
a crisis there and so i'd like
to ask mister mister chairman
for my expert witness doctor
nester to explain the bill and
how it works.
Oh but well we'll go to justice
the mora first and cause she's
online and I think she's she has
a statement she'd like to make
about about why this is needed.
Thank you can you hear me okay.
Can you hear me ok.
The.
Yes I think we can hear you now
thank you
good morning chair tallman and
senators my name is brana soma
i'm an associate just a
something new mexico supreme
court i'm here because I was
part of a group of professionals
that participated in samsung
confidency policy academy we
were tasked with creating
solutions to improve the
criminal competency process and
you mexico
this is not a judiciary bill the
judiciary takes no official
position on this legislation but
today I don't want to offer you
my knowledge and experience that
i've gained spending a decade as
a trial court judge presiding
exclusively over criminal cases
and subsequently the experience
i've received observing and
getting feedback from stake
orders to all throughout the
entire state as judges our job
is not only to interpret the law
but it's also to administer
justice to affectively
administer justice we have to be
equipped with adequate options
and adequate resources.
Having more options and
resources available on criminal
confidence he matters would
assist us and more effectively
resolving this case so let me
tell you what happens right now
and what's happened for over
forty years in new mexico when
companies see is raised in a
Determine whether they're
competent to recompetent
now as a criminal judge we have
many options while well this is
pending while this entire
proceeding is pending they may
be subject to conditions of
release they may remain in jail
or they may have some
combination of both
some remaining custody are found
incompetent and our hospitalized
at the new mexico behavior halt
instead to to see perhaps they
can attain competitive not to
get treatment but to see if they
can learn and understand the
process enough to attain
competency most reoffend and the
end result is many cases have a
lengthy process that ends and
dismissal.
The vast majority of these
individuals will never be
connected to services treatment
housing or any other wrap around
service available the system and
place is not working and I want
to briefly tell you about a
couple of real life individuals
to illustrate my point there is
a thirty eight year old man in
albuquerque and for the past
fifteen years he's had over one
hundred cases almost if not all
or mister meaner such as
criminal trash pass distortedly
conduct his most recent case was
less than a month ago it since
been dismissed because he's
found incompetent that's over
one hundred times in the past
fifteen years we have missed an
opportunity to connect this
individual with rap around
services in an effort to prevent
residentism.
The second defendant has been in
the system for over three
decades almost as long as we are
operating under this competency
statute he has a hundred and
fifty nine cases
while most of them are
misdemeanors his elevated to
some felonies he's had assault
on a health care worker assault
on an officer all of these cases
were dismissed without a
connection to services or
treatment but the particularly
the following cases were lengthy
and involved jail and
hospitalization.
And the last of minute who you
might think is doing much better
is thirty six year old since two
thousand nine his head eighteen
charges sounds much better the
problem is is although he
started with mister meaners
they've escalated to violent
companies he now has domestic
balance of sort domestic
violence aggravated battery and
battery on an officer the
domestic violence involves his
family which is the only support
system he has left family
members are increasingly
frustrated and begging for help
from the judges they appear in
front of our justice system to
date has offered three options
involuntary commitment jail and
or dismissal I believe we can do
more and I believe we can do
better the pro proposed
amendment would set up a
framework for new mexico to
start moving its cases on the
right direction if the parties
agree there's an opportunity for
diversion to services and
treatment which means right at
that first interact action with
the justice system at the
arrangement they can divert to
treatment
as opposed to going on with the
criminal process.
They're the hearings to
determine competency and
dangerousness what happened more
expeditiously and for the first
time in new mexico we will have
the opportunity to not just.
Decided not to just
automatically hospital license
one there will be outpatient
impatient competency restoration
and the community and well these
are not built and not available
now they won't be until
their statute there's a
statutory change that allows for
it and finally if both parties
agree and where it's available
the option would be to refer it
to sustainable patient treatment
the national center for state
courts the state justice and
institute the council of cheap
justices created a national
judicial task for us to examine
state court responses to mental
illness and twenty twenty the
task force issued a report
specific with recommendations on
how to improve companies see the
stand trial in criminal cases
the vast majority of these
recommendations are included in
the proposed legislation.
Justice is only served when our
judges are equipped with
adequate choices and adequate
resources I hope that as a state
we can change the path we've
been on for the past forty years
thank you so much for your time
and consideration I stand for
questions and again thank you.
Okay thank you thank you judge
senator I would move a do not
pass on senate bills sixteen.
And the dupass for a discussion
purposes and the committee
substantial health and public
affairs committee substitute for
senator sixteen and a and i'd
like to ask my experi.
The.
Okay we need to.
Move o.
Okay.
The.
Go ahead.
Thank you chair.
While I don't feel like just as
the more a really summarized all
of this well I would just re
iterate and add that
to the identify yourself i'm
sorry yes dr brown eastern.
I am a trained psychologist
friends and psychologist but
that's not my current role
clinically I now do
consultation and more
administrative tasks
I helped uh help done sort of
the initial portion of this and
then carried it through I
suppose so it started with a
revise
going to the sample gains policy
academy on competency
we were with four other states
looking specifically at
what's happening in our country
across the entire across the
entire country related to
competency crisis.
Um we were with washington dc
alabama taxes and north carolina
all of which have taken very
different approaches to
competency within their states
new mexico is very interesting
in the way that we are
established unlike most of the
country that works off of a
state hospital system wherein a
defendant is comprehensive is
raised that defendant then
weights in custody for a
hospital bed to open where there
are then transferred then an
initial competency evaluation
happens and then the next
process whether not that that
defending goes towards
restoration or otherwise.
Here are new mexico we have an.
Out patient or out and out
patient
contract model for competency
evaluation that means that when
comprehensive is raised a
defendant than is either
stays in custody or is released
and then at.
A private evaluator than mix
makes that evaluation and then
recommendations to the court.
Um.
Due to our limited resources
here in this state I think we
all know that that's true both
in physical health but
definitely within mental and
behavioral health we've been
limited to the number of
providers and evaluators that
we've had on that contract up
until about a year ago when a
bhst increase the evaluator rate
and we are able to obtain
additional evaluators to that
contract.
However that doesn't really
address the main issue which is
back to white justice the morris
at is an ineffective use of our
current system we have a
defendants who are evaluated for
competency they come back into
our judicial system four months
later competency is raised again
and we don't have any official
oversight over
whether or not those competency
evaluations are still good if
they should be stipulated to and
each judicial district really
approaches this in a very
different way we could have a
defendant the order to
competency multiple times in one
year
it's it's just not it's not an
effective way to use our current
system it's a burden of
financial burden on both our
judicial system but also on our
evaluator system and again back
to it just as the more aside to
echo that we're missing
opportunity is to get these
individuals connected to
treatment that alter me at that
ultimately could prevent
residentialism.
Um.
I think finally this bill is
extremely aspirational but so
many people were consulted along
away i've spoken to almost every
single other state about what
they're doing what they've done
if they've touched their statute
if they have what happened we've
heard exciting things happening
in other states and horror
stories we've consulted with
every major stay cold the deers
office the pd
the executive the judiciary
we've consulted with the actual
providers community providers
the police the counties the
cities
we we really have tried to do
you are do diligence on what is
the ultimate impact on this
because what this bill
ultimately does is it calls for
our state and for our
communities to support the
people who live there
this isn't just for people
feeling safer at home it's for
giving people homes to feel safe
then.
So I really think that this bill
while it is very complex
a lot of great people were
included to try to come come up
with the initial solution and
and lastly i'll say.
With the resources aspect of
things currently under current
statute we're not allowed we're
not allowed to have out patient
restoration so those programs
haven't been developed those
programs haven't been built yet
because we're not allowed to use
them so there has to be this
change that comes first before
we can see the building of some
of those additional resources in
our communities thank you
mister chairman with that will
stand for questions.
Okay I I did want to mention
that secretary allen and then.
The at him shields ahead of the
behavioral health institute in
las vegas the state hospital
they're both here in case
there's questions that arise
about of this might impact those
facilities any of the facilities
in doh especially the state
hospital.
Okay thank you senator and I
will turn to the audience how
many in the support is a bill.
The.
Has anyone that in our position
to this bill.
Okay would take a four from our
position for and support the
first will go for an opposition.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee my name is
bennett power in the chief
public defender
with a buildings complex it's
hard to say that we are actually
opposed to the bill there's a
lot of moving parts here we've
been consulted over months over
weeks
is.
Is recently two days ago in
meetings with people to make
changes I think as the experts
said
parts of this dollar
aspirational and very complex
and the public defender's office
who represents individuals in
those court hearings in I when
they are facing the court when
they are in orange jump suits
and handcuffs and we're trying
to make the right decision we
fear very strongly about this we
know so does everybody else
there's a lot of people working
in good faith here and so I feel
bad scene that we are posted
bill as it now stands but I
think there are improvements
that can be made and keener who
is a lawyer from our office and
obviously he whose work for well
over decade represent
exclusively people with male
health issues if we need to
discuss this whether or not this
committee is the place of
whether moves forward and we
continue to work with the
sponsors we just want to make
people aware of those ag.
Thank you mister public
defender.
Next I would have a tend you
generally see will take five
instead of four.
Thank you mister chair mr chair
members of the committee my name
is money silver and i'm the
executive director of the new
mexico coalition and
homelessness this bill will
directly impact marginalized
populations including those
experiencing homelessness.
Those individuals have increased
holderabilities around lack of
housing transportation internet
money etc which start really
impact the feasibility of them
successfully being part of this
and what this bill sets out to
do.
The bill does not address the
many issues with current
companies and see determinations
lack of train evaluators like a
medium cognitive testing etc or
create a confidency restoration
program are we have now is in
and bhi which lacks the capacity
to perform the duties required
in the spill.
In its current version and
because of the lack of services
and facilities this bill will
further burden our jails.
We understand what this bill
aims to do on the agree that a
behavior health system is broken
a couple the coalition believes
that continue care and continue
of care however it must be done
through lens of equity and we
know far too often systems do
not work in this way the bill
will work to further criminalize
those experiences homelessness
and with this I ask that the
committee vote no one especially
sixteen thank you.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee ellen pines
representing the disability
color.
Is that better.
Nope can you hear me there have
I hit the happy media okay i'll
try to keep up there are ellen
pines repres.
Representing the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of people with
disabilities including those
with mental illness who might be
caught up in the criminal
justice system
I regret having to stand up in
opposition to this bill because
we very much support the concept
and what the sponsor and the
proponents are trying to do
we support treatment in the
community we support diversion
from the criminal justice system
but this bill is quite frankly
in its current state and i'm
referring to the substitute not
just the original bell it's
quite frankly a mess it has all
sorts of gaps it has
inconsistency on clarities it
has really poor drafting and
i'll give you just a few
examples there's a provision
that I believe is that the
bottom of page three top of page
four where they retain a thirty
day deadline for having a
competency and dangerousness
hearing in fell any cases but
completely eliminate the
provision for mister meaner
casters so there's no deadline
at all for mister meeting our
cases if you look at the
definitions section in the back
of the bill they'd define a non
violent felony as a person and a
felony is not a person so
they're a lot of drafting places
that really do need to be fixed
so which is why I say the the
bill is not ready for prime time
another problem with the bill is
that they're trying to combine
two things which are different
one is competency to stand trial
one is the need for treatment
for your underlying condition
you can be mentally l homeless
living on the street unable to
adequately care for yourself and
still be competent to stand
trial and under this bill if
there's no issue as to your
competency to stand trial you
can't be diverted to treatment
it's simply not contemplated in
the bill so they're a lot of
problems with the bill we
believe it needs a lot more work
and we'd love to engage with the
sponsors and the proponents in
that work we were not consulted.
During the intermont as we
didn't find out about it until
the bill was struck we would
love to work on it because the
concept is something we support
but the bill itself it's very
problematic so we urge you to
simply table this and have it
worked on and properly vetered
by interim committees during the
internet thank you mister.
Good morning good morning mr
chairman members the committee
and martial martinis the
executive director of equality
new mexico bodily autonomy is at
the crux of the elgerbtq
liberation movement and bodily
autonomy is that the crucks of
this legislation anytime any
system attempts to restrict or
limit bodily autonomy we must
ensure that elgibitu community
members are brought to the table
early and collaborated with to
ensure that our concerns are
taken into consideration elger
particular people in new mexico
are asking for more access to
mental health behavior health
and substance addiction
treatment in fact we have been
bagging for more resources more
places to go a better pull of
providers providers that are
trained and inclusive of our
queried transcommunities we have
been pleading with the state and
our leaders to make those
available to us but so that we
can access them when we are
ready in our own community with
support from our loved ones
chosen and families of origin
not by caution not by force and
certainly not as a piece of
punishment in the so called
criminal justices.
The.
Thank you mister chair andrew
representing the criminal
offense lower association
I don't want to what first I
want to congratulate and and
support the sponsors of this
bell whose who dedicate their
life in this case centers or a
teasy pino has dedicated his
life into making life better for
people with mental illness and
for treatment one of the
apartment problems with this
bill though is it is
aspirational and there are
services referenced in this bill
that aren't available in there
are procedures that are in this
bill that aren't available and
the argument is well we'll put
it in the bill and then we'll
double either empathys to grow
out the the behavioral health it
really should not put words and
bills are programs and bills and
reference to bills if they're
not there in the community and
so yes there is a very delicate
balance between mental illness.
And the court system that is to
typically at shop point four a
four services but what is is
trying to do is pretty ambitious
is trying to use the competency
and I was rapid up mister chair
is trying to use a compensate to
be that vehicle to provide the
behavioral whole services
competency is very complex we do
need to work on this much more
and we do need lawyers involved
in the drafty thank you.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee larry horand
registered lobbyist for the city
of los crucis we had a good
opportunity to speak with both
of city council and the police
chief in los cruces on this
piece of legislation and we've
been collecting data and he
provided data on individuals
that had at frequent contact
with law enforcement and all
i'll just remind the committee
that this bill is for people who
have already been arrested and
it gives us an alternative of
what to do what to do and how to
help them rather than just
churning them through the system
over the past six years
at they collect a day done about
twenty people who they think
would be benefited by this
legislation in those six years
the low number of rest of those
twenty people was thirty five
and the high end was a hundred
and fifty eight arrests for one
individual there are no options
are police officers do not want
to arrest charge and have to
book these individuals into the
detention centers we want to be
able to provide support and help
for them to to receive services
so although there may be some
things that need to be fixed in
the will that's been pointed out
we frequently put things in
legislation and then have to put
services in place so that's not
unusual site urger support for a
due pass on this legislation to
keep it moving this is an
important piece of what we need
to do to improve not just the
criminal justice system but to
behave a health system and the
healthcare system in the state
of new mexico so we urge your
support thank you mister
chairman.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is daniel williams i'm a policy
advocate at the american civil
liberties union of new mexico
and like mister bower I wasn't
entirely sure what line to stand
in because the saw you have new
mexico since in support of the
intent of the spell but as
you've heard from others we do
have concerns about the bill in
its current form.
You heard from mr bower from the
mexico criminal defense law
association from advocate for
people with metal illness and
disabilities that there are
technical issues and the bell
and and we share those concerns
that was very real concerns what
we as the sell you of new mexico
with highlight in this
conversation is that issues of
competency issues of bodily
autonomy are civil liberties
issues and constitutional issues
we hope that as the vital
conversation about the
intersections between mental
health and the criminal legal
system on folds the
constitutional rights and human
dignity of people involved in
the criminal legal system are
centered and prioritized we
strongly believe an expanding
robust medically appropriate
culturally appropriate diverse
and programs that treat people
experiencing mental illness
rather than criminalizing them.
Mister chair members of the
committee we urge the
legislature the executive
experts and stay called to
continue conversation so that
this bill can accomplish its
essential and important intent
thank you.
Thank you thank you good morning
mister chairman good morning
members of the committee my name
is all registered lobbyist on
the behalf of the city of
albuquerque want to echo a lot
of the comments that my
colleague mister ran mentioned
on the behalf of the city of
lost cruises we stand in strong
support of this legislation as a
justice is more a talked about
the people of front of us talked
about
the intersection of mental
health in our criminal justice
system requires swift attention
it is clogging up or court
systems and it is actually
preventing the real
administration of justice with
respect to the people that in
our society scare us as opposed
to those who require help and
caring and understanding we
think that senate bill sixteen
wow may not be perfect is an
important step forward to
addressing and streamlining and
making it more efficient
judicial system that also
ensures that those who need the
help in the services most have
access to them so that they can
be better and not be a burden on
the rest of our society thank
you mister chairman
good morning mister chairman
members of the committee jason
weeks registered obvious for
burner leo county
berlio county operates not just
the largest detention facility
in the state but the largest
behaviour of health facility in
the states the same facility
huge number of the individuals
that interact with that facility
on a daily basis have underlying
behavioral health issues and
they're really not being dealt
with in a systemic way that's
very productive because they
come in we book him in.
They may be get some quick
access to services they go to
court to get a credit time sir
please or they get out and then
they don't show up to a quarter
parents they get picked up in
the cycle just continues and
this significant population is
we're just from a systemic
standpoint i'm dealing with them
very well I would i'd plan out
that berlio county also has a
lot of services extending out of
the jail
to try to address some of these
critical behavioral health
issues while they are not as
robust as we would like to see
them be
we also can't drive utilization
of those services as
appropriately as we would wake
at present because of the
systemic issues within the
criminal justice process though
this bill definitely needs some
additional work we would urge
the committee to move forward so
that that work can continue it's
an important incredible
conversation and without the
appropriate treatment we're
going to continue seeing the
same public safety issues come
back over and over again and
then people end up essentially
denigrating into this behaviour
health crisis and they just they
can't pull themselves out of it
it drives homelessness it drives
property crime it does a lot of
things in our community that we
need to try to figure out how to
address and
this approach is like this
actually do move us in the
appropriate direction I very
much appreciate that the
comments in opposition I think
they should be taken and he'd
but they shouldn't be a reason
not to move the bill forward at
this point thank you.
Hello i'm brack wolf and i'm the
ceo of the veterans integration
centers and album kirky and just
speaking on brat behalf of the
veterans that we serve too many
are struggling with mentally on
this and up in the criminal
justice system it helps prevent
them from may be getting
benefits it's also very
difficult often times to
convince them to get the mental
health care they need i'm and I
think this bill would strongly
support our veterans as well.
Thank you
don't thank everyone for their
comments.
One
person
anybody else said
indicated
just one no one know additional
okay we have a germany's dory
who was the last crucial please
chief
who wants to speak her line go
go ahead.
She story good morning mister
chairmen of the committee my
name is jeremy storing the
cheaper police for the last
cruise's police department mr
mentioned several of the things
I was want to talk about.
In last crucials we've seen an
increase in the need for this
bill on a strongly supported and
although i'm not an expert in
the logistics of it I can tell
you that we cannot continue to
do nothing
just some quick numbers to
highlight the need for this we
track residential rates and.
And twenty eighteen and twenty
nineteen we have five people
most crucials who were arrested
ten or more times.
In twenty twenty one we have
fourteen people.
And twenty twenty we had twenty
four people and in twenty twenty
three we had twenty one people
who are arrested are criminally
excited more than ten times.
I had one person just last year
there was a rest of thirty five
times one hours arrested thirty
three times one thousand twenty
nine times and there's a long
list of people that are in that
ballpark.
It's it's not comparison to
continue in the cycle word and
the vast majority of people
suffer from entry and at all
ness substance uses disorder and
often times both.
And most of these people have
been teamed in competent their
cases get to smith.
And the officers find himself
interacting with them get next
day a week later a month later
and the cycle starts again
thank you for your time and I
strongly support this.
The.
Oh thank you chief now will
turn.
Go ahead
I wonder if we could make a
couple of comments in response
to some of the issues
sure go ahead
i'll start and I think the
doctor niece wants to say
something as well I was struck
by two things one a lot of the
come and said.
I didn't hear anybody say we
don't need this reform.
What people were saying is this
needs more work or
alternatively.
We need to also have resources
in place before you change the
look.
But it's a but it's a vicious
cycle yeah that argument these
are vicious cycle.
Check in a day kind of cycle
I think we need three legs to
this stool we need to change the
scheduled we need to find the
resources to improve the
programs and we need to do the
and we need to have personnels
to staff the problems we
currently don't have enough
people to step the existing
resources the existing resources
aren't enough to meet the needs
of the people who are asking for
services voluntarily and the
people who need services but one
astronomy voluntarily or even
larger.
Until we change the statute
though how do we rationally go
to.
The legislative finance
committee and say we need more
resources because we intend to
change the statute we've got to
do all three things so you heard
bills in this committee we heard
when the other night hundred and
sixty eight million dollars for
more.
Treatment centers buildings and
programs.
You heard my bill for a hundred
million dollars to expand the.
The health care work force we
need all of it and we need to
change the statute now I am
perfectly willing to sit down
with the people that have they
weren't equivalent about the
wording.
The.
I am perfectly willing to sit
down and work about we have to
change the statute because we're
not going to get the rest until
we change the statute I am
convinced that until we start
seeing the courts have the
authority to send somebody for
treatment and not be able to get
it there won't be a demand for
that will be content to let them
just live in the park continue
to get arrested twenty nine
thirty times a year and just
continue this cycle this is
absolutely part of the of the
solution and i'll let my
expert witness addressed some of
the issues to.
Thank you
I don't have much more to say
that uh senator did not say but
I do just I I guess I want to
echo in terms of I very much
appreciate the concerns that
people have shared about this
bill
again it's a very complex issue
I think some things are getting
misrepresented in terms of what
we can actually do in a bill
versus what needs to be put into
policy and what needs to be put
into raw and that was a really
big conversation that was had in
the drafting of this
when you consult with so many
different stakeholders everyone
wants certain language this bill
was quite quite a bit longer at
one point but I think what we
realized is were really
addressing the criminal
competency statute a lot of the
resource pieces of that yes this
is calling for that this is
calling new mexico to stand up
and to come together and to
prioritize our communities
but the the actual understanding
of the building of and you know
the appropriations for any of
that I think is outside the
scope of what this is asking for
this is purely asking for that
criminal competency statute to
be revisited so that these other
mechanisms can be can be
outlined and then lastly I just
want to say
we're not looking at court
ordered treatment as like the go
to treatment we're looking at
diversion to treatment as the
first go to treatment we're
trying to keep people out of the
justice system work trying to
keep people away from a system
that isn't the appropriate fet
because they committed a crime
of poverty
yes there are individuals who
commit more haines crimes this
this bill doesn't take away from
the judicial process it just
widens the variety for all
different levels of offenders.
Rather than putting every single
offender through the same system
we're looking at really creating
a continual of care via changing
our competency statute and and
lastly like senator said.
I really do think you know i've
had a lot of conversations and
this is just not bernaly of
county I want to make sure that
everyone understands i've talked
to.
So i've talked to so many people
in all of the different areas of
our state each area of our state
has really unique and different
circumstances and I think that's
another challenge that we face
this bill is is really intended
to.
In a lighten new mexico to the
fact that what works in touch
might not work in daniel anna
what works in donator might not
work in farmington
but it allows for each community
to build what they need in their
community to address their
people and their communities
so again back to this is really
looking at criminal competency
the language in here is around
criminal competency and the
resources peace this bill calls
for that but it doesn't
necessarily give the language or
speak to how that's going to
happen because it's the it's the
criminal comprehensive statute
thank you.
The.
Thank you.
Shameless plug.
Um there if we pass the alcohol
tax there could be up to two
hundred and fifty million
dollars in additional resources
for behavioral health problems
and particularly those related
to substance abuse but that that
certainly would could go into
this pipe a little bit because a
lot of substance abuse itself
medicating for underlying.
Underlying mental health issues
so
I hope the i'm in a vote for it
big but with the hope that
before you get to are you going
to judiciary
yeah with the hope that before
you get to judiciary that you
meet with
ln and and the lgb d q
advocates.
Um.
Because there are some issues
with with it that I think could
be fixed
and the kind of relates to my.
I'm glad that the justice was
online talking about this bill
and in supporting it because she
would all ultimately decide the
constitutionality that are the
the supreme court
cause i'm a little bit work for
example and i'll just give one
example but i'm i'm not
suggesting this change and I am
just suggesting that
constitutional issues might be
here because it says it shall
provide a provisional diagnosis
or full diagnosis it says when
possible.
With the person doesn't have a
problem
if if it is truly as sudden to
abuse problem with no underlying
medical mental diagnosis which
is possible they shouldn't be
forced to end up with a
diagnosis.
Does that make sense.
So in and I would think that
that might raise a
constitutional issue if this is.
You know you're in this system
and all the sudden you know
you're fighting the diagnosis.
And then
you know you're you're being
impossible i'm just thinking
that there might be some
constitution she's it could be
fixed and i'm not suggesting
that would be the perfect change
and just suggesting to look at
it and I think if you were to
meet with cause I don't want to
hold you up.
Here in committee um.
Did you know do a temporary
table into all that because it's
a short session if this is a
long session I would suggest
that but because it just sort of
short session
i'm would have vote for the bill
with those caveats.
And supporting that alcohol tax
mr chairman and and senator said
the olympics
I definitely think that it would
be really wise before if if it
gets out of this committee
before we go to judiciary that
we have an opportunity to meet I
would offer next tuesday
afternoon I was gonna say
tomorrow but I don't even know
if the capital is going to be
open tomorrow and sunday if it
work I would suggest tomorrow
afternoon for people who have
concerns about wording.
Uh the way the bills drafted.
Things that might have been
omitted or should have been
included that we sit down in the
cut in or get a conference room
but uh either tomorrow afternoon
or tuesday or mister chair you
could do it by zoom
or you could do it by zoom
III think it's much better just
get people around the table
in activity issues well on that
condition and I I support the
bill I think
and i'll just say mister chair
you're kind of want to might
touch stones before for
civil liberties issues and and
i've been thinking about it
about this to like involuntary
commitment I know they've been
calling this building
involvementary commitment
and um.
It scares me involuntary but I
think that there are some guard
rails in this bill some of them
have constitutional issues as I
just described it but I think if
you put guard rails which would
probably be part of part of your
discussion to make sure that
people aren't caught in this
system.
Wrongly yeah.
And you know as many protections
has possible including regular
regular follow up hearings right
you know just making sure that
somebody doesn't get stuck
so mister chair that that's
that's all I app.
Thank you senator next up with a
senator in the neighborhood.
Thank you
mr chair.
I'd like the start
with a couple
things on
on page one in two page one line
twenty five and page two lined
six and ten.
I see the word parties and I
just wanted to know who
who were really thinking are the
parties is that the defendant
and the state or does it go
beyond that.
Mr chairman and senator
neighborhood I believe in in
these instances we're talking
about the state and the
individual who's before the
court.
There could be either the the
prosecutor or the fact.
And when you say that defendant
or defense that would include
the attorney representing the
family the public defender
probably in these cases so if
one of if one of those parties
think that there's a competency
issue they can raise the the
issue and.
Decide to start this potential
compass competency evaluation to
to occur and then.
Yes in those negotiations uh
they agree.
Then there may be some diversion
programs that that they are put
in
that.
Correct yes if there is a
diversion program that they can
agree on that would be the ideal
solution
m and them I look over on page
page three
and this this applies to the.
Defendants who are now in a
diversion program.
And they complete their
their whatever requirements are
imposed upon them and it says
that the the defendants charges
shall be dismissed and so
if I read this correctly and and
i'm not a criminal lawyer so I
may need help from across the
way but
if the charges are dismissed.
That means in assents
there there's no consequences
for whatever action there
going through that diversion
program satisfies whatever
the court wished to impose there
be no
finding of guilt or innocence
there be no though
subsequent uh
penalties are fines or anything
about sort that they charges
would literally just be this
morning
yeah mission.
Yes then it are not every year.
And and keep in mind that these
are the two categories we're
talking about here or mister
meter cases where they're now
being just dismissed right off
the bed or nine violent.
And so those of the two
categories where they can go
through this diversion.
And that would in every instance
require
the consent of the state to
enter that diversion program
because it says the parties have
to agree
and I guess the judge I mean the
judge of course is the final
arbitrary in these cases but it
would be the the public
defender.
The
days offers and the judge these
parties that would be agreeing
to instead of sending this
person to jail where he won't
get to help you need also to a
treatment problem instead.
Right in and that's because the
court has discretion whether or
not to.
To move forward with the party's
agreement or not the court can
decide well no i'm not going to
accept your agreement we're
going to go to trial exactly at
the chips fall where they may so
anyway the court would be
involved in that
mr chair
if mister chick
and charge
there is.
I'm a chart
that I should say mister whose
in charge
minister chair
with respect to the turn non
violent we saw yes wireless
provisions on page two
and then we look at the
definition on page nineteen per
g one I am fifteen sixteen I
think the comment that was made
about the definition may have
been correct and so I think we
can handle it one or two ways we
can either omit completely the
definition of my violent felony
because bylong fell on the is
definitely on page twenty one
five
so if we define violent felony
and other felonies would be non
violent if you will so we could
either omit the definition
completely or we could define
mon violent felony means a
felony that is not a violent
fellow and I don't know how you
would like to handle that but I
think you could do it one of
those two ways and that I would
certainly
yield the you on your preference
senator neighborhood I would
have gone with your second
suggestion but a doctor niecer
tells me that in discussions
there were stay colders involved
in the uh drafting of this who
were very clear that they wanted
a definition although this is
kind of a non definition.
But I like your suggestion if
you don't mind us making good as
in a moment we would accept it
as a premium and the amendment
that we define that that we
defined it okay
then.
He who is in charge
five
I would I would move that on
tage nineteen
other committee serb.
Wines fifteen and sixteen we
amended so that it reads.
G
non violent value vvmarkquote
means
a felony.
That is not.
A violent fellow me
michael.
So we're striking the words
someone who has not been charged
what they crime consistent with.
And inserting and live there of
a felony that is not.
You have that frank.
We have it written down on a
newspaper appeal with the
measure.
On that point.
Is in the end of finding it with
it with its own definition with
its own word
that's why we could do without
it right so could it be of
felony err in which violence was
involved.
No no I mean not
the opposite and sorry
a non violent selling is a
felony in which no violence was
involved.
So that way.
Because violent violent felony
is is specifically defined on
page twenty lines five through.
Eleven and that does not
incorporate every
action that.
Involves some violence it only
incorporates those that have may
be extreme or substantial
violence a battery as violent
even though it's not captured in
violent general.
So on that point so you need
everything captured that's not a
violent selling
I think that's there in terms I
don't okay.
Well leave the age.
They follow me that is not a
violent.
Mister chair.
There is probably better than
which.
On this point what would about
doing this non violent felon.
Take out the way and then mean
someone who has not been charged
with the claim con.
So then it's it's a person that
you're defining cassette seems
so weird to
but I don't think that word
appears.
It has nine nine one felon does
not appear okay then with.
Never mind and mister chairman
we would accept the senator
neighborhoods amendment is a
friendly one.
The.
I think we need to vote on the
reminder.
Yeah.
Okay
mr chair mr chair.
My question is I don't know
whether the procedures here are
to get a point or version of the
committee so with that amendment
or whether you are men committee
subs.
That's the one my paygrade
okay.
You know to remember that when
we do the motion and if they're
any other amendments we can
incorporate them into the same
point for okay.
That's all I am.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you services if you know and and
thank you justice and what are
all the folks who are working on
there so some brief sharp minds
that.
Public foreign against.
I see where this is I see where
this is going cause it's
incredibly frustrating just a
quick review mister chairman I
mean.
That the whole philosophy of a
competency of if someone is
incompetent if someone does not
understand the proceedings
around them.
Then they won't understand any
punishment doled out by that
proceeding and won't change
behavior cause I don't know why
they're being punished that's
kind of the
thought of the old school
philosophy with regards to come
on therefore if someone is
incompetent.
Ah.
The government can bring a
criminal case against them
because it does it matter with
the exception of if they're
dangerous then you can civilly
commit them even though they're
technically innocent to approve
and guilty you can civilly
commit them essentially.
Jail them up in the max what the
state hospital for the length of
the maximum sentence they would
receive if they were bumbled.
So like for example I think the
guy's name is high who I was
deemed incompetent murdered
multiple people he's
theoretically he could have been
found guilty and served multiple
consecutive licenses so he's in
the state hospital he dies so so
there but short of that there's
no recourse particularly with
mister meanings there's is no
recourse there's no civil
commitment on mister meaners.
And in some of these small towns
the cops know the person's
incompetent why arrest him he's
in companies like perpetually
incompetent.
So he's his cases ultimately is
going to get dismissed every
single time so why arrest him in
the first place so it is
incredibly frustrating and and
one good thing about the
criminal justice system as it
can make you do something you
know by mister chairman center
could make you go to prison it
could make you go to jail it
could directly make you got a
treatment.
So you don't go to jail you know
it can make you do something but
for these folks who are income
but it we can't make them do
anything because.
The case is dismissed so anyway
this is so we're trying to
figure out how do we overcome
that century old legal structure
so we can make these folks do
something to get the treatment
they deserve and and hopefully
desire and and create a better
community for all of us as that
kind of what we're trying to do
mister
mister chairman and senator
myster's absolutely nailed.
So in order to do that we're
gonna have to like struggle with
long held
beliefs
it in in amongst the legal
community.
And that that struggle played
out when we when the legal
committee of this state believed
how hardly in everyone's right
to fail.
And then when when we.
Took that right away and and
created a preventative detention
constitutional amendment it was
very difficult to hold people
without bail.
Because we were just trained for
decades that everyone was
entitled to bail this is my
personal opinion and how long it
took a step.
The whole appropriate people so
this one everyone is in
essential who he hoped he.
Yeah.
Even though this isn't like
punishment it's making them
doing something even though they
haven't been determined guilty
it's not a center presentation
so we have to kind of get
comfortable with it and
hopefully we can get there
quickly but it's really it's
it's it's the flow charter like
this bill is like a low chart
you know if it's a mister meaner
they go here it's a non violent
felony that will there if it's a
violent and the flow chart
doesn't play out in this in the
in the bill the buildings a lot
of work.
In terms of the language of the
bill so let me just let me just
give you a couple examples and
all ended at that so mister
mitchell chairman's in our
disappeal so we have thirty one
nine one.
Where it worked were repealing
that statute and then inserting
this new language in that seems
that you.
Paragraph.
But it's all kind of new
language and this is great
language
you know whenever one of the
parties or the court has a good
faith basis you raise a
competency issue.
The case is stayed and the court
shall order competency or.
Do the following if the parties
agree divert to treatment if the
parties agree so
so this is awesome the court
can.
Order a competency evaluation
and we go through the process we
go through today or if the
parties agree divert to
treatment.
We're gonna kind of listen to
assume the person is being found
in companies before they're
going to be found in common it
again the case going to get
dismissal so what do we do.
So we we defer to treatment and
then i'm line ten through
thirteen.
If the party so there's if the
parties agree with divert
streaming or if the parties
agree
the party shall find a
stipulated petition requesting.
Requesting.
The.
Whom whom are they requesting.
The requesting that the
defendant be considered.
For assisted outpatient
treatment who are they
requesting to whom are they
requesting mister chairman
senator general lady mr chairman
and senator mosses i'm gonna ask
doctor niece.
Thank you that's a really good
question
so basically then that number
two part would follow the way
that assisted out patient
treatment work so it would be a
uh prosecutor who would have to
make that
so we're requesting from the
state that they make that refer
all to.
The.
Aot.
Excuse me
assisted out patient treatment.
So and the words say if the
parties agree in other words of
the defense turning and the
prosecutor agree the parties
that offense turning the
prosecutors shell file
stipulated petition so you're
filing it.
Presumably what the court yes
requesting.
Okay cool but it doesn't say
that it does not see that
so assisted out hit sorry I
didn't mean to interrupt but
assisted out patient treatment
than has its own sort of legal
process that it follows
so it has its own statute so
then so it's similar to civil
commitment in the fact that then
the defendant would have to be
assessed and then they are
either qualified into aoti or
they don't qualify into a o t
similar to civil commitment okay
thank you and thank you for that
mister and so so up so far as
deployed petition.
Presumably with the court
requesting.
That they definitely be
considered for assisted
outpatient treatment.
Yeah
just as a moral would like to
answer to your question she says
we may not have gotten our
answers right just thank you
just tomorrow.
Chair senators thank you so much
for the great question center
masters I agree the words are
petitioned requesting with the
quarter participant with the
court but the prosecutor does
not need to file free of tea but
the statute does require that a
petitionally filed and it's in a
civil court rate so you're
moving the case out of the
criminal justice system to the
civil site
so but you're right I think it
is missing a word and I
appreciate you saying that but I
just wanted to be clear it
doesn't have to be by the
prosecutor so that the two
parties could agree file it with
the civil court.
The.
Thank you thank you justice
thank you mister chairman and
then and then i'll i'll go down
in it I won't cannot can ask
these questions rhetorically so
then in paragraph be it says in
in mr meaner cases comma the
defendant may be ordered to
participate in a version
treatment then it kind of
distinguishes magistrate court
for metro court it says.
Are line sixteen when the
defendant is diverted to
treatment any mister minor case
in magistrate court.
The case shall not be
transferred to district court
okay.
In that same paragraph of
misdemeanor case in the match of
political court shall remain
within the jurisdiction of the
metropolitan court so it's kind
of saying two different things
in the same paragraph regarding
two different course that it I
don't think it isn't really need
to say.
I think the point is is that we
don't want to just send
everything a district I think
magistrate courts can handle
their own is doing our business
metro cork and I know their own
mistake in our business.
You're restricting the metro
court say there's a treatment
programming in a real rancher
that the metro court can send
him there cause their restricted
berlow county then in paragraph
seed like twenty two it says in
non violent file any cases comma
the parties may and then
paragraph d.
It says the defense charges
shall be dismissed.
After the time period for
completion of the diversion
program has elapsed.
Or upon the defendants
acceptance into assisted
outpatient treatment.
The defenate shell not be
required to undergo a competency
valuation for the case while the
defendant is participating in a
diverse.
So
so I think it's just getting the
flow chart right that if in fact
the parties agree they're sent
to a diversion program that that
there's no order for confidency
but anyway my point is is it
deals with.
It deals with mister minner
cases it deals with non violent
phony cases.
Paragraph d kind of doesn't
really deal with any particular
charges but there's no it
doesn't capture all possible
crimes it doesn't capture.
Ah violent felonies
and so you anyway i'm just
thinking about getting the float
are right now just finish up
real quick and then also.
On page three r
lines fifteen sixty one when a
court determines that an
individual requires a confidence
evaluation.
The evaluation shall be
conducted.
Um.
When would that be required was
that when the parties don't
agree.
I think doctor nice you can
answer them.
The.
Oh yeah think you still
three can you repeat the
question you are asking when the
time that when does a court
come
into when is required when when
what a competency valuation be
required
when one is ordered okay
so competency can be raised at
any time
throughout the legal proceeding
right and so if something were
to happen or change and
circumstance
the the public defender the
state the judge they can all
raise competency ah any point
during a tribe during
understood.
But this isn't about raising
competitiveness this is about
requiring a competency
evaluation for today it's a
given someone raises competency
there's a competency valuation
in this one we're like saying
less to evaluate we know they
might be incompetent let's send
him to the version over here.
But this says when when a court
determines that an individual
requires a confidence they all
require it.
But when is it ordered and when
is it not ordered seems like
it's ordered.
When the parties don't agree to
diversion anyway just and then
it it could be a thick the issue
mister chairman senator most
this is that this gives the
judge the discretion about
whether or not to order a
competency evaluation understand
if that if the judge when a
court determined
so it leaves it up to the to the
court to the judge.
To decide whether there is a
need for a competency evaluation
instead of automatically
everybody getting a competency
evaluation but we've added to
the judges array of options.
Diverting them into treatment
instead of ordering a competency
evaluation.
No understood understood the up
and I think the judge would not
have the authority if the
parties agreed to diverting t.
And then.
And then on page four
section three that starts online
thirteen this is a big huge
awesome run on.
Paragraph
so you have
I met under point four bergen
you may want to like.
You know create multiple
paragraphs like online twenty
that's a new program line twenty
two maybe a new paragraph.
Because it's this is like the
flow chart
you know as to where the
definite goals under certain
circumstances
what's great is the least
restrictive setting.
Blank twenty four that's
fantastic cause right now it's
all that they're all they're all
like assume dangerous else it in
jail the competency what
just a side point we we may want
to put it.
A a deadline on how long the
competency valuation.
Shall take place.
There's always problems with
comprehensive evaluators I know
that the fee was way too low I
don't know if we raised it or
not but we should definitely put
a deadline like a complex
evaluation shall be determined
within sixty days or whatever
deadlines are liberating right
now sometimes they take six
months sometimes they take
longer and then lastly.
It just under it what the issue
just raised senator i'm told
that that's now in the court
rule that the setting the time
frame for those when the
competency evaluation has to be
completely fantastic.
And then.
Okay and then that this is word
that the flow chart gets
confusing and on page five per
ref b line twenty three.
In the event of dismissal of a
criminal key.
The prosecutor that the the
attorney county turned turning
anyone else authorized below to
refer the defendant
may refer the defendant.
For an eligibility determination
for civil commitment but the
case is dismissed.
So you're gonna like just give
him a piece paper take all this
guy so so the the case is
dismissed nobody has any
jurisdiction over that defendant
so it says the prosecutor may
refer the defendant the court
may order the definite court cat
order the defendant to do
anything because the case is
dismissed so you don't need a
responsibility and then unpaid
six line seven the next
paragraph the court shall hold a
hearing on the same day the same
day as what and then and of
course we know it's the same day
as a dangerousness hearing but
it isn't necessarily say that.
And then you know the court
shall hold the hearing on the
same need to determine whether
defendant charge where they fell
any he said now this is in the
felony realm I don't know how we
jump jumped there.
And then it says up online
twelve if the definite is.
If the defendant is ineligible
for confidence he restoration I
know how they would become
ineligible the defendant shall
be committed committed where
and then it says if the
defendant on some program one is
committed to the state hospital.
There is shen defense i'll be
defect detaining a secure and
lock facility.
Then i'm curb two of the
defendants completion
accompanied is.
Upon the definite completion of
competency restoration and
submission of the final report
the courtshell into an order.
Transporting the appropriate the
definite to the appropriate
county detention facility so
they're presumably.
In jail but what if they're not
you're basically putting them
back into jail.
And then it says upon release
release from the state hospital
or release from jail the
committing facility shall
forward a discharge plan so
anyway the flow chart and I just
got to page seven and just have
all these I I don't even get the
page should the nineteen bridge
will start into the last week
pages but there's just a lot of
just a great leak lawyers in the
room that that could price it in
women has all the stuff about it
just needs to be written in a
much more tighter way.
To ensure no ambiguity and no
confusion with the worst of the
words thank you mister chairman.
The.
Mr chair.
They start.
That analysis.
I'm wondering if we need that
point for version to address
those issues.
Another question is to inside
her neighborhood I think.
This is this is this statute is
thirty years old it must be
revised.
I think it's a policy decision
whether we want to send innocent
people.
Make innocent people do things
that's a policy question but.
But the flow chart of the bill
has to be.
Corrected at some point and then
we.
So whether that happens here or
in.
Judiciary
I don't believe to share what
give the searing the ways
written out but that's that's up
to the determined in the sponsor
because I think everyone kind of
wants to move forward with this.
Mister chair and sermice does it
it seems that.
The issue you raised maybe the
court needs to retain some
jurisdiction.
For that period of time.
And i'm wondering if that's the
solution to the issue you raise.
Again a question not a
statement.
I think mister chairman that.
The issues that senator masters
raised about a need for a clear
guideline
flow chart.
Through you know of the the very
issues what we're doing is
actually blending civil
commitment options available now
a lot of the language you just
read is from the existing
statute and civil commitment.
With the criminal charges for
these petty misdemeanors and the
nondashviolent felonies and
trying to.
To to make them fit together
apparently it's confusing and so
of the idea of having
a working session where we would
try to
essentially make clear in the
statutory language how that
would flow as it makes good
sense if if if if there's we
could do it and i'm willing to
do it either way I would either
hold the bill over although the
time getting shorter makes it
but I would I would invite
senators neighbored in my
estimates.
And anybody else who wants to to
me with us tomorrow afternoon
to rework it if the bill gets a
a dupassion one week send it on
to judiciary it has some
uh
clarity that makes how have
these cases fit together and
would flow I was asking the the
expert witness who who is the
attorney not who drafted it for
us because he was working off a
draft supreme court commission
provided and that was I guess
with her tidmore.
It works at with the behavioural
health institutions they're look
maybe if we could get him either
tomorrow or tuesday to work on
this with this that would be
good and then our draft you're
here as well sean dollars so
that we could we could move it.
Not move it but but revamped the
language in a way that makes
clear which offences in which
are which charges and which
options belong with which
section of the bill.
Mister carol obviously we were
going to have a point for
version anyway yeah but i'm just
wondering if we should address
the issues that are my estimates
raised.
Well we're getting that drafted
or should we.
Leave it up for you and
judiciary and I think that's
probably your call mr chair i'm
happy to pass it along but but
then
but I would love to do to pass
it out of here today so that we
don't have that extra delay but
then to sit down with members of
judiciary and any of the members
of this committee that if have
concerned we'll try to probably
tuesday if we pass it out here
today we'll do it.
Uh.
It'll be a judiciary committee
so
I agree with you saturday we
should
so on and trust that you get
fixed along the way.
With that mr chair I would move
it do not so on senate bill
sixteen and I do pass on then it
health and public affairs
subcommittee substitute for a
senate bill sixteen being a
point for version with the
amendment that we.
Discussed earlier.
So we have a motion we have a
second
second from a center of a cut
please call the role where we
discussion
discussion thank you mister.
Do you want to bring the point
for monday and pass it out or
just pass the three out now
because I don't know what we do
I don't think we agreed on a
point for
yes okay great thank you.
Thank you
and please call them we have
both second
senator hickey yes then he give
out yes center my estas.
Yes under protest
center ministers votes yes then
in my country so my current
involves yes center mechanic
yes and explain my vote please
thank you
votes yes center neighbor center
neighborhood yes many centers
that you love best center
tomorrow the strong years there
until man will see as center
disappear now thirty zip in a
vote yes
yes
please explain your vote
thank you chairman
a year chairman and senator
thank you this was I obviously a
big lift i'm supporting it under
the conditions that senator deal
was put forth because of what I
concerned about the
stakeholder has not been
consulted.
Thank you.
The.
Congratulations that are you
have a
seven two vote mister chairman I
would say that we will meet on
this bill in
i'll have to double check it but
for now this plan on three
twenty six
and tuesday afternoon
at
three three o'clock okay thank
you thank you sir do you have a
comment.
Yes it was an accurate is not
seven to seven
thousand seven two excused
me to pay you better attention.
Okay again the congratulations
senator and the next step.
Thank you very much mister.
So let's let's do so
center
senator fifteen with cartered by
senator.
Yeah.
The.
Yes you want to sell
the subtest
mister chair yes please no
anything but.
Yeah.
Right
mr chair I believe there's also
a table of changes between the
original bill and the subset I
hope hope you all have it would
probably be good to pass out.
The.
I.
If anybody in the audience wants
some of these materials they've
been put on a table at the back
of the room.
And you can access them there.
First come for serb don't
trample each other.
Okay let's be ready let's go
furniture do it welcome to the
committee and we look forward to
your presentation on senate bill
fifteen thank you mr chair
senator bill fifteen as the
health care consolidation
oversight act.
And mr
I think people often think of me
as as a trial lawyer who might
be adversarial towards a medical
folks the majority of my family
are folks in the medical
profession I to brothers or
doctors my brother and laws also
a doctor sisters are all nurses.
My niece is a fantastic cardiac
pay
iron I am not as I know I I
understand how critical our
medical community is I which is
one of the reasons we've brought
this bill to you today there's a
nationwide trend of private
equity groups buying up health
care by another hospitals.
Mr chair i'll try to make it a
point to to speak directly into
into the microphone.
But so there's this nationwide
trend of of private equity
groups buying up hospitals and
that trend is especially strong
here.
New mexico has the highest
percentage of private equity
owned private hospitals in the
nation at forty three percent
forty three percent right now
and what we know his coming is
that more
mergers and acquisitions and and
acquisitions by private equity
companies I and these other big
out of state companies are
coming i'm sure you all read in
the paper about the the
prosperitarian merger that ended
up falling through um there's
reason to believe there's
another one coming I
also reason to believe that one
of our major health systems and
hospitals I was going to go
public.
I wishes to go public.
There's also situations like I
christopher st vencent where
they.
A private
equity group.
Is now who runs all of their
gynecological services and
reproductive health care other
than c sections case sections
are what makes them money.
Otherwise they have farmed it
all out they have had they have
this agreement with this I state
private equity group they is
making health care decisions for
new mexicans based on what is
most profitable not what is best
for new mexicans health and so
that's why we have sent a bill
fifteen here today the purpose
is to make sure that the state
has is aware of these really
significant transactions that
are happening and can exercise
appropriate oversight to make
sure that when these that if
this is going to reduce access
accessibility quality of health
care new mexico
that there is a mechanism there
to either put appropriate
conditions on that transaction
to make sure that those health
care practices services are
protected and patients are
protected or in the very rare
circumstance.
To to block that transaction.
And so it creates a review
process for the superintendent
of insurance who have sitting
here with me and i'm sorry I
should have started by
introducing I have a alice can
our superintendent of insurance
here
are calling bio who is the
deputy superintendent and jane
wishener who I think we're all
very familiar with
but was the former I governors
adviser on health care policy.
And so what this bill does as it
creates this and and mr chair
let me say i'm going to talk
about.
The sub that you all have in
front of you this bill has
trained dramatically from what
has was filed based on
discussions with folks in the
medical community we are
essentially giving them whatever
they want other than a bill that
does not apply to them so this
will only this has a one year
son said on it this is only
going to cover the next year and
transactions that may happen in
that year.
I'm entered only applies to
hospitals but it allows the osi
to review those transactions are
and make sure that it's not
going to negatively impact
availability accessibility
affordability and quality of
care new mexico.
There and mister chair I don't
want to go on too long but
there's a lot of background
about this that I think is
important for that the committee
to have.
In in nineteen seventy ten
percent of hospitals in the US
were were part of a hospital
systems as of two thousand and
eighteen at sixty seven percent
this consolidation is is really
significant and and
consolidation isn't always bad
but we what we know from dance
from the data that we have is
that it tends to increase costs
of health care and lower quality
of health care yes again
you don't have folks here in new
mexico who are making the
decisions about what health care
services are offered based on
what the needs are and what is
best for new mexicans you have
someone in another state who is
looking only at profitability
and that is what determines the
health care that is then
available to us here in new
mexico.
And because we have this we have
the highest in the nation
private equity owned or ready we
already have higher health care
costs in our surrounding states.
In new mexico we spend about
four thousand dollars per person
on hospital care as compared to
twenty seven hundred new tall
twenty eight hundred nevada and
three thousand and texas and
thirty two hundred colorado in
arizona so we're already seen
the the impacts of this and it's
going to get worse
we also see things like lawsuits
against patience who can't
afford these escalated costs
scaling back of nursing staff
are reducing an eliminated
services because they're not
profitable whether or not they
improve health outcomes and or
use primarily by low income
residents.
There is also a study that
showed that I
in in hospitals that are doing
these kinds of transactions.
Hospital choired yet and
hospital hospitals acquired by
private equity admitted medicare
patience had a twenty five
percent increase in hospital
acquired complications compared
to patience admitted before the
acquisition patience also had
twenty seven percent more falls
and thirty eight percent more
bloodstream infections caused by
central lines.
And mister chair i've mentioned
the reduction of services a
little bit but this is a real
concern
there is a.
Actually i'm not.
I was going to repeat a rumour I
heard but I I won't do that
stick to what I know
tempting to hear it
i'll tell you after the
committee listener.
But yes we we definitely see a a
reduction in services I where
this is happening and we want to
make sure that doesn't happen
here and mister chair these
transactions aren't always a bad
bad thing sometimes they are
necessary for the health of of
the hospital
sometimes as long as they're not
going to negative it's not going
to negatively impact health care
new mexico there's no problem
with it but we need to have a
mechanism to make sure that is
the case before they happen.
And so right now new mexicans
virtually no oversight over
these kinds of transactions and
that's what we want to fix here
now i'd mentioned and you have
the sub before you.
There has been extensive
negotiations on this bill what
you have in front of you in the
sub is a very narrow bell they
only applies for this next year
with the idea that all
stakeholders will come together
over the interim in order to add
to come up with that a
comprehensive bill going forward
but in the meantime we need
something in place over the next
year because these transactions
are very likely to happen in the
there's things are gonna happen
in the next year that we're
going to want to have this
mechanism in place for.
So like I said if we have been
on ever I
am a it brought kind of girl
mister mister chair I am
agreeing to total
confidentiality of everything I
was wished was getting cut
through the bill for you a new
but you have this chart there up
there showing all of the.
Huge changes that have been made
at the request of the the
hospital association and others
and presbyterian and others
so
mister chair one last thing
before I passed it over to miss
miss wishener.
I this morning you all heard sb
seventeen which is expected to
net these hospitals one point
one billion dollars annually.
So a little bit of oversight to
make sure that the folks who are
getting this extra one point one
billion dollars annually to make
sure they're not also reducing
central services to new mexicans
or jacking up prices on new
mexicans I don't think is is too
much to ask I would that I will
hand it over to miss wisher.
Just a second I just wanted it
before you start doing.
We will we will in all
likelihood finished with this
bill I mean our session will end
without any other bills being
heard of after this one but we
will resume after the floor
session.
So right after the four sessions
for any bills we don't get to
and that includes senator
gonzalez's bill your other bill
the senator do a
senator moon munice and shares
bills on the health care trust
fund medicate trust.
And pills bill and the police
two of the bills will do those
after the floor session because
we have a hard stop it I think
we still have a ride job at one
we haven't heard any change in
that so we have a floor one but
anything we don't get to will
come back to after the four
session in the same room or very
alert committee secretary grab
the room for us and and mister
care mrperiod terror I can help
I take a little bit off your
your afternoon again that that
other bill was the appropriation
for this bill it's so narrowed
now that we're going to withdraw
that bill we don't even we don't
need an appropriation so you can
take that off here you're.
And now I really twenty four has
been withdrawn.
Thank you mister chair and
senators and and thank you
senator do heck i'm jane
wishener and I am a.
Lapsed attorney who has spent
the last ten fifteen years doing
health policy work including as
a researcher at the urban
institutes health policy center
for about four years where I
also was the lead author on a
study on rural hospital closures
so this is an issue I care
deeply about and honored to be
here and to have help the
superintendent in the drafting
part of the spell what i'd like
to do is start by just
mentioning this and we we should
have plenty of copies for people
in the audience that it that
doesn't even list all of the
things that have been removed
from the bell or change that the
request of
the providers but a lot of the
main ones are there I was not
going to go through that but we
can answer questions about
specific items I also just want
out for for your ease in the
discussion and what it means and
where things are just quickly go
through the structure of it you
know the short title is section
one section two is the
definitions those are important
and transactions are defined on
page four and kind of refer back
to some of the other definitions
the definition of control is
there and then in section three
there is a a applicability of
the act which limits this to
hospitals and section three a
and presumption of control and I
want to say something about the
definitions.
Those definitions are based on
the insurance holding company
law in our state statute
and so the language is very much
picked up from there because
that's a system the currently
exists for reviews it for
reviewing very large
transactions and superintendent
came will be discussing that
more.
The section four is confidential
confidentiality and all of the
information and materials that
would be provided would remain
confidential
section five deals with the
timing of the review and the
when the notice of a major of
one of these major transactions
would be completed and that is
when the documents the material
the information including follow
up requests from the
superintendent of insurance are
provided and at that point the
timing starts to run
the section six lays out the
notice of the proposed
transaction
there is a very important
provision in six b
which provides for an emergency
situation i'll talk more about
that it defines the content of
the notice consultation with the
health care authority and the
retaining a professionals to
provide support to osi
the review of transactions by
oversize and section seven post
transaction oversighted section
eight and then there is the
sunset clause which delays the
repeal of everything on july
first of twenty twenty five
except for ongoing oversight
role of osi and then the bill
also has an emergency clause
because of concern that
transactions may move quickly
but let me talk about away from
the specific sections how the
bill will work essentially the
bill only applies to the
purchase acquisition or change
in control of an existing
hospital in new mexico now
superintendent cane will address
after I speak what has become a
major objection of several
hospitals in the state about
what type of transaction should
be reviewed and what change and
control means
the definitions in approach
reflected in the bill against.
Are based on long standing
regulatory review of large
transactions throughout the
country
in new mexico these are
clarified in section fifty nine
a dash thirty seven dash one and
after that which is the
insurance
holding company law the notice
review and a osi approval of
transactions and sections five
six and seven at least one of
the parties to the proposed
transaction must submit the
notice to osi it does not have
to be our local hospital we
drafted it and way so that if
there's a large for profit
entity for example that's coming
into acquire a small rural
hospital they can bear the
burden of submitting the notice
working with osi and doing that
part of the process the specific
disclosures are set forth and
section six e and i'm not going
to go through them right now
five days where osi may request
more information from the
parties and this is really
critical.
To have effective oversight of
any large complex transaction
the party should not get to you
and laterally decide how they're
going to summarise and
characterize the transaction
and without having some of the
basic understanding it is
critical that the superintendent
can look at the
basic agreements between the
parties for the transaction and
that may lead to a request for
more information again
superintendent can as is an
expert hand his issues and would
will address it more
these the bill also says that os
I will consult with the health
care authority which has deep
experience with the hospital
community and inside into some
of their most pressing financial
pressures and needs
and there in section six h
that is the provision that says
the the a transaction cannot be
a factuated until osi has made
its determination to either
approve approved with conditions
or disapproved the transaction.
The bill establishes a review
timeline from when the notice is
complete and immediately os I
must determine of the
transaction is urgently
necessary to maintain the
salvancy of a possibile or if
there is an emergency that
threatens the continued
Review and this clause is is
critical to the bill and
recognizes the concern some
rural hospitals have in the
state nothing prevents osi from
making that determination
earlier even if it has requested
more information.
If there is no such a emergency
situation within one hundred and
eighty days os I must make its
determination
and provided in writing to the
parties.
The review itself includes
several factors related to the
provision of essential services
and the availability
accessibility affordability and
quality of healthcare services
osamer might may consider and
that's found on pages nine and
ten of the committee substitute
the bill is set up to
require approval if certain
criteria are met as we mentioned
and and
senator do hig agreed to rather
reluctantly I think i'm always
signed the authority are
required to keep all the
information and documents
provided to them confidential.
There's an important provision
in section six a and that is
actually modeled on what already
happens under the insurance code
and how the office of the
superintendent of insurance or
ready reviews mergers and
acquisitions and changes in
control of insurance companies
and these type of transactions
often involve entities that are
outside of new mexico including
some of the largest private
equity firms in the country that
invest in hospitals and some of
them own hospitals here they
have some of the most
sophisticated experts in the
country advising them on these
transaction so osi needs to
retain its own third party
experts to analyze these
transactions officially and
effectively this bill therefore
relies on the same system os I
uses under the insurance holding
company law that's how it
currently works and the costs
the reasonable cost of experts
retain are a paid for by one or
more parties to the transaction.
The post transaction oversight
to the bill and section at a
scale back dramatically and now
only allows our side to request
reports from the parties there
is no enforcement clause and
there are no penalties laid out
and i've already spoken about
the sunset provision.
And with that I will turn it
over to superintende.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee
I I am as you've heard alice can
I am superintendent of insurance
and I really appreciate your
time and focus on this saturday
morning our senate bill fifteen
is an oversight bill that's
intended to give our side notice
of major transactions that could
have impacts on availability
this is the lens we're going to
be looking at through at the
transactions availability
affordability quality and the
quality of care for new mexicans
our intention is not to block
transactions frankly in the
insurance industry when
transactions are reviewed I I
can hardly remember any
transaction being blocked under
the insurance code but to ensure
that there's a fair review
process to protect the interests
of patience.
I want to give you some inside
from my perspective of someone
who has worked in the industry
for fifty years and it is
familiar with the types of deals
and transactions and structures
that have been a reviewed by
various insurance regulators
industry stay cultures have been
asking us to increase the
definition which is one key
point here of control to other
hospital to fifty percent of
voting rights or ownership and
at first glance that really is
reasonable fifty percent is a
you know or fifty one percent
becomes the majority of the
shares but frankly there are too
many deals that allow one party
that appears on paper to have
only a small ownership share but
separate agreements may be in
place to allow them to have the
ability to feed out of decisions
or control and enedy through a
subsidiary and and ultimately
make management and operational
decisions that's why the ten
percent threshold rebut as a
brabudable presumption exist in
so many laws regulating
corporations it's in our
insurance holding company act
it's adopted by the fifty state
other insurance regulators that
government mergers and
acquisitions we also see it in
the bank holding company act
that has a five percent
threshold and their federal law
that reviews foreign
transactions for security also
has a ten percent threshold so
this is not unusual to ensure
that there aren't structures or
a cresting of relationships that
don't appear to have it as a
matter of fact
one of my our fellow regulators
in new york had to issue a
circular letter focused mostly
on the private equity groups
basically saying don't tell me
you just know nine point nine
nine percent and we're not going
to look at it it's a facts and
circumstance review that we want
to know who is really
controlling this either directly
it meaning the immediate
corporation or at the ultimate
holding companies are osa I in
new mexico is the only state
agency that has had decades of
experience.
In reviewing complex financial
track transactions we have
reviewed them through a
different lands for for salvanc
and trustworthiness and
capability of management and now
we're going to be reviewing it
if this is passed under under
with the help of the the uh
authority on quality
accessibility affordability and
the
focused
not largely but but scrupulously
on any reduction and health
inessential health care services
the legislator at there is a
question on whether we have the
authority to regulate non risk
bearing energies right now we
have been given the authority by
this legislature to look at the
pharmacy benefit managers their
party administrators and brokers
and agents the surprise billing
protection act is under our
perview and the patient dead
collection act also gave
oversize specific regular
regular if I could speak
apologies regulatory authority
related to health care
providers.
My team at osi's prepared to
take on the responsibilities
under this bill while also
engaging with the wide range of
stakeholders over this interim
period to develop a more
comprehensive bill for the next
sixty day session.
Again I want to thank you for
your time and consideration and
we look forward to today's
discussion mister chair members
of the committee thank you good
thank you superintendent cane
did you want to say anything
calling mr chair members of the
committee no i'm just here if
there are any questions I can be
helpful okay thank you very good
let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this
raise your
okay is there anyone here
opposed to this measure
but equal numbers why do we take
five from each you could we know
yourself down to five and will
start with those who support it
anybody online in in this.
Okay well will take some of them
so this if you could try to keep
your comments brief then because
we have so many to go through so
madame secretary let's start
with you
thank you mr chair new mexico is
one of only eleven states that
has no statutory process for
tracking or challenging health
care provider transactions as
health care more gets become
increasingly consolidated state
regulators need tools to protect
competition and consumers from
the possible negative impacts of
these types of transactions
including downstream impacts on
healthcare access quality and
affordability for this reason
the health care authority stands
in strong support of senate both
of team thank you.
Hello mister chair members of
the committee my name is danger
williams i'm a policy advocate
at the a cell of new mexico that
a cellular has a long history of
advocating for community
oriented oversight of health
system consolidations because we
know that these partnerships
often reduce or significantly
change access to care for both
patients and those employed by
the health care energy
especially in places like rural
new mexico will be support this
initiative we would urge
increased transparency and a
clear mechanism for community
participation in the decision
making process for those who
would be directly impacted by
the cost quality and access to
care available to them and by
changes to employee conditions
and benefits oversight of health
system consolidations with
direct community participation
could help ensure these
consolidations do not harm
community access but rather
improve access to quality of
affordable healthcare services
for all new mexicans and we look
forward to continuing
conversations around this thank
you thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is erca
sanchez and am an attorney at
new mexico center online poverty
we believe all new mexicans
deserve access to quality
affordable health care well the
bill is introduced with much
stronger we support the
committee substitute for senate
bill fifteen as an initial step
toward address in the impacts of
consolidation on access to
health care in our state as you
heard research tells us that the
consolidation of hospitals and
other health care entities
increase health care costs
decrease access to health care
by eliminating services that are
not considered profitable such
as labored delivery and
emergency rooms have an
especially severe impact on
rural communities where patients
are increasingly being forced to
travel long distances for care
and the undermined workers and
communities values priorities
and decision making when at
estate corporations move
hospital management outside of
new mexico.
Since health care consolidation
happens through confidential
business deals our communities
and state agencies have little
visibility into major changes
into the health care system.
Although we're disappointed in
the removal of provisions that
would provide public comment
opportunities and deeper
transparency this bill will help
move as closer to the oversight
that is needed to protect the
availability accessibility
affordability and quality
services for patience we asked
this committee to vote in favor
of the committees up for senate
bell fifteen and hope the
legislature will more thoroughly
addressed health care
consolidation accession
thinking.
Hello members of the committee
mister chair my name is mary
felbloom i'm a former academic
my phds and sociology with
background and economics I am
the executive director of the
whole security for new mexicans
campaign and i've been involved
in looking at research on social
Word to dress a major problem of
increasing control by out of say
corporations better impacting
the provision of health services
there are a social policy health
policy folks that are describing
it is a takeover and that you
are all familiar with the social
determinance of help I am now
seeing the term the commercial
determinance of health
I i'm not going to repeat all
the data that show that this is
impacting these takeovers are
impacting not only health prices
but they are also repacting
patience and doctors but while
the bill is a really admiral
attempt and i'm glad that
there's going to be more
consideration of some of the the
provisions
it there is a problem said it
doesn't deal with it doesn't
deal with the problem of
corporations practicing medicine
without a license there many
states that have laws like that
nor does it deal with the
problem of not for profit
hospitals
receiving tax benefits but not
investing in their local
communities nor does a deal with
the hospital hospital proposal
of global budgets which is a
great success in met and
maryland and many european
countries use its recommended by
the national academy for the
state health for state health
policy hospital prices are major
reason why overall health care
costs are increasing solutions
to this and other systemic
health cost drivers need to be
addressed were coordinated
process separating out one piece
of this big puzzle is not going
to solve the problem this is why
the whole security campaign hope
said the legislature will
provide sufficient funding for
the legislative housing human
services committee to continue
its critical work to develop
solutions.
To the case systemic drivers of
rising health care costs and
these solutions would of course
have to be approved by the
legislature but this is a very
important first step to be and I
comment on senator
do
for taking this big topic on but
it is only a stepped in his only
one peace of this megapuzzle
that we have to sort of thank
you.
Thank you mary now we have three
other supporters on line so
we'll start with the doctor
barbara mechanic.
Thank you mr chairman members of
the committee my market mac i'm
a physician in the mexico for
over forty years I learned my
health policy as part of the
american medical association
council on medical service which
is the health policy council
which I chaired and in my time
on the board including sharing
the board of the american
medical association and serving
as its president.
I also temper my health policy
by having been a new mexican
sense nineteen eighty three
working in health care in this
state having served as the
president of new mexico medical
supply and then I currently
manage a multi disciplinary
cancer focused practice in an
albert kirky and dowe.
I am in support of this bill
because of the
consolidation of hospitals has
been well shown to increase
costs and decreased quality in
access I am only able to support
this bill because the effects on
physician practices have been
removed and because the promise
of a considered discussion of
the market forces that are
forcing physician practices to
be acquired by external entities
hopefully we will be able to man
improve access to care by making
new mexico as state that
supports physician practices the
basis of all consolidation in
health care is who controls the
physicians hospitals merged
provide market share that allows
them to charge more for services
which intern allows them to work
acquire more physician practices
in lack market share and
therefore cannot negotiate
patient payments sufficient to
remain.
Independent which is the low
cost high quality locally routed
providers I am a long supporter
of accountable sustainable
health care and independent
practices as the low cost
options this means that
physicians must be able control
their own practices so that they
can make decisions based on the
need of patience rather than the
on the economics of their
employers or owners so the first
step in this process is to take
a very hard look at hospital
consolidation.
There are other parts of the
consolidated industry that do
deserve a scrutiny but one must
be very careful to make sure
that we focus that scrutiny on
those who contain the market
power and we do not have any
unintended consequences of
blocking physicians ability to
recruit more physicians into
their independent practices here
in new mexico so I support this
bill and I support the the
process that we plan to go
forward to make sure that new
mexico is a state that that
regains its ability to provide
health care to new mexicans.
Thank you thank you making a
next is ember.
Attention.
Good afternoon thank you mister
chairman committee members my
name is amber may all I am a
resident of hotel county which
is recently experienced in
unchecked acquisition of its
only hospital gerald champion
regional medical services by
christes health although I
prefer the bill's original
verbiage I do support the
substitute of senate bill fifth
team it's better than zero
oversight would currently have
and I do appreciate that it's
sunsets next year I hope the
next legislature will be able to
consider a more robust bill that
is influenced away by what has
worked in other states includes
meaningful transparency language
includes strong post
transactional overseas and
outlines what happens when a
transaction is approved but
resulted in anti competitive
market hair her health care
market
monoposity where other adverse
effect to access quality and
cost of services that this bill
is trying to prevent because so
much of new mexico is still rule
in front tear territory it is
far too easy for unchecked
healthcare acquisitions
consolidations and bergers to be
economically detrimental to new
mexico residents especially when
services to women and lgin
people are no longer provided
new mexico needs strong
oversight that favors people and
does not capitulate to the
hospital sociations members have
before to to late and because
hospital associations and other
health care organizations would
be against robust overseas thank
you
thank you ever end up then the
final person online in favor is
cat.
The.
Good afternoon
you opportunity today
mexico sufficient one hundred
besides can you pull the mike to
yourself we're having a hotel.
The.
This.
Go ahead.
Is there any better.
That's marginally
any way of.
Go ahead try again that's
helpful
and read you at least we'll do
that.
Thank you again for the
opportunity
to help to get the mexico the
reason of the sponsors
that that if we appreciate it
what we know from hospital
even white spreading impact on
berlin communities
at the fifteenth board is a good
start I work at that county
when overlooked during the
process of the gerald japan
hospital acquisition what I
heard clearly from community is
the need to be given note
transactions in their community
and opportunities to have
your regional person at part of
it if the application wouldn't
input from community
and yours I would make the
notice of website I want this
person does
notice
does not get voice individual
and that
I heard the forward to bringing
community to the enter of your
electric settings against that
holders on a meeting.
The.
Well very good thank you so much
now we'll go to opponents of the
bill and those in the audience
if you could come forward but
limit your comments to ten
seconds or less.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee larry
haran richard lobbyist for
pressure turned healthcare
services
and from the beginning I would
say we do not object to
oversight we do not object to
legislation that will create
review and approval by the state
of new mexico for healthcare
transactions also were committed
regardless of what happens on
this legislation to work in the
interim for a more robust or
more complete bill so that a
commitment do we've made and we
will stick to throughout the
center of i'm just going to
focus on three areas in the bill
there's others that of my
colleagues who will hit a couple
of their issues that we have
concerns with first of all the
timeline the timeline for
approval in the legislation is a
hundred and eighty days or six
months keeping in mind that this
legislation's only given me in
effect until june thirtieth of
twenty twenty five we would ask
for a shorter and quicker
approval process that's part of
the principles that we would
have is predictable timely and
easy to comply with approval
process that we would request
ninety days not sure we can get
there but that would be or ask
second is the review and the
payment of the review and
appreciate miss wishener
discussing how that is in the
insurance code but with
unlimited potential fees and
costs born by those applicants
for approval process our request
would be that there's a set fee
that's put forth in statue for
us that will cover the cost of
the transaction for osi in the
last thing refers to the only
peaceful legislation that
actually is not gonna sunset
that's the oversight piece
although it is significantly
reduced from what was in the
original legislation I think
that that should be something
that we discussing with that
oversight of these transactions
post transaction is something we
discuss in the internet what it
looks like in the reason for
that is there's other areas of
statute where we are regulated
and we have regulators by the
state of new mexico so I think
we should I would ask that you
remove that section from the
bill it will not be necessary
for any transaction that are.
Hers within the next year and a
half because this that's a
temporary peace so next session
when we're looking at a more
robust door I think that would
be on appropriate time for us to
have that oversight issue
addressed and thank you and I do
I do want to acknowledge this
bill is dramatically different
in the other the other bill and
we appreciate the sponsor's
oside everybody involved for the
changes and an and for also
having an open dialogue with us
to listen to our concerns thank
you mister chairman thank you
learn
thank you mister chair dry clark
again from the new mexico
hospital association
I want to reiterate I think this
I had three hands this page two
page document that shows all of
the changes reiterates all of
the work that has been done
in whether you we weren't used
to work concessions or
discussions with the very stay
colders this is a very complex
issue and that represents a
whole lot of work and it's been
done in a very short period of
time
in fact it's lead down to where
we have a substitute before us
today I think it's very close to
our me something that we my
members can live with the some
issues that we would final
issues that I think we'd like to
address and i'm not going to
reiterate the points that mister
han made but when it comes to
the time frame and reducing down
one of the other aspects we've
got to recognize this how rural
are state is and we don't want
to defer or discourage potential
suitors from hospitals that may
be struggling or they could have
parties come in to help them
maintain sustainability in their
communities this has been
addressed in some of the
language with the ability for
uh emergency provisions to be
provided by the superintendent
we appreciate that greatly we
appreciate the confidentiality
provisions that the sponsorers
and other do have put in there
but if we could reduce that time
frame down
because this is a very costly
process costly not just for the
what is put in here but the cost
that are incurred.
By potential participants in a
transaction before this
application even exists we don't
want to discourage people who
would be willing to come into
our communities and our rural
communities and keep the
services open so we look forward
to.
Some additional conversations to
be able to get this to where we
could be no longer be an
opposition for that thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee in my name is charles
canada and i'm the director of
public policy at the new mexico
chamber of commerce we oppose
the bill and have concerns that
it won't pack not only access to
care but also set precedent
where state government has final
approval and control over
private business transactions in
any industry in the state we
believe in supporting health
care providers and entities
which in turn will improve
access to care and health care
outcomes in the state we have
concerns that as were in this
bill could discourage
investments in new mexico that
could expand access to care for
example should a new mexico
system wish to contract with a
large out of state tell a health
provider or expand primary care
coverage by partnering with the
national chain of primary care
clinics in fact and you heard
this today by the new mexico
hospital association but the
american hospital association
shares that health system
integration may offer financial
stability for struggling
hospitals provide access to
health the summary sources and
provide equipment and facility
upgrades as hospitals are
already regulated entities
adding continued burdens and
fees on our hospitals works
counter to making us competitive
health care services thank you.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee jerry nichols
on behalf of christas health
i'd like to start by thinking
the sponsor and the
superintendent for working with
us over the past week
but this is a very complex piece
of legislation that requires
more time to fully vet the
issues and the potential and
intended consequences I think
senator city a lot best was
gonna mention something earlier
that we're also concerned about
but if you take a look at the
fire the ages office has noted
some potential constitutional
concerns specifically with
respect to scope of authority
and is currently drafted were
concerned that this bill will
discourage investment in health
care infrastructure and that
could ultimately decrease access
to care so for those reasons we
respectfully oppose this bill.
Mister chairman members of the
coming name is triggered on the
seat you and president of others
helped system that an operator
key thank you for your time
today we appreciate the work
that has been done over the last
week or so there have been a lot
of concessions unfortunately for
us we still have some things
were concerned about to make
sure we can be fully supportive
this kind of oversight
the goodness for us is we
actually think that the idea of
oversight is something that we
can live with insured these
resources that we have for
health care crucial to come
communities to the state of the
citizens of new mexico it's a
big responsibility that we have
we understand that we also want
to be sure that we can go secure
financing and resources to bring
into the state in the way it's
structured today there's a lot
of ambiguity with some of the
language we look forward to
continue development around that
language we look forward to
working with the proponents of
this bill in order to find
solutions that work for all of
us that we can have a workable
solution that we can introduce
to others and make sure we can
be fully supportive of thank
you.
Now we'll go to the.
People have signed up in
opposition online and the first
is
christine accomplished at the
while look at county hospital.
The.
The money mister chairman
members of the committee I don't
have a copy of other changes but
I know in speaking to jane
wishener and to superintendent
cane that they are intentions
what the similars are to
maintain access and
affordability I would just urge
that as this process continues
that the that difference in
consideration is is given to the
rural communities who are on the
verge at times of closure and an
immediate purchase is all that's
going to keep them open
and I believe that that is their
intent and I look forward to
working with them on the spill
and and providing a rural
perspective on the
the future needs or hospitals
and how that we can we can keep
them sustainable and sometimes
it's only two mergers or
acquisitions thank you very much
thank you chris and then as
carlos contact.
Good afternoon mr chairman and
members of the committee it's
larry santa here on behalf of
the new mexico business
coalition nbc strongly opposes
sp fifteen where although we've
not been able to see the
amendments that have been
submitted we believe this bill
is an overreach of government in
normal business operations and
is not amount not allowed by the
matter of law having a one year
son said on legislation dealing
with private sector
transactions albeit in a
regulated industry brings all
kinds of uncertainty
unfortunately more of our
healthcare businesses will be
sold or go out of business this
is a further indication of how
difficult it is to do business
and new mexico
if a business is unable to
continue for whatever reason the
owner should have the right and
be allowed to sell or convey
their business some other
constraints on your mexico's
healthcare operations include
the gross receipts tax structure
this is an unnecessary tax on
our health care industry and
most practitioners cannot pass
this tax under their patience.
Other problems that we've noted
that attorney general's office
pointed out this bill is in
violation of the state's
constitution it should not be
considered going forward the age
also noted that there are anti
trust implications subject to
the new mexico anti truster
which allows the attorney
general and any person
threatened within with injury to
bring anti trust actions for the
reason stated and for others
that have been stated by other
parties going to be strongly
opposed to speed fifteen thank
you.
We also have online another four
but i'm gonna just give her name
it's carry robin bruter who's
with the medical society.
Chairman members of the
committee
I think that we would just like
to offer a comment more than
supporter opposition we are very
very grateful that the
independent health care entities
have been removed from the bill
in the committee substitute but
we do share some of the concerns
with our hospital partners
especially with how this will
impact them in the upcoming year
we are also buried at the
medical decided to working with
the stake holders the
superintendent insurance and
others to have a comprehensive
bill in the sixty day session
that will appropriately look at
how health care mergers are
happening in our state and how
they are impacting access to
care so please look forward to
seeing us again in the sixty day
on this issue but we do
understand the concerns that our
hospital partners have been and
hope the committee has a really
great discussion today about
where the appropriate level is
going into the next year for
oversight on mergers and
acquisitions thank you so much
mr chairman for allowing us to
speak thank you very much carry
okay now we'll go to the members
of the committee i'm i'm going
to say this senator worth says
he's delayed the floor session
for us till one thirty so let's
try to wrap it up on this bill
by then members if you could
keep your comments to the point
and and try to focus in on on
the key issues so do we have
anybody who wants to come in on
the builder we're going to just
pass it
I guess not okay senator
neighborhood you always have a
come home
thank you mister chair and
senator.
I guess my my first question
would be
do we have.
Well.
Hospitals are not
regulated by like public
utilities are are they.
Mister chair sounder I don't
believe so all that the folks
sitting on the other hand
probably know better than I do
misreturn senator
the.
This.
Public utility
industry is regulated because we
create the narrowest and have
them serve the public as the
soul.
Provider of.
Utilities within a certain
geographic area and to my
knowledge we don't have any
similar type laws with respect
to hospitals or medical
providers or
anyone else related to the
health care industry do we
mister chair senator I know we
have some pretty weak anti trust
last year but I I believe this
was near can speak more on that
mr chair and and senator nibert
thank you for the question the
no it does not regulate like a
utility but health care
providers are heavily regulated
under state and federal law
their license tear I mean
essentially healthcare providers
commit what would otherwise be
batteries on people handle her
have special licenses special
rules are including
on quality and and other matters
so there is a difference between
them and other industries and
misreturn and senator with
respect to that
the purpose of that oversight
deals with the actual treatment
we can care of an individual
patient if you will is it not.
Thank you and mr chair and and
senator nibert some of them are
but there are also an array of
other issues related I mean even
in our medicaid program for
example and I know secretary
designate army who is here there
are you know many
provisions in our our medicaid
plan that deals with exactly
what services how guaranteeing
access we have both in the
insurance code and in medicaid
for example network adequacy
requirements are for insurers
and how to ensure this
legislature has adopted numerous
laws almost every year you adopt
laws relating to the health care
system to try and improve access
affordability availability in
quality.
But mr chair and center none of
those efforts go to the.
Organization issues of how
the business structures
organized carried out or
place limits upon
their ability to freely alienate
their property today.
Sender.
Mr chair senator I don't think
so that's that's why we're here
with this bill
we don't have any mechanism to
to stop a total monopoly of
health care new mexico right
now.
It and so
the the question but that I have
is why
in twenty twenty four do we
see the need is this directive
at a problem that we've
experienced and if so what what.
Is the the problem and concern
because i'm from a community
that has had.
Variety of transactions with
respect to its health care
facilities and we could argue
whether it's better worse but
but I mean the organization
has occurred and has changed
over the years
so i'm familiar with that but
now we're trying to interject
government into that process
where I think
prior to this bill.
Are concerned more or less worth
respect to the delivery of the
health care to the fation not
the business structure itself
and this is really going to the
business
and mister chairs under it's
because that business structure
is will impact the deliver.
What we know so nationally where
were when we're seeing this
happened there's been
circumstances where where
there's hospitals that don't
have competition where they are
charging seven hundred percent
of medicare rates the folks it's
that is crazy but we also
specific to new mexico.
We know these transactions are
coming here presbyterian already
tried once it's come and again
there's others that are coming
to and so it's because of that
knowledge of those coming
transactions that there is a an
urgent need to have to act on
the stability let me feel too
superintendent came for a little
bit more
i'm probably going to reiterate
which you've heard in in some of
the research that we've done
quickly albeit quickly which is
why we're talking about an
interim bill and having more
stake of input is that we've
seen when the many of these
consolidations occur you see a
drop in quality you see a drop
in access of essential services
you see an increase in cost and
what we're trying to do and and
what other states are also
looking at I think
secretary armio said eleven
other states are looking at that
you know transactions along
these lines is to make sure that
that we have the ability to see
what what those energies think
the impact of the transaction
will be and to tell us to tell
us that you know what's going to
happen and I think some of the
concerns are the rural hospitals
and needing you know a financial
support we definitely understand
that and that's why we're
talking about an emergency peace
but but we also want to
look at the access to the
various communities it's a
little broader than patient by
patient and I think you're right
in in your question senator and
excuse me for not saying mr
chair senator i'm learning
apologies
mister chair and senator.
The.
Consolidation has occurred in
many industries and I would
submit to you it's occurred
because of the things we do in
this building and the things
that are done in washington DC
we have.
Created
policies we've created rules and
regulations that frankly only
bigger entities can afford to
comply and to do all the things
that we as government are
requesting of them and so I
think we see this in many facits
of our life today where maybe
when we were
fifty seventy years ago
a small.
Institution regardless of its
business could could do it by
itself and so III blame us to a
certain extent as to why we have
consolidation of not just this
but but a lot of other entities
if you'll go with me to page
two.
The definition of acquisition
for me and it talks about an
agreement or activity the
results in a person acquiring
directly or in directly the
control of a hospital in the
mexico uh talks about stocks and
things so.
Your fi.
Had the ability to purchase a
controlling interest in uh chs
that has hospitals in new mexico
is that.
My
acquisition of those shares of
stock something that would
trigger.
The provisions of this bill
mr terry senator yes.
Because we would want to make
sure that you acquiring that
some some control of them would
not then reduce access access to
affordability of our quality of
health care services that are
already being provided to new
mex accounts
and sen mr chair senator can I
just add to that it would be
focused on what was going to
happen to the new mexico
hospital it wouldn't be the
broader transaction review if it
were totally in the mexico it be
a different story
where you might have just
dictioned over me because I
happened to live here what if
someone like michael bloomberg
purchased a controlling.
Mister chair senator yes because
they have juror section over
that new mexico hospital even if
they don't have jurisdiction
over
but do we have control over
mister boomberg
mister chair center no we don't
have a control of a mister
boomberg but we do have control
of a weather in the next sec
that in a mexico energy.
And we can ask mister boomberg
what his plans are for the new
mexican energy and he could
assure us which i'm sure he
would based on his association
with john hockens that there
would be adequate access you
know there would be essential
services would be preserved and
I think he'd probably be very
anxious to make the community
feel that this was a very good
thing for the for the area well
my concern is that well.
We're asking for things and i'm
not sure of number one will ever
Uh majority interest on what
have you and i'm not sure that
that the fact that that hospital
may have some little hospital
new mexico would rise to the
level of the second hall you're
so wall street to determine what
they have to do but anyway i'm
i'm concerned about that aspect
of it then it also talks about
the the.
Acquisition of my assume the
cell of assets and.
The word assets it says or or
assets.
Is there a threshold that your
contemplating or is it the
celebrities.
The chair senator what we're
talking about assessed is to
really say is that as it sail
going to change the management
and operation of the of the
energy it's not whether they're
selling you know chairs or beds
or things holding those lines
it's really how it would impact
the management operation cos
often times that that's the way
controls shifts in many of these
structures.
Well I would submit to you that
you might want to look at that
definition and tighten it up a
little bit.
The.
The.
On page four
definition of transaction
mergers acquisitions and then we
get to three
and a filiation or contract or
other agreement that results in
a change of control of a
hospital here
and.
I'm just
wondering if there's some.
Technical changes in control but
don't really affect the actual
control so a different
structuring uh of of an
organization as to how they're
going to
treat the new mexico hospital
that the
in reality there's no change
there's been no change of the
new mexico organization but
there is a change within the
organization up above it that
that.
I guess could have a changing
control but it's really not
going to to affect that so my
concern is that we're we're
asking for some things that uh.
Uh most people wouldn't consider
a change of control but.
The.
And I just have a hard time
getting my arms around around
the breath of this.
If you are comment on that mr
chair senator neighbor the this
particular provision one of the
things I didn't mention that in
the bill is that any
energy any party to word
anticipated transaction can
request a conference with the
superintendent of insurance in
advance and that shall be
provided and
one of the purposes of that is
actually to get at the question
of what transaction might be
covered and that's part of the
purpose so there could be a
determination that no notice is
required the issue becomes
whether that change in control
actually could lead to or will
lead to and therefore should be
reviewed
an impact on who controls the
policies and operations of the
hospital here in new mexico and
there are these new entities
called management services
organizations that contract with
hospitals and health systems and
takeover a wholesale of of of
work including negotiating
insurance rates and provider
rates which has a direct impact
on network adequacy provider
networks the cost of consumers
are caused to ensure that it
passed under businesses our
enter individual.
You know that the thought
entered my mind that say a large
hospital organization
you got to be so large that it
then created two divisions and
eastern division and a western
division even though the new
mexico hospital.
The the same people are in place
the same authority all that that
the creation of that new
division that goes over there
western us which would include
new mexico that changes and it
seemed to me that we were
capture that
in this bill and the.
Again we're getting into some
pretty.
We're getting into the the
business interest of of how the
business is organized and I
don't know whether that was your
intent or not but it appears to
be
mr chair senator our intent
isn't really to stop these
transactions or these
reorganizations it's just to
make sure that when they occur
that nothing will change change
or deteriorate in so in how the
new mexico energies are being
operated at that pre conference
hearing at you know a
you know conference it is
similar to the ten percent
rebuttable presumption come in
tell us it won't change.
Tell us why tell us how and will
we can say
you're not you're not going to
be subject to review where you
will
and again this is an interim
bill so we really didn't were
unable to lay out all the the
the rep you know the permatect
permutations that could be
pulled in on this but the intent
again is not to stop
transactions not to slow them
down if it's not necessary just
to make sure if conditions are
necessary they're put on.
But again mister chair you have
to come see permission from the
king to do it right.
On
the same page seventeen through
nineteen
this is a game part of the
transaction definition.
A cell purchase lease.
New affiliation.
Relationship or any agreement
that results in control of a
hospital in the mexico.
So I understand self purchase
lease
what is your intent with respect
a new affiliation.
Mister chair and senator
mrperiod chair senator I think
out.
Entered a dohak laid out one
that we're just dealing with
we're in affiliation comes in
and and takes you know becomes
the contractor for the obgin
services and that's a total
change in how the place operates
so it's affiliations are often
the beginning of that sometimes
the end of the beginning of
changes and control.
Of essential services so
mrperiod chairman and senator.
Doctor company.
And now they have.
Terminated that relationship and
they go with doctor company b to
supply certain specialties to
that hospital is that a new
affiliation that needs to go
through this pr.
Mister chair senator I think we
were leaving out most of the
individual providers because we
really know that's a more
complex issue than I think
doctor mechanic said she wanted
to be along with other the
medical society wanted discussed
of that with us and the other
stakeholders during the centre
and period so your answers know
as I interpreted cracks at
mister chair center yes and I
assume mister chair and in
center that the same answer
would be with respect of nursing
contracts and other type.
Professional contracts at
hospitals.
Mr chair senator yes okay then
let's look at the next word
relationship what do you intend
to capture by the word
relationship.
Mr chair senator I think that
there are probably going to be a
lot of creative ways to try to
get around this kind of
oversight they I think
incorrectly if i'm wrong
superintendent but I think that
is an attempt to prevent that.
Just as we often have catch alls
throughout our statutes in order
to make sure that they are
flexible enough to catch new and
creative ways to avoid them.
The.
I mean I I understand sale
purchase lease and I could even
go with any agreement that
results in the
control shifting but the new
affiliation and the relationship
words I I i'm at a last even
think of what we're trying to
get out there so
mister chair senator I think
what's most important in that
sentence is that results in
control of a hospital in new
mexico so no matter what it
looks like if there's something
happening that's going to change
the control of a hospital in new
mexico.
The state should make sure that
that's not going to reduce
access quality and affordability
of health care services at that
hospital so relationship seems
to me that mister chair and
center yes the business entity
hires a new president or a new
ceo but that.
I mean their responsible for
controlling the organization
therefore I would see that even
bath action would fall under
the.
Perview of transaction maybe.
But in the same emotion and I
don't think that's the interpret
but i'm just wanting to make
sure it have had not what we're
doing.
Mr chair senator know it's not
at all we're really looking at
relationships probably between
large organizations and how they
go forward and and often often a
restructuring perhaps at a at a
higher edit and ultimate holding
company so some message chair
and center that's not your
intent but do those words
expressed that intent adequately
and I I think again we need to
probably tighten that up a
little bit.
The
section six.
You know requires the parties to
pay the reasonable cost and
expenses which uh.
I guess the superintendent gets
the determined what those are.
Over on page.
Paragraph age which is online
twenty.
Forty seven a factual way a
transaction without ridden
approval.
The.
If a.
If a company interested to a an
agreement.
Preliminary agreement to
investigate.
Whether or not that merger
should occur or whether or not
that.
Purchase should be
pursued is that.
And a factuation of a
transaction that needs to be
approved or can they enter into
those preliminary agreements.
Without having to go through
this process and then if they do
agree to move forward it would
then trigger it mr chair senator
yes if you look on page seven
subsection c lanes at night
through twelve you can even
enter a binding agreement before
it's affected and that's that
that would not be a violation.
And mr chair center just can I
add that's open the way it's
done in insurance transactions
there's a binding agreement in
effect subject to regulatory
april
insurance is a different
category because the
superintendent has
authority the regulate insurance
companies but uh.
On
the post transaction oversight
section a page eleven
I don't see a time limitation on
that oversight if we're worried
about the transaction and it's
impact on one
the organization
should that be limited to.
A couple years after the
transactions fulfilled because
you're asking for for things to
have submit these reports and if
if the transactions occurred in
after a couple years they're
moving on and doing their
business
seems to me that they're having
to fill out these reports when
the hospital in another town
that's been there since prior to
this is not having to do those
reports does it make any sense
should there be a a limitation
mister chair and senator on how
long I have to do those report
mr chair senator we certainly
would consider that in the in
the comprehensive bill I think
we had a time limit of ten years
but we obviously can do
something to satisfy your
concerns.
Yeah because I I think you know
the way it reads is that would
go on
as long as they're in business.
Mr chairman senator.
Would.
A decision to close the
hospital.
That.
Be something that would trigger
this.
Mister chair senator no not
without a change of control
there's a change of control and
then they were going to shut
down the hospital that might
become relevant but now that
control was the same and that
entity just decides that they're
gonna shut down this would not
it would not come into effect
under europe would not be
relevant under this act so so
mister chair having control and
reliquishing control which is
what you're doing when you set
it down here's not an event that
would trigger these provisions.
So it really doesn't address
some of our concerns with
respect to raw hospitals on the
presence of of shutting down
part of my concern is.
That may be the
result that might happen.
Your.
Some of these things don't take
place and precreate additional
hurdles for.
The alley nation of property.
The alienation of a business
then
we may see some companies have
to have to just.
Over plug so speed and I think
we are to be doing everything
possible to prevent that from
happening and.
If it's consolidation or or
change of of uh ownership or
what have you
I would hope that we would.
Been over backwards to make sure
those things they opened at uh.
I'm i'm concerned about this
and.
Again the the short period of
time it looks to me like it's
focused on something that may be
coming down the tracks in the
next six or seven months which.
I'm not sure we ought to be
legislating for specific in fact
I think we'll cost usually
prohibited from legislating for
a specific transactions that
occur on the state so i'm i'm
concerned about it thank you mr
chair and senator.
Senator just conferring about
the floor session I said we
could wrap this up in ten more
minutes but I don't think it
will have a final vote so why
don't we just plan we had
already said that this committee
will resume after the floor
session because we have five
other bills on our agenda.
But this one we can hold till
after the floor session I have
sent you sicky and tolemance
hill to speak out at my store
still to speak on it so with
that we we've pretty clearly
could not finish up in ten more
minutes so if it's all right
members will feel okay about
that
I think so yeah we have the same
room
we heard your your materials
here and will provision mr
following the floor session
whatever hour of the night that
is thank you
I just of some yes it gives
there any way to encourage the
people presenting the bill and
some of the people who don't
have to be on the floor quid
talk in this interim.
I I see heads notting and i'm
i'm hearing maybe their may be a
way to get it everyone on board
here and i've been not to pick
on you but you're not on the
floor at you're not on the floor
