So the senate health and public
affairs committee resumes it's
deliberations over.
Senator bill fifteen and we
understand that while we were
done on the floor passing
important business.
With the state that you have
reached some agreements that
would love to hear about so
senator mister chair thank you
yes and thank you to senator
hicky for his suggestion that
that we meet during that time it
was very productive you all
should have the amendments that
we agreed on.
And where with with your
indulgence mister chair if the
the folks from medical community
who had stood in the opposition
to the bill before would tell
the committee what their
position is on the bill now I
think that might be helpful
information
yes did everybody have does
everybody have a copy of the
amendments did you all get a
copies you've seen it everybody
is anybody not have one.
Okay.
Yes please the the the father in
sunday jars please and and no no
you start you got nine first
thank you mister chairman
members.
Another good discussion and we
came to agreement not on
everything we asked for but
that's the the art of the
compromi.
The legislation centered bill.
Even when they had emphatically
they had to do that several
times which I always appreciate
thank you mister chairman just
to be clear press material
support still legislation thank
you.
Yes thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you and we did get eight a
zoom
text message
from nathan bush saying that you
are name is great with the
exclusion that you made clear in
the language.
Anything else anybody else
anybody else want to come in on
this.
Okay
very much okay.
What's the will of the committee
regarding these multiple amend.
Senator icky want to discuss it.
No
I think I think at this point we
we're working off of the point
of
the new.
Mr chair I think technically
someone needs to move a do not
pass on senate bill fifteen it
do pass for the purposes of
discussion on the senate we we
did that you did yeah okay then
we're okay I think we can.
Your mike I got a thing your
mike was an on senator hickey
got another thing that carry
robin brunder from the medical
society says.
I guess that means they're in
support
we have does anybody know how to
think compare ya at this point
yeah no please
you don't want to hear me so
this vote on the amendment is
there any opposition to adopting
these
seven met amendments.
Seeing none the committee will
consider the bill to have been
amended to the committee subtle
been amended and we go you still
you were next to your finish
senator we've got to use senator
key and senator almond you're
still on my list so do you love
this is on my list of
mister chair just to keep this
brief I really appreciate people
coming together and working out
I know it's been really
difficult
I
I was one of the original people
this summer and lhs that woeo
and and we kind of went through
a process but we're getting to
where we need to be today and I
greatly appreciate everyone's
work to tolerance patience etc.
Thank you.
Thank you mister mister charlie
support to spill I first heard
about this build during the
interim
during their own session of it
health and human services
committee expressed an interest
in.
Spite of your spill but
obviously.
So.
Question if I run you said they
were one of my seven states that
don't have similar legislation
mr chair senator I think we're
one of only eleven states that
doesn't have some mechanism to
be able to track these
transactions there are other
states that have specifically
have this kind of of of an
approach to I don't know what
what number those are right now
the comprehensive review a long
lines were talking about is in
oregon I think california is
just interest introduced it and
washington and.
I think that's the other states
have sort of a
either anney trust or
certificate of needs authority
to look into these transa.
If other states are someone
raised the constitution.
I won't be constitutional
questions
as even raised in other states
then if so what was the outcome
constitution
somebody said it would.
The.
But there is there is litigation
we know an oregon it I
and
I don't know of any other
litigation so it's not a big
problem that doesn't appear to
be okay
so I was disappointed that you
had to make so many concessions.
You limited everything that
hospitals.
So what was behind that decision
you feel yet the whole estimate
to get
I think we wanted the supported
the physicians and we wanted
they wanted more time to work
with us so we eliminated the
individuals.
Physical more turned it to delay
intact I don't think so I think
I think again this came so
quickly and we really didn't
have time to spend time really
talking to people about it
enough
because we were drafting so I
think that was a you know that's
why the interim that's why it's
interim that's why it's sunset
that's why
the senator got the commitment
from the hospitals who were
working with us on these
amendments to work with us
during the interim period and I
we're going to have up the other
stay cultures as well.
Oh thank you and there's two
other quick comments I don't
think uh the profit motor should
be.
Behind determining what the
quality of care is going to be
and finally i'm glad I live in
alba cookie as I have a choice.
Between profit and I profit
hospitals.
So I really feel sorry for those
who live in rural areas with
their own choice as I for profit
has to let all hi.
Thank you senator tom and
senators.
Thank you mr chair I too was
disappointed with the weekend
any of the bill and limiting it
just to hospitals and and some
of the other.
Limitations and an enforcement
because I actually do think it's
criminal there should be
criminal fees and so I just just
going through I I was
disappointed but I understand
why you did it and I still
support the bill but more
important you know the bigger
picture thing for me is that
health care to me as a human
right and the fact that health
care has become such a profit
making business
I think is really been really
been bad for for people's health
care around around this country
and very specifically in new
mexico and this is just a little
thing they can help ensure that
the profit is is not the only
motive of these hospitals and so
I strongly support this bill I
would have strongly supported
the one that was not weaker but
I understand why you did it.
Oh I did one address that
constitutional issue with the
dead I think is they just kind
of.
We call this issue spotting in
in and they were just kind of
throwing things out but if you
do an independent research there
argument about that you can't
add duties is not going to hold
water I didn't have time to do
the independent research for the
cursory review of lower the
article suggested to me that
that's not going to hold water
and that's what I start to say
earlier on the wrong bill
but so that was what that is she
was about thank you he did
confer with our general council
and outside council when we got
that comment yeah yeah no and I
I started it but I was too early
in the morning when we came ten
o'clock in the morning and I
was litering open the wrong fire
I I just had one quick question
so that the bill describes where
it takes to get approval
what if you disapprove what is
there any hammer at all here do
you have any authority to
can you I mean the quick if you
got rid of
no enforcement.
But I I will tell you that
that's not what we anticipate
because most of the other
transactions both on the
insurance side and we've seen an
other authorities that are
looking at hospital transactions
it's a very minor group that
gets disapproved I think there
were eighteen looked at in one
state that you were disapproved
and I think with the attitude
that we're having with the
hospitals right now
I think we'd be fine
members of the committee what is
the will of the committee
master thank you and i'll try to
be briefly chairman senator
doing.
Superintendent we are familiar
with bushner's work to minutes
credibility to this endeavor
just want to thank you
and
this is new to me I don't know
anything about mergers
acquisitions.
Uhm.
The
I think ultimately.
I don't know what the
superintendent insurance is
charged with this or not bring
and looked at the statues but
it's not explicitly laid out in
the constitution I think I think
a couple that one is the the
review of proposed transactions
that review.
We may want to just review the
entire system ongoing.
On the healthcare system.
There may be this may be better
done like in a bureau of the of
HSD or the health and forty
anyway I think that I think
under your leadership the skills
said in the and the people to do
it so I think it's best for
your.
Flows with the other duties and
responsibilities of your office
bank but anyway soak up but on
the bill control you have
control and page two line
fifteen paragraph d and says
control means
and then and then on page five
line five it says control is
presumed to exist if.
Why the two definitions of
control.
I deferred in my draft
mister chairman center it's good
to see you again actually this
was it was all together and both
of those provisions you find in
the insurance holding company
want it was the advice of
council service that the
presumption really didn't belong
in the definition and so that
technically is why it's in a
separate place.
No interesting think you must so
it's just the rebuttable
presumption.
If you thought should be in a in
a separate understood section I
think if the definition is clear
there's no need.
The and then also the approval
with conditions is that if you
do this will approve it or.
Or or or those conditions.
Are after approval and if
they're after approval how can
we enforce the condition so how
do you want to speak the
approval with conditions playing
out I think it's gonna depend on
mister chairs
sorry
I I think it's going to depend
on the actual issue because some
things will ask them to continue
like essential services don't
reduce them and then there may
be some things will ask them to
do right now the only there's
not an enforcement but there's a
reporting requirement for three
years.
Okay thank you mister minner
then i'll keep I won't I have
the o two.
The old adam smith speech out
failed save you guys from that
but just briefly
the joint stock company the the
four profit shareholder
corporation is completely.
Non conducive to health care
services not can do so too.
To any deal out of smith says
it's not a good idea to do
businesses way and I would agree
but particularly for healthcare
services and so when you
suggest.
When someone would to suggest
you know I wish or I want or I
hope or no the function of the
of the of the joint start
company is to create profit for
the shareholders and until we
change that law at the federal
level they're going to keep
having that same motive
apparently so.
You can we can check our head
all day long so it's just a
question of how do we regulate
that entity so instead of maybe
the focus on this bill is too is
to really keep up strong on
these acquisitions and mergers
but we need to figure out how do
we regulate transnational
corporations multiple you know
state corporations.
The way we can do it in my
opinion as we created a line to
mexico where where someone can
have a you can incorporate under
a different act where you're
you're not beholden to the
sherilders you'll be holding to
the state colors of the public
of the community and that way
the co doesn't have to go to
jail for not just pursuing
profits
but but anyway it's not.
It's it's the system we created.
So we can't criticize people in
those systems we need to change
the system and we think.
So I I have issues with this
bill because i'm unfamiliar with
it but i'm going to.
I may miss up the combat thank
you
mister chair assuming you are
going to get to emotion would
you mind rolling this out as a
point two sub from your
committee so that when it goes
on to the next committee they
can see all these changes.
And and from here do you go to
finance that you're next up we
got to judiciary.
Why do this well okay
We don't have emotion is
anywhere else
second department what's your
motion my motion is to pass the
submittee do not i'm set
all right right do not pass the
original bill
do not pass
and it bill fifteen instead
please
and do pass senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for senate bill
fifteen point two.
All right and six seconded by
senator tomorrow any other
discussion the secretary will
call the rule senator hickey yes
senator he give us yes center
masters.
Sure
center ministers roads yes
center my cutting so my catch
involves no center mechanic.
Yes there can avoid yes center
neighbor center neighborhoods
now sinner speakers center city
a lot best yes that you'll offer
as well yes sinner thomas yes
santa man both yes senators if
you know yes
to explain his boat
quickly yes sir
mr chair and folks
very thankful for this but the
work has just begun and I look
forward and and would love to
volunteer my services as i've
lived in this world for forty
years
to write a build that goes
forward becomes permanent in the
state but the governor's office
the osi other interest in
individuals certainly the
hospitals and if we do poland
anybody else that we also have
the tableness will take a while
this summer but I believe that
we can do it and maybe lhswell
monitor our progress
thank you mister chair very good
thank you senator thank you for
all the work you've all put into
this I think it's a nice piece
of beginning to be proud of
thank you thank you very much
thank you membership we'll talk
about your billion dollar
medicate
are you supporting this.
Alcohol tax.
Will you have a lot of the
humble about senator.
So we're going out to senate
bill.
This is very similar to one
thirty nine but this is actually
two twenty three yeah and I hope
you'll explain the difference
i'm the sponsor of two twenty
three and solicits the sponsor
of one thirty nine no it's a
when you us actually know single
consolidates together yet so
actually mister chair I can't
really explain in depth of the
difference
I think senator gonzalez is
going to come here in and do
this but this is the one that I
think finance committee is
looking for.
But I can't tell you what w.
He was yes earlier
no she was
the analysis we had simply said
sp one thirty nine SB two twenty
three are almost identical and
section one
until subsection d one thirty
nine provides for distribution
starting in twenty twenty seven
whereas twenty twenty seven bill
two two three provides for an
immediate start the first
session after passage.
So we just started reaping the
benefits faster.
Yes mister softel is what it's
over so what this is this
creates a medicaid trust fund so
similar to some other trust
funds that we set up so we would
we'd put money in there and let
it grow and we would pull five
percent out to pay for medicaid
to try to create some stability
it would have continuing.
Flow of money coming from excess
federal a mineral leasings would
also get the excess of oil and
gas school tax money that starts
flowing into it so the ideas
that it would continue to build
and ultimately when it pays for
half of the medicaid general
fund portion
then it would stop so one like
mother trust funds this one
doesn't keep going forever when
it gets to where it's pan for
half of the general fund.
Medicaid budget.
Then and we're done so the ideas
that it really does pay for
medicator at least half a
medicaid in perpetu.
The other big difference I see
between yours and the other one
is they just put a billion
dollars into the fund you have
the supplemental revenue stream
exactly yes so there starts with
a billion right off the bat this
one starts with whatever is
there which we're looking at at
the moment is six hundred and
thirty three million years six
hundred and thirty three million
right now seven hundred and ten
million next year.
In then so forth.
Okay good.
Anybody here in support of this
bill.
Opposed to it
nobody online members of the
committee.
Yeah.
Senator
somebody's online oh
who is it
carry brunder
and notice that to late you will
will hear you heard carry.
Thank you mr chairman I
appreciate it we just want to
say that we're very grateful on
to the senator for reading this
forward you know there was a lot
of conversation in the interim
under your leadership senator or
teasing you know in the helping
human services committee about
the need for a long term staple
funding for medicaid we think
this is one idea that can get us
there and so we hope the
discussion is it's one that gets
us further along the pack that
having that stable long term
funding for medically thanks so
much.
Very good thank you carry
anybody else on the
members of the committee center
mister senator thank you mister
chairman center
what's the.
Senable to twenty three and.
There is two two items there on
this chance it first of all sent
a bill one thirty nine starts
off with the billion dollars
just put in their.
This one gets the excess of oil
and gas money in starts with
that.
The second part is that there's
weights a couple of years three
years I believe before there's a
draw on that and this one will
draw next year five percent.
In in in and after that it's
it's five percent of the five
year rolling out
understood and the and the money
they would go in here mister
this bill doesn't password with
that money.
B.
Well
currently the money is going
into there early childhood trust
fund.
And so there would be diverted
from there the early childhood
trust find when we established
it we believed that it would be
about three billion dollars and
now it's well on its way to ten
billion dollars and so others
there's some real issues about
having that much money sitting
there so if we put it here it
does a couple of things one it
starts medicaid stable fund.
Um.
But also medicaid gets almost a
four to one match it was forty
one I think it's three three two
one seventy five seventy one
percent yes so when we when we
pulled this money out it's
tripled or more than tripled
right off the bat.
The early childhood money is.
Thank you mister center and i'll
appreciate the
board thinking all I stop i'm
i'm.
The list of the opposed to
bonds when we have taxing
authority
and to put such money away and
pill up by a percent.
So that we can have it in
perpetuity is.
Is good if you have no.
Revenue stream.
I think all that money should be
in the general fund you're
correct that early challenge.
Trust dumb is earmarked
which is good for the build out
but.
But that billion dollars that
they are colleagues are putting
into this fund to me that she
just.
I may have to go something
senator so the old office.
Thank you mister chair I I think
this is actually a good
stewardship of the excess oil
and gas money because well while
we do have taxing authority our
budget has been relying so much
on an oil and gas over time and
it has been
up until a few years it's been
kind of a rocky road
and so this would smooth out the
smooth out the the rocky road
so.
So I i'm supportive of the
concept and especially because
medicaid
so many of our people
Why there are two bills
is it just.
What way actually they guess
that's my question why do you
think there are two bills
because we didn't talk to each
other mister chairman oh
mr chairman do you think you'll
talk to each other on the way to
finance absolutely so a week
we've talked to each other now
but when we were getting the
bills drafted we had a
kind of a conceptual discussion
and so I got a bill drafted in
and senator munios got a bill
drafted and sold it it came down
to.
Kind of some of fine details but
but the idea was the same
ok will then I I mean i'm in
support of it and since it's
going to fight it's going to
finance a yes and since the
sponsors of the other biller
senator would use and they're on
finance and your own finance i'm
sure it'll all be worked out so
for that reason I support
anybody else possible to the
committee.
Yeah.
You're you've made emotionally
brought out think anyone
seconded by senator tom.
Listed to space and i'm sorry.
The secretary will call the rule
senator hickey yes senator he
give out yes center masters no
so my stores won't know several
mechanic.
Senator mechanic.
Yes senator mechanic votes yes
senator neighbor senator
neighborhoods yes
center city a lot best yes
instead of as well yes senator
thomas yes santa man votes yes
if you know yes senators appear
what's yes
six six to one you have a dupass
boat senator and good luck in
finances a great idea thank you
mister care and ken griffi
junior is not going to give him
a signature
and.
Come on up mister garcia I think
senator he's going to put your
bill on for center to go solid.
We just it'll be up on monday as
response it was in here you
didn't ask his to roll.
So we'll just add it to our
growing list of things that we
didn't get to today.
I unless he's asked you to a
hesitate to do that as he might
but I think this is a good idea
that we check with him when we
see him again on monday.
Yes it so she knows you you let
you know good because she's got
the next two.
Okay so.
Welcome senator in and just
negotiated to see you thank you.
Mr
mister president then a bill of
two four four two four four
mister chairman I am proud to
introduce senate bill to
forefore in nineteen ninety one
US senators peak diminishing and
senator reject bingleman kicked
off hope the new mexico quality
wards as the way to develop our
economic competitor
to date new mexico is recognized
over two hundred and fifty
organizations both private and
public who of achieved a certain
level of performance improvement
by following the baldridge
criteria this bill allows for an
appropriation of seven hundred
and fifty thousand from the
general fund to the general
services department to contract
for services to administer total
quarterly man total quality
management training programs for
a government in business
sanities with me today is my
good friend former secretary
john garcia of the general
services department and the
economic development department
in tourism department the man's
been around the black he has
received recognition for five
quarter new mexico awards and is
here to explain the bill and
answer any questions thank you
and he seers an exper.
Thank you thank you for being
here
that miss chairman members of
the committee center
consolidated I did have to go
home on an emergency and I
appreciate it senator my good
friend center hiki stepping in
vouching for me
mister chairman members of the
committee we spent billions of
dollars on a budget
and how effective are we with
that money there's waste rod and
abusing government we know that
we try to find out where that is
every day I could we manage the
best use of these monies we
change man has been every four
years or so or how can we show
the taxpayers that were doing a
very best for leadership and
leadership changes every manager
director in government and
cabinet secretary included
retrained in common practices of
budgets human resources and
policy management at a high
level we could definitely
achieve a higher level of
accountability of productivity
managing processes systems and
people are challenging in times
of constant change and different
political climates
so but this build us mr chairman
and
committee members is it really
looks happen the things about
account accountability
transparency results orientation
you pass the bill will probably
pass a hundred or so may get
signed in up to the governor and
out every agency asked it then
take that that bill and create a
processor systems around what
just passed now we never also we
don't pass one bill but we don't
take one or two out so we just
layer on top of uh of this
increased disbureaucracy if you
will but what this will do with
allow
agencies to look at how to
improve their process and
systems a run many agency that
i've been asked i've been with
republican administrations
democrat administrations and the
reason why I think is as they
say you get results in you get
things done every time I go to
an agency out ran over a dozen
of them.
The first thing I do is apply
these principles and apply for
these this recognition if you
look at my record in agencies
there's no indictments no
convictions no scandals it's the
facts it's it's either yesterday
now black and weight but we the
first thing is you go in and you
folks on training and developing
people you develop systems and
processes and I would challenge
mister chairman that if we did
this
I would estimate that senator
vinosit munius and I talked
about he thinks as fifty percent
wasting government i'd say a
minimum of twenty percent and
that's where we would close the
gap mister chairman i've dealt
with billions of dollars of
public money and had that
responsibility
i'm done with my career i'm at
the end of my career I would ask
that you do this to try to
improve how we do government if
you take seven hundred fifty
thousand divided by ten billion.
That's how much we're spending
here a nominal amount less than
one tenth of one hundredth
percent
to just tell people do things
right do it the right way and be
accountable so mister chairman
know you're busy appreciate your
time I ask that you
that you support this distance
this bill and I stand for
questions great thank you
anybody only.
Anybody in the audience have an
opinion when we are another on
this.
Mister chairman I had supporters
this morning I had a bolder's
examiner with us she had to
leave in some of the board
members of quality to mexico
better or misdetermined they do
support the appreciate this sir.
Members of the committee.
Did you read the fire missed
chairman I did like trouble
questions raised I wanted to ask
you about the gs
mister gsd said we don't do this
stuff
but they said we don't the
chairman I was secretary of that
you just see a year ago we did
it
with all the respect to the
agency III asked them to look at
this bill support it because
i've ran that agency I know how
they operate
the only two things that the
department would have to do and
it's in the bill one is that
they the gsd will let an RFP for
contract services they would not
manage to run this it would be
contracted out to an entity that
could meet the that the criteria
for a quality to quality
management system
and and the second thing is gst
would be the fiscal agent for
the money
constitutionally can't
give you to give the money
directly to them yes good in mid
criminal add one last thing that
gsd we use it as a benchmark
center secretary before was
secretary about twenty years ago
and he created that application
for quality of mexico.
Which was outstanding and it's
it's really been the benchmark
for all of us to follow since
then I did it when I was
secretary there and other
departments just need to look at
that example of of what they did
and what we could do in
government thank you have
senator mechanic you're you're
up.
You have a question.
The.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator hickey for pitching in
for center guns.
A few days ago chairman and
senator I had the pleasure to
speak to mr garcia about this
endeavour
and
those around this on the table
we all did a high for handclap
because I was sharing with them
that I was an examiner for
quality in the mexico which is
based on the national ward the
national baldrige award and I
believe.
Those who know more about than
me it was initiated under the
reagan administration.
I can tell you chairman and
senator that the new mexico
quality new mexico program is
very rigorous and not only is it
helpful with identifying a waste
and how how to do things better.
It also enhances team work and
satisfaction at the job site so
I applied this bill chairman and
senator thank you.
Thank you very much energy
mechanic anybody else.
But will a century deal office.
Thank you mister chair did them
if this seems like a a good idea
because the really we've seen it
over and over again problems
with the waste duplication.
Non responsiveness of of
different agencies
I guess my question is is I
guess it will be competitive
bids this is all harder money on
a recurring basis and so how is
it going to be distributed
because especially because
the departments.
Endorsement is is extremely.
The.
We mean they they say they
currently do not have staff to
implement or oversea trading
programs they don't offer
employment employee development
courses
i'm clear of department would
choose to provide training by
hiring f t or contracting so
what's the vision for this money
mister chairman senator great
questions.
The gist department will not be
overseeing any of the training
or or operation there what
they're going to be different
contract out with an
organization that can actually
implement these awards
mister chairman senator there
really is only one organization
that qualify and that's quality
to mexico it would go to bid
others couldn't bid for this
contract as well but all it in
mexico does have a system for
training and development
mister chairman center also this
is not just public sector this
is for private sector as well
and they can also apply for the
awards and have the same
recognition from this what will
be new in this mister chairman
senator in this bill although
it's not in the bill
is two things will be new act a
leadership institute that is
going to be created for both
private public organizations and
also quality communities
currently i'm deputy county
manager for santa balk county
there are three counties in the
mexico that are are actively
working on creating and there
are criteria for this quality
communities real rebus santa fe
and sand a ball of three
counties that are already
involved with the with the
process of of getting this
recognition so mister chairman
senator the it is for both
private and public it started
with center to diminishing
senator bengamen and is
determined this is an open
attempt to try to keep this
thing going for new mexico and
going right here if mister
chairman center if we don't do
this it will probably go away.
There's not enough support
financially for it without
without supporting support f.
Thank you mister chair.
I I generally don't like things
with its only one percent entity
they can do earth it's kind of
looks like an appropriation to
their entity I mean that's okay
when you're talking about small
little kept let leave things but
seven hundred and fifty million
dollars yeah seven hundred and
fifty thousand.
Of seven hundred and fifty
thousand seems like a lot every
year and then it's nonreverting.
Mr chair doesn't
senator I would tell you that
what this will do firm for waste
just waste alone and government.
Because organizations will end
up developing known systems and
processes that I will I will
guarantee it will improve its
improved every in every
organization that's ever applied
mister chairman senator.
Your concern is it valid it
should be this is a watchdog
over the monies that you already
appropriate this is some
assurance mister chairman
senator i've talked to the
senator munosed about a
currently stick with this if
agencies are performing then a
car at works and you can
encourage them to apply for the
word and give them at least
recognition for that those that
aren't performing that miss
budget deadlines that miss
their audit deadlines for
example those should be on on
notice and so when we get to
finance the senator is looking
at possibly putting some some
more meat into this bill that
will hold agencies accountable
mister chair senator I can sure
you and guarantee you this will
be good for the if you look at
that money divided by ten
billion dollars this is a good
use of taxpayers money
thank you and in what you say
about how the money is going to
be used sounds really really
great it's just not here it's
just a flat appropriation to one
entity that.
Has the the one entity that has
a capacity of doing it I would
have supported because they
think that the idea is good but
I I will be looking to to see
how it how it actually is used
in what kind of guard rails are
put on it that's for
thank you mister chair what's
the will of the committee
but have a motion for a due past
from senator tomorrow seconded
by senator mast us any other
discussion.
The secretary will call the role
senator hickey.
Yes and explained my boat
senator who give us yes senator
mayor stuff.
Yeah yes does votes yes center
my cution center mckenna yes the
mechanic votes yes senator
neighbor senator neighborhood
votes yes in irish meetings
centers that your lobbies yes
since the real of his votes yes
senator men
yes explain my role serential
man votes yes and artist if you
know yes they do explain his
vote senator hickey and then
senators are told.
Thank you mister chair it just
dawned on me now that i'm kind
of ironically sitting here
that the person to my right just
doesn't talk to talk he walks
the talk and and just a brief
explanation of that yesterday we
approved the health care
authority gargantro.
That in all honesty really
started when he and I work
together in multiple multiple
meetings over the summer year to
go trying to work out the issues
with the risk management to
vision and it was inside that
and people we brought in that
the health care authority the
idea of it which is I believe as
I said yesterday and a greatly
benefit of the state but I want
to give credit and that to me
because I messing the stuff all
the time but to this man here
who had the fortitude in some
difficult situations to move
towards getting it right and
then planning the seat so I just
wanted to ignore his thank you
senator senator tonight.
I think I just want to
do it applaud mister garcia for
is involvement in this is a
great idea i've been involved in
similar programs in this is long
overdue
is common alleged to state waste
and all a lot of money I
whole hardly endorses thank you
very good so on a vote of.
Six seven seven two
no two example two
you have a depend.
Now with two bills.
Mr chairman let's start with
senate belt to forty four
in four.
That's cracked mister chairman
so this is a an appropriation
bill for
children youth and families
department to provide trauma
informed training for all staff
and foster families as well and
the reason I felt like this was
important to bring forward and
and I did have a meeting with
the cfeese now secretary
casalas about this in november
yeah in the reason why I think
this is so important right now
not only um is cift.
And
note no surprise that they've
made the headlines a lot for
um
not doing enough to protect the
the children of new mexico but I
know that the the current
secretary is really open to
having discussions about how we
can be more supportive and
provide
this.
The resources to phoso families
and the staff at cyfd to be as
responsive as possible and and
provide a safer environment and
address while being issues so
trauma as i'm sure you're aware
of mrperiod chair
affects children's growing
brains especially and those
first three years when a lot of
your own development is taking
place and often if you haven't
received the trump informed
training you may mistakenly
think that a child who's been
exposed to some dramatic event
when there are an infent may not
remember it and therefore it's
not in affecting them.
And what we understand from
research though is that actually
when children are the most
vulnerable in their early years
when they cannot excape a danger
or they cannot care for
themselves they are most
succeptable to having adverse
effects from trauma they are
completely dependent upon a car
giver and if they're not getting
the support they need during
those early years it will have
negative effects for for that
child the rest of their lives
including half a fact so one of
the sayings that I really like
to share is the issue is in the
tissues all of that trauma
response that court is all
that's released during a
dramatic event to store in the
tissues resulting and higher
instances of diabetes and other
issues that are experienced by
people who could develop these
chronic health.
Issues because of trauma and
then
become dependent or overburden
our health care system and
causing additional costs to
every one long term you you're
less productive as a citizen you
may not be able to hold a job
because of the higher areas of
the lower parts of the brain
like in the fear response the
safety response where you're
always in fighter flight and
reacting in situations instead
of able to you're not able to
respond and I thought for ways
so more likely chair respond in
and gressive way and so by
providing trump informed
training to see right workers
and foster families we can
better educate them on
appropriate ways to respond to
children and families who are
undergoing trauma and hopefully
be able to medicate some of the
negative aspects of trauma.
That mister charles.
The.
Anybody in the audience.
But you think
you're alright.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And mr chairman sent sorry to
interrupt but I just want ad
that often people were thinking
that going to talk therapy is
going to help at the peace
that's missing is it's not
stored in the language center
that child probably has no
recollection of what happened so
it doesn't make sense to really
process it verbally what we have
to teach is how how to self
regulate and being aware of our
automatic responses that maybe
have no rational reason for
occurring and without judgment
understanding that that's the
root house of a lot of substance
used just orders and other
maladapter behaviors is your my
car yes maybe it was yours I got
a note from your mechanic no
mike on I I think that might
have been in the public maybe
the lady
all right i'm sorry no I just I
learned so much being it unless
it comes with that you and I
keep learning
learning here but I really I
applied you for bringing this
like whole hardly support this
and there is so m.
But this will make a difference
thank you for bringing it.
The.
Second second
yeah i'm going to i'm gonna
propose an amendment if it'll be
accepted as a friend of mine did
you read the FIR as see wife d
said we should provide this
training to our preventive
services contract providers to
would you be open to adding that
mister chair I would absolutely
be so that would be on page one
frank.
Line twenty one.
Before.
It's just obvious.
Page one line twenty one.
Following staff insert
comma contract providers of
preventive service or prevention
services.
The.
Well.
And first of all I don't know
what to what the if they use the
oxford comma not in.
I think they do they'll knock it
out they don't.
And you're okay with that as a
friendly amount mister chairman
yes.
Prevention services move the
amendment
discussion of the amendment
second okay so right.
Saturday
thing no opposition will
consider the bill amended and
then we'll go to your comments
energy.
Thank you thank you mister chair
in the last couple of years
working in some other areas
particularly rounded diction
i've been reading in men's
amount of where called
functional mri's where with
color we can really see
different areas of the brain and
how they grow and don't grow
given environments and so forth
and the
the centers around the middle of
the fear and so forth
definitely right up and over
time they grow up so we know the
aces the issue is is the tissue
in its at tissue and a recent
study finding that children who
were non verbal before age of
one in a potentially abusive and
naz supporting family do grow
these areas and so the assistant
very early very deeply so I
highly commend this
and if you could keep us
appraised of the science while
it goes for it because I think
there's so much more to be done
around asis and the training is
critical in the in the training
and understanding that
difficult family situations
really have an impact and we get
much more involved sooner this
goes to the court again so again
great bill and thank you for
your deep concern in your
experience around children and
health ca.
I I think we have the movie yet
do you have any comment.
Very good one quick comment and
that the other day was a group
of former foster kids uh from
the
new mexico can probably and.
One of them said they had been
moved forty times
and what we know is every move
every time a kid is moved it is
a trauma because they always
blame themselves there's
something about me that makes me
unlike a bill unwantable and
desire whatever and so forty
times that and she's she
struggling now which is in
school and
I was just born with mister
charle add that research shows
that the second most dramatic
event that a child could
experience as being moved from a
teacher.
Moved classrooms a different
teacher so imagine the impact of
your primary caregiver changing
forty times
yeah
quick question from
assuming this isn't is there an
hb to right
mr chair and senator it is not
an each between but i'm hoping
that we can secure some you know
anybody else on the senate
finance committee they could put
it I may be able to
advocate with a member to on
senate finance so we'll see what
we can do i'm hoping to be able
to get some extra funding there.
I stopped doing appropriation
bills six years ago when you're
had seven appropriations.
Six one to get through the
seventh one.
I got one third away I was
asking for and it was only
asking for half a million but
good luck is a wonderful program
and i'm sure.
You're being a financial help.
Minimally
one thought that we we've been
developing with the interim
committee usually we take our
appropriation request to lfc
laden october and we've made the
presentation to the lfc this
year I think what we are to be
doing is taking the step that
doesn't get in this year.
And packaging it up and taking
it to them in april or may so
that it's in their thinking when
they're putting the budget
together and and I will try I
mean I think it's worth trying
to try to get it in there
earlier so we've instead of
using this year's thing as
failure we use it as this is the
building blocks for next year a
good idea.
Secretary will call the role
senator
senator hicky votes yes center
my stuff yes that are masters
votes yes sir my curtain center
mechanic.
Yes center mechanical yes center
neighbor center neighborhoods
yes
center city a lot best yes some
city a lot of what's yes senator
man yes seven time on boards yes
center to the yes.
Senators if you know about yes.
I would have seven in the
affirmative none and the
negative you have a dupassion
senate bill to forty hover to
seventy eight thank you mr
mister chairman so senate bill
to
seventy eight.
Yes just changing the number two
seventy eight
is an appropriation bill for
fifty thousand dollars to be
provided to the southwest carg
and this is for additional
resources for seniors and grant
county and i'll go county and
and the reason I feel like this
is really important to bring
forward as in roll new mexico
it's very difficult for our
seniors to be able to access the
resources that they need to be
safe and live healthy productive
lives and so we we need
additional resources and we all
know that our junior money gets
concentrated in those urban
areas where you have a higher
concentration of legislators and
we're
in a roll community or a rural
district we have very large
geographically large districts
so I have three huge expense of
counties with a lot of need and
a lot of difficulty accessing
their resources that are
available so this is just a help
support those most vulnerable in
our communities a little more
adequately anybody on the
network for this members of the
community.
Second advice
you have a question senator
neighborhood I thought he was
second asking.
Mister chair and senator you're
not the only one here that
represents rural parts of the
state and this is going to two
counties.
And.
I I understand the need in rural
new mexico but we're singling
out to counties for this bill
and it just doesn't extreme.
For lack of a better word fair
so you know if your other
counties have the same needs
I don't know why we should
single two out and then.
You mentioned capital and stuff
we tab quite a bit of that stuff
and I know some of mine went to
to meet these types of needs so
I don't know why we're seeing a
direct appropriation bill for
two counties in the mexico when
probably most of us could have a
similar bill for for the folks
in argument and mr charons
senator neighbor thank you for
that question this is actually
to help to supplement an
existing program that i'll go
medical services that has a
clinic in both great county and
hit alcohol county they are
ready are implementing this and
they wanted some um some funding
to better provide those services
so part of my junior bill was to
provide senior.
Reserve resources for senior
needs in grant head algo and
luna county those are my three
county so I do prioritize my my
junior money to address the
needs of those most vulnerable
in our communities i've
consistently done that with
health councils and
are seniors access to
food as well food security that
was another one of the requests
that I made on my junior bells
so this is just to
provide some additional support
through the southwest cog and
that will then provide the
funding to had alcohol medical
services to do the support for a
seniors in our in those two
counties.
Yeah mister terrance and it I
suspect that other cards and
other counties have similar type
programs and I would submit to
you that those seniors need
their probably very similar to
those situated than these two
counties and I just don't don't
know why we would single single
doubt.
My concern they just happen to
have AAA more aggressive
assertive dates and
or may be the rest of us just
just
use our cap wildly dollars
differently anyway that's my
concerning that point senator
tom and you have something to
see.
Yeah because he you have you
have three countries don't you
how many.
The.
Okay any other discussion we
have emotion do we have a motion
we do have motion and we have a
second and this is our last bill
and your vote is all outstanding
between us in the highway home
so the secretary will call the
role senator hiki then only give
out yes center my stuff yes
there may ask as well yes my
catch in center mechanic yes
senator mechanic votes yes
center neighbor.
It's now centered center city a
lot best yes center city all up
as well yes and our top man
said how man votes yes center to
see if you know.
I just want to come in two
things before I cast my boat
whenever they foot senator night
neighbors name after it comes
out of senator neighbor
but also I hope you're feeling
better senator mechanism and
that you can join us soon as it
was it looking.
Oh thank you chairman in
colleagues I plan to get some of
that incredible prescription
drug on monday and I hope to get
better soon to to return to the
round house
alright and I would yes and that
gives us a total of six and that
on that point that point.
The senator canada yeah the
sooner you're take it that more
powerful the impact so if you
can get a pharmacy today do
that.
Bank you send it are hiki.
Certainly little medical advice
along with our voting in your
voters to one you have a due
person from a medical doctor
thank you mister thank you
members that the committee.
Amazing.
