There's a screen that says
webcast on of that means
anything.
I'll check on my iPad.
Signs up with it's trying.
Representative regents RG Texas.
Yeah okay very.
So welcome everyone to the final
meeting of the twenty twenty one
legislative session.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee.
Senator Gallegos texted me
seven.
problems we had him on.
Yes use the link we got this
morning.
Senator wrong with the system
that he can access that.
Sure wouldn't.
Well.
I got on the regular way yeah or
maybe they six the outlook.
Maybe only senators can now use
the outlook.
Yes maybe.
But let's go ahead and start the
chase we have
Representative joined guarantee
here and our expert witness is
here.
Welcome you this year
Representative you can go ahead
and structure presentation
Representative okay so I'm
presenting house bill twenty one
the public works project
contributions it does two things
it cleans up some technical
language in the public works
apprenticeship training act also
known as P. what and it requires
con contractors in category
eight there's a B. C. and H. R.
to give contributions either
into a company's apprentice and
training program are if they do
not have a an apprentice program
and do not want to start one
they pay into the public works
apprenticeship training fund for
all public works contracts
construction projects
at a time when we're really
trying to expand job
opportunities across the state
in every industry and workforce
category in what we're building
roads like crazy and when
they're shortages of skilled
labor this help promote the
apprenticeship expansion it
encourages industry to join or
to start or support programs
there are already forty one
registered apprenticeship
programs in our state but I want
to emphasize they include
program sponsored by private
industry and companies.
Halliday is the city of
Farmington and actually has a
registered apprenticeship
program that is for recognize
trades and then by labor
organizations we have I think
it's one thousand eight hundred
and three registered apprentices
as of a couple weeks ago an
employer can make contributions
sure.
All registered.
And this program.
And what is a participant or to
the public works bureau of labor
relations division in the
workforce solution department if
you don't and you only use
journeymen to work you pay sixty
cents per man hour for every
construction employee on a
public works project that's over
sixty thousand dollars so you
pay to your own program or you
pay into the P. what
apprenticeship training program
at the end of the year the
Pequot fund contributions are
split among the registered
apprenticeship programs that I
believe that was about a million
four hundred thousand last year
Under the current law.
Public works minimum wage Jack
there's four types of
construction A. B. C. and H.
only doesn't participate in the
program the others are which
include general building
residential and heavy
engineering have been operating
under this for decades so this
law would require typing a
contract contractors which
include a street highway utility
and light into nearing who have
not had to pay previously to
either pay a contribution or
start registered apprenticeship
program I think this is a win
win for the workers and young
people of our state.
General contractors which is
part of the apprenticeship board
actually opened ace leadership
high school a decade ago to just
straight how education pre
apprenticeship can build up to
this and with that I'd like to
invite my expert witness to say
a few words before we take
questions and that's a Brian
content from the building
contract trade.
Thank you Representative Mr on
it good to see you Mr Chairman
very good to see you as well all
members of the committee out
thanks for allowing us to
present this bill this afternoon
you know I will say about and
appreciate been general they
were established in the mid
nineteen hundreds nineteen forty
seven nineteen forty eight are
they rolled along in New Mexico
primarily around
our national laboratories in the
demand for trained manpower
deposit of fuel industry and we
as we fast forward into
into the twenty first century in
nineteen ninety the P. what all
fund was established and it
helped us grow or pretty ship in
New Mexico exponentially what
we're enjoying today with with
all the talk of economic
development and training of all
resources are a pretty ship has
proven to be one of the absolute
very best mechanisms from taking
R. E. a young people like myself
in nineteen seventy three I I
joined I beat this electrical
apprenticeship program and out
we've we've trained thousands of
apprentices in this mechanism so
with that because I understand
pretty questions and thank you
all very much.
Are we stand for questions what
the.
Is there anyone in the audience
who wants to speak on this bill
either for or against it.
Raise your hand then slide issue
that your hand up first so we'll
we'll take you first.
Okay Mister chair members the
committee my name is Matthew
slides are representative of the
coverage you Mexico we sent
strong support H. B. twenty one
and the four to this passage
thank you so much.
Thank you Jason Espinoza your
secretary.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
mechanical contractors
association in New Mexico.
In the sheet metal and air
conditioning contractors of New
Mexicos well we stand in support
of house bill twenty one and see
and smacked are in a partnership
with two joint apprenticeship
committees and understand the
importance of training the
workforce it is necessary to add
this funding to expand training
and safety to more workers which
is a staple of the skilled
workforce we are very urgent
move the bill forward thank you.
Jane journey and.
Yes to yourself Jane and then we
can hear from.
I apologize for that you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee thank you again with
New Mexico utility contractors
association and although we are
support apprenticeship programs
are we would like to keep the
type a work exemption in place
because this H. B. twenty one
will substantially increase the
cost of public works
construction projects
estimations show that for every
one million spent on a public
works project this bill will
increase the cost by six
thousand dollars for the deal to
do with a hundred and eighty
million dollars in discretionary
funding that equates to ten
point eight million dollars a
year there are no apprenticeship
programs for utility contractors
and this fund this fund only for
this.
One the only gives money to
state approved apprenticeship
programs meaning that in house
an employer apprenticeship
programs do not have access to
money we also do not have access
to the partnership programs and
training for respectfully ask
you to vote no on H. B. twenty
one thanks for taking the time
to hear me.
Thank you Jerry.
To see you Representative.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman and CEO
appreciate your the committee
order in your works Mr Chairman
representative there are so
seated contractors of New Mexico
where the highway builders in
the state and we have our own
training and certification
program as required by the
Federal Highway Administration
and we use that training and or
or personnel in the proper
methods of groups of sampling
and testing highway construction
materials such as aggregates so
concrete and asphalt in nineteen
ninety five federal highway
Administration mandated also if
the states must have recognized
training and certification
program for highly material
Samper's attests New Mexico
department of transportation
partner with us we'll see if the
contract is a New Mexico to
provide uniform and consistent
training for all private and
public sector highway
construction personnel involved
in sampling and testing highway
materials and this is very
important for highway work here
in the states is specialized
training for highway
construction.
And maintenance of our high
waist so we sent our we're we
sent for printers to because
that's what we do but we have a
problem to be that we are not
going to be able to get the
proper training from I don't
know the process that would
change Mr Chairman but I want to
thank you Mr chairman
specifically because I know
you've been interested in that
before in your words what we're
doing and we approached
appreciate that tremendous Mr
chairman I want to.
Thank you.
yes it was a very impressive
training programs that you had
any business.
and I.
They came here for the the
sample the durability of the
strength of the week instruction
by but really none of the
engineer corps and and somehow I
got somebody stole it actually
is what happened to instill in
from my office.
Jim good to see you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee for hearing test site
managing Garcia I am the
executive director associated
contractors of the New Mexico
the heavy highway Division I
represent five thousand
employees that are building your
highways here and the right
Mexico state we have first of
all I want you to know that at
sponsor here you you visit our
facility as you know a scene and
conducts Senator training and
certification certificate
programs your TD CP after
training programs that are
approved through the federal
highway standards ACM also host
the to your teacher training and
certification in our office
which also includes extensive
JT training the heavy highway
has been exempt from this
apprenticeship program
constitution because of any can
specify training that we offer
we are we are in favor of
apprenticeship programs Mr chair
with the that's great we think
with the safety the high level
of safety and a customized
training that we offer that we
would like to be exempt and
remains that we have been since
the mid nineties we stand in
opposition to this bill as it is
written in the FY are Mr
Chairman also shows inclusive
additional cost DOT projects we
but we know that that is not
true Mr and again just made that
comment it does also disposing
and that will be additional cost
to the contractor bids which
will be carried straight through
to the D. O. T. as well with
that Mr chairman I thank you for
your time I thank you for all
that you are doing for New
Mexico.
Thank you see here thank you
is there anyone else in the
public wants to make a comment
before we go to the committee.
Seeing Representative and and
and Mr Khan did you want to
respond from the committees and
into the issues raised by Mr any
hand and Mr Garcia.
Chair Mister chairman let me say
a few words and then have Mister
Condit speak
remind everybody that if you
have an apprenticeship program
you don't pay the P. what money
so late the kind of program that
associated contractors of New
Mexico has is exactly what you
would use in your partnership
program the state workforce
solutions department has the
registration for partnership
programs online it's very easy
to register on and so the and
they may be running can talk
about when you have when you're
paying an apprentice working
with the journey then it would
not raise the cost of highway
construction.
Thank you.
Determine if I may hi exactly
that of the public works minimum
wage act under which type A. B.
C. and eight are covered
require either the payment of
German wage rates or registered
apprenticeship wage rates so
with the ability to pay and to
protest on worker of they start
off at about most of the
apprentices in the different
crop discipline start off at
about fifty percent of the
gentleman all up okay and and
fringe benefits so there is a
built in
I'm pretty sure it doesn't cost
it really takes so the economics
of it just don't add up in the
ten million dollars with a
little the entire types BC NA
eight.
At the rate of about one point
County is in the state and
that's three different all
categories of construction I
will also say although we are in
strong support of any training
out there all for construction
professionals
after hearing as we worked our
way through the committee
process we did a gather some
information on the New Mexico
department of transportation's
on the job training program
which which
I think is is is probably pretty
good it looks a little anemic to
be an actual partnership program
but as the gentleman said
they've got he represents five
thousand employees in that
industry there's a reporting
requirement in the New Mexico
department of transportation
specific to training and a total
of two contractors actually
turned in their annual report I
turned in I contractors of
turned and some some some
monthly reports and only two
actually turned in all their
annual report which only
represents.
Ten employees for one of the
contractors and I employees for
the other so four five thousand
employees are weak bill that
some so specific craft training
ironworkers of operating
engineers cementitious
carpenters up would would not
only up all the benefit to
contractors but it benefit our
state and actually the up the
efficiency of which would get
these things done so I'll be
glad to stand for any questions
on that.
Let's go to the committee we
have to committee members
questions already and we'll
start with the Senator Tallman
and and senator and hair loss.
Thank you Mr chair and I guess
my questions were answered.
Just want to confirm the fact if
you.
Already have a impress program
you.
I do not have to pay the.
Sixty S. Census.
For our.
Is that correct.
That is correct Mr chairman and
senator.
Okay.
Thank you for that that's my
only question thank you Mr chair
and thank you Representative for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you senator John and
senator Dianne this year next.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Just a few questions so Mr
common if I could ask him I like
the idea of where you're an
apprentice that you'd make half
the wage and I'm trying to
figure out what a blade operator
apprentice would be making I'm I
guess I'm a little confused
because we're always saying
fifteen dollars an hour or more
and then my calculation they
would not make that and I'm just
trying to clarify that.
Mr Chairman representative.
What do you want Mr.
Mr chairman if if Mr Cutler I
can answer that.
be I will be glad to try to up
says Senator and as was
described a starting wage rate
for princes I think the state
apprenticeship council of which
supervises a print is shipped in
in New Mexico of the minimum of
starting wage is our fifty
percent of the judgment wage
rate so I'm gonna take a minute
here and pull up all all of the
published rate duration I've got
I'm here up pretty handy
so historically what happens is
as an apprenticeship starts to
complete the curriculum what's
familiar with electrical
mechanical that's where I spent
a lot of of a lot of my career
up so first year yet you
complete first year you'd go
from fifty to sixty percent of
the German wage rate are you
complete second here you go up
another ten percent so other
incremental as you complete the
classroom curriculum and the on
on the job training requirement
all of the apprentices
apprenticeships union and
nonunion are very similar to
that.
So how much what is your name
and lady raider made up give me
up I can pull up the scales here
pretty quickly
It it popped up on my.
Or maybe you're just gonna join
us.
Yeah if you could put it on the
screen or.
Mr Chairman can you if he has it
can he just share it verbally
okay.
Mr chair but mostly I I I'm not
able to share my screen at the
moment but I believe looking at
the Taipei and.
Agreement as far as the weight
classifications for a operator
of the journeymen level it would
be thirty four thirty four
dollars and six cents on the
wages and fifteen dollars ninety
four cents on the Fritz.
And and so then the input is we
did have that start.
Right right it was it was sort
of half the right answer skills
and time to trade.
The rules are wages over the
course of their partnership that
integrates support of five
years.
Mr chairman and Representative
are all those Davis bacon wage
rates or those
You Rights Act yes I'm trying to
figure out that's a little high
from what we pay and I'm just
wondering why I thought we went
well we're doing public works we
go of Davis bacon and they give
us loves her job and that I was
anticipating twenty seven fifty
is what I thought.
Mr chairman and Mister Conder Mr
Stewart is can either you
comment on that.
Twenty seven
well.
I can find a COVID.
Mr chairman of the committee
Some years ago there was a bill
that was passed leaves SB thirty
three which type of data so the
mistaken right in New Mexico to
organize.
Goshi CVS across the state in
various trades there for thank
you all very straits up to those
collective bargaining rates and
that would be the current day
state committee state in Mexico
bearing on its classification of
the work would excite eighty CH.
Right and I thank you for that
that apple couple years ago when
we went to unionize but.
And I was just checking a it's
been a few years since I've had
to bid a project road projects
so it would have been prior to
that my next question Mr
Chairman representative do we
have any of these training
institutions outside of the
Albuquerque corridor.
Mr chairman and senator yes we
do.
Mr chair and set Representative
could you tell me where because
I'd be interested I've got
employees and I would like to
pay them half their wages but
the I don't have many kind of
apprentice program.
Mr chairman and senator would it
would depend on the trade for
example as I said
the city of Farmington itself
has for trades in apprenticeship
programs so it would depend on
the specific trade that you were
looking at.
Mr Chairman representative wrote
word construction in southeast
New Mexico.
Mr Chairman and Mr Condit do you
know of apprenticeships there
yes well let me let me describe
how how are project covers for
the most part they cover all
thirty three counties in New
Mexico so where the actual
classroom training Mayfair.
many of the apprenticeship
programs are on block trading to
where our people are are working
on the job site and once a
quarter they come in for a day
or two and they they capture
their in in classroom are in
classroom training required I
will say that depending on the
demand of when when we had
training facilities in unit
Eunice New Mexico with that
training facilities and lost
almost
Espanola for me Dan Albuquerque
most of the.
Offices are in Albuquerque so
periodically they might be
required to all COVID up with
the COVID we've had two modifier
training up modifier training
Primarily going online but a lot
of it a lot of the classroom
contact on is taking place all
of.
Online via computers.
Thank you.
Good.
Mr chairman and senator I wanted
to add that that that is one of
the blessings in disguise of
COVID that some of the
apprenticeship programs have
realize that you can do it
so that's you know that's just
the unanticipated blessing of a
horrible situation.
Thank you for that and and thank
you Mr Khan and Mr Mr when
they're in Eunice at your Ranko
I actually approach them the C.
part does could come on when
they had their concrete batch
plant and we were not allowed is
that just because it's that it's
their program and not
County or educational facility
program I know they're a little
bit more rigid than most people
but and I appreciate your
bringing up Lea County that's
the only one that I've known of
in Lee County and other protest
bunch we're not welcome.
Well I'd like to that I can I
can I think described to you if
someone showed up on our project
is that I want to go to class
tonight we probably could do
that no more than you could go
into a community college or
university or even high school
if if if if you are interested
in finding out how a pretty ship
can be made to work for you I'll
be more glad more than glad
either to direct you to existing
apprenticeship programs or
potentially work with department
of workforce solutions and and
customizing an apprenticeship
directly up for for for your
company the majority of the
apprenticeship programs are
multi employer so you have the
group said the employee
employers come together and they
subscribe many of them are
unilateral which means they're
they're they're all the shop
Our is our bilateral also
prepare jointly trusted but it's
it's important lines training
it's it's not a casual come in
and check it out we'll be glad
to give students tourists were
reaching out to high schools up
but actually have up an
apprenticeship
train ad hoc up I would tell you
that.
They are sometimes particularly
safety safety models are stuff
that we open it up to to more
than our own this is a German
Richmond programs that we make
available to other people but we
would probably have to customize
some of for a lot of I'm not
duration like yours.
Thank you for that Mr
Representative misconduct at
times is your Ranko constructors
Inc analytical company and I
cannot think who they work but
they're the only ones allowed on
facility even though I had
contacted him before the start
of the general program just
because I was interested to see
if I get some extreme but what
that'll yield at thank you for
your input discussions.
Thank you senator Senator and
legislation.
Thank you Mr chair and so the
question I had was I we had
earlier is there anybody who's
an apprentice who makes ten
dollars or less.
Mr chairman and senator up I do
not know of anybody who makes
less than fifteen dollars but Mr
Condit can you answer that yes I
can there is not any of the
scale so
there in the contracts of
covering the fifteen
construction unions are
representative I think of the
lowest scales in here you might
have a
you might have a of seventeen
dollars an hour scale of
someplace that fifty percent so.
Usually the way that contracts
are written is not and all of
them comply with state and
federal minimum wage tax and if
if there's an exception all
aware I'm gonna present scale
would be below the minimum wage
they would absolutely be that
would that would be that would
be the lowest it could go and I
think that would be few and far
between most of our premises are
starting off at fifteen or
sixteen dollars an hour there
might be a couple of
classifications
I just got I'm just ahead of me
okay also.
Mr Chairman Mr Condit
I appreciate the good work that
you all do but I would like some
and you can get back to me on
this but when we pass that when
we were going to increase in and
solidify a higher minimum wage I
asked the question of the unions
in some on some of the bill will
you then raise your rates to at
least be that so would you not
today would you please get back
to me to confirm that that's
actually happening.
I will be glad to do that I'll
send it to you first thing in
the morning or not tonight thank
you so much that's all I have
Mister chair.
Thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You're more passionate thank you
thank you I just wanted to say I
too would like that information.
Members of the committee I'll be
glad to send the current Wade
sheets are to
we'll get in short we'll get him
out to everybody and we'll have
that information for you
tomorrow.
For the second time Senator
dangerous.
Yes Sir Mr and I was trying get
outside to get better wifi
losing
the conversation earlier I did
just another follow up question
with DOT having a hundred seven
contracts already out and if we
went into this partnership
program with those contracts
have to be renegotiated or and
if so what prices I think it's
one point one billion dollars
currently I just wondered if
there's an increased risk that
would be a decrease of my
employees would be paid at a
smaller rate than what was
customary for for instance avoid
offer.
Practically Mr chairman members
of the committee practically
what happens is when they I'll a
wage wait in fringe benefit is
established all of for instance
we were talking about operators
a minute ago a group nine
operator twenty eight dollars
and eighty cents an hour plus
six dollars and fifty four cents
plus a minimum of sixty cents
per hour so that wage the the
the wage determinations that are
assigned to each of the existing
contracts would would play out
completely so it's if there was
a change in either wages bridges
or the apprenticeship
contribution it would be after.
It would be after the law went
into effect and then that would
be a requirement to pay the the
the modified wage for and and
training compiled.
So Mr chair and representative
miss common so if I did a bit of
let's say my plate operator at
I've been in the twenty eight
and then we went in and did do
an apprenticeship and and all
the other add ons.
If.
If that increases doesn't come
out to the contractors come out
to the department
transportation.
What let me let me let me take
another shot at describing this
so we agree to bridge budget
established every January first
they start in about August
September they gather all the
information on the department of
workforce solutions as public
hearings up there's public input
up and of the collective
bargaining of agreements for the
state are are utilized as dollar
storage right those right wage
rates and fringe benefits stand
for the entire year thank if you
added to your project and let's
say it was dead in February of
we're we're more so say March of
two thousand twenty one is the
two year project those wage
rates in French budget all that
follow that project drop so in
January when there might be
another modest increase they
wouldn't apply to existing work
that already been procured.
Okay so Mister president and
Representative misprints are Mr
Chairman representative and
misconduct so then what I
understand is you would take the
negotiator rate so I would not
be giving you my actual so when
we did a job we've been a job to
get the job so I look at my
total cost we go about five to
eight percent typically right
now over what our costs are so I
would have to do that I will.
Thirty dollars an hour in the
state has to absorb that
how do I get my chance to under
bid someone if we're always
doing the same cost value of
employers
that's a very.
Mr chairman members the
committee I love being treated
drug shot answer may have lost
you.
Senator.
Okay.
Yes Sir so kind of the scary
inspired of public works minimum
wage Jack in New Mexico all or
the federal Davis bacon act is
employers are
are forced to compete based on
their planning there are
education their expertise all
and not necessarily on of the
the the ability to to lower wage
rates and current budget for
construction professionals so it
makes and every every contractor
out there this complying with
the law is paying the exact same
thing you are.
Getting the same job and
everything's equal and we have
two budget of a hundred thousand
dollars how is it that the
department transportation is
going to determine which job to
take because if we have
everything the same and I don't
reduced wages are reduced time
reduce a quick manner if
everything stagnant how do I get
the benefit to
try to get up.
How does that work Mr chairman
members of the committee I've
been in this business awhile as
I said earlier I started is in
Princeton in nineteen seventy
three All I Want to bit openings
every single day and in types is
D. and H. primarily B. R. is
where you see a lot of activity
there can be a fifteen to thirty
percent spread on any given day
are some contractors will look
at a project and calculate how
many man hours he thinks it's
going to take him to do that R.
others may look at it and think
that they have some sort of
expertise that would allow them
to do it at a not all lower cost
per man hour but a lower number
of man hours so I've never seen
a dead high
that that's some see a lot of
things in my life I've I've not
seen that.
But I appreciate that and Mr
chair and representative
responded typically when you're
going to be showing not us but
I've been I was act the us to
Patel's just for bid opening
because the contractor there
always had one bit in on table
and one bit in the briefcase if
you have competition pull the
other bit out but I guess my
thing is trying to your
statement on costs on price on
on not employee price than the
old thing you could do is either
speed up the process which
please state and or sheet where
else you cut but I do have
another question Mr chairman and
Representative misconduct on
like AC and M..
How would I get into the resume
program if they are going to be
training
How would it be that our
organization could access them
and does that have a feat for
for bears in trying.
Mister chairman Senator I would
suggest that you talk to Jim
Garcia offline
he has wonderful resources I'm
sure he's happy to share with
you.
Okay and Mr and Representative I
appreciate that but I do have
someone called me and said they
do not have zoom size trying to
figure out if.
One of my employees are wrong or
or if you're on but Mr etcetera
all Representative I'll try to
get that on.
Offline.
Is Mr C. is going to answer your
question so I will yield to him
usually we we don't go back to
the audience a second time but
as you and you have the answer
to that question that would be
good.
Yes it chairman center thank you
for that I I would like to get
some clarification of that first
of all I will tell you that a
lot of the training that we do
for our is not approved to
federal highway unless it is a
proctored exam so most of our
exams have be proctored so we
don't use them we can be certain
classes like OSHA ten losses in
the intro classes for that also
Senator Gallegos I will tell you
that it's not one point one
billion with the but to bonding
packages we are almost two
billion dollars in lettings that
would be coming out for next
year and there's no such thing
as a hundred thousand dollar
project these are very very
large projects we also I also
wanna let you know that you see
and then travels around the
state doing customized training
in every segment of the state so
that we can qualify all of our
all of our trainees so we can
get the custom training that
they use and the last thing I
would like to add is that any
additional cost in in employee
costs will revert back to the
host which will be the D. O. T.
that's just that's just the way
it's going to happen so with
that that's we believe again in
the plan is to programs we would
just like to be exempt as we
have been since the mid nineties
because of the specified
training that we do there in our
office thank you Mr chair I will
be available if you have anymore
questions.
She's still on the floor thank
you Mr and and Representative.
Discussion and I apologize I
throughout the hundred thousand
I actually don't do of state
highways by choice we have done
in rules will bridge work in
some I would prepare eight years
back but it was a little bit
harder for us so as our company
size we stay in town and do
asphalt we've got a hot mix
plant and and I would love to
have this group people with us
we're talking about air quality
because
we we didn't get much opposition
to their quality standards but
that's different I productive
day but I guess my last question
is on trend fund Mr Chairman
representative do we know how
the federal federal government
would be filling about the unit
you the New Mexico using federal
funds on another state agency
are are we as far as if get the
funding comes from the federal
department transportation and
then that money's going to us
for these training purposes and
stuff like that are there any
issues with the way that tracks
down.
Mr.
Mr chairman and senator that
really doesn't have anything to
do with this specific bill.
So Mister and representative of
the the federal
Dollars so we get federal
dollars we put into of federal
highways so two eighty five is
both state and federal we got
sixty to one eighty that gets
federal money so what we're
doing those projects are bill
shared funds Mr.
Representative.
Chairman and and senator.
Many of those are shared the
more strictly federal summer
strictly state somehow mixed
funding but again we're talking
about I'm requiring our New
Mexico companies to either start
up mentorship programs affiliate
with them or pay the P. what a
cost.
Well as a something of runs on
Federal attitude about this
absolutely I would just add that
the Federal Highway
Administration recognizes
approved apprenticeship programs
for any of their training
structures are and as most of
the projects that are happening
in New Mexico or is choose a
split funding their joint.
state and federal dollars coming
into that of the rule that the
US steel well has and the New
Mexico department of workforce
solutions follow suit with it's
if there is a difference between
the liberal wage in the state
wage than the higher of the two
prevails so we we have
contractors that are operating
with the partnerships all on of
federal highway then.
The station up funded projects
currently.
Okay and I thank you for that Mr
Chairman representative and
misconduct that and and when the
representative said it had
nothing do with bill those those
sort of cautious thing for me
because I do know we do the
joint so what that I'll call
you'll for the second time thank
you discussion Mr thank you
senator Morris any other
questions from the committee.
What's the will of the
committee.
Almost two passed.
The second.
Chairman second any other
discussion I had a quick
question for you both.
Both from Mr Garcia and Mr here
in the past about.
Could take a.
budgets we excluded from our
and what's the response to that.
That is a very very good
question why does what category
get excluded it's been said it's
because they have their own
training programs this happened
years ago I think in the current
you know the biggest issue and
highway construction for cost
overruns according to the
association of general
contractors and Bloomberg news
is a shortage of skilled labor
and that includes shortages of
highway journey then as
operating engineers laborers
ironworkers electricians and
carpenters it's not just about
getting a job on billing at
highway it's about really
developing a career pathway and
that's why apprenticeships are
so valuable it's a career
pathway not just a job where you
do it and then you're laid off
and then you get another job
so I think that's why this is so
important.
You want to add.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative Garrett
I don't think I could say it any
better myself.
Thank you Representative
secretary will call the roll.
Goes on the house bill twenty
one no ma'am I'd like to explain
my vote.
Yes.
Lopez yes I'd like to explain my
vote.
There is the facts yes.
Sir Tom.
Yes there are no yes.
Senator Harris and then Senator
the locus.
Thank you Mr and thank you for
this question I just don't see
how a slider could be a
journeyman that there's so many
things that I think that are
going to be at all costs I
appreciate I'm glad I'm not in
that industry on state I was so
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator said
the office.
I I am just gonna say these
apprentice programs are really
really important has we get into
recovery and and both being
people forward this is great
thank you for bringing the
bills.
Mr chair.
Thank you very much.
And do eventually do yes
Representative then you I guess
you come for next so good at I
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee for all of your
questions and discussion I
really appreciate it.
Thank you
Mr Garcia Mr again everybody
else a match and and Brian for
coming in and testifying on this
thank you.
Thank you.
Final final bill of our session
and members of the committee is
a bill that senator dole and I
have are you still here is
Senator poco yeah they are.
Collaborating on with the.
Some people in the Albuquerque
community.
And that's Senate bill four
forty three we're not under any
illusions in this bill is not
going to go all the way through
this year but we weren't sure
least.
Bring the issue up for you.
And yes some of your feedback.
So
Yes
you are trying to meet ends
So Senator public did you want
to want to go ahead and present
the bill so we can just kind of
discuss it we're not gonna we're
not going to.
We should but we will probably
come back present in some kind
of modified form and we also
want to get some public comments
so Senator pulang shoot start
the discussion then we'll go to
the public.
Mr chairman and committee
members out Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill for
forty three amend section thirty
one dash eighteen B. dash three
of the hate crimes that to add a
list of specific non capital
felony subject to sentence
enhancements in the form of
longer prison terms when the
motivation for the crime is hate
the bill makes mandatory court's
discretion under current law to
include an alternative sentence
of any combination of community
service treatment or education
requires the alternative sense
relate to impact intention or
nature of the hate crime and
makes mandatory the course
discretion under current law
tried to speak to suspend order
further sensor grant a
conditional discharge.
these non capital felonies
misdemeanors or petty
misdemeanors would be charged
because of the victim's actual
or perceived race religion color
national origin ancestry age
disability gender sexual
orientation or gender identity.
with that being said I I'll pass
it over to you chairman of the
Pino if there's anything else
you want to add but that's a
synopsis of the bill.
Let's go to the the audience and
then the animals or vote for
internet discussion Marshall
Martinez you raise your hand.
Mister chair Mister chair
members of the committee Jim
Marshall Martinez executive
director of equality New Mexico
glad to be with you all and
probably the last meeting you
see a lot of me I want to say
thank you to the chairman and to
senator pope for caring this
bill
save a couple of things to say
first of all what I will say is
that equality Mexico has been
working with a number of other
organizations mostly Albuquerque
based around this legislation.
People learn to hate somewhere
we aren't born with it we are
taught how to do it and we can
be taught how not to do it.
We've seen a significant rise in
hate crimes each year over the
past five years and of course we
must not ignore the tragic
attacks and murder of our Asian
Pacific Islander sisters in
Atlanta just yesterday we've
seen a significant rise in hate
crimes in New Mexico as well
which include the repeated
vandalism targeting very
specific communities we passed
this hate crime statute in two
thousand three in quality New
Mexico was one of the original
group Senator Stefanics is a
part of this work was there for
this work who worked in strong
broad coalition to pass this law
back that.
A couple of things that are
important about what you've
brought forward Mr chairman.
We know any quality New Mexico
that increasing sentencing
increasing the severity of
crimes alone only leads to more
black indigenous and people of
color often queer and trans
people of color to have their
criminal charges stacked up to
put us into jail or prison
simply for longer periods of
time and quality New Mexico we
don't support extended
incarceration for hate crimes we
do support rehabilitation
attempts the most important
thing about this legislation is
to build on what we knew even
back in two thousand three that
the way this bill is written it
supports the alternative
sentencing options the
combination of community service
counseling education and
treatment instead of just more
jail time.
And as senator pope mentioned it
clarifies that that alternative
sentencing should relate to the
crime and I'd like to give you
all an example if an individual
let's say in Alamogordo New
Mexico and I won't say where
this example comes from.
If an individual in Alamogordo
New Mexico commits an act of
violence against a member of the
LGBTQ community I don't want
that person to just go to jail
for a longer period of time but
I also don't want their
community service to be mopping
the gym floor at the boys and
girls club for two years that
doesn't teach them anything and
it doesn't give them an
opportunity to be rehabilitated
what we are seeking in shifting
the way this hate crimes
statute and sentencing is
administered is that that
individual would conduct their
community service time at some
place that connects to the LGBTQ
community maybe a local
community center maybe with the
local P. PFLAG chapter if their
attacks were against the Jewish
community center the Jewish
community that may be at a local
synagogue not only so that
they're giving back to the
community in general not only
for a sentence but so that they
get to interact with the people
who they've been taught to hate
so that they can see us and to
learn our humanity so that
hopefully their hatred is pushed
away we believe in equality in
New Mexico putting someone in
prison for a longer period of
time just gives them an
opportunity to be more angry
more hateful more better and
less rehabilitated and we also
think that we can move forward
by shifting the way we hand out
these alternative sentencing so
that we get at the root of the
problem which is hatred that has
been talked to people and
therefore can be taught to that
people can then be taught to
arrive to get it thank you so
much Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else who wanted
to speak on this bill.
Mr.
Senator yes I just wanted to add
and I just want to thank a
martial for the comments on this
I just want to mention that the
N. double ACP Albuquerque
chapter in the Jewish federation
of New Mexico we're also working
on this legislation just wanted
to throw that out.
And.
Yes thank you for that Senator
and Marshall thank you for
you're actually you explanation
point.
But no new light on the bill for
me because I've been reading the
FIR ahead using the F. I. R..
We really need to get the FIR
two to all the people that
worked on this legislation so
that way because we're gonna
have to redrafted for next year
I will tell you governor to
return her call for next year
As I did
the alternative sentencing
process issue for our it says
This bill amends section thirty
one eighteen eighty three in a
crimes Act the list specific you
to add a list of specific non
capital felonies.
Subject to sentence enhancements
in the form longer presenters
which is the exact opposite so
something about the way we.
We wrote the bill.
Miss you know or we missed what
would you were just saying.
but I would love to get the
input of the rest of the issue
of the committee on this for
just a few minutes I know
everybody's that sires that if
you have some input on this it
would be very helpful to us
because we're gonna have to get
together and and work on on.
Just.
Stronger.
We're more accurate wording of
this of this bill so the chapter
is the essence of what can be
the groups and work together on
that one.
Anybody have a reaction or a
suggestion Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you I too was a little bit
confused with the bill I really
love the idea I think it's
really
The task of trying to eliminate
of bias and AP and hatred and
you know and they're all these
levels right from intolerance
all of the the levels of
discrimination that we have and
he crimes are the worst that's
that's the ultimate
and.
What I thought about when the
bill was being described was
restorative justice the kinds of
things that they didn't in South
Africa and
you know there there are
restorative justice models and
if you like next you to some
academics who've done that
because restorative justice.
Of involves more than just an
alternative sentence.
It is in the process of these
different
you know there's the there's
usually at an agreement a plea
agreement because because you
can't what this does is a grant
a really neat idea onto a very
traditional process which is our
adversarial process and and I I
just for me there's a
disconnection there I think that
if you structured this bill so
that the person could either go
through the during traditional
process or choose to do
alternative to to make a plea.
And and then do alternatives and
have and have these kinds of
alternatives then I think you're
getting somebody who is
motivated which isn't a really
key element to restorative
justice because to for somebody
who's just been convicted.
Of a crime that they.
You know depending on how.
How hate filled they are I think
that that's that's problematic
and and I and the other thing in
the I. FIR talks a lot about
this is judicial discretion
restorative justice justice
models are really taken out of
the jeep that the adversary
process
and.
And what what you do you might
want the judge to providing the
agreement.
and and having and the
legislature giving the framework
of these agreements you don't
necessarily want to take out of
judicial discretion that reminds
me of the sentencing guidelines
in federal court which is to
disaster and you know
But I I really admire really
truly admire what your that
you're attempting to do here
because I think it is a up a way
of trying to reach the most.
Difficult difficult cases of
the racism and bias in you know
that we have in our system and
this is I hate crime you know
that that to me that's that's
the ultimate when someone.
Has this kind of behavior filled
with hatred
with you know the racial hatred
or.
It's it's just so hard so if you
like I'd be happy in the interim
to connect you with
with scholars right you know in
around the country who of worked
on this kind of legislation we
have someone here
Eric Sirotkin who was involved
with the reconciliation process
in in South Africa.
And if you know him he's he's of
wonderful resource just here I
mean this is he's got an amazing
reputation but those are my
comments and suggestions but
thank you so much for bringing
this idea forward it's it's
great.
In center city Lopez and I think
this is a start for me you know
I'm bringing this bill forward
from some community members but
there's some things that even
I'm not wasn't comfortable with
some of the language and I think
this is the start of the
discussion I too wanted to do
more of of that restorative
justice and not just locking
folks up you know it is about
keeping people accountable but
not putting in a situation where
we lock them up and actually
drive down to maybe be even more
hateful right and learn more of
this and so I think that's
something we need to do and and
I think this is the start of the
conversation here in the
legislature but going for we can
work on this in the intermediate
of more community involvement
and and just come with a better
I think a better bill next.
And I want to allow Marshall to
comment elect Marshall please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator pope and.
Thank you Senator see the city
Lopez I think I would love just
so that I appreciate this
feedback I definitely want those
connections about restorative
justice I also would love to
just take one sort of step back
and sort of explain how we got
to this place right at the
beginning of the summer last
summer it the I don't know the
time is not real sometimes the
pandemic started there was there
were new there is some
significant vandalism in Santa
Fe I think we all were made
aware of right there was some
there was also repeated
vandalism on the Holocaust
museum in Albuquerque and a
group of folks came together and
said we've got to get a hate
crimes law New Mexico I was
lucky enough to join their group
and say Hey we have a hate
crimes law in New Mexico right
and and right now they hate
crimes line New Mexico is set up
so that it is and it it's it's
an enhancement to the crime rate
and so what what came out of
this bill was a group of folks
in community working quickly and
the as as well as a coalition
put together quickly can
possibly work to say we want to
address these crimes that are
not being taken seriously and
also we want to acknowledge that
we don't want to just put people
in jail for a longer time so
what we came up with I will say
this bill is not a systemic fix
it was it was a compromise to at
least get at that enhancement
part of the sentencing and and
Senator Sedillo Lopez I'm a
hundred and fifty percent with
you and the real aspects of
restorative justice and as a
queer person of color I try to
stay away from the so called
criminal justice system as much
as I can for all of those
reasons and so I think that that
you know this is a great
opportunity for us to have this
conversation I I'm taking this
conversation and feedback back
to that group to say we've got a
whole year to come up with a
real systemic fix and and.
The other thing I want to see is
that.
These community service programs
don't exist yet right in my mind
to the idea of putting somebody
in an LGBTQ community center we
don't have any by the way
kind of had one in Farmington
for awhile the putting somebody
backed into the queer and trans
community to do that community
service is a great idea but none
of us are set up for that at UNM
I couldn't take community
service workers right now I'm
working in my better whether
they you know and so would also
means spending this time to
figure out how do we create
those programs that are not come
clean the Jewish community
center but that are coming gauge
with people at the community
center come learn and build
relationships in a way that is
you know that is safe and
productive and so I just want to
fully acknowledge I'm taking.
You're going back to the to the
rest of the coalition because
this is beginning a real process
for systemic effects I hope.
Thank you Marshall yeah yes
mopping the floor the Jewish
community center is a step up
from mopping the school gym the
other very big step of.
Senator Tallman told by Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chair just a quick
comment I really like the
alternative sentencing inspect
of this bill.
And I really like the idea of
placing an individual and
organization is been a victim of
a crime so I have look forward
to hearing more about this bill
next year thank you Mr chair.
Thanks senator Senator chairman.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator pope.
and gentleman for doing this
forward to us this afternoon I'm
curious and I'm they're both
recited it gentlemen what what
is the current.
sentence.
Just someone convicted of a hate
crime.
I'm
not sure if you're not I don't
know it would you happen to have
an answer Marshall.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
McKenna so right now
and and of course Senator
Sedillo Lopez will correct me if
I'm wrong right now the crime
has to be committed by itself so
let's take the crime of
assault right so you're
convicted or charged with
assault and the prosecutor ads
than the charge of hate crime
because the person who assaulted
was clear like myself and that's
why you assaulted them this
sentence then you're convicted
of assault first and your
sentence based on assault then
you also must be convicted of
hate motivation in addition to
that and if you're come if
you're convicted of hate
motivation in addition to the
assault right now the sentences
a mandatory one additional year
in jail and then the it is also
a
I'm losing the were
discretionary it is possible for
up to two years of alternative
sentencing and that could be the
combination of counseling
education therapy or community
treatment or community service
so it and I don't I don't engage
in the system but if the salt is
five years in jail and hate
motivation is added to that is
automatically six years in jail
it's the automatic additional
one year and then maybe the two
years of additional alternative
sentencing hopefully I answer
that correctly and accurately.
Thank you chairman thank you Mr
Martinez so.
Kind of an idea of where once
this legislation is is fully
developed and gets to the finish
line.
What for instance has been in
conversation of what the
alternative sentence would be.
Absolutely Mr chair and senator
McCain at the the the place that
our coalition has gotten to and
is hoping for is that so we'll
take a salt again the assault
charges still what it is thank
the sentence is still five years
our hope is that it is that the
alternative treatment
alternative sentencing is
mandatory so you must get an
additional two years of
education treatment counseling
or community service and that
the judge would still have the
discretion to add the one year
of additional incarceration we
don't want to take that away to
Senator Sedillo Lopez is point
and something that I'll say as
somebody who has been the target
of violence based on sexual
orientation I also don't just
want to put someone whose
violent into a situation with
the people against whom there
are violent especially was it
was the second time or that you
know if there's a history there
so we want the judge we want the
sentence to require the
alternative sentencing we want
to really say lean into this
opportunity for rehabilitation
and then there still the
discretion for additional
incarceration if I as a judge
and I I would defer to Senator
Sedillo Lopez but I think the
judge makes a decision in
consultation with based on the
trial in consultation with the
attorneys and all that stuff the
judge says nope this person is
too dangerous is it happen too
many times we have to include
additional cars iterations they
can still do that but but I will
be Frank with you and say in
some communities in New Mexico
in the community where I grew up
depending on who the perpetrator
is they will lean into the
additional sentencing and never
think twice about the
alternative sentencing we wanted
to lean into the alternative
sentencing first and have that
additional incarceration as an
option if necessary does that
answer your question Senator and
chairman.
Very good chairman thank you Mr
Martinez yeah I I absolutely
agree and.
Yes is really worth it what
happened in Atlanta.
Yet again.
And.
When I think about these things
crimes are bigotry racism.
And then we are ultimately to
violence.
I I always think about the
perpetrators.
Those who are guilty of it.
If I could just talk to them
when they were four and five
years old.
because remember those innocent
conversations.
I need you ask again
kindergarten or preschool what
do you want to do when you grow
up.
And I've yet to hear one of
those children so I want to be a
mean person I want to go to
prison I want to be homeless or
want to be addicted to substance
abuse I've never heard a child
say that.
And.
And so in between that that
tender age and the time they
become adolescents maybe some
even some pre adolescents.
some some really bad trauma
things that probably happened to
them they probably
That behavior is been model for
them.
and and a host of other things
so I just think.
I just want to think about that
for five year old.
And and helping.
You know that.
That young minds that have
somehow gotten really shaken up
and they've done some bad things
that made some bad choices.
But I think I'm in the criminal
justice system we still need to
have some compassion because
down deep inside.
Is that young child.
Who have these great ideas of
what they want to do and when
here she grew up.
So I I like I like this more
compassionate intelligent.
system that that you and Senator
token Senator Ortiz Y. Pino are
proposing.
Thank you center.
Anybody else have anything they
want to offer my heart is you
might we might want to work on
this with you we might want him
some.
Consideration to developing a
pilot project that we would try
to get signed into
maybe it is to Albuquerque four.
Just show how working.
To enter leverages some of the
details and then we come back
with.
It's going to going statewide
legislators it's working out
well.
What's the name of the gentleman
that you and then that does all
the restorative justice work.
It is name somewhere in.
Well we're getting older as you
can remember any names.
How is the name he does he's a
college education does a lot of
work with restorative justice
Senator Sedillo Lopez one last
comment no I just I just want on
on the point of the point you
were making the mediation
program that is it at the be it
mental court right now started
with the federal grant.
And and so they have a lot of
federal money looking for
creative ideas in the court
system.
So that I that that is I just
wanted to support our chairs
idea Mr chair that was just I
think a pilot project because
now it's the norm you have
mediation in in Mitchell court
is just an option and it started
very small with one of my
colleagues Michelle Herman being
involved in one of those
projects years and years ago
probably.
At least twenty five years ago.
Senator Sedillo Lopez is that
similar to like the veterans
court and some of the courts
that they kind of established
well you know I I I don't know
about how all of the you know
they have a drug court of you
know they have various courts
and I don't know how all of them
got started but one of my
colleagues was involved with
starting the mediation program
when she taught of alternative
dispute resolution and
mediation.
And at least I think is at least
twenty years ago they got a
grant to big grant to work in
the metro court program they did
a pilot project project they
analyze the results and now
agency record his implemented
it's not exactly what they did
but they learn from that project
and it's it's just an
alternative and it's mostly the
civil courts but I know that the
federal government and if this
is something you might look into
for some of the funding under
the George George Floyd
act just passed the house.
Funding in there as well and so
I I just think it's it's worth
contacting
you know doing some outreach
because I think it at pilot
project could be very exciting
and they end up being
transformational so I'd like I
said this is an exciting project
and I'm happy to brainstorm.
The idea was partially title
funds to get it started.
So we have our work cut out for
us.
Want to thank you all for
changing the extra half hour
here to discuss this with the
with the senator your program I
sell third Marshall did you have
any final comments Senator folks
that you wanted to summarize
with.
No Mr chair I I I I appreciate
still are bringing this to
committee and having the
discussion you know knowing that
we weren't going to get it done
in the session but I think this
is a great way to get this
started so I appreciate it and
we'll just we'll just get to
work on this together.
Right Marshall any less remarks
here.
I'm I just want to echo center
posted and say thank you to all
of you for your feedback and for
those of you who don't know me
I'll give you a week or two to
recover posession but I'm ready
to get going on this and so
you'll all here for me for for
ideas and follow up insights and
so I I'm just I'm really looking
forward to really shifting the
way we think about this at this
time and I think New Mexico can
be a leader nationwide a time
when so many states are going a
different direction on this
issue is so thank you all so
much for giving me so much time
and opportunity to have dialogue
this evening.
And then we can bring that that
rules of the workgroup together
again the.
Hello from the Jewish community
center doctor Bailey women
double ACP
there was somebody there from
the Asian community we we we
would end and the some some of
the neighborhood and community
as well so we we really do need
to there were.
The server recuperation we are
get back together and get to
work on this.
Ready to start on Monday.
Yeah you years really you're
you're you're you have a great
more resilience that I do
any any other loose ends for the
committee there are Milou says
you know we could get a bill and
we could decide to let it go
like other committees or we
could be at informally I mean we
could be you know what the last
what can't be allowed to debate
business and just do a quickie
but I think we're done yes
unless the house bill's come
across we certainly genesis all
the Senate bills.
And and and I think any house
really comes across now they'll
probably just
Senate judiciary where where it
will be with the other eighty
bills were.
Isheri to die.
Mr.
After a listen to our candidates
you sure cannabis isn't coming
your way.
This was.
I would I would like that when
we didn't get addition Senator
Tallman one less common.
Mr chair I just want to publicly
State to really enjoyed working
with you this year and I want to
thank you for being such a
professional fair and well
organized here thank you.
Thank you.
The apologize usually I have
little little token presence
thanking the staff in the
committee.
This year virtual you'll find an
email message from here
something that'll be it but but
I would forward to next year
maybe we'll have a little more
opportunities and well maybe
next year guests to get since
that one
is an idea
everyone.
Thank you Senator McKenna you
answering.
Thank you thank you chairman I I
do want to express my
Press I am with how you ran our
committee I learned so much in
these days weeks and really
appreciate the help of Derek and
Frank and penny.
And Trevor
that all cohesive and productive
and
beaching out to the public that
we serve so I think you and I
also thank my fellow community
committee members for teaching
me
general this was I think the
best attended committee we've
had very.
Every time no problem getting
inform when we I was very
impressed with the work
As usual the committee members
it was very very impressive
thank you.
The reserve thank you we'll see
you will see you tomorrow on the
floor thank you Mr chair I just
wanted to say did to everything
with that was that this was a
great committee just like it was
last last the last two years if
ever.
Thank you for any insurance.
That was that it was a great
confusing and.
Only a year or may.
New ground.
and I don't know if I said your
name thank you.
Thank you for this is my first
session and and and I really
appreciate it is really good is
really good I like that.
Thank you you you got us through
some really tough times
appreciated you off of any
general model is shown to this
yes.
You can yes Kim and and you know
I want to say remember that time
that I was like where are my
emails and I can these.
In the in my spam filter.
The actual.
chairman agent we actually we
should have mentioned this to
Brian funded a penny is running
her own apprenticeship training
program.
Generally in training to to to
take over at some future date
committee secretary thanks for
they've been working together
very closely this wonder what
you would make a great one
that's for sure.
Well enjoy your restful evening
and we'll see you tomorrow on
the floor I don't think it's
going to be very restful on the
floor more.
Okay thank everybody at a.
What
made you Representative thinking
about there was remitted some of
this work it was another guy
that worked with the Schardin on
on restorative justice use from
Chavis originally your over the
I mean
yeah I'll come up with that.
Today is another another good
one hundred budget range.
Right just add on this working
with us on this so the idea is
that you and and now he's a
professor there now.
Used to be in Dallas and he
returned unto workshops is.
At.
Right think of it.
His first name was William or
bill.
Yeah I'm also really interested
in brainstorming and working a
little bit not a little bit but
working with you on that okay
now.
Background I really really liked
yet to have a little bit of a
voice in that.
It's great wellness center.
We will be in the lockdown and
we will be running for
reelection so we we actually had
something to energy you hearing
brushing.
Are some yes this is some of us
will be ready.
Everybody thank you.
The return leg Gen stuff
