Public affairs committee
substitute present a bill to
ninety eight thank you Mr
chairman and and what what we've
done is just kind of regroup and
and look at that the original
bill and just basically I've
come up with something that I
feel person is more viable to to
offer to the committee so
basically this committee sub
requires disclosure of rent
increases for the previous two
years permit prohibits
termination of a rental
agreement because of the size or
age of a mobile home creates an
order by which resident payments
are to be attributed Prewitt's
rent increases more than three
percent in any twelve month
period increases civil penalties
for landlords violations
provides for Attorney General
just turning to see temporary or
permanent injection on behalf of
residents.
provides for court costs
attorney fees for successful
action against the landlord and
importantly it still retains
that right of first refusal the
owner must give notice of sale
residents sixty days before
acceptance of an offer to sell
the mobile home park.
Operative which allows residents
residents association etcetera
to make an offer before the
owners final acceptance so with
that Mr chair I tried I tried to
get this to interested parties
as much as can you know you
heard extensive that you know
testimony when right introduced
the first bill so with that I
stand for questions they still
seem to substitute yes comments
on I believe Mr Duran is in
attendance and he has seen the
substitute and asos the folks
that I've been working with I
mean I sent in the substituting
of course importantly I got a
two year crackerjack analysts
you know in time hopefully for
their analysis and stuff good.
With that I stand for questions
okay good I mean perhaps you
want to go to Mr Duran for his
response yeah I know we have
rules will go to the audience
now let's see let's see just a
show of hands first who's here
in support of this bill.
Who's here in opposition to this
bill okay so you've got a few
people who are against it that
an online you have somebody else
so let's let's start with the
opponents mark you want to start
up the by reacting to this the
committee serve.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee on mark Duran with the
New Mexico many I.
Parks in
New Mexico
Mr Chairman just so I understand
the up looking at the correct
version of the bill and it's a
point to version yes correct
very good.
Appreciate the sender o'neill
working on some things from the
original bill of quite frankly
Mr chairman members of the
committee it still looks very
much like the original bill most
importantly in the bill it has
rent control in it that is
untenable quite frankly rent
control has been proven across
the country to take downgrade
and degrade the quality of
manufactured homes manufactured
home communities
that's all this rent control
provision is going to do I'm
surprised Mr chairman that of
the people who are in favor of
this knowing that all it's going
to do is to create the quality
of mobile home park as if it's
okay to do anything possible to
get rid of control in New Mexico
and that this is some sort of
weekly a mobile home park to
introduce of rent control in the
state of we don't think that's
fair Mr chairman of our mobile
home parks are quality parks
their quality communities people
love living in our mobile home
parks they appreciate the
managers they have of our park
owners have to maintain roads
they have to maintain peak
properties this isn't a
monolithic apartment building
with one parking lot in it they
have lots of maintenance and
lots of cost Mr chairman members
of the committee and this is
expensive to maintain
by the way Mr chairman of I just
want to know to this one example
that has been brought up to me
many times and that is the
elderly a person who has a home
in a manufactured home community
and of a rent increases taking
place and they're stuck because
they can't afford the rent
increase and they have to move
the many factor well just remind
everyone Mr chairman for three
years no one has been able to be
evicted.
And for the last three years
because of COVID everyone has
had the opportunity to have
emergency rental assistance I
know because I worked on the
program that program was not
only available to tenants that
programs available to landlords
who were able to apply on behalf
of tenants.
And if that was still the case
so I haven't heard of that an
incident like that in years Mr
chairman.
If it were to exist I have to
tell you we have someone who
would help that person move
because I manage issues between
mobile home park owners all the
time where they're poaching each
other's
residents to try to get them to
move to their park and so the
natural economic forces are
addressing that all the time if
someone needs to move their many
factors home there's someone
who's going to want them in
their park and they're going to
pay for them to move down to
that alright.
Mr chairman the
bill still includes the first
right of refusal you could
imagine how are of mobile park
owners are thinking about the
ability if they want to sell
their hard earned assets that
they would have to first offer
first right of refusal of the
bill even goes farther beyond
that let me direct you Mr
chairman and members the
committee section for item in
Page ten.
Section four at a group or
association of homeowners or
their assignees.
May submit an offer to purchase
a mobile home park at any time.
The owner of the mobile home
park show consider an offer made
and negotiate with the
homeowners and their signees in
good faith.
So whether the mobile home park
is for sale or not.
At any time if a group that is
undefined in the act.
Or an association that is not
defined in the act.
Or their assignees which is
defined in the act may submit an
offer at any time to purchase
the mobile home park and the
mobile home park order has to
negotiate that with them in good
faith.
again I'm sorry Mr chairman just
untenable we try to work with
the sponsor
the bill still raises a penalty
for an infraction the mobile are
from five hundred dollars to
five thousand dollars and I want
you to just be to notice Mr
chairman and and don't be
mistaken there some sections
that have been eliminated from
the act and moved to a new
section of the act so they sound
like they're addressing them
again but the you the mobile
home park owners hasn't been
able to discriminate against the
age or size of the manufact of
over at least a decade
that's already in the act of and
all the items that list what a
prospective residents that means
anyone they were walked to walk
in the door and say they wanted
to think about moving into
mobile home park we think that's
what perspective resident means
we have to find them on the
whole number of things including
the name and the address of the
owner of the mobile phone.
and and so that already exists
quite frankly we don't like it
at the time but we negotiated at
the time that already exist in
the mobile part of Mr chairman
members of the committee it's a
rent control bill it's a first
right of refusal of the bill and
all the bill will do is degrade
our mobile home communities we
don't deserve it we have provide
many factors home parks in the
state Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you thank
you mark your who else wants to
speak if you could avoid
repeating anything that mark
said that would be helpful.
I'll do that Mr chair thank you
my name is Randi Valverde I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico association of realtors
we represent approximately
seventy five hundred members all
across the state of New Mexico
and we also stand in opposition
to the bill
like Mr Duran we appreciate the
the changes that were made in
the substitute but we still have
significant concerns including
those outlined by Mr Duran and
we would just add that the
changes to the eviction
procedures significantly
increase the time from two days
to thirty to sixty days and
significantly increase the civil
penalties for five hundred
dollars to five thousand dollars
and the bill seems to change
expanding to the Attorney
General or the DA's office and
so that's a concern for us and
we appreciate your time thank
you thank you Randy anybody else
want to speak and yes if please
come up.
Mr chair members of the
committee hi my name is Doug
Adams but my wife and I own
operate that several communities
in Santa Fe and Albuquerque this
is our twenty ninth year in
business
in addition to everything Mr
Duran said that I have three
things that concern me yes the
rent control is one
we we need to trim trees I just
got an estimate for thirty
thousand dollars used to pay a
whole lot less than that I get
it everyone's budgets are tight
this year.
English unless there were to be
an act cap on our insurance all
of our labor and materials this
is untenable
also this bill has a section
where they repeal the three day
notice for non payment of rent
that combined with the others
basically
removes a property owners
ability to terminate for non
payment of rent.
And there is enough time to get
people that need the help who
want the help we've had several
people that I don't have to
payment on.
So
we that that is a nonstarter and
then also that first right of
refusal can't imagine being put
in the position from my family
or my errors that they need to
sell and yet as Mister grand Act
and unnamed Fund organized group
that food can't hold title.
Or they're just signs that has
not been formed yet if I if we
were to get an offer on a
property from someone that can
and will perform.
but we have to offer it to
someone that who may or may not
they could just tied up that
doesn't seem like a very good
thing it seems to use up perfect
private property rights and I'm
not I just would like to ask
where is the consideration for
that first right of refusal that
usually cost money I don't see
anything in here that gives the
property owner eight any kind of
consideration and further more
as I research that.
In other jurisdictions first
ride very fuses are typically
given by a property owner
whereby that is subsidized
housing I'd like to remind the
cat chairman and committee that
manufactured housing is one of
the most affordable under
subsidized housing options
available to Mexico today and
again I just thank you for
opposing this substitute to to
an IDA thank you thank you Sir
okay we do have somebody online
who's in support and we have one
more in opposition so let's
start with the one more in
opposition Sarah fitz Gerald.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
Sarah fitzgerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we stand and respectful
opposition to this bill without
having seen a subsidy before you
we too are most concerned by the
rent control provision or just
now coming out of a forty year
high inflation rate that lasted
the better part of the year if
the cap in this bill had been in
effect during last year's peak
there's no way these property
owners would have been able to
keep up with the rising cost of
maintenance and staff pay things
residents rely on their
landlords to provide for in the
petition process described in
the bill for justifying a rent
increase isn't a viable option
for property managers many of
which are small local teams that
don't have the administrative
capacity for such involved
procedures were sympathetic to
the affects inflation is had in
our communities but this bill
will limit landlords ability to
serve their residents thank you.
Thank you Mr chair of the and
then there is idea Griego who is
supporting the bill.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Maria Griego I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center
online poverty and the director
of economic equity I just want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this important bill and
highlight some important
information about mobile home
parks in our state in New Mexico
seventeen percent of our state's
housing stock is comprised of
mobile homes additionally in
nine counties mobile homes make
up over thirty percent of the
housing stock.
Farmington having the highest
percentage of mobile home of any
U. S. county with thirty two
percent of its housing stock
comprised of mobile homes.
I'm despite this abuses in
mobile home parks run rampant
as you know many a mobile home
parks
are at.
Many elderly folks and folks on
fixed incomes called mobile home
parks home
they rent a home but lease the
land making them inherently
vulnerable to bad faith
practices
and the mobile homes are
difficult and costly to move to
a new location the cost of
moving one is often more than
tens of thousands of dollars and
can be more costly than the
value of the homes itself the
home itself.
when families are threatened
with eviction they are often
faced with the choice of having
to either comply with
unreasonable or legal demands of
the landlord or abandon their
most valuable asset their home
simply because they cannot
afford to move it so we thank
you again as we think the
sponsor again for bringing this
important bill and shedding
light on these
This is that run rampant in
mobile home parks thank you
thank you Mr.
So do you want to respond to any
of the things that have been
said to yes briefly thank you Mr
chair and I certainly appreciate
everybody's comments on this pro
and con look.
You know this isn't about the
personalities of good mobile
home park owners you know that
that's not what this bill is
about unfortunately the way
things are.
There are bad actors there are
abuses it's not as if this comes
out of no where there there's a
reason why this bill is
important and why I'm bringing
it forward in terms of you know
it's not egregious it's like
somehow I feel like this is a
grievous it shouldn't be not be
egregious I mean the right of
first refusal fine it ties it up
for sixty days Hey sixty whole
days you know and then and then
tell me that has to be a viable
offer I mean I don't understand
all this outrage about certain
certain provisions in this bill
and and and you know it's it's
just this bill exists for a
reason we're policymakers this
is so similar to some of the
other bills we've heard you know
where it's yes the small
businessman is insulted if we do
that do they and you know the
family leave act or whatever
because they already do that
fine that's not we're not
talking about you we're talking
about others and and we're
trying to protect vulnerable
residents of mobile homes I mean
you can talk about it is a rent
control bill whatever but it's
just again I just have a hard
time with this notion that all
this is just egregious advance
notice out we got to tell you in
advance that you know we're
gonna you know gems not move
them and we're gonna sell the
mobile home park we're gonna
raise around oh my god that is
just so bad so with that I.
Turn it over to your career
committee okay members of the
committee what's the any
questions debate discussion.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center o'neill thank you for
that because you're right and
want to thank the.
Some of the most critical
because which he says is.
This.
Makes makes the statutory fix
imperative
and up I know you've been
working hard you know trying to
get a bill that.
We can get on the governor's
desk this one probably.
Well not because it's still kind
of a big leap I think of.
Hi the section I can't imagine
anyone having a whole lot of
harbor with section one.
Section two I think is key.
And I think it's reasonable.
The section three actually is
pretty good too
Section four is all new material
so that's kind of a lot of
newness there.
And then on section I missed Mr
chairman Senator o'neill page
eleven.
It's it's it's lines thirteen
and fourteen.
That are tough.
It's like a tough.
Something to vote vote on and
that's the that's the three
percent rate increase there was
a
the proposal couple days ago.
That would have a.
No more than five percent plus.
Plus inflation.
And that was that was kind of
doable and that bill died as
well ordinary was rejected in
and then section seven section
seven is just.
In the grand scheme of things
five thousand maybe just and
fair but to go from five hundred
to five thousand just type so I
mean.
If you were to do a bill with
sections one.
One two three and five without
lines thirteen fourteen I think
about it may not satisfy up a
lot of folks but.
The current statute does that
satisfy a lot of folks so.
Actually Mr Chairman used to
live in a mobile home I loved it
it was it was a mile east of
nine mile hill so we refer to it
as eight mile.
It was awesome.
There was like a like a TV show
tricked out mobile homes that
would have been it would have
been part of it but I'm.
The up but you you you you rent
the mobile home you rent the
physical home and you pay the
the mortgage on the home and
home is yours but you rent the
ability to plant the home on a
piece of property owned by the
mobile park and they hook up gas
electricity whatever it's you
pay two bills you pay the
mortgage and then you pay the
rent.
And so
So the if someone of Vic shoe
from an apartment you know
that's that's a bummer you grab
your stuff and leave some of it
you from a mobile home park you
have to literally move the home.
So so we got a deal with some of
those concerns in a constructive
way
And hopefully we can do that
here that because change is hard
I mean change is hard for the
mobile folks because they've
been under the same statute for
decades having self for
hopefully either this year or
next year we can kind of
modernizing it without.
Without jeopardizing investment
and and things that are
currently happening for the good
in these parks you know Senator
thank you Mr Justin I love your
suggestions and if this bill
were to pass this committee I
would work on it do those
changes frankly between here and
Judiciary I know it's late in
the session but but I just to
think at least we've established
a dialogue and and so forth the
work in progress but those are
those are you know I just want
to take your time with
amendments and all that stuff
and we got a bit busy Jen this
is anybody oversee the the
mobile home industry I mean is
there some kind of update and
might know that and to what
extent have someplace to take.
If there were a problem owner
with that with the tentative
some delivery a Griego or mark
Duran would be best suited to
answer that question mark you
know yes.
Hurney General.
The Attorney General doesn't
quite have our office of that
they have people that work on
the issues we work with them all
the time okay.
Thanks mark.
Senator McKenna McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator for bringing this very
timely and urgent legislation
chairman and senator
someone is yes the audiences
Pardon me that it right down the
name.
One of the concerns that he
expresses I think on page ten.
Section F..
A group or association of
homeowners or their assignees
may submit an offer to purchase
a mobile home park at any time
and the any time pieces what
concerned him.
And so I'm wondering chairman
and senator and the gentleman
who testified if
if you could suggest an
alternate time that would work
thank you Mr chair and Senator
yes and then grand flag that and
that's yet another thing that we
could you know tidy up as it
moves forward if it does move
forward I think that's very good
and one more thing chairman and
senator on page eleven.
And I'm looking at the C.
section five.
Section see a rent increase
shall not exceed an increase of
three percent I think there was
some.
Our concern about that and again
chairman and senator I would.
Want to query those who are in
opposition.
What amount would work
Yes I mean so I was okay I was
the one who sponsored SB three
seventy five which was the ten
percent Max
And I just think that there is.
So what do in my own bill
chairman and senator I found
studies that said both if you
have rent control you're going
to stymie growth.
and then rent control does not
stymie growth that is more about
zoning.
Zoning has a big piece about
what can find what can project
rent control so
If there's.
We have a number of states that
do have rent control in their
statutes it's working there are
a common case have not slumped
and I'm thinking about
California and Oregon in
particular so I just think.
This it's you're being a really
good advocate chairman and
senator for for those of us that
we all serve right our
constituents and I think if we
can get closer.
To both sides where they can
feel at ease with that
that be good and I'm a supporter
of your bill thank you thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
I too am very worried about
affordable housing and of
trailer parks are mobile home
parks are a source of affordable
housing of.
One of the things that it and
one of the things that a note a
noise tenants these are these
massive increases that look like
the look like in the the whole
the owner of the park is taking
advantage of the of the shortage
of housing or whatever it and
when you listen to the owners
they say well of like that the
person who has a thirty thousand
dollar bill for for that
trimming trees you want those
trees to be trimmed and I'm sure
the owners due to so I'm just
throwing out there that are
rented rent increase maybe shall
contain an explanation of the
cost increase to the the park.
That way tenants could
understand the reason for the
increased the problem that is.
If if they are just taking
advantage what do you do you
know so I don't know I'm just
I'm just thinking out loud
because you do want.
I was thinking the mobile post
home parks I'm familiar with and
there was one in my district.
Kind of more more toward Mimi's
to strict but
There there is one there and
It's been up and down over the
years depending on who's who's
owned it just the visuals of it
you know whether the fences are
painted and whether the trees
are trimmed.
In what it looks like it is hard
to me to figure out what the
cause is Mr chair of the of the
up and down this it's.
If they raise the rent and then
they fixed it up or they didn't
raise a rented and they let it
down I don't know I I'm gonna
vote for your bill because I
trust you to make the changes I
know the kind of person you are
in terms of of accommodating
changes and I know you'll leave
with the landlords and and try
to come up with something that
can work because landlords don't
like bad apples either that make
the whole industry look bad so
that if there is something they
can they can live with
I think that that would be
really important and but I I
applaud you because I've heard
horror stories to and
in in I've representing somebody
who has an apartment with a
horrible our story they tend to
be out of state investors that
just put the money in and don't
do anything for the place so I
just hope that you could do
something I am going to vote for
it
I don't know.
if that's helpful Mr chair can I
ask Senator so how about just an
explanation for the increase
rather than assigning a three
percent or five percent or
whatever I think that would be a
reasonable you know step in the
right direction is that what
years yes that we're raising the
rent by three percent because
the cost of utilities would have
this much the cost of insurance
insurance were trimming the tree
is no it it's for the it's just
like a homeowners association
and and that maybe some place to
look at is is regulations of
homeowners associations are or
how you because we're in a way
that's what they are but they
have no power they don't have a
homeowner's association in a
mobile home park it's really
with the landlord dictates are
the rules there's no agreement
they don't pool like in a home
owners association if they want
the trees trimmed there's an
assessment to get it done that
doesn't happen in a mobile home
park the trees are trimmed or
they're not it's totally up to
the landlord and so that those
are suggestions that that I
would make but I think the most
important thing is to try to get
the sides together and and see
or at least get their input
because they may not want any
changes at all but at least get
their input about what's what's
livable thank you like I said I
will vote for it anyway thank
you senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you senator and
Mister chairman Senator ring the
bell for genesis and I know
there's some bad apples out
there but as we discussed the
other night in terms of rent
control
there there are consequences to
too much rent control in Oregon
where my children live
just know once investing and
except in very high and and so I
have I have grave concern about
the the three percent and you
said you tidy it up but what is
tidying it Madam chair meetings
like strike that three percent
and go with with Senator studios
suggestion explanation rather
than assigning a percentage and
and this and that so when I say
tied it up I mean you know work
with the stakeholders and a way
that that the note for this can
take a better better form in
terms of you know moving it
forward but I do I am confident
that that deserves to be moved
forward and and you know so
forth
so so they could do any percent
increase diss songs that
explained it twelve I'm
personally I just you know my
dad was the president of an A.
I. O. P. he was the first he was
the founder of any so it's not
as if I'm oblivious to these
arguments but he was out just
just back off just let the free
market to know if that isn't
enough then maybe what I'm a
Democrat I don't know but it's
just basically it isn't you know
that's great all these wonderful
owners and of course but it's
not geared towards that and so I
have no problem with with
backing away from rent control
you know to to more of a diss
like advance notice this is a
big part of this bill the people
need to know what's good you
know if if there's gonna be a
rent increase in why I'm fine.
With that okay so so the I mean
if the rent thank you Mr Sam
sorry it's late Mr chair Senator
So the rate increase can be
driven I mean oftentimes is
driven by the market are I mean
they have these costs so so if
if I am hearing from you that
that there won't be a percent a
specific percentage I mean that
my problem of the other ones
that we're in a time of
inflation we all thought it's
getting better and now the fed
chair today just drove the
market down again by saying you
know what it's not under control
and we are going to have bigger
increases despite what the fed
of Denver wait in New is this is
an amazing time uncertainty
means so I have a really hard
time voting for the bill and
less I know that we are going to
be able to fully adapt to the
economic circumstances earns our
respect for every vote it's fun
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir for bringing this forward
presheaf your.
Concern in.
An interest in helping people
but the.
this is not the answer to our
the the first segment of the
market is not working with that
providing
Thanks for affordable housing
for a lot of people so that the
government needs to step in.
So that's communities of bill
housing.
In this three percent five
percent.
Thanks for Mr chair useful
numbers are there that we are
kind of stability can predict
the future like.
Senator Hickey
Consists the nation.
The big oil.
I have no doubt that they took
advantage of the situation we're
in Iraq and the there's some
refinery refinery fires.
And they jacked up the price.
More effective in the.
The more that they could really
justified and we don't put a cap
on that big pharma look at look
at the prices of drugs cannot
control and conscionable looking
do have.
Development.
It's the.
So.
I would vote for you know if you
took out the phone with I don't
you want to do nine I mean not
just honestly this is a work in
progress and I just don't feel
like at the want to maximize
your time tonight I mean I can
assure you that I will very much
go back into that three percent
five percent again I like
sensitive Senators suggestion
but you know I understand like
you know you don't want to vote
on something that you know you
can only vote once before it so
I would just put it to the
committee and I just respect
totally understand what a no
vote and I totally really
applaud to test your keep
working on a ten yeah but all
have in summary and it's upon
what you're doing
but it's not the answer sure and
the free market is not working
which is why I have this is a
step in.
In order to die so for one
thousand.
The.
That's all I have thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Ingle.
So you making a motion to table
there's a motion not individual
motion to table.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos is meant
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna absolutely not.
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Clemente.
Yes center to the piano yes.
Zero four five to
six.
Sixty two by sixty two motion
there's a table to join explain
your vote so the record's clean
I might when I lived eight miles
before the movie.
Both.
From.
I add one thing came up that I
just want to throw out there
well you're working on this you
know the notion that that that
for the low income trailer
parks.
Most of the most of the people
here that for the test but today
they really are working at a
higher and higher income level
the the the newer manufactured
housing.
Maybe we we really ought to
start suggesting to
municipalities that if they
really want to do something
about the housing situation that
a look into creating their own
municipal trailer parks but with
the with rent controls and all
the things that wouldn't
interfere with the with the
operation of market place I just
throw that out for us thank you
thank you committee thanks thank
you senator thank you the okay
let's go then to Senator pope.
We're Senator pope there is
thank you this I didn't
recognize you in your three
pieces.
I I apologize Mister just New
Mexico right.
Two military base no military.
military bills.
Yes Mr chairman you know that's
what I like to do special
things.
So first off Mr chairman we have
you introduce the Mike forces
okay might I think it's better
to use a handheld you have to to
keep the button to.
Mr Chairman first off we have
Senate bill four zero six
military base child concurrent
jurisdiction.
And what we're doing here Mister
chairman as
on military installations right
now.
Federal jurisdiction can
actually send juveniles to
adult judicial system.
access to state juvenile and
family courts may actually allow
for them to have suitable
outcomes
and what we like to do here in
this state is remove those
barriers and try to pursue a
solution that supports military
families
And what we like to have have
have have have been is we like
to clarify that state and local
authorities may assert
jurisdiction over June juveniles
on military installations in
areas of exclusive federal
legislative jurisdiction.
we want to allow state
authorities to enforce laws on
bass with respect to civilian
family members without doing
this
juvenile misconduct to include
problematic problematic sexual
behavior in children and youth.
would be sent to a federal court
system and this federal court
system would lack appropriate
juvenile focus resources and
often we try juveniles as
adults.
So Mr chair I do have
an expert Kelly Douglas who is
the department of defense
defense liaison to help answer
questions about this as well she
on to she is on zoom Kelly dot
this test that our oceans on
and I know she sent letters to
committee members as well about
this
but once again we are trying to
establish concurrent
jurisdiction
that establishes offenses can be
adjudicated to the state
juvenile court system which
would allow for more appropriate
sentencing in case management
outcomes of military dependents
on military installations with
that Mr did provide us with the
written more of yes Mr chairman
and I would want to give us a
few minutes for Kelly Douglas to
make some comments of that be
okay Mister yes Mr Douglas are
your online.
Good evening good afternoon can
you hear me yes we can.
Hi chair and members of the
committee thank you I'm sorry I
mean I contingency right now in
a hotel so and doing the best
they can nearby that PTA you
hearing this bill it's very
important to the department of
defense so I'm my name's telling
me Douglas I'm the Pacific
southwest region liaison at the
United States Department of
Defense operating under the
direction of the undersecretary
of defense for personnel and
readiness
we SPC four sixes Kita
appropriately addressing and
reducing juvenile misconduct on
military installation in two
thousand eighteen Congress
expresses concern about the lack
of state or local jurisdiction
over juvenile offenses that
happened on military
installations with federal
exclusive federal legislative
jurisdiction
historically the federal
government either obtained
exclusive federal care provided
insurance jurisdiction over land
by agreement with the owning
state board maintains exclusive
federal legislative jurisdiction
over certain land on after the
formation of the new safe when
land use and the second.
Surrounding the that use changes
such as when military bases
experience an increase in
civilian population for when
face within a federal military
installations partially leased
and non federal entities as
changing federal jurisdiction
maybe appropriate what we're
asking for.
Here is that when there are
cases of do now miss out that
suspected even out at misconduct
on bases that the state and the
federal government can share
jurisdiction in those in those
particular parcels so that those
those you can be at at at
supported and and and go through
a process that's more
appropriate for them with that
I'll leave it for questions I
appreciate the chance to provide
comments.
Very good thank you Mr president
you for your written comments to
the the very helpful anybody in
the audience want to speak on
this bill for or against.
Is there anybody here from the
courts or how did they react two
years to.
Thank you talk to them or are
they okay with this chance to
look at the F. I. R. E. F. R.
seems to be.
It doesn't say one way or
another doesn't.
It just kind of describe the
bill it didn't say what they
want to do what do you think
senator Maestas.
Anybody else online.
there is somebody online this
kid that.
But Carroll.
Or.
Yes but Carroll.
Yes the Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Bob
Carroll in a member of the
veterans and military families
called Sliq we support SB four
oh six because it establishes
concurrent jurisdiction related
to juvenile misconduct on
military bases without this
concurrent jurisdiction given
misconduct is adjudicated in the
federal court system which often
lacks appropriate juvenile
focused resources such as
rehabilitation and diversion
programs we recommend passage of
SB four oh six two four military
children the full range of
services available to help them
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Now Senator
messed us you have a question it
chairman Senator pope thank you
Mr who would decide.
This is upon request and I
states who would this would make
that request the leader of the
particular military base for the
US attorney or who would or
would come from DC or who would
do that.
Mr Senator said Mr Chairman
center Maestas Mr Lewis would
you be able to help me answer
yes.
Yes Mr chair and senator that
yeah so this bill would allow
would authorize the state to
to authorize that shared
jurisdiction all upon the
request of that military
installation or service.
Okay thank you Mr chairman at
centerpoint so essentially the
leader of the military base with
the leader of that branch of the
military I guess Mr chairman
Senator Maestas that would most
likely be the base commander or
probably the jag around the
judge advocate general of the
thank you thank you thank you Mr
act this is this actually.
Also my idea.
And I don't know the disparity
of.
Of justice outcomes on a
military installation but you
see it play out.
On a grander level with regards
to jurisdiction of
native American defendants in
federal court that that that
that up.
If if for native American
commits a crime against another
native American Indian country
it's federal jurisdiction they
they get tried in federal court
the penalties are.
Our draconian compared to
penalties that would be in that
exact same committee in state
court at that was sadly the
Supreme Court looked at that
issue and thought and decided
that there was not unlawful
discrimination but anyway so
this is kind of cool
that up that they'll get the
resources they need and and
because it must be tough.
Being a teenager on a million
that this is coming from the
from the military is of right
exactly back on I think I think
you need to take action Senator
Pat we have a motion for due
process.
Scissor second second seconded
Senator Gallegos you have a
question is Mr chairman center
appreciate elected dialogue I do
have a question because in the
FIR talks about and and I
understood lady was talking
about that and it it states in
here.
Of that
United States must first request
this state to establish current
jurisdiction over the military
property when a child is
committed violation of law has
it already been done that's what
this bill does yes this bill
center that's what we're
Representative thank and I don't
know why AOC would consider that
a significant issue if you are
already doing that in in your
bill it goes on the New Mexico
AG explained some of the summer
for issues with that.
And then technical issues AOC so
says did not provide a mechanism
for how records are shared
between military and state
entities such as a M. O. you are
dot does it clarify what is
considered a violation of law by
child I don't know if you've had
any of those discussions.
Mr chair Senator
I have not
I would probably want to talk
with his Douglas about that yes
the specifics on how to that and
and Mr Lewis I don't know if you
to help answer that yes I know
she's working as a states.
Yes I have an yes share thank
you Center so the employees are
already authorized and so this
is just a clarifying that you
know first the state is
authorized to create the
concurrent jurisdiction and then
they're there that then allows
for the opportunity to develop
the employer which is completely
possible once this is done.
Thank you for that that makes it
easier for me to vote on Smith
with that are you Senator
Sedillo Lopez you're next.
Thank you so.
To be clear what is the state
right now you know what happens.
In the absence thank thank you.
In the absence in the absence of
this statute I'm unclear about
what happens to them right now
so Mister chairman Senator Kelly
if I could have you responded
that I just wanna make sure I'm
correct yes Sir Senator out
chair Senators thank you so
right now that's the problem and
there's and there's a there's
media about it there is that
congressional inquiries what
what typically happens is one of
two things either go through the
federal justice system which is
not designed for juveniles for
the basis of the packs and
nothing happens.
And and what the administrative
office of the courts said in
their comments were that
exclusive federal jurisdiction
on military installations can
send juveniles through an adult
judicial system because they
don't have anything set up for
juveniles.
So that's why this is so
crucial.
I I really like the idea it was
a problem I wasn't aware of I
hadn't read anything about it
and I was just thinking because
I've I've worked so hard on the
limit eliminating.
Life without parole for
juveniles of Bill.
I think that that would be
another if we passed a bill that
would be an another benefit to
these children to get age
appropriate sentences because I
Michael what I was thinking is
perhaps the federal government
treats of youthful offenders
like adults which would be very
did very problematic that's
exactly right anything else
senator.
No I'd support the bill when
you're ready for most secretary
no we already have a motion
sensor we have a due pass was of
of a second by.
Bye you bye you second yeah
secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senators metes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes yes we do pass
on that one Senator pope know
what your next move Mr chair the
next one is going to the.
Senate bill four fifteen what's
your accounts for licensure
exists exemption yes and for
this one Mr chair
you know right now the state
licensure process can be a
barrier a barrier from providing
timely mental health support to
service members and families and
what we're trying to do here is
have states provide a licensure
waiver for military and family
life counselors to allow mental
health care as needed
right now license no mental
health care providers working as
military life military family
life counselors are within the
DOD family readiness system
under US code title ten may not
provide non medical counseling
services in states where they
are not might licensed.
and what we want to do is we
want to allow licensed
professionals working in the
deal the half health care system
as members of the armed forces
civilian employees are under
personal service contracts
that hold a license in any state
regardless of where they're
providing services
they have a license those folks
right but non medical counselors
right now working as a military
family life counselors are not
covered by title tend to provide
the services and so what this
bill what we're trying to do is
the non medical counselors that
provide this counseling we want
to give them the opportunity to
provide this counseling and the
way to do this type of work here
in the state when you say none
medical what do you what do you
who who'd who you're getting at.
So these are.
They're not there like that
they're not
that embodies there's they're
not M. D. N. that entities are
not Indies so all the the
license family and and urgent
family grounds is the social
workers all of those would be
included in this yes.
Thank okay and I see Mr Douglas
is your expert on this too yes
and and miss us you might be
able to explain that a little
better than I did somewhat
confusing folks are.
A problem that was a great job
at chair thank you so much
etcetera so military family life
counselors are integral service
program provided by the
department of defense to ensure
high quality non medical mental
health accounting units they're
they're usually licensed
clinical social workers or
marriage and family therapist to
provide services only to the
military community and to flee
through either schools or
but I Montoya community centers
childcare centers on their
already certified their DOD
contractors so that contractors
working for the of the they may
come from a variety of different
states but they provide services
only to the military community
and so please give the contact
person uniquely uniquely
qualified to provide this
critical service to the military
community and it's non medical
and it's on the spot counseling
so as needed typically and you
know situations where you're
you're dealing with that you
know a child that has a deployed
parent for for in the worst
cases if there's you know some
sort of casualty these these at
counselors are uniquely trained
to deal with and work with the
family so we're just we're
having issues with being able to
recruit.
to fill all the spots that are
that are allocated I heard from
the school liaison at W. Beria's
inflation's in New Mexico that
there are.
Unfilled positions that are
ready to treat children of
military personnel and military
personnel that are not being
able to be filled because we
can't get enough people that are
certified in New Mexico we can
get this thank these counselors
that are DOD contractors.
To come to New Mexico because
they think they know that they
don't have to go through that
duplicative the process of
getting we license again we can
we can search these critical
person to our families and and
that's what we're asking okay so
are they license in some other
state or.
Or or it board is the DOD do its
own licensure.
Mr chair yes that's a great
question bear license fully
licensed and and in at least one
state and then DOT hires them
with those credentials okay Mr
chair sorry for the confusion so
on the medical side right that
that the EMTs and doctors I do
the counseling they already have
the waiver to where their
license in any state they can
work on base or installation
provide this service but right
now the non medical social work
folks they have a license from
another state and then a lot of
work they actually have to go
through the process with the New
Mexico to actually do the non
medical counseling at install
insulation New Mexico and so
we're asking for the same waiver
that we give the medical expense
and even though they're not
going to be paid by private
insurance or by
Medicaid they're going to be
paid by the department of
defense that is my understanding
could you confirm that miss.
Mr chair yes that's true center
yes this year good thank you
let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this.
Anyone here in opposition to
this.
And we have a Bob Caroline Beth
men both in support do want to
say something about it Mr
Carroll.
Mr chairman of.
The veterans military families
caucus supports the Senate bill
four fifteen for the reasons set
forth by Senator pro and this
does.
Okay thank you how about you
Miss men.
Yes please thank you chairman
and members of the committee
from allowing me to my name is
yes then I am This schooling
program manager at Kirtland
airforce base and the subject
matter expert The New Mexico
military children education
compact State Council want to
point out a few things about
this bill New Mexico in New
Mexico we have twenty nine
military family my counselors
thirteen that service all six
that serve children in Houston
based facilities and trend that
are embedded in schools Haaland
airforce base currently has five
make it decisions because they
are simply unable to get someone
to come up with these licensing
issues and another thing to
point out is whenever we have
our embedded military family
life consultants they come in at
the beginning of the year so if
there's a delay from licensing
and they can't see children
that's when the majority of our
children Terry connected
students are transitioning and
need that mental health support
one other thing that I like to
point out is that there are
fight and schools that are on
military installations and one
of the last bill will cover any
non military connected students
so that they do something wrong
at their school and they will be
able to be handled in children's
for the flex no matter what
school they were in can only
provide services to our military
did you I am supporting this
bill and I ask you to support it
as well thank you great thank
you miss Smith do you want to
say anything about this bill.
No question Mr chairman members
of the committee they're
absolutely correct the medical
nurses and doctors so long as
they practice on military bases
are exempt from licensure here
New Mexico discovered we did a
lot of research and figured out
when contractors for coming in
under COVID that they were
absolutely exempt and I've
worked that through with the
nursing board in the medical
board but our health care
providers are not exempt and
less this bill were to pass on
the surface and so you do
support of this bill yes so long
as they're practicing on
military bases that is correct
thank you thank you madam
superintendent okay we've got to
Senator Gallegos Senator Tallman
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Hickey Mr chair Senator
be brief I I just
I like the idea I wish we could
do an animal you for them to
help the community because we
need them as much as military
base do but and and that sort of
threw me that this and secretary
said that
I understand the for the first
three years are already waiver
from our license that not
correct.
Mr chairman Senator I I don't
believe so but I.
Yeah Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative Senator
I keep wanting to call your
representative
Of the the the military
exemption is if someone's coming
into New Mexico and needs to get
licensed here it would not be
serving on a military base but
they are a military member then
they can see slide through
military expedited licensure and
then they won't have to play pay
those fees for up to three years
but they have to come in and get
license this is different we're
saying they don't have to come
and get license along as they
serve on a military basis and
our license in another
jurisdiction okay thank you for
the clarity Mister chairman
Senator then just my question on
of the young lady was talking
about twenty nine current of.
The staff to do this type
training negative five for
Holman of those twenty nine do
you know about how long the last
year I know that the move all
over the country but do we have
any stability in those numbers
or they just randomly move every
year Mr chairman center wouldn't
have the answer to that and and
I don't know if agency then it's
still online or not are you
still there miss then can you
answer that question for.
Yes thank you chairman Senator
I'm at when this program started
they were limited to only like
forty five day time period but
thanks to push back and a lot
probably the child abuse they
and now very consistent we've
had some military family life
consultant at curtain airforce
base and have been there for
twelve years I know the one that
we have invested in our school
now is going on I think review
so yes that they they if they
come in they provide and like
the place and many people fall
in love with New Mexico they're
very consistent.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
center and thanks for of it's
the land of entrapment you come
once you don't leave and I liked
that longer duration because I
think it's valuable is for us to
have that stability so with that
are you thank you senator
Senator Tallman.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair so Google my
questions or the answers are.
A limit to the number of years
you can.
Work without licensure.
Mr chair Senator I don't believe
so under this current waivers
there's no expiration or
anything so the.
This to.
To correct to a.
To verify my understanding is
they can only do so employees
can only treat.
Military personnel that is
correct Mr chairman Senator
actually can only work on the
installation with the military
or the military dependents.
And finally you know it.
Over this several years I've
been here we've.
For a lot of similar bills we
we've
Exempted people from being
license so it seems to be quite
a mishmash depending on what the
profession is.
With the secretary like this Mr
chair would like to see some
uniformity.
Mr chair Senator let.
Representative Trujillo.
Mister chairman Senator and
thank you Senator for your
patience I had no intentions to
steal your thunder here
it it would be lovely to have
some uniformity and we've been
working on compacts but we just
can't seem to get them passed in
New Mexico and that's like a
whole nother subject but I don't
think with each profession you
can have uniformity across
different professions but trying
to have some consistency and
mental health providers and
medical care
providers that must remain
licensed in a jurisdiction there
is consistency on that thank you
for the answer that's all I have
Mister chair good thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez
followed by Senator Hickey thank
you Mr president so if one of
these consulars
So one of the things about
licensor licensure is that
there's a border there's
something that you someplace
that you can complain about of
about the behavior of the
counselor and so what we're
would it be.
In in this situation where we're
with a.
Mr chair Mr chair Senator so
those complaints to be made at
this in the state that they're
actually license.
Mr chair
friendly.
What did you have something to
say Mr of us thank you Mr chair
thank you I I just wanna clarify
center was right but the
insulation where those a
military family like counselors
are employed are they are being
supervised from the installation
and the installation coordinates
with the contractor and that
that those complaints go
directly to the state with a
license but it's actually more
accountability for it for
military family like counselors
and most at because they they
have to answer to the notes as
well.
I can imagine Mr chair would it
be a friendly amendment to F.
but will input is one source.
Mr chair is that the military
wanted says military one source
cancers what is one source
Mr was sick can you comment on
that I know this is military
OneSource website is kind of
where we're getting a lot of
this legislation what we work
through and it's actually the
support system for all the
military folks but I'll let me
start with COVID and
specifically the.
Mr chair Senator yes thank you
for that question I actually I
work under the defense stateLee
is on office which is under the
that we are second W. secretary
for a military family
military community family policy
under military community family
policy we've run military
OneSource military OneSource is
it is a wealth of resources for
military families to include
counselors that are online as
well so we also into and in
addition to military family life
counselors that we deployed out
to the state we actually have
counselors that work with
spouses on you know where we're
counselors we have all kinds of
counselors that went under the
altar OneSource that is the over
riding contract.
That's the contractor Mr chair.
Is is that possible to change.
Because we wanted engine no no I
don't if if that that well my
thought was in bed in statute
some contractor that could
change but but I'll just go to
what I thought might be a
friendly amendment
or a military OneSource
counselor who is licensed in any
state would that be friendly
because it doesn't mention any
qualifications of these
counselors that are.
Mr Mr chair Senator right I
believe the way we did the
verbiage there was because those
counselors are going to be meet
the criteria to be licensed that
are going through military
OneSource miss Davis I don't
know if you want to should you
want to comment on that Mr
Lewis.
Mr chair Senator yes so these be
there is a specific requirements
that are thank there's specified
with and I will be calling the
part and defense instruction
there are there are
qualifications that are laid out
we can sure that if you if you'd
like that but they have to be
certified in at least once our
license and at least one state
and be up to date with no
disciplinary actions and they
have there there's certain
specifications depending if
there are at a license clinical
social worker if they're a
licensed professional counselor
or if the are American family.
Thank
god this is Terry is so it would
not be necessary I just didn't
see any criteria and so if so I
I withdraw that idea because it
if that's already criteria of.
Of the cancers that were waiting
that's fine I think it's a great
idea and with that when you're
ready for motion okay Senator
Hickey you're you're up.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I am going to move it to
pass but having been in the
Indian health service as a
public health service officer
with military rank licensed in
one state but working in several
different states is only makes
great sense to do it for all the
other ones and and I hope I
therefore say do pass and let's
rock on.
Second seconded by Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Ingle if you want to
vote on this we we just have to
pass on this bill.
Senator Ingle votes yes.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
This is the center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
But zero vote you have a do pass
Senator this is my favorite
Canadian thank.
Now you go to Judiciary will
they will raise some of the same
issues and we'll get in the
compact again yeah that's right.
Why is this why are you putting
this in a compact those amended
to be put into a COVID okay.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you're up
with juvenile correctional
officer retirement.
Senate bill four thirty one.
Thank you Mr president this bill
is about removing ever moving
the the juvenile correctional
officers employed by CYFD who
are currently in the state
general P. E. R. a fund and
allowing them to vote to get
into the
Into the state police an adult
correctional officer plans and
of course they have to vote on
it but
basically what happened was they
we plant we passed this before
but they and they voted for it
however they did not get a
quorum for sufficient vote and
so this is to give them the
opportunity again with greater
outreach and and education about
this I have of has my experts
and I'm sorry.
Mr chair and senators and
Williams with parent deputy
director okay right okay I
wasn't sure who is going to be
here from Paris so yes.
So this as a juvenile
correctional officers to the
existing.
What a code plan.
Mr chair Senator is yes this is
moving a bit this is for them to
take a bow to move them from
their current plan into the
state police correctional plan.
We'll have to increase the funds
are to increase their their
contribution yes the
contribution of Mr chair
Senators their contribution rate
would change and I serve on iPad
Mr chair and that fund is a fund
okay and then what is it due to
the solvency of the fund Mr
chair Senators this has a small
impact of the fund we got the
actuary now says today it's up
one time impact of four point
three million.
That after that visit
stabilized.
Mr chair Senator is yes.
And and what's the advantage of
doing this and it's opening it's
giving this opportunity to the
CYFD juvenile correctional
officers giving more resources
to people work who work in a
really difficult job hoping to
enter attract more of them into
this position.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wants to
speak in support of this bill
Josh.
come on up and use the Mike.
Our records office on.
Many of her he didn't he didn't
sign up here what's is name
Polish Fisher she should be on
the urban impala Fisher.
And she sent an email to the
committee.
After all as I feel and that's
probably a foot but I'll go and
speak first Mr chairman as a
senator stated this was part of
a previous bill the members
voted overwhelmingly to join
this plan but there was a
stipulation that they didn't
meet the threshold of enough
people voting and this is right
in the middle of right when
COVID hit pair did a great job
of trying to do this all online
but for folks that are potential
workers on the frontline working
the facility voting by email in
a short period of time you know
I don't wanna make excuses but
it was just it was it was just a
very awkward time to kind of do
this so they've tried to see if
they can't just have another
voted at doing it we try to see
if there's a way to do it
without legislation but
unfortunately it does take
legislation so that's kind of
why we're here today again the
members will get a presentation
from para see the pros and cons
of doing this and then they'll
have a chance to vote and if
they vote to approve they will
move into the enhanced plan if
not then they'll stay where
they're at what are those
thresholds the judge so in the
in the previous build fifty
percent of the eligible
employees had to actually vote
and then fifty percent plus one
had to vote in favor I believe
this bill just has the majority
of those voting would would
would constitute the change so
that's not a fair rule you don't
have a formula that you have to
follow.
That.
This will.
Okay should we go to a policy.
dented USA so if I could just
add Mr chair the airport has
take.
This legislation okay publisher
of that is.
She's also members that would
expose his member of the board.
Miss Fisher did you want to say
anything about this bill.
Yes Mr chair and members of the
committee can you hear me yes.
Yes I'm sure on a member of a
asked me as well and of being a
member of Ashley supporting
other juvenile correctional
officers and this initiative to
try to move us forward.
We did as jar stated we we did
vote we didn't have
The amount of votes needed to
move forward like probation
officers did
but the voting period did take
place during COVID and we
corrections officers were
working daily utilizing Care
safety security all constantly
sanitizing to keep the juveniles
and staff COVID free at the
facilities we're hardly had any
downtime because of COVID.
And this lasted for well over
here by the way many J. studios
were over worked overtime in
COVID mandates and able to sit
and function of the computer
after work hours that there was
a lot of information for them to
read steps to vote there was a
an attacks linked to review many
I didn't get that far and
because of the mandates we had
and of course were eyes on years
on so we don't have the luxury
of sitting in front of computer
like our fellow probation
officers did for their vote when
they got on
Having said that
We correctional officers are
essential workers like the adult
correctional officers and state
police and we're asking to have
another opportunity to vote.
And we're asking that you please
support Senate bill four three
one.
Good thank you Mr chair how
about John Lynch's you want to
say anything about it John.
yes Mr chair members the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me to speak challenges
with The New Mexico federation
of labor for all the reasons
stated you know we also talk
about the need for recruitment
and retention of a lot of our
public sector positions where we
have large vacancies I can think
of no other better recruitment
and retention tool than allowing
them to invest in the great
Paris's some that we have in the
retirement system so for that
reason we urge your support of
this measure thank you.
Thank you an act of just reading
over the the FIR and I was
mistaken it will increase their
contribution it'll decrease our
country.
So what's not to like.
Yeah okay is it because.
Then there's only seventeen of
them right now so I mean we're
we're talking about.
Very small hit on the thank
members of the could anybody
here at up physician to this.
Members of the committee what
what is that we have a motion to
do pass seconded by Senator
messes any discussion.
Did you have a question for good
if you have a question just
because of the.
We're all in a hurry that that
is when you can ask a question.
So that is that the budget Mr
chair and.
Senator is the benefits are
better yes.
So the reason it's going to cost
because.
Has the.
The.
Better for this phone that's one
reason but the other reason is
there's so few of them.
And the employer pays more.
The employer picks up the
difference okay that's a better
deal thank you that's all I have
thank you.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator have us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center mass this this Senator
McKenna yes Senators maintenance
Senator Sedillo office.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Steve vote
for this bill I do.
I do vote for this bill yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator to
the piano yes yeah we do yes
thank you senator thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
okay Senate Representative Ortez
you're here let's.
Yeah we have we don't would but
okay I see but she's here let's
let's go ahead and let her make
her presentation well what what
do you do.
Mr chair she's.
Specific.
Yes.
Representation Representative
Chasey for your call three of
four public conclusion is yes
yes no I know that we got this
great I'll be glad to.
This is going to leave them just
I think I'm happy to let where
is she.
This is getting to get a catcher
I miss here until.
I'll stay until she's back who
is she doing it for Thompson.
diabetes yes this list is great
can you wait course thanks I
mean this is kind of a fun
frolicking nine.
We're we're gonna be in the
house on the house floor until
two AM Mr chair so I'm going.
We're not doing this.
No I didn't final score U. N. M.
eighty seven Wyoming seventy
six.
The game's over we can take our
time to relax.
Okay so we're gonna do now.
House bill fifty three thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm here today in
place of are representing
Representative Liz Thomson where
the list caucus in the other
list.
He's pretty all right now.
Senate bill fifty three to
committee so.
And it's not diabetes in
supplies about diabetes and
specifically I have a living
case of a problem here with me
today he's going to tell you her
story.
But diabetes is intensive
device and supply.
Many insurers did not have
enough contractors that have all
the supplies and so sometimes
people have to go out and spend
their own money even though they
have insurance to go buy
supplies because they cannot
find it these are the needles in
the syringes and right in
today's with me I have somebody
who's gonna tell you about how
she had to call over sixty six
times to her health insurance
into the supplier to chase down
supplies Lori Hart is here as
one of my experts and Laurie she
she's the head of the Mike yes.
Welcome is hard.
You can stay seated if you'd
prefer.
But they've been waiting I
really yes no no it's good.
We do here is.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
senator and members of the
committee house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill a fifty three one
just a second they don't have
okay your story a twenty okay
I'm I'm I'm Laurie Hart M. type
and type one diabetic for the
last forty years and over the
last couple years of really
struggle to get diabetic
supplies for my insurance
company even though I had the
insurance and so I had Senator
to.
A several years for every year I
would have to call multiple
times in the last year I had to
call it in the first four months
of of twenty twenty two at a
call sixty six times and and
spend four hundred ninety two
minutes on the phone and I still
did not have some of my supplies
both type one and type two
diabetics need to their medical
supplies and equipment in order
to be able to effectively manage
their disease and when they
don't get it it can be life
threatening it can put them in
the hospital it can increase the
risk of complications and death
so it's super important that we
make sure that they have the
supplies they need when they
need them and so we're asking
you to please support at this
legislation because it will help
save lives so Mr chair members
of the committee when a health
insurer limits where patients
can go for diabetes supplies
there's no law requiring an
adequate number of diabetes
equipment suppliers this bill
changes that it requires health
insurers to mandate the use of
network or contracted suppliers
to have an adequate network of
those providers and suppliers
this bill prohibits align
contracts with suppliers to
lapse and requires contracts to
be in place to ensure continuity
of care it requires a health
insurer to monitor the
performance of network providers
and suppliers to ensure timely
delivery of covered items
guarantees reimbursement for out
of pocket expenses of covered
persons have to buy their own
items when not timely delivered
by a contracted supplier with
interest it requires each health
insurance to report quarterly to
the superintendent of insurance
on the previous quarters
compliance with reimbursement
requirements on the performance
of network suppliers and on any
disruption of supplier come.
Contracts it requires oversight
to annually audit all health
insurers for compliance and it
limits prior authorization
authorizations to one per policy
period which is normal but
sometimes they do change that it
is an epidemic we probably all
know somebody with diabetes and
I also have with the today show
on masses whose and one of our
experts as well so I'm showing
you have a comment and and you
drafted the bill
yes Mr chair members of the
committee I did I I I was with
the Legislative Council Service
for five years not so long ago
and I was assigned to the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and it's
behavioral health and it's
disabilities concerns
subcommittees so actually the
reason I'm here today is because
someone directed miss hard to me
last year when she was having
these problems and in and so I
helped her and with the help of
the office of superintendent of
insurance and while when I did
that obviously I looked at New
Mexico's existing law New Mexico
does have a diabetes mandate and
I was concerned that although
it's a it's a broad mandate
there's no specific requirement
with respect to have network
adequacy for suppliers and
before I met miss Hart I thought
diabetes was just about insulin
and through working with her I
learned that it's very very much
about supplies and equipment so
so I took it upon myself to
draft a law to change our
insurance code with respect to
the diabetes and date and to
require this accountability and
so I'm here I also stand for
questions Representative
senators to provide access
pretty much described with the
build us.
Does it apply to Medicaid to.
No.
However.
I believe that a rising tide
lifts all boats so so it applies
to any of private health
insurance that is sold in the
state it applies to any private
insurance is purchased by the
state or its of various
political subdivisions and has
you all know what the I back of
the eye back agencies to be
covered by this.
The they would be yes.
Okay let's go to the audience
and see if there is.
Anybody online nobody unlike
anybody in the audience who
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition to this bill.
Seeing none members of the
committee Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing forward I
think this.
Having worked in the industry
very important bills
I will comment that
The industry could do a whole
lot better in customer service
and
I I see and and I see you have
an appropriation here structures
it was stripped it was stripped
okay that good because I don't
want to die there
and but I also at some point.
Working with the OSI they are
going to need people to really
to to to do to be sure that this
is getting done I mean this the
four times a year and so forth
that they're going to need some
help to do that
so that's the for that next year
but let's get this in place and
I'll be coming back next year
when we have a the permanent
superintendent runs however
that's a decided to work to
build up the capacity of the OSI
to enforce customer service and
I just have he this and
everybody gets to compare the
time to answer which is usually
pretty bad and so forth but I
just want to point out they will
need help to do this well and so
please come back next year I'll
work with them to get a bill to
get the staff in place of these
things can force thank you for
bringing this bill thank you
this bill of fits nicely with
the bill I carried earlier the
gives of pharmacists the ability
to prescribe the equipment if
the doctor didn't to sometimes
the doctors yeah you take
insulin and they forget about
the syringes in the test strips
and all the rest of it so the
for the pharmacist will be able
to make that prescription and in
theory the insurance company
will then pay for.
Okay.
You don't want to share with us
the name of your insurance
coverage yes that's probably
Undiplomatic we maybe on that
point Mr sheet she's willing
she's go ahead Senate resolution
BlueCross BlueShield one of the.
Stalwarts of our system to.
On that point Mr chair they'll
do it they'll do it all right
okay the.
so we are you are you revealed
in the packet in read through
the fact.
All right do we have a motion
for a do pass seconded by
Senator Hickey or.
Those are very high Senator
Tallman seconds it.
Well the.
Any questions any discussion.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guided us yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna
Senator smitteez center city of
office yes senator Clemente yes
Senator Ortiz penal yes.
He seven seven zero you have to
do best thank you thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
we really appreciate it thank
you and and your personal pain
may convert into changing health
policy which would be great
thank you thank you John.
Okay now will.
Is there anybody else that had
to dash out here all the house
members are here but they've got
plenty of time to relax.
Okay Representative Ortez thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I'm here to present HB
two oh five.
Which addresses the severe
health health care professional
shortage that we have in New
Mexico yeah nine.
Okay William is two nine.
Okay we do this by investing in
health professionals and
creating incentives for them to
stay in New Mexico or come to
New Mexico this is will what the
bill does first it deletes
primary care as a requirement
the physicians in the definition
of a qualified health
professional this is really
really important because right
now specialist can not take
advantage of this health care
professional loan repayment
program.
And that's a real problem in
places lake house where we have
not a single cardiologists
there's no cardiologists north
of Santa Fe a new issue I ends
in many districts all around all
around the state so they'll
they'll now be eligible for
these loan repayment warts
second increases the year of
commitment to receive an award
from two years to three years
that means that the higher
education department can
increase the total amount of of
the award to a health care
professional which is a great
incentive to to retain and to
recruit finally the bill
codifies that AGD consult with
the department of health when
determining rural areas we have
a handout I don't know if you
see other discussed right up so
on that hand out if you flip it
to the map you'll see the states
and how much award they give to
health care professionals for
the loan repayment program we'll
see that New Mexico is fairly
low we believe that by
increasing the amount of debt
that can be repaid we can
attract and retain health care
professionals we have money in
the budget for this Mr chair
we've got a fifteen million
which is a nine hundred thirty
percent increase from last year
the program is so popular we
have to turn hundreds of people
away but now we can we can award
more you know more of funds and
that's just it's gonna go a long
way to bring more physicians and
other health professionals I
have an expert a Kerry robin and
brindar she can answer any
questions right thank you
Representative Kerry did you
want to say anything.
Mr Chairman just remember we
talked a lot about this an
intermittent the it's not
picking you up for some of the
button down.
I'll just talk louder here okay.
Mr chairman members the
committee we talked about this a
lot in the interim with the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee so I'm with
medical societies is here to
answer any questions you have I
was astounded at the data we
heard this summer that of the
hundreds of applications they
were only able to work like
twenty one or twenty two it was
pathetic now you put more money
in but you're also increasing
the amount anyone individual
gets will we still only have
twenty one facility rate up how
are they going to decide that I
don't think that's gonna happen
I think that we will be able to
have more awards.
Health promotion let's see there
anybody here wants to speak in
support of this.
This is just one person okay
good.
We set the hospital cessation
supports this we think it's a
great idea one thing I would
point out is the longer position
stays in New Mexico the more
likely they are to stay here for
their career so I just as
Senator Gallegos described it
the land of entrapment.
The question Senator Hickey then
Senator Maestas.
I've given absolutely is and
what a fill up but where did you
get to what is the data source
and this graph.
Mr chairman members the
committee that is from the
twenty twenty to health care
workforce report on the chart
that's on the front side the
backside is we literally it was
it was me we researched every
single state and their medical
professional loan repayment
programs that are in current law
and through the numbers on that
they're willing to pay off so
that we could really give you
kind of that national that
national look but it state by
state pulled from their rags and
their loss.
Of the thank you Mr chair and
Representative and
Kerry ms expert
The.
That entity needs to completely
restructure how they do their
survey it's.
Wrong.
There is not an adequate
oversupply PCPs and Bernalillo
grant Los Alamos many the Santa
Fe scar towers hello OBGYN and
and I can go through the
technical where they're making
their heirs so I'll cover that
off line with you they need to
redo this survey this is not if
all near accurate it's much
lower than what is being
portrayed thank you this is
doctor Larson in particular that
Dr Larson is no longer doing
that survey Mr chair that's
good.
Thank Senator Maestas enough
said thank you Mr Chairman
representative Ortiz gentlelady
the real quick well I was gonna
ask what what department is
department department higher
education department but also
what are the colors me on our
chart Mr chairman members the
committee so all all qualified
with two things number one the
data is coming from the number
of health care workers we had in
the state in twenty twenty one
and the study is then published
in twenty twenty two so green
means that you are meeting
national benchmark for the
number of health care providers
you need in a certain category
for the population in the county
yellow means your benchmark and
red means that you are severely
below national benchmark so the
more yellow and red you see on
the chart the worse off that
county is for actual healthcare
providers Mr chair gently what
is up gray and black mean if you
know Mr chairman members the
committee gray means that it
wasn't data that was collected
and blue it means they are
actually over national benchmark
which we are over national
benchmark according to this
study and a couple of areas
however the study does have some
flaws there's going to be a
recalculation how they do it
because that that the
information on the ground shows
at the shortages are much worse
than what the chart shows one
year in arrears the methodology
they used was to take the
license application renewals of
the application for license
renewals and then they just
basically but you know some
people have their license
renewed even though they stop
practicing ten years ago but in
case or or the like Dr.
I think of the profession kept
those stats tie it would be very
helpful all of us thank you for
Mr chair and may I also address
the fact that you Bernalillo
county looks okay pretty green
but folks come from all over the
the state to go to Bernalillo
county so that's only to meet
the needs from Bernalillo county
not to meet the needs of all the
rural folks coming in for health
care all around the stated
point.
And Mr chair if I may on that
point the denominators the way
they use in calculating his bass
Act courts I'm again I'm just
it's it's a very inaccurate
methodology and I have expressed
my desire to work with the
university of New Mexico and the
new people who are going to do
the survey for the current year
what they should be looking for
in terms of benchmarks and how
they should assess in F. T. E. I
mean they have no there are so
many part time FTEs in these
areas and they don't it just has
the it has to get a lot more
sophisticated and they can do
it.
Thank you any other questions
secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you yeah we have a second
element did he was a little
behind in the state so we're
giving them a chance to go to.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center my yes Senator McKenna
yes Senators metes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz penal yes you have to do
press congratulations.
Senator Steinborn come on up for
research and rescue volunteer
insurance Senate bill four fifty
five.
Sorry.
You can go next.
Still.
I'm willing to defer Mr chair
okay Representative Matthews
thank you of this is podiatry
licensure changes thank you.
We have to go back to the floor
yes.
More for
the okay cool.
Inability three.
Remember of Representative that
Senator Steinborn deferred to
use so when you have a bill of
his in front of you you might
keep that in mind.
I I have written that on my
wrist thank.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
We're here on H. B. eighty three
and very briefly what H. B.
eighty three does is move the
responsibility for the
enforcement and administration
of the podiatry Act to the New
Mexico Medical Board this is the
final step in consolidating
administration and enforcement
of Indies dis and podia Ettrick
physicians under the medical
board.
the podiatry board support to
this move
my expert today is
administrative deal with the
regulation licensing the
superintendent of licensing and
The place is.
And regulations are so how does
it do away with the podiatry
board.
Madam.
Mr Mr chair members of the
committee the foreman podiatry
board is gone will be gone when
this happens but there will be
an advisory board that works
with the medical board thank.
Superintended you want to add
anything.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we've negotiated
pretty significantly with the
medical board to get to the
place where there is an advisory
board we've worked with the
thirty attributes Association
and are all in agreement and
unfortunately there's only a
hundred forty seven licensees in
New Mexico and that really isn't
enough to cover the cost of a
whole separate board that is
correct and so this is just an
economy of scales and it's a
good match they're they're
they're they're medical
professionals and they should in
fact be regulated by as a group
by medical professionals okay
good who's in the audience in
support of this measure yes
Chris.
Mr chairman at Christmas on
I can we can we can we keep it
down a little bit it's hard to
hear thank you Mr chairman this
was on the register of this for.
Just for the recommendation of
that doctor sign this act you
actually.
and she's in this meeting right
now is it is a specific because.
But what's your name Chris Dr
Simon Gen David Jensen okay Dr
Simon you want to say anything.
Thank you Mr chair as
Representative Matthews and
superintendent Trujillo
indicated there has certainly
been on much back and forth
discussion on transitioning of
the board to trump are all the
to the medical board and
the podiatrist feel that it is a
good match and that it would
hopefully provide
needed services that we have not
necessarily been able to do that
over the last several years from
our old P..
So we are in support thank you
great.
Okay anybody else.
Members of the committee what
you're what you're Senator
Hickey who do pass very
commonsense bills Mr Chairman
good is there a second seconded
by Senator masters.
Any other discussion of one
little question Wendell question
as long as it's a little one
well I don't know I think it's
little okay is does this allow
is does this expand the ability
of podiatrists to expedite the
licensure here or is it about
the same I just wonder if that's
the additional benefit.
Matt Matt.
Senator the a podia Ettrick
physicians would have expedited
licensure under the medical
board
so they currently don't have
that expedited licensure moving
over to the medical board would
give that because we have
another bill H. B. three eighty
four that we're looking for
everyone support to do that for
the medical board excellent
thank you Mr chair.
Any other discussion secretary
will call the roll Senator
Gallegos Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes center
to the penal yes you have to do
press representatives thank you
madam secretary thank you
Representative Harper will go to
you for first responders
survivor benefits house bill two
seventy seven.
And senator Munoz to do so gonna
do this the electronic records
great.
Yeah great okay Representative
Harper and the committee members
of happy to present this bill.
This bill does three things.
The first is if your call last
year we passed a bill that
increased the benefit to a
family of a fallen New Mexico
police officer two million
dollars.
Well we should have also done
that for New Mexico firefighters
and and you you did see a be a
bill similar to that already
Senator birds Bill two fifty he
is our Senate sponsor of this
bill
so this bill includes New Mexico
firefighters moved them up to
that one billion one million
dollar budget for their families
as well.
second the original bill we
passed last year it should have
had emergency clause.
And it should have gone into
effect immediately when the
governor signed it.
but it didn't and with this bill
we we correct that so this bill
says the effective date for
these changes to be February
twenty fifth.
Twenty twenty two.
And that is because that is the
earliest date the governor could
have signed and it could have
gone into effect.
that's what I should have gone
into effect and so what this
does is those families of those
who pass in the helicopter
crash.
They would benefit from this
change.
And then the third thing this
bill does is right now in
statute there's an automatic
trigger
that if the firefighters
survivors fund balance falls
below two fifty thousand dollars
there's an automatic
appropriation into it.
And we've we fixed I'm if we're
gonna make that that to go up to
million dollars which that
threshold should be a million
dollars so we fix that in this
bill to.
And I think
I'll just mention there is money
in the budget for this and house
bill two bears fought four
million dollars going to the
fire protection fund that
And there's also another four
million that goes into the first
responder survivor Fund there's
eight million dollars going into
there so we'll be in great shape
funding so if you pay up the
benefits to the fore in the
helicopter crash one during the
fund you've got enough to do
that's right and R. F. R. talks
to that point and I think just
the last thing I'll mention and
all that over to my mic my
friend Representative Vincent
this is first bill in a Senate
committee
Representative Vincent welcome
thank you.
I'll just mention my my second
son on his best friend for many
years by Daniel beers they are
they are twins and they just
spend all our time together and
sadly his his dad was on that
helicopter and and I just want
to.
That that family has gone
through a lot and that ultimate
sacrifice for state I think a.
This is something that we can do
it would be a great help to
them.
This.
Do you want to say anything
Representative event thank you
Mr chair in senators it's good
to be here this is my first time
in here and the system of
freshman legislator I was
honored whenever I was able to
sign on to this bill is a co
sponsor because I was a I'm
retired fire chief out of read
also in in Lincoln and the other
day whenever we were able to
honor
lieutenant king on the house
floor his started up all over
for me again and when you see
firefighters getting killed in
the line of duty I know
unfortunately it's one of those
things that that do happen but
when they broke out the bagpipes
and all the emotions started to
stir and I was looking at his
family and I was looking at is
he has a daughter you know the
whole trajectory of their lives
changed and you know the he's
not coming home so.
At two hundred fifty thousand
whenever you've whenever you
think about when they receive
that and its taxes not a whole
lot these days to get a mortgage
and vehicles and everything paid
for so
I'm thankful that I got to sign
on to this bill with with the.
Representative Harper and he's
been a big mentor to me is teach
me the right way I hope and
thank you for having us thank
you Representative is there
anybody in the audience was to
speak in support of this bill.
The very opposed.
Nobody's online.
Representative Senator Maestas
thank you Mr now I'm out of them
thank you Representative Harper
representatives welcomed the
Two questions is there any up so
we've seen Google bills do this
last year the law enforcement
this year
National Guard
and I think there was another
one and then this one so two
questions one is the the crash
that you referred to.
Are all for decedents covered in
this bill.
Yes so Senator chairman and
senator great question and the
answer is yes
there were there was a mix of
police and fire on that
helicopter and and under this
bill all of their families would
receive the one million dollar
benefit thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper so the up
the the police are covered under
current law the firefighters
will be covered under this bill
yeah so.
Chairman and senator that's
that's almost exactly right the
current law for the police still
doesn't go into effect until
July of this year that was a
must I'm that's why state that
bill should emergency clause and
should have gone into effect on
the governor signed it but right
now under current law.
That following police officers
family only gets to a fifty
thousand dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper is and I
was because
The language from Senate bill
three seventy five that one in
the house bill sixty eight
didn't kick in until July of
this year because it was a
restructuring that one section
should have kicked in that July
first
And and that is so just to
follow up on your question then
there was the police officer
shot down in Jareth shut down in
in Deming would would he be
covered by this too yeah so so
Chairman you're asking a really
great question and I'll just
mention this was this is a
challenge for us because officer
Jarrett
he he gave the ultimate
sacrifice to our state February
fourth of twenty twenty one
hello okay and so when we're
looking at those who had fallen.
We had ask ourselves what's the
right thing to do in the rating
it was when the legislature made
their will known and they passed
that bill and the governor and
and and this Senator has a great
memory that that section was it
should have been in that section
that went to affect this year
should gonna affect earlier so
we said okay the earliest the
governor decided December twenty
fifth so stay we picked.
Okay thank you Mr thank you
Representative Harper so section
two.
Is good law million dollars
online sixteen page three.
Section one is is what we're
amending with regards to the
tuner fifty up to a million so
here's here's the issue I have
Mister chairman I like you to
think about this between now and
and and and the Senate floor to
go to the floor yep and this
only goes to the floor after
this okay so to me this doesn't
reflect Mr Chairman
representative I'd like to a
modern family when you read it
it says the budget shall be paid
first to the surviving spouse.
If there's no surviving spouse
the legislative shared all the
surviving children the the.
The National Guard bill was easy
because the National Guard they
have a life insurance policy
that they sign when they joined
the guard and we created in
statute or been that bill rather
popoli statute essentially up
for beneficiary document so that
the person determines who's the
beneficiary or beneficiaries
because for example if someone's
married for twenty years they
have four kids get divorced they
get married a week before their
death the new wife gets
everything that may be fine.
but it may not be fine so
so I don't see this bill before
just now to come up with any
members but the up but you'll
think about it talk about I
could you know book months the
stakeholders so I may have a an
amendment on the floor will if
it's an item that that amendment
you mean that change really does
affect the the primary purpose
that you're doing that could be
done even next year if you can
get it done and what I would
hate to delay this one correct I
have to go back for that no
doubt what we could do Mr
chairman gentleman is like they
can say.
A minimum of fifty percent goes
to any surviving children you
know we could do a however we
want to structure it the one for
the.
National Guard was just a
straight beneficiary and it's
not one budget chair like a life
insurance it was any number of
beneficiaries but it was the
person's choice and they could
amended in any time so it would
just be thinking about that I
don't think concurrence would be
a big deal on the house side but
but I don't have a.
I want to talk to you I don't
have any suggestions now you can
consider floor amendment Senator
Sedillo Lopez hi
yeah yeah it was unless it was
on that point you to that point
but
I.
I disagree because this is law
community property law and and
it's a a desk in work and and so
I actually disagree with the
idea of changing it unless it
was a beneficiary thing but then
you need to.
Then you need to hold somebody
to administer that so I think if
you're not going to create.
I support the bill I think this
is an excellent thing HM just my
only quite awhile well wait that
was on sale was good we'll put
your the listen for you for
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman I thank you
representatives you know I was.
I was so concerned about the
family to after that horrific
and accident and I was pressing
The bill sponsor on another
piece of legislation will why
can't we take care of the family
as such and such and our
analysts Mexico
Shared with me that we have in
our constitution that we can't
do retroactive laws.
so I'm wondering
why is this Representative
retroactive how did you survive
that threshold of constitutional
law that we can't do that.
So no ex post facto law bill of
retainer nor law impairing the
obligation of contracts shall be
enacted by the legislature.
Yeah so chairman and senator
great question and not the first
time we've heard that question
and and the answer is
That particular constitutional
provision we've done some
research on it.
That was really enacted by the
legislature to prevent us from
say
if there was like a UNM football
coach who had like a golden
parachute and we decided we
didn't like him and we wanted to
take his parachute away we this
the statue really not the
statute the constitutional
provision is really looking at.
Renting the legislature from
doing those kinds of things it I
am certain that when that was
put the constitution it did not
this this situation was not
considered at all.
And and so
Representative the direct answer
to your question is I think this
probably is a a slight violation
to that provision in the
constitution but who would be
heartless enough to challenge
it.
At chairman and representatives
then.
So I got two part question
I get nervous about.
Now I'm just in the constitution
but then secondly how about
coupling this bill or another
bill have you thought of this
another bill to.
To change in statute those that
are thought of.
Because I've heard that before
chairman and and Representative
Who's gonna want to challenge it
but why are we presenting that
for for challenge what we fix
the statute if we find it's
problematic.
It's a constitution really so
as senator and chairman Senator
of the the direct answer to your
question is we would have to
carry a joint resolution get
that through both chambers get
that to the voters have them
vote on it and that is like a
two year process and then we can
enact enabling legislation so
that's a thirty year
These these families need the
help.
But chairman and representatives
and I completely
And sympathetic to what you just
said but this is come up
time and again and what I'm
suggesting is that we do do
that.
and put it to the people because
it just feels really kind of
picky I don't know what else to
say that but we say well
challenges on it.
But my heart is completely with
his families and the survivors
it's just that it feels thank
you to me when we say all who's
going to challenge us is just I
just think it's bad health
keeping.
thank you chairman thank you
Representative.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You might.
Thank you I I think that this is
a.
I think you make a good point
but I I'd hate to slow the bill
down for that because it does it
would be a slow process
I actually sort of think you can
make the argument that it's
The benefits are different.
And so you you know you know
lawyers conspire to distinguish
things like thank you mate you
might be able to make that
argument so that's what.
Just defining it for me in my
mind
and so the other
I circle something on the bill
and then we lost.
The the other thought that I had
had to do with
The.
These the survivor benefits the
whole point is to is to
Deal with the survivors and.
And and I know that we talked we
talked about with Senator I just
as we talked about the the
approach and I was just
wondering how the hell this
what's the process for does the
family have to apply is it's
just going to be an automatic
check how to how does that work
yeah so so chairman and senator
I.
I will just a minute that I
don't know the exact process but
I do know that these families
they do receive checks
and from the state they're
delivered by you know members of
you know the.
The the state representative
district areas like our state
fire marshal's office and and
and and such
And and and I think I'll just
say.
I do agree I think we probably
do need to look at how do we
define these to beneficiaries
and I can see both sides of of
of this and not just a one of
the
but members on that helicopter
crash had a fiance and under
this that fiance doesn't
benefit right so I think we need
to have that conversation and
figure out what's right that's
the benefit of beneficiaries but
it does take and that's why I
was asking about what is the
process like if there's already
they have to apply maybe there
is already some some process and
then my other question is I
thought I was going nuts because
I was like I've read this before
my losing my mind deja vu all
over again
so what is that so years goes
directly to the floor and then
on to the governor and what
happened to senator Byrd spell
Center Bristol was assigned to
committees and I got through its
first Canadian and we're
actually the house Sanchez
so it's a going through our
committee.
Okay
all right well I'm glad you had
the two.
The two bill approaching thank
you thank you Mr chair when
you're ready for a motion it
would discussion here the last
one on the list with some of the
committee now we have to bite
the bullet and decide whether we
want to do a retroactive benefit
or not
Senator Tallman bites abilities
so move.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any other discussion of
this.
Senator McKenna.
The chairman.
With our vote or breaking the
law right.
Well I would that would.
We I think there's an argument
that can be made and that's the
thing about constitutional
litigation is you don't know
what's unconstitutional until
the Supreme Court decides the
constitutional.
As you could you thank you for
signing is in a real quick.
Sure that we're another way of
thinking of it is that we are
going to leave it to the courts
to decide all of chairman and
representative I got a great
idea I'm gonna sponsor
legislation.
It's a very small this conundrum
thank okay thank you.
What but nobody's going to see.
Hello ladies night out when you
don't charge of the cover cover
charge to a woman coming in
because that's very
discriminatory but no man is
ever challenges that yes.
I I appreciate senator Maestas
your metaphor it it's a tribute
to a whole new level.
Session secretaries of call the
roll.
I have a.
Senator Hickey yes which is why
Senator Ingle center my is this.
Yes this Senator McKenna he yes
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes let it never
be said that our consciences
aren't very flexible with.
I will never hear that from me
thank you chairman committee
members thank you both thank
these families are really
grateful Senator Steinborn.
Four fifty five.
The state is that within that.
Order Mr chair.
Yes.
We just have yeah we're getting
close.
We're really of yeah we have
three F. as.
Okay we're we are going to try
to get out of here by nine so
let's let's all of your
ourselves up and go for it
spirit run.
Thanks the Senate bill four
fifty five.
For the Mr chair committee this
is brought to me by constituent
who who the now period meant who
leads our search and rescue and
Dona Ana County early snoring
pursuing an account we may have
a couple of.
And volunteers total volunteers
and right now risk management
division has insurance policy
that covers a lot of groups in
the state including search and
rescue it's a very minuscule
policy it's twenty five five
thousand dollars for a
collective it per incident so if
you had a number of people it
isn't that have to split it up
for medical bills etcetera fifty
thousand dollar death benefit
what this does is this raises
that two hundred fifty thousand
dollar policy for risk
management and the search and
rescue provide a critical role
in our society as we grow
outdoor County they're going to
be called upon even more so we
need to support of I think of
the FIR said it would cost
nineteen thousand dollars a year
risk management maybe they can
even do it without this bill I
really don't know they may need
it but that's what build us
misfit progressions.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this bill.
The video online anybody opposed
members of the committee we have
a motion for a due pass from
Senator Hickey is service
seconded from Senator Gallegos.
That's good Center you're
slipping behind in the second
competition this does not this
this helps use no this helps.
Thank you for calling Senator
mostly will still meet the nine
o'clock Mister chairman Senator
Ahmad who determines who a
search and rescue volunteer is
to get the question Mr chair hi
honestly don't know I mean they
do it right now and so I can get
questions okay now that's cool
thank.
So these are to the specific.
There's not a specific registry
of these results I you know what
and we may out there in may be
online he could probably answer
that if he is or I could find
out but.
But the name is al Berryman.
Yeah.
Positions yeah you know they
they they get a GST policy right
now so I would wager to say or
risk management that's right the
figure this part out financing.
Go to finance next did you get
any money and finance I did Mr
chair it was it was a bill that
came a little later and has
nineteen thousand dollars in
total so like a rounding error
rate so the entity.
No they didn't give us the
heaven though you're on the
committee that didn't have been
rounded up yet with the you know
it's something I'm gonna work on
an.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guided us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center my SS yes Senator McKenna
yes Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes.
Seven by seven deserve which of
the two passed and senator much
this I see that the
representative Gallegos here do
you want her to do it or do you
want to do it.
Representative over.
For.
Are you can do it jointly that's
good.
This is the.
House bill one eighty.
So after this and we have
Senator Hickey's very fast bill
which we have on a grid and then
my bill that I'll do for Chasey
Mr chairman honorable members
this is house bill one hundred
eighty like shortly after
midnight on new year's eve
scouring the statutes as a as I
sometimes do.
I came across a ninety nine
forty seven statute in nineteen
forty seven statute that did not
include the word electronic
record.
And I called my fellow west side
Representative and said there
ought to be a long.
And she stepped up to the plate
yes you want to explain what the
bill does Representative but
first of all thank you your
first time before committees
good evening everyone you guys
are still smiling thank you for
having me so house bill one
eighty amend section fourteen
dash one dash five NMSA nineteen
seventy eight to provide for the
electronic storage of official
records and to provide that
records stored electronically
shall be deemed to be an
original record for all purpose
and I just need to tell you guys
are really quick little short
story so in nineteen eighty one
I worked for tax revenue during
my summer summers in college and
I put P. I. T.'s on microfiche
and I just had to share that
with you because like we're
doing some of those we're still
doing some of those and I'm
openings on microfiche.
I'm hoping we're no I'm hoping
that we're moving into the
digital area era.
And we need a lot to do this we
need to change this that this is
very important Mr chairman
members to the to the courts
okay so we have Mister Pepin
here anybody else once beacons
in support of this.
Mr of the Courts Irish there's a
thing to ask please if you do
please come up and use my.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you senators I am concerned are
having I'm the chief technical
officer for the administrative
office of the courts we're very
excited about this bill the
point working very diligently to
protect our public records in
right now are only on.
And it would be at a a great
boon to have the flexibility to
store our records properly and
securely as we do today and
electronic records and have that
be officially accept well you're
getting great nuts from the
audiences this is this is a very
popular bill we just started
with this.
Thank you Mr changes the whole
mood of the meeting anybody
online anybody else want to
speak on this bill what's the
will of the committee
some of that right.
So so Sedillo Lopez moved.
Okay Senator Hickey seconds.
The secretary will call the roll
Senator I have also.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas this Senator
McKenna.
He just Senators maybe is
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Resolutions your your eloquence
and story carried the day on the
fifth day thank you very good
Senator Hickey let's do your
grid.
Testing.
Mr Chairman.
Go ahead please I move do not
pass and Senate bill five oh one
and they do pass on the ****
committee substitute for Senate
bill I want for the purposes of
discussion right.
So this is this is an emergency
bill that's what we have this
whole letter thing.
And your appropriating twenty
million dollars yes Mr chair and
colleagues we're appropriating
twenty million dollars actually
did discuss this bill before the
committee we just didn't have a
formal motion on F. and that's
what I'm doing tonight proton
beam therapy is like getting out
of a track radiation therapy a
track record getting out of a
track all over the place and I
have any other McAfee Shindo
getting out of my face and and
we're getting into proton beam
state state definitely needs us
cancers treated with this.
You know I haven't practice in
fifteen years and I have not
kept up with that exactly but
breast cancers a lot of soft
tissue cancers that are amenable
to radiation the proton beam
just it's the cancer and that
the tissue and burn the tissue
around it which regular
radiation Taos
this video we don't have this
and we do not have this in the
state university I a year ago
but I Mr Senator Mr chairman
I've we talked about doing it
that at the cancer center
they've they're interested in
getting other things done
this would be a five oh one see
three entities located at New
Mexico cancer center I have put
in capital money myself for this
be the governor's putting in
capital money and this just
formally puts the officer moves
this on to the finance committee
for whatever they're going to
put in themselves for this three
I.
Senator Tallman moved to do past
second from Senator all seconded
but I do have one request for
yes he came and made a
presentation never took action
on.
Yes
was generally in our committee
yes we need to do to do that as
of that all in the last few days
because it was because it was an
emergency bill of one of our old
demi built into.
Again does of all of these
provisions and that's going to.
Any other discussion of the.
We have a second from Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
And the secretary will call the
roll Senator I have a.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center my is this
yes Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente.
Senator to the Pino yes.
And with the seven zero vote you
have to do pass you Mr chairman
and committee and the last bill
of the night.
It was the three oh four if you
just want to we're exhausted.
So this is in the process
of.
Social.
That's right so.
I'm going to.
Speaker
in the future.
So this is a bill.
Of the.
Would make it possible for.
It would change the the Peoria
Act and it would make it
possible for a the the the.
The P. R. A. members to to
designate a trust for a child or
a I guess in in yeah I have to
be really a spouse to I guess
could be exposed to instead of
the cash being paid out it would
be it would set up a trust they
could stay in effect long after
as long as a person needed the
the the the help for example a
child who is with the disability
of some kind this could take
care of that now that entity
explained it so much more
eloquently than I can.
Mr chair members of the
committee it first I'll just
note that the pair were just
taking a formal position of
support on this legislation are
currently under the pair Act
only a living person a
A living person can be named as
a beneficiary and these are
people who member works oral
care careers they retire and
they can name a beneficiary
they'll take a reduced pension
during their life but in
exchange for taking reduce
passion they can have a
beneficiary receive a benefit
for the rest that beneficiaries
life but it's only been able to
be offered to
living persons this bill allows
as the center but one of these
types of trusts to be named in
stad it won't have any sort of
financial impact because it's
for the life of the beneficiary
of these trust which would be
the same as if that person
themselves was and where were
named it would be for the life
of that person then I'll just
note that George's bill came
from a retired member had gotten
touch with P. R. A.
really the issue is that named
their adults disabled child as
the beneficiary but had come to
learn that if they receive that
money directly it was counted as
earned income and knocked them
out for the Medicaid budget but
these types of trusts allow that
that money to be taken in and
for it not to be counted against
them they can still receive
other types of need based
assistance while also receiving
the benefits.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Anyone in the audience and
supporters.
Anyone in that position anyone
and soon Sir.
Will now turn to the
Committee any of.
I have this little questions or.
The second to be paid.
so so what happens if the
beneficiary of that trust.
Of the.
Mr chair Senator are you
speaking of if they died before
the retiree passes away and they
they actualized that benefit
it's the same as under current
law if you name a beneficiary
and and and that beneficiary
passes away that that person
Would pop back up is what it's
called to form a which would be
as if you were receiving your
full benefits
so so if you're if you're
retiree you're tired you're
you're receiving a pension you
name a beneficiary but before
you pass away while you're
receiving your pension your
beneficiary passes away then you
move from your reduced benefit
up to a full benefit because you
no longer have a beneficiary
that sure in essence reducing
your budget to pass that on to.
And that's our is treated the
same is treated the same.
Okay thank you.
No I have a question.
If.
Is there a monthly amount to
going into the trust.
Mr chair Senator there there is
there there paid out of as
monthly checks but they're not
necessarily pulling out of the
trust that full amount so it
could be accumulating.
A value in in theory it could
be.
And what happens when they die
would have is that trust Mr
chair Senator that these types
of trusts are fairly strictly
regulated under federal law
which allows them to be treated
in a way where it's not income
and under federal law what's
required is that when when a
beneficiary one of these types
of trust passes away this
senseless claw back to Medicaid
to to make Medicaid whole for
for for money that they paid out
soon Act Medicare as far as as
far as Mr chair as far as it
pairs involvement we don't
administer once once they pass
you on it exactly.
I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
assertive you know determined
the of if if the.
Beneficiary passes before the
the retiree can that retiree
name on another budget pressures
of Mr chair and senator there is
the option to do a one time if
you've if you've retired you
have essentially one shot it
renaming in the last sits in
less it's it in will test a for
for that scenario there's
there's there's another scenario
for divorce but the sooner that
you just listed you have
essentially a one time shot
thank you Mr and gentleman that
started take a private if if
someone's retired for five years
they have a name benefit sure
that beneficiary passes then you
go back to having no beneficiary
do recoup the five years of less
payment.
No Mr chair Senator Q. U.
dollars it's from its from that
moment on I think you're right
about all the stuff later thank
you.
How do we do passed.
Thank you we already.
So the.
Yes this is the work force.
The secretary called the roll
Senator Guerreros.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maybe Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
The vote count in the.
Four seven.
No we have to pass.
With the seven.
Thank you very much and thank
you committee members.
If you checked the clock we got
on here twenty minutes early so
if anybody has any of the bills
they want to bring up we could.
No no no no no.
And we'll get to it and we'll
get to run for a.
