Zoom link saying that I was
waiting patiently in the rules
committee zoom room.
When you re admitted
I've done that.
What we have looks like senator
Tom is there although we're
mostly seeing is copies of.
I think we ought to go ahead and
get started.
let us know everyone we're on
webcast.
We can begin.
Senator you know just.
Yeah we can.
Senator Gallegos is here too so
we got a quorum and so will will
open the meeting of the Senate
health and public affairs
committee for March the third
twenty twenty one.
And
When we don't have I guess is we
were hoping for Senator million
euros the sponsor.
For.
Representative my as I know he's
in the other committee he was
Cherry and I was just in there
with the bill.
Senator when you us and see if
we can get him to join us.
I'm contacting him right now
preach thank sure.
Well we're waiting did want to
bring up our weekend meeting.
It looks very much like it will
have a floor session on
Saturday.
So I think we're we're gonna try
to have a committee meeting on
Sunday and I wanted to run that
by you all and see if that would
be convenient if we may let's
say from one.
Let's say one thirty on Sunday
one thirty to five how is that
being.
Find chairman.
Anybody have serious problems
and we were just very we're
slipping further and further
behind in in trying to get to
all the bills so that works for
me.
As.
Prior obligation but all I move
that.
It just says a Senator that
would be great.
I think that you Senator I'll
say yes anybody else now.
Very little let's just plan on
the session Sunday afternoon we
have one lady.
Your number one Sunday afternoon
another one Monday afternoon.
So we should make some inroads
as we can.
Senator I'm sorry could you
repeat the time.
Just.
Let's plan on one thirty on
Sunday.
And since we're you know you can
do it from your home so.
Point five miles too far to go
Mr.
Yes yes from your hotel room or
your.
Your.
Your condo or whatever you have
here Senator that would work.
Soon as we get senator Munoz
here will do Senate bill three
fifteen.
Senator we Center justified X.
is going to do the house bill
one eighty five which should by
all means be a fairly quick one.
Well let's start with that one
and Senator is sure thank you
you you want to do that Atlanta
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
Representative McQueen and I A.
our scope sponsoring house bill
one eighty five.
If we're exempting over those
over seventy five from the jury
duty no affidavit it is already
in state law statute.
To allow persons seventy five
years of age or older to be
exempted but the
Law it says that they have to
request they have to file an
affidavit requesting that
exemption.
Point is for constituents that
asked for this at the
administrative office of the
courts actually has access to
all the records that says the
correct age of anybody
requesting the excusal now we
certainly want people to be
anticipate seventy five and
older who want to.
But for those who are afraid to
go out in inclement weather who
are suffering a chronic illness
or disability we want to make it
easier for them and requiring an
affidavit does mean going
outside.
Of the home usually to request
that information I would stand
for questions or comments from
the public.
I move to do past.
Is anybody in the public
assisting.
Sorry the the the but you've got
the right idea I think is there
anyone in the audience solicit
we don't have anybody signed up
in advance so I'll just go and
see if anybody wants to speak on
this raise your hand.
Seeing none will recognize
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you Mr chair we we
saw this we seen this before I
think it's a in a very important
bills for the for elderly
population so when you're ready
I'm happy to make a motion I am.
Okay I'll move it to pass.
Sir a second.
A second.
Call for a Commons any committee
discussion whatsoever yes Mr
chair I just let everybody know
this past the house floor sixty
seven zero.
So this is says bipartisan
support using that's what I'm
saying thank you.
The secretary will call the
roll.
I'm house bill one eighty five
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle I don't think is
present
Center Canada yes.
Yes.
Okay yes so you're CENIC's yes.
There are two.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Stefanics you
have to press thank you very
much then we'll go to senator
George when you us for Senate
bill three fifteen welcome
Senator.
Thank you muted.
Well he was there.
This one is on there did did you
leave the room.
His name is right there in the
corner.
Well appears and we'll go to the
appropriations grid.
he's going on there too.
That's okay we can do the grid
without and.
So how do we do this very to
integrate up on the secretaries
when US and then.
There is.
Okay.
Welcome Senator.
Thank you senator I'm sorry I
did we don't have a quorum in
finance and so I'm trying to.
Get a quorum and so thank you
for putting me on first that
anyone you Senate bill three
fifteen please tell us and then
we can send through the other
bill appears as part of our
appropriations grid.
Okay and I think I have a she
started are you are you with
this year restriction is here
yes you do you do.
Okay.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate bill three
thirteen it is kind of a
cleaning.
Important when we transfer motor
trans to the state police we
transferred almost everything
but when we made the transfer we
did not transfer all the pension
requirements.
We didn't catch it till just
this last year and so what it
what it does is it transfers the
motor trans abilities.
Pension dollars into the state
police.
Pension fund which is over
currently over funded and so it
corrects that it it's a.
Three to five million dollar
adjustment will need to make an
Senate finance.
And so I think that's the short
of the bill
chief did you want to add
anything else to start.
Those of Mr chair members of the
committee that's correct and
that's what we're trying to
accomplish with this bill we
believe this is an oversight at
the time and these into the
officers I just want to stress
that they are currently New
Mexico state police officers
they wear the same uniform that
we have I'm wearing today and
they've been with you being here
with us since two thousand
fifteen and they've had long
careers as well as one make sure
to put in the appropriate
retirement plan to ensure that
when they do retirement plan on
doing that they're not affected
by not being added to the bill I
believe the Senate bill seventy
two last with the Paris solvency
and then also on to is
lieutenant can you Figueroa who
was part of that merger bill and
he can speak to how that will
affect him
as he retires but if you want to
ask me questions I stand for
questions that's correct with us
in the most conveyed earlier I
don't want to reiterating thing
that Mr it's at.
Thank you to.
This.
We have people signed up in
advance to speak what is Miguel
Gomez and he's here and the
others Michael sciences and he's
there to so yeah I want to go
first and Mr Francis.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Miguel
Gomez I'm representing the New
Mexico state police association
offers all want to think center
when you lost for sponsorship of
this legislation as a senator
said this is a a legislation
that's taken care of taking care
of the relatively small number
of state police officers that
were specially inadvertently
left out in the past it's a
small relatively small
corporation as the centre also
said the state police para fund
is a hundred twenty seven point
two percent over funded so so
any issues can be easily
adjusted for what with with the
pair fought with with the state
police power fund we think this
is a good measure it's just
taking care of our our police
officers and we appreciate your
consideration thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
We'll go to Mr Michael Francis
and he'll be followed by Jose
Carrasco.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator so
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak to you I'm a retired New
Mexico state police officer I'm
also on the board of the New
Mexico state police association
and I just want to ask you to
please move this bill forward to
give it a do pass these the
officers that were transferred
over from the former motor
transportation division and the
special investigations division.
Almost at that time that they
would get this retirement and
through an oversight it did not
occur
right now all they're relegated
to retire of with the same
retirement benefits as a general
state employee which is is not
not right these officers deserve
to have the same retirement as
any other New Mexico state
police officer as chief Orton
said they wear the same uniforms
they believe the same as we do
they protect the people of New
Mexico just like anyone else on
the state police and it's a
relatively small costs to get
this done and make it right I
know that as legislators you
want to make things do things
the right way and do the right
thing I appreciate your
consideration of this bill.
Thank you Mr price and then we
have our state congressional.
The
We we can insure you for some
reason it doesn't look like you
are muted but we can't hear you.
You better now yeah now we can
okay sorry about that Sir thank
you Mr chairman and members the
committee chief cabinet
secretary it is a second ask on
the president for the New Mexico
state police socialization I'm
also one of the affected members
of this merger
and it was brought to our
attention of last session and
we've been working hard on this
on this and this bill sends
since last year's session and I
would ask that everybody gives
it a do pass and so we can
actually be able to retire
there's some of us that are
close to that retirement age
already were at you're eighteen
nineteen twenty twenty two IST
but because of the current plan
that we're in we're not able to
retire and I'll be asking you
just to meet be made whole so we
can actually have that
retirement and be able to enjoy
the the rest of our lives there
under retirement basis so thank
you very much Mr chairman and
members the committee.
Thank you Mr Cardoso is there
anyone else are you for or
against this bill who wants to
speak.
Mr trio great Trujillo.
Is Mr chairman members of the
committee Greg Trujillo with P.
E. R. A. the Parramore does
stand in support of this bill
there is an appropriation in the
bill to help offset the cost can
all be on the line Mister chair
if any any Paris specific
questions come up.
Great thank you Mr Trujillo.
Okay let's go to the committee
and
Who wants to start discussing
this bill Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Your muted Senator Sir.
Thank I apologize.
Course I support this bill it it
seems
it's it seems like the absolute
right thing to do I just because
the constitutional provision I
just want to go over the numbers
just a little bit because it
seems like it is it is funded
but there was something in the
FIR that that I wanted to if
somebody could explain it so the
state police plan was funded a
hundred and thirty percent of
liabilities so it was over
funded was that because it that
these officers were were
expected to be in the plan or
what is how is how is it that
there are over five.
Mr chairman and Mr chairman and
senator so along the way the the
least.
Somebody's got to me.
So long awaited the state police
to have paid more into the fund
that then came out and so as
that fund grew
the they they employees paid
more in on their side and it it
was such a small funded over
grew maybe the para
I has a little more common but
that's basically what happened
is.
It Mr chairman and the.
Got Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Mr Chairman uses correct the
contribution rates in the state
police plan are quite high I
believe it's nine point one
percent to the employee and a
little bit over twenty five
percent to the employer so the
the contribution rates are are
set according to the the
generous nous of the plan so
that that is why the as become
aware funded over the years.
Mr Chairman it seems to me that
this is funded not only from
the.
From that although it does say
that there's no gain overall
gate to the pier yari Fund but
it seems only fair since it's
over funded but it also says
that
that there's been of the.
There is a program a special
appropriation of two point four
million to pay the cost of
social security benefits it
should have been paid.
But if they're moved into the
state police require proper
retirement fund they will not be
eligible to receive social
security that in that case that
two point four will go into the
costs of the upset of setting
this so it doesn't look to me
like this is this is funded
as far as I can I can not make
out the special pre
expropriation included one point
a hundred ninety four point one
thousand to make up for the
point five percent contribution
increase at effective mentors
members.
Would have paid between fiscal
year sixteen and in fiscal
twenty so it seems like this is
this is a very well funded and
appropriately so is that correct
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator you're correct
it is over funded
constitutionally when we
transferred those employees we
should have done it with the
transfer of money to make the
fund the whole and so that's why
you're seeing that dollar amount
it's gonna probably come up a
little bit in Senate finance but
in order to abide by the
constitution and what we're
doing we need to make the
transfer of the money the
employees are been made so we
need to make that transfer.
Thank you I appreciate that
explanation and Mr chair when
you read the for most.
I just had a question before so
Senator and and to Mr Trujillo.
Insurance.
The state didn't.
The state wasn't paying social
security benefits between fiscal
year sixteen in fiscal year
twenty one were the employees
paying their share the.
The mobile.
Chairman members.
All Mr Jordan.
When the I understand Mister
chair members the committee my
understanding was in the merger
had taken place social security
benefits had not been paid by
the employee at that time that
they had when they were moved
over into state police that's
not require we've never played
into social security so when
they were brought over as the
merger so security stopped at
that point so Madam been paying
into those benefits the state or
the employee for the the last
five years so those benefits
have gone away and moving them
back into this retirement plan
we wouldn't have to deal with
the social security piece.
Yes they will be eligible the
laundry for social security when
they reach social security
retirement age.
At some point I believe what
I've been told as far as
securities that they have to
acquire yeah not a quarters to
be paid out so as as they get
closer and and they get another
job they can pick up the course
a need to be paid so security
but as of right now the last
five years those employees have
been paying into that.
You probably were before that
and I'm just trying to figure
out alright that there isn't
share.
The.
They would be able to hit social
security retirement in addition
to their social security
benefits in addition to there
Chiari retirement.
During her free time during
these five years.
You see what I'm saying we we
will pay in.
This plan calls for us to pay in
their social security benefits
doesn't it.
Or maybe I'm misreading that
to start and.
During the June two sixteen and
two twenty one twenty sixteen
and twenty twenty one.
Nobody is saying we're paying an
employer wasn't paying.
They may have been eligible
prior to that because if they
may have been serving for eight
or ten years before that.
But if we pay in for those five
years.
We will make them eligible for.
More social security benefits
and they're actually retire yes
it is fair they were working
with the increase in their share
of the budget so Mister chair
members of the committee and
that and I hope I'm not
confusing when it is pretty it's
a pretty convoluted process so
my understanding is we
retroactively placed them back
into the state police plan that
we're not going to be paying the
so security of which is cheaper
as far as what they would pay
into the this money would go
into the error Fund the state
police fund and then that's how
the funding the so security
benefits and are not being taken
care of as far as this bill
here.
Okay Mr chair do you do you the.
Did you hear what I'm what I'm
asking about.
So yes Mr chairman and members
of the so largely law
enforcement public safety
throughout the state of New
Mexico do not participate in
social security when the merger
happened that something that
stop the stop the social
security benefits however the
need change to start reporting
these members under the state
police plan did not occur.
Right let's let's say there
were.
Fifty of these ninety four
officers we're working fire to
the merger.
They were paying their social
security and the state was
paying the employer's share of
their social security.
Business plan called for any
money.
Three paid out.
Representative read between
twenty sixteen.
Twenty twenty one for their
social security benefits.
Thanks their payroll tax.
Through the employer or the
employee share.
A retroactive payment to cover
the.
you Mr chairman it does not take
it strictly appropriation to be
our a and the retiree health we
are is there's nothing that
would pay retro translocates
Spence and I Representative
thank you very much any other
discussion on this.
What will the committee.
I move.
And seconded by Senator
Stefanics any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senate bill three fifteen cent
higher goes yes.
I don't believe Senator angle is
present.
Yes.
Yes.
Well past yes.
Thanks yes Sierra.
Yes.
I don't think Santo Domingo is
the.
You know yes.
Congratulations Sergio do yes
while you're here let's let's
get into this this we have one
of the bills one of the bills
and the rate is you're very
religious east indigent persons.
Eight three fifty six.
Yes Mr chairman and and so
Senate bill three eighty six
just set up a fund for indigent
burial some counties currently
have it Bernalillo has it.
If there's on claim remains if
there is someone that can't
afford burial expenses so what
I'm trying to do is in McKinley
county and it's and it's sad
the culture of native American
people is you know when someone
passes they have they they
gather by their clans and their
plans help pay for this and but
it it's been so tremendous and
burn some currently people park
on the side of the road with
signs.
Ask for help for funeral
expenses.
Because they're not eligible
together it's kind of sad it
really is that
I can look the last the amount
of people that.
We've given money to for burial
expenses because they couldn't
get buried in New.
My wife secretaries mother who
who got COVID in and the first
week in one week no
we actually went out in the.
The reservation but we went out
to the reservation to drop money
in a pocket in a snowstorm so
they can help others their
mother there is a little help
from the tribe but we need to
help them a little bit more in
the county because there is some
people in in the committee and
small and San Juan counties at
that can't gather the funds in
its.
It will incredible the state
manage that we can't.
Set some aside to help these
people in there what but what's
happening so that will stand for
questions Mr chairman.
We are we supposed to do this.
As it were Mr chair members the
rate is just there to put in one
place of the verbiage from these
one paragraph bills.
Really well ourselves with one
single motion role I think we
the way we've been doing is just
for heaven and and do a motion
on each one as this one I would
only add that this money is from
one to the aging and long term
services department which will
then figure out how to
administer this out to the.
Out his for this purpose.
It's for all over the state
to Senator morning when US.
Yeah and and we don't know what
all over the state is but you
know Albuquerque has plenty of
money.
We're trying to get their number
and and see what we had they I
believe long term ageing said
they do have some money that
they help with but they don't
have a lot every county is
different so we're just trying
to to figure figured out and and
get it in place.
What long term aging.
anybody here in the audience
wants to speak on this.
Do you want to speak on this
our our members of the committee
of ones that'll knock the W.
secretary breaking long term
services.
Senator with sandy we were
trying to figure out of buying
all of all the same kind of
model of the county do you right
now with.
what we know I've been distant.
Articular and that one one.
We are multiple yes
R. all are not family so it
really can collect but some like
this is needed and our we don't
have all the answers and all the
people the power to do this but
we're gonna work with counties
to see if we can make it at
that.
All.
In my part of the county that
you need.
thank you our.
Thank you Mr.
Anybody else from the public
wants to make a comment on this
Senator Sedillo Lopez you have
your hand up.
Yes.
Mr chair thank you for
recognizing me I just wanted to
read a line from the FY are that
was just absolutely tragic these
funds would assist local
communities in navigating the
increase in just no doubt seen
over the course of the pandemic
so when you're ready for a
motion I'll be happy to make
with.
Senator Gallegos next.
Mr chairman and senator
appreciate the.
Religion very important I'm just
trying to understand so.
Am I understand the county runs
out of indigent funds is that
what causes.
Your chairman center the county
can't use indigent funds those
are for for hospitals some
counties have a burial fund so
if someone passes away and
they're on the claim.
Hey for services I know that
happens and early of County.
It has no tied it to the engine
funds is just.
That we don't want to do it but
we're we kind of need to do it
to help people and so
it has no tie to inject funds.
Thank you Mr chairman center I
was just
I know and I guess it is
different fund
in Lee County they have
Part of the cemetery and monies
are allocated for that so that's
all I want is clarification
thank you thank you senator
diagnosed.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator Munoz for bringing this
legislation to the committee to
pay.
I I am curious Senator chairman
how what the amount two hundred
thousand are required at I'm.
From the FIR.
Mr Chairman center we don't know
what the amounts gonna look like
and in finance will probably
figure out what what what is
gonna look like it's five
hundred thousand if it's.
What it's going to take in his
first year so we don't have a
clear path because like center
guy go said they have a in
County they have in other
counties but in our county it's
it's just we all just to add it
in and like I said today on the
floor
one person that.
Work for a friend of mine
eighteen members of their family
have passed away twelve related
to comment the average funeral
expense is.
Three five thousand right.
So I mean after a certain point
thirty thousand dollars I mean
almost sixty thousand dollars in
one family just to to try to get
funeral expenses.
A forced just off on real
impossible in the.
I want to be able to get it all
one time are all for one person
they'd get some tribal health at
the chapter house is I believe
they give them fifteen hundred
burial expenses at the chapters.
Then they're kind of left on
their own together the rest but
if we can give a little bit
each.
It just helps.
I thank you senator thank you
chairman.
Thank you and and senator I I
believe doesn't social security
a.
Ariel the budget as well.
Maybe Mr he noted can speak to
that.
Are members of the committee I
believe there is a small portion
that San Diego you know but.
It's not involved really cover
anything.
Five hundred dollars.
I don't get really.
What we
know and could supplement that
in and you know I I don't and I
assume it would be here
Representative surely barebones
kind of a the ceremony that
would be done very little to be
provided.
Senator guys did you have a
second comment yes so Mister
chairman Senator I was just
wondering is this money go
through the county.
Our orders to go to the family
and and the reason I ask that is
if it goes directly to the
county how would the family know
that they had been given that
given from the legislature from
this group.
Mr chairman and senator so what
what I think's going to happen
is.
Long term ageing will we'll
figure out how to places fund
and then but the eligible
dollars there.
And then send them to the
counties and I imagine you know
word of mouth or the funeral
homes will say.
Is our cost in here's where you
can go get help on the list they
already know the chapter houses
have the fifteen hundred they
say oh you can go to the county
and get another five hundred or
two fifty to help with the
burial expenses but
get making chase money to bury
people but I mean it's better
than them sitting on the side of
the road with the with the
poster board in a bucket.
Mr chair and senator I agree
with you on that final question
why yes to pulled
so the money would probably go
to the funeral home family
directors that correct.
Correct.
Okay then my my next question hi
in Colorado we had a family
cemetery that are plus for free
but.
Well had paid for the burial
expenses so and not a problem
because I don't know the
structure of.
No nation do they have any
designated Indian lands for the
actual plot percent accounting.
You know they they do and I I
believe it's it's up to them to
choose where they where they
buried their members some of
them are in their tribal lands
in the And cemetery plots some
of them are there's one located
on just north the window rock on
their cell in Gallup that are
located in so.
They're kind of all over and I
think people going to determine
where wherever they want to be
very.
Thank you for that Mr and
Senator my final thought is and
do not want to distract from
this but it during chance we get
with our federal delegation to
see if there's something they
can do federal.
Matt also just because I know
the need if you're talking about
fifteen hundred and now another
five hundred of some of these.
You know five thousand dollar
variance in the family if you
talk about that group with
eighteen members that could
devastate a family forever so
just a thought on how we might
want to get our delegation
involved in this if there's
anything we can do federally so
what that all young.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Sir Thomas.
to see again now.
Yes.
So Senator thank you another new
pass out of the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you on a project as I did listen
to debate and and I was on
public affairs when Senator
Feldman was there and I was the
vice chairman Senator film and
was there so maybe could you
get.
Your vice chairman at time clock
because a senator Feldman used
to make me set the time clock
and you can only talk that long
and then it would it would ring
and then I'd say it rang and
she'd say I don't care.
One.
That I'm on the time clock in
the trash because you're gonna
play so you're very patient
center I I really appreciate
your public affairs I really
appreciate that community and so
I I was there for a couple years
but thank you at it here one of
the greatest chairman that Alice
Lee from heart patients and care
very game into us is you don't
have to go through some of those
strange or but afterwards.
Thank you so.
Thank you.
I.
The next item on the.
Appropriations credential.
Senator Steinborn so now he's
probably in finance can you the
Sherin can you call in.
Come in.
You to switch over to our zoom
room meanwhile the money for the
closure and housing study.
Three three three.
Senator Stefanics do you mind
sharing the meeting rolling this
on.
Yes that's fine.
Please go ahead.
Mr chair.
Thank you senator
This is a simple bill an integer
in state I don't know what your
your season is entering the room
Recent two thousand dollars to
The administrative office of the
courts.
Contracts for a counseling
program in mortgage foreclosures
service teams this is something
that was done through a federal
grant for several years and then
eventually the federal grant ran
out.
The B. Asians the HSD is there
aren't any two or three around
the state the administrative
office of the courts was
contracting with.
Kept doing it finding other
money from a.
In one case from the foundation
grant in any other case I think
they just didn't.
In addition to everything else
they were doing but the the the
number of store closures because
of the pandemic is expected to
increase and so this is an
effort in making sure that that
very badly needed service for
people who who are facing
foreclosure have an opportunity
to to me was the.
A knowledgeable person in the
field we can give them
alternative courses of action.
This is all about and the
administrative office of the
courts ready before they're
currently willing to run it
again.
And that will stand for
questions.
Thank you very much do you have
an expert witness Mr chair.
I don't believe we we do on this
although
Diane's.
Doran Jones from United south
Broadway may have gotten on the.
We can ask for her is there
anybody in the audience who
wanted to raise their hand in
support of this bill.
Is there anybody opposed to this
bill.
Questions discussion Senator
committee.
Thank you.
Madam chair and let me my video
on so I can see.
So I I did take up our chairman.
Challenge or or suggestion book
recommendation okay and I really
enjoyed what I've read so far.
Thank you again to the center to
the piano on that.
and I take great interest in
this in this topic and I
actually called the few
sheriffs.
Because of what what the book is
said is you know they they're
going through
the the scenarios where of a
innovation happens and the
shares are tasked with carrying
this out and so I called the
right shares with with inside my
district in outside the
districts and that's helping me
understand kind of how how they
get involved I just want to say
one thing
you know for whoever whoever's
listening.
The bill it says that they'll
provide policy recommendations
that will.
Protect community stability.
And
you know I think one of the
things that that does promote.
Stability and with with a lot of
evidence and this is been a
controversial surprisingly is
what's called the success
sequence where you can
essentially reduce your risk of
poverty to well under five
percent in America if you obtain
a high school diploma or GED.
And then get a full time job of
some kind if you don't go to
graduate school pursue college
and then don't have any kids
until you get married.
And if you have kids will you
know which.
And so I think we have a lot of
evidence there and I and I hope
that this group will will look
at that because
you know if if we have found
that sort of to bring you know
once again community stability I
think those things are going to
bring community stability and
yet for some reason whenever I
brought this up in the past
seems to have a partisan flavor
to it but I I do hope that
they'll look at that and I did
want to to mention that
just for the hopefully then
Richman of the of the committee
but I'm very much enjoying the
chairman's book very very good
so far so thank you.
Mr Mr thank you Sir.
Thank you very much
any other questions or comments
from committee members
of the committee.
Madam chairman I I would just
point out one thing I use I use
some of my junior money to fund
this so it should go smoothly
through finance because there's
you money at that store that's
great thank you for doing that
Senator
I would moving to pass is there
a second.
Well seconded.
Thank you and penny could you
please call the vote.
Senate bill three line center
guy.
No.
No is.
Three three seven or teaching
piano.
I'm sorry for wrongful excuse
me.
Thank you for the.
Third.
And now I have to reconsider the
vote yeah.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Yes Sir is there a Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Thank you senator thank.
Unanimous do pass thank you
thank you.
And then we heard from Senator
Steinborn.
What are you this is just a
simple appropriations bill let's
go ahead and do is.
Would somebody like to with the
sun for an Senator Stefanics be
willing to.
Yes let me pull the bill this
minute we.
Yeah let me just have it in
front of me here.
Okay members of the committee
this is.
I appropriation of five million
dollars from the general fund.
just administration of Kay and
that ninety five mass or
criminally with the latest the
effective mass.
Reduce the transmission of the
disease so that it can be used
for state in a statewide public
education campaign.
And it contains an emergency
clause.
And I am assuming it does go on
to finance.
Yes.
Else in that let's discuss any
questions any Senator
guidelines.
Mr chairman and
Center I'm wondering why.
I understand the five million
dollars at the beginning of the
pandemic what are numbers
drastically reduced why would we
need that much right now.
for education.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I'm
not the original sponsor of this
take a stab at this it is for
Public Education use a statewide
public education campaign and if
we are sending our children back
to school that might be one use
are so that they have
appropriate mass and aren't
wearing.
Inappropriately or ill fitting
mass but I do think that the
five million will probably be
adjusted quite a bit in the
Senate finance.
Mr chair Senator on the in the
school board and we had federal
monies to bring us the K. and
ninety five mass and I'm just
trying to figure out what we're
trying to do I know you know
as we're talking the center when
you know some.
is a state of different.
But with the federal money so we
received that that that's how we
acquired all mass we currently
have in New I'm just.
Then.
Mr chair I know that the numbers
will be adjusted down but that
just sounds a little bit higher
for me even in the.
overall picture just because of
were the end of the pandemic.
Beginning with.
No Senator Steinborn not here Mr
chairman chair all to stop
ranting raving in I see what he
does on the floor so with that I
yield.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Harris anybody
else I mean it just strikes me
the other thing that.
The is probably likely isn't too
is the additional federal money
with this new bill passes there
will be more money coming in
then we would be basically
appropriating that some of that
federal money for this purpose.
Discussion with several of the
committee.
I would like to pass.
J. we have a motion this is our
second.
Thank you.
From Senator Sedillo Lopez I
think that was her.
The secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill three oh nine.
Sir guy goes no matter what I'd
like to explain my vote.
Senator McKenna yes.
There Schmidt is not like to
explain to.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Service.
Yes.
Sierra are you.
I don't think so.
There are two C. panel yes.
In his phone Senator guy it was.
Mr chair and and Committee mais
my thoughts were as I directed
earlier I just don't understand
if this is the beginning of the
end of the.
Endemic of the five million
dollars just way extreme for me
just understanding this teaching
German and put out that that was
federal funding this may be
absorbed through the federal
funding but I'll reserve my vote
and the positive thing what
happens on the floor so with
that are you.
Senator Steinborn we we just
vote on your bill do you want to
say anything about it and
there's been a couple of
questions raised.
yes but let me just tell you
that I will share the results of
the loan until after you spoke
in a.
That's very that's very merciful
of you Mr chairman I appreciate
that yes I I will give you the
back story and I'm I'm I'm sorry
I was just been bouncing around
so I I feel are that New
Mexicans have a lack of quality
mass and that a quality mask is
our number one defense to
protect the spread of the virus
and that we should all
government should be helping to
provide those quality nasty
people and quite frankly we're
getting a lot of federal money
so I reached out to our
secretaries of health and Human
Services had conversations about
it they thought it was a
reasonable idea as long as there
is flexibility on the right kind
of mass and we ran some numbers
and figured out that we could
supply New Mexicans with several
high quality mass or you know
mask K. ninety five minutes off
mask and including postage and
that's basically what this bill
does and up.
You know obviously I I wrote it
he can ninety five pods or
equivalent so that you know
people we're not replacing their
to rack with another to Iraq but
rather trying to get a quality
mass that would actually get
higher level protection in New
Mexicans.
Mr Chairman.
The question came up to are we
doing this at the tail end of
the pandemic when it may not be
needed any longer.
Well I I don't know Mr chairman
I don't think any of us now you
know I will say that what I do
now is with all the variants
coming online you know this is a
this is a moving target and I'm
not going to speculate on what a
worst case scenario could look
like with how this virus could
to go with mutations and how
whether or not they're affected
by the virus vaccines are not
but I still think clearly we
have a public health situation
the state of New Mexico is about
to get a billion dollars and
you know we're asking for a
piece of it that I think public
health experts state that mask
is the number one defense so.
You know I won't even try to
convince you to vote the worry
voted one way or another but.
But I think none the less it's
it's it's a decision in a
conversation point that I just
you know we're putting out there
for the department to consider
with all this money there about
that.
The.
So Senator are you haven't do
press motion carried.
Senator Senator Schmedes did you
want to explain your yes I could
Mr chairman I'll be brief.
Thank you what I'd like to say
is first of all I I like Centers
time warrants choice of the K.
ninety five that's the mask that
I that's my mask of choice.
For when I examined patients in
outpatient setting the reason
which it's it's a lot more
comfortable than wearing a
regular in ninety five I don't
know about you all but it's it's
hard for me to get through the
day if I have any ninety five on
the the whole time I mean you
kind of have to to take a break
want to take it off you have to
reset it and and you take it put
it back on it's not gonna fit
that properly so I I do like can
I quite a bit
I will say though that I did and
even Senator Steinborn as my
neighbor on the floor I really
As as Senator Brandt was saying
I I don't want to keep voting no
for all your bills in the to do
that this time to my neighbor
and I I want to briefly explain
why the reason is you know I
I've done just looking at the
evidence and nearly every
jurisdiction in the United
States when they have a mask
mandate they have greatly seen
their infection rates increase
and as have jurisdictions
without mask mandates but the
question is which ones go out go
up higher well recent time point
in mask mandated jurisdictions
in the United States nine point
six million cases which averaged
out to twenty seven cases per
hundred thousand people per day
in the non mask mandate
jurisdictions you have five
point seven million cases which
averaged out to seventeen cases
per hundred thousand per day so
the non mask chair section in
the United States at least at
this time point are doing better
on average ten cases hundred
thousand people per day
infection rate
and I'm not gonna speculate I
that would take too much time
for appropriation bill I
speculate as to why that is but
there are some good studies
going out there and if you think
it's because of mask compliance
you'd be wrong because a recent
new New England journal of
medicine article about marine
recruits they're extremely tight
on their mask wearing a show no
difference at all in pause
before or after the study period
I'm in New York a couple other
quotes I think we should all
consider World Health
Organization I quote the
widespread use of mask by
healthy people in the community
setting is not yet supported by
high quality or direct
scientific evidence of the
potential their potential harms
to consider end quote and
finally once again recently
published New England journal of
art journal of medicine article
which by the way is one of the
top medical journals in the
world I quote we know that
wearing a mask.
Outside health care facilities
offers little if any protection
from infection and so I am like
I said I like the king the K.
ninety five in this bill but the
though mask wearing of a
symptomatic healthy people in
the community setting has been
completely debunked there's no
evidence whatsoever to show we
should be doing that so who
should be wearing mass in New
Mexico when a doctor examines
the patient your dentist people
in hospital and I even know that
even though as far as the
barbers you know I I'm fine with
that I'm not against it because
I don't think it's overall
harmful but otherwise I just I
just can't support because
evidence isn't there thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you senator Dr she so so
there you have it Senator
Steinborn you have two choices
of medical opinions.
Senator doctors committees or.
G. and you take your choice.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you Dr Schmidt is Senator for
your your opinion on that and
you will have another
opportunity to support one of my
bills and really make it count I
promise.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman I I'm
gonna keep hope alive all right.
You Senator Steinborn okay
couldn't could dispatch
contacted to house members three
really.
Who's bills are pending here to
see if they're gonna be able to
join us as representatives
Matthews order CEO or Chandler
two bills from the house still.
Well we're waiting for them to
contact us Senator Stefanics
what we do here bill on marriage
license.
Please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm bringing this
up bill forward for the county
clerks and.
Today with me I have I hope
she's here with me.
Whitaker you she on.
Yes yes okay so the marriage
license this a Senate bill two
ninety four.
With double the marriage license
B. that must be paid to
accounting clerk for twenty five
dollars to fifty dollars so that
is the basis of the bill and I
would like for my expert witness
Whitney Whitaker to please talk
about it.
Mr chair members of the
committee again my name's
Whitney Whitaker I'm looking
County clerk thank you for
allowing me to speak today.
I just want to let you know the
clerks are in full support of
this legislation we've been
thinking about increasing the
fees for some time now and this
is one of our legislative
priorities this year.
We wanted to move forward for
the following reasons at the one
time fee it's not a reoccurring
fee the cost of supplies have
increased and this includes our
binders are paper.
Receivables and of course the
certificate that Phelps and I'm
finally at to be competitive
with other states around us
we've seen a high of eighty
three dollars to a low of thirty
dollars for the species.
And with that I just stand for
any question that you may have.
was just checking to see if
anybody is signed up in advance
and the only one who did was was
planning part was a when you
witness so.
Anybody else in the zoom room
want to speak on this bill you
for or against it.
Go to the committee.
Current tax after this tax and
business.
Is is okay good Senator Schmedes
your first.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for for the bill
I'm I I I must say I'm a still a
little confused
I mean I I heard the
presentation I guess I'm I'm
confused in general as to why
why the government is still in
the business of issuing licenses
I don't know has there been any
talk to actually just do away
with some instead of adjusting
the fees and all this it was
that part of the development of
legislation of the bill right
now.
Mr chairman of my bill only
addresses of the change no other
of point because of the county
clerk's request well let miss
Whitaker make a comment if you
wish wishes to.
Mr chair Senator this bill only
addresses the license fee for to
obtain a marriage license there
is no legislation to change that
or get rid of them at the
license for the marriage this is
only just to increase it by
twenty five dollars currently in
law we have a fifteen going to a
child's fund that children's
trust fund and ten going into
the general fund and nothing
going into the clerk's provide
as to why we're bringing this
board for the twenty five into
the clerk's fund okay.
I get that Mr chair Senator I
thank god and I I'm probably you
know tend to devote vote no for
this one
primarily because my overarching
I I just I'm not sure you know
there's a lot of common law
states that don't
they don't issue licenses
because I think there's quite a
few I'm so I'm not sure this
this bill's going in the right
direction of kind of where I'd
like to see it
But in in the and then you know
I I just think it's something
that the government I I think
the state does have an interest
though in
in seeing that more marriage
rates I think give stability to
families
and I mean we even have a gosh
we have a fertility rate that's
less than the replacement rate
right now in America Italy is
dealing with severe more engine
and fertility problems right now
and and hungry is as well and a
lot of other jurisdictions so
but anyway I I think I
understand the purpose of the
bill maybe at some point we can
look at you know what are we and
what are we doing with with
these but anyway thank you very
much for The presentation I
appreciate things and.
Thank you senator.
Anybody else on the committee
was a question.
One.
How are the parks funded without
assuming early right another
hearing nothing from the
marriage license fees.
What I mean how are your office
cost paid for currently.
One answer that please.
Chairman.
Members of any thank you Senator
Stefanics currently it for
recording fees we get seven
dollars from the twenty five
dollar recording fee goes into
our clicks Fund feet.
That.
First
is that it is in.
I mean there is an adequate
supply is generating enough
revenue for you to operate.
Chairman and members the
committee what so what we're
asking is to help support
tips so if we get this funded
then of course we can help pay
for the off cost of the binders
binders are currently costing us
close to two hundred sixty eight
dollars for a would just a
marriage finder the archival
paper that we use it's costing
us a hundred and twenty three
dollars.
And then just a certificate that
south a quantity of a thousand
ranges from.
Eight hundred to about nine
hundred dollars for it just that
quantity of the certificate so
this would help offset those
costs.
Well so these are the things
issue turned over to the Google
after the marriage the
documents.
They cost you quite a bit of
money to produce.
Cammeniti subpoena yes they they
do the certificate to accept
thank they do cost quite a bit
of money and then anything
that's recorded in the county
clerk's office is on permanent
record so we have to keep on and
archival binders and wells are
table paper and that can be a
cost to the counties as well.
Okay when I understand I see
Senator and got into the city
you want to make a motion
Senator.
Now Mr chair I was just gonna
ask question so.
And it sent a question my court
Mr chairman and senator of us
little dog funded because it to
me it looks like it's.
From my view not a well thought
out bill but
can you tell me if I understand
right to twenty five is going to
go in I heard the story about
the binders what does actually
cost for the recording and
what's a long term you of the
twenty five dollars the
increase.
Mr chair outlet miss Whitaker
into that.
Chairman as senator the cost to
record it's twenty five dollars
we ask that twenty five again
that doesn't go into our
recording fee fund that goes
into the general fund for the
county and then again the sixty
percent or fifteen dollars will
go into that child's children's
trust fund so and forgive me if
I'm not understanding your your
question.
Well.
Mr.
Senator I guess I was trying to
figure out with the increase.
And we heard the story earlier
about binders I just I'm I'm not
understanding what the full use
of the increase is going to be
going forward.
Chairman Senator it would be for
the binders itself but we can
also use it for any purposes for
the recording funds so that fund
is set for any so we.
Any recording it within our
county clerk's office we can use
it for archival binders for it
doesn't necessarily have to go
to the marriage but we can use
it for recording purposes so
it's not just segregated to the
marriage portion but to all over
quarter.
And the historic aspect that we
have to maintain all these
records and.
Miss Mister chairman Senator
expert witness by Whittaker that
helps because I can understand
the recording the history part
of it because we've got shelves
and shelves and shelves of
rolling touch of
closet looking things that have
a lot of the detail I just
thought it was a large increase
if we were gonna get anything by
under so what at all you'll
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator once.
Yeah I and something.
And the F. I. R. DFA indicates
that the county clerk's the
fund.
Yes in a stab with frontier and
is utilized to assist with
purchases.
That complies and software and
what we do know is that a lot of
county clerk offices many county
clerk offices for better English
are needing to update their
software and their computers in
order to maintain better records
thank you.
Thank you senators explain some
of the committee.
We do best Senator Ingle moves
into pass seconded by the.
Thank you senator civilised and
the secretary will call the
roll.
Okay.
Two nine four Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am I'd like to explain
more about.
Thank all yes.
So.
Yes.
No.
Thursday Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
And senator Senator Tallman your
back I'm back yes.
Fourteen you know yes and to
explain is no Senator Wirth.
Mr chairman I I was really
struggling with the overall long
term use but I really like
Senator paddocks
information there the at the end
the quickness supplies to me
that gives me some heart idea of
what to use of the politician
and not just binder so I
appreciate that last piece has a
strong no deal centers on ex
brought that up so thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you senator and what was
the vote thank.
One.
And seven yes is.
Graduation Senator Stefanics
thank you Mr speaker.
And I notice the representative
Garcia is with us former U. S.
marine.
and
Before we get into his bill
which is house bill one
thirteen.
I wanted to let the members know
you may have already been
getting texts about this as
Senator Stefanics texted me
about it you know I've heard
from several other legislators
we just got word this afternoon
of the passing of.
Former state representative and
Santa he passed away today.
Those of you who had the
opportunity to serve with a new.
No just what a.
Will the human being he was in
Norma Cisar was so.
Just keep him in your prayers as
you utilize your work today.
Quite a while and I guess it's
just did you just find the was
not able to to continue.
So Representative Garcia tell us
about house bill one thirteen no
discrimination based on military
status thank you of Mr chairman
and members of the board of this
the card on got me a little bit
of a guard like that somebody
else's introduce it but we're
would look to bowl of.
Mr Chairman this is the one
third Kate is routed to human
rights for Betty discrimination
based upon military.
Or I mean military or veterans
at is and the problem we're
having Mr chairman and I have a
experience this somebody notices
Doreen I was in Vietnam in
nineteen sixty eight and others
but a lot of discrimination even
to this point in life.
I've been discriminated against
for being of Vietnam veteran
I've been called anything from
baby killer to commit it's been
on the board and the the purpose
of this bill Mr chairman is that
I don't want our military people
are coming out of the military
now to go through what I've been
going through for fifty two
years it Mr chairman of.
This also includes of all the
National Guard the Air National
Guard Mr chairman you know I
don't know if you guys are aware
but if you're the National Guard
Mr chairman and members you're
not considered a veteran and
issue have been attached to a
military branch.
For a hundred eighty days.
Consecutive hundred eighty days
other that you might be
considered veterans and I
included them this bill
basically Sir because they do
serve our our state the news
we're going to needed and
Mr chair I thought I was going
to have a next for windows but I
don't know so all several
questions.
It's a great job all by yourself
Representative you need an
expert so.
Does anybody really have
somebody who signed up to speak
on the bills but I don't see her
in the room.
Let's just see issued under
Julien echo.
For you there are you signed up
to support additional.
He was something else today.
Mr chairman if I may yes this
includes all veterans accepting
veterans have been discharged
and a bad conduct or
dishonorable discharge thank you
Mr.
And I would I would start the
committee's discussion offline.
By the thank you for being there
of a National Guard whenever
people say are are you a veteran
I am I know what to say because
I was in the National Guard.
For a lot of.
That is in you're not considered
a minute veteran
your bills for your bill it does
make you more and I appreciate
that clergy Mr chairman of I do
continue a veteran anybody is
served our state or our country
has every right to be.
Recognizing that are.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Garcia
Senator Gallegos.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia appreciate the dialogue
on this and.
My dad was retired military and
and I know that he went through
a lot also.
Just mass really quick and and I
looked it up and I can't find
the conflict in the FIR exes
conflicts with house bill one
twenty one twenty.
Montoya cells as fast expedited
licensure have you heard what
the conflict is.
Representative no I haven't I'm
sorry to they can answer that
question but no I have not heard
of the conflict I know there was
a conflict on the there was not
a conflict there was issues that
in regards to
Workforce solutions
Thank you Cameri I'm sorry for
somebody saying but we are in
those problems out of what I
have not heard of any conflict
Mr good Representative Abel's
Senator I think it just goes on
to explain instances very use
your.
This bill defines veteran more
broadly than some other bills to
and some of the federal
legislation does which is what I
think of Representative Garcia
was alluding to when he talked
about.
Including National Guard units
they were in attendance for a
hundred eighty days to act for
the military you.
Okay well that's the only
question I have I like to build
some of that you thank you thank
you senator.
Anybody else.
Somebody assigned Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair that makes me
sad to think of discrimination
against veterans Daniel
Fernandes was from my community
ability County he was the a few
a few years older than me
probably six or seven but he was
a hero in my view he went to
Vietnam and he threw his body on
a great on the committee to
protect his troops and in our
community he was a hero and in
our community Edmonds of the
Vietnam War were heroes and so
it's very sad to think of Topeka
veterans being discriminated in
in in this way
I only had
I have one question and this is
raised by the F. I. R.
It it just a little bit of
confusion to me it says that
Severance.
Senator constant basketball.
The bills those were just.
You too.
Human Rights.
Mr chair I apologize I realized
it was taking care of with the
amendment.
Very good yeah and question I
was going to ask was this
different clarify the meaning of
it better to exclude school
district never mind it was taken
care of well just.
Mr chair a.
The report centers the deal you
know would you just finished
saying kind of give me a little
chill.
You know because the you know
dental Fernandez was a hero you
know and and everybody is served
in in the military deserves to
be called the hero because you
know we all want to different
things and and in our
deployments you know the for the
committee I graduated from high
school in may of nineteen sixty
eight.
And then the Vietnam in
December.
Thank you sixty eight noted
little boys the eighteen years
old.
The records to get to.
The.
Thank you.
Thank you representative Garcia
was the will of the committee.
I'm happy to make a do pass I
just felt like I've been making
too many do yes second second
over the past.
Photo we we don't keep track of
quotas so whenever Senator
Stefanics native and senator
dole in second.
Many other discussion I I would
I just want to give you a movie
review right now in connection
with this bill.
Representative Matthews is gonna
join us for the next bill but I
I think just watched on Netflix.
We can zero.
The slightly movie called
deskside bloods.
Well as you seeing that
Representative Garcia Richard
movie about Vietnam veterans
from Vietnam what happened to
them afterwards.
They're still struggling with
it.
Forty years later years later
they're still struggling with.
So it's a great movie I
recommend it highly to you so
they learn that.
Your call the roll.
Chairman of.
Okay and it's unfortunate that
we have to struggle with issues.
Two years later on in a lot of
people out of trouble with this
so I really appreciate your
thoughts appreciate the
committee and all in all this
keep are very happy is but happy
to possibly get their wonders
from the worst of.
And then you are a veteran sure
my are you are you thank you
thank you Sir Representative.
So the secretary will call the
roll one to do says motion on
house bill one thirteen as
amended.
Yes.
Thank all.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
Thank you source the fax yes
Tallman yes thirteen panel.
Yes graduations Representative
would do best.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee very honorable
thank you thank you.
Okay we'll go to Representative
Matthews bill the house bill
thirty four as amended.
Reentry services cost sharing
limits.
Welcome Representative.
And you read it.
Thank you and Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
didn't realize this bill was up
today and I.
was under the impression that
the lobbyist and obtained a
Senate sponsor in any of that
but I can
Yes of John Anderson.
In order.
It.
I I really I I really I really
apologize because we've been
trying to get bills heard but
and he did tell me he was going
to range for Dr Hickey to be the
this the Senate sponsor.
We're moving too fast.
Okay I I and again I apologize I
did I did not realize that this
was was happening
And we we do have an expert and
doctor Janet Simon a podiatrist
to explain the bill I key in.
Issue would you want to roll it
over to Freddie please if you
wouldn't mind I I would and I'm
I've again I really apologize I
just state and no idea this was
was happening you should not in
any way delay you already passed
the house still this is so I
will roll it over.
After after four sessions right
so tell John Anderson to get to
work during his salary
is with I will and and thank you
very much for allowing me to do
that and I I apologize that we
were ready
thank
at
your we are ready all right
thank you.
We will next to here when we
contact senator Campos you're
coming in and while we're doing
that will deal with Senator
said the lotus is bill Senate
bill three oh three.
Thank you.
Okay thank you I was just gonna
say all contacts Senator Campos.
Thank you we'll hear his bill
immediately after Senator
Sedillo this bill.
Thank you Mr chair Senate bill
three oh three just increases
the size of the in the education
department board from seven
members to nine members and the
two members that would be
included would be a member
elected to a four year term by
members of the American
federation of teachers which is
a union representing thousands
of thousands of teachers
throughout New Mexico and also
represents people teachers were
not members of thank you and the
and the secretary of higher
education or designate.
J. H. A. D. the the secretary of
higher education designate would
be required to be in New Mexico
resident the current HUD
employee and have relevant
experience relevant financial
experience I have an expert I
have a two experts with me I
have Melanie Meyers who is an
anti national expert on
retirement plans and I have
definitely who is with AFP.
We will turn it over to Melanie
Meyers.
So.
Welcome.
Thank you.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Sally Myers and I work for
into you members who service
pension fund trustees and
overseeing their retirement
systems these funds include that
California state teachers
retirement system the New York
state teachers retirement system
and many other small and medium
sized education and public
employee pension funds across
the country I'm.
Include participate trustees
because having them participate
and board deliberations and
decisions create budget embassy
I'm retired and active members
have confidence that their
pension is in good hands syringe
for difficult.
I'm sorry can you hear me yes
okay sorry.
You.
So at the same retired and
active members have confidence
when they see people like them
sitting on those for in these
rules and that brings tension
point both legitimacy and
important form of Diversey also
facilitates better communication
existing research I want to
share some of the academic
research on this subject related
to that bill there's not a ton
of academic research on public
pension board governance but
there are some good studies and
I want to share a little bit of
that with you
this research supports the
changes that are proposed in SB
three or three well some
senators in the bills last
hearing suggested that adding
members and make it less
effective pension fund
governance experts actually
recommend that pension boards
contains six to ten members of
size that allows for adequate
stakeholder representation while
still being able to function
efficiently expanding the
educational retirement board to
nine members but also bring it
closer to the public and pension
fund industry standard that
national association of state
retirement administrators
reported in twenty nineteen that
nine member boards were actually
most common among state public
pension funds.
I mentioned diversity earlier
adding to states to the E. are
being will encourage more
diverse representation of you
points business leaders and
public pension funds alike are
of a firm a growing consensus
that board diversity enhances or
performance at oversight and
actually leads to improved
outcomes increase in crude
financial outcomes most of this
research has focused on
corporate board diversity but
the lessons learned they're
apply equally well to our
pension funds Boston College are
there center for retirement
research and study on pension
fund governance structures and
they actually found that strong
governance correlates with
better pension fund financial
performance I'm into the queue
governance structures that they
studied or pension funds the
board size and board composition
specifically a share of plan
participants representation and
both of these are things that SB
three oh three addresses well
some of argue that retirement
board decisions really should be
left in the hands of financial
experts research on good
governance actually does not
back that up on stakeholder
representation experts recommend
that boards to include twenty to
seventy percent of active or
retired fund participants with
fifty four percent being average
certainly having financial
experts in the board is critical
but having only financial
experts on the board I'm is not
consistent with governance best
practices currently in the E. R.
B. participants account for
forty three percent and us three
oh three would increase that
share to forty four percent just
a one percent increase and
bringing it slightly closer to
the average of other public
pension funds while adding
important professional diversity
in both the participation and
the acceptance States.
Well documented the corporate
board diversity correlates with
improved performance are leading
to considerable focus within the
investment industry and
diversity.
The national business round
table for example states that
quote America's business leaders
are increasing their emphasis
and commitment to promoting
diversity in the boardroom
diverse backgrounds and
experiences on corporate boards
strengthened board performance
and it turned help drive long
term economic value and.
I'm another study and STI from
the greater board gender
diversity leads to stronger
financial performance if your
governance related controversies
are Harvard Business Review
article found that demographic
and professional diversity are
quote both important for
increasing the diversity of
perspectives represented on the
board and quote and for ensuring
a diversity of ideas the
committee to superior
performance last fall the
Russell three thousand boards
diverse city disclosure
initiative that's a mouthful
which is promoted by twenty one
institutional investors called
on corporations to voluntary
would voluntarily disclosed
adversity data quote given the
correlation between board
diversity and long term
performance and
coach so this research I won't
bore you any longer for this
research spanning both public
pension funds and corporate
governance clearly suggests that
expanding the R. B. to nine
members to increase diversity as
proposed Rio three is in line
with strong governance practices
thank you chairman.
Thank you Mr Myers seventy
eight.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Stephanie Lee A.
F. T. New Mexico president and
we represent over twenty
thousand educators who pay into
this E. R. B. into the
retirement system and so that is
why we believe it's really
important Melanie was great with
giving out the research but
that's why we've asked for this
so Melanie at.
Can I answer all those questions
but I'm here just to explain why
we're moving that forward thank
you.
Thank you.
I have a quick question before
we we go to the.
The audience and anybody in the
audience is going to speak
who makes a.
The New Mexico association of
educational retirees is
comprised of both retired a and
empty nesters and retirees any a
teachers or just any a teachers.
Mr chair I believe it's all
educators part of the ERP.
Here are the the association New
Mexico association of
education retirees which has
ruled by law one position on the
on the board.
Miss Mister chair I will defer
that to either well to right Mr
chair we
I I am a member of that
organization as a retired higher
education faculty so
yes all education.
Okay so it's all education.
Well I'm I taught at the
university so I am eligible as
to be a member and I am.
So HSD members are eligible.
As retirees to during that as
well.
I have to leave that the AFT and
NEA.
I'm talking about the university
yeah your can association of
unity of.
This is really can you members
join that organization when they
retire.
So Mister chair members of the
committee
they can pay to join another
association when they retire but
they also state members of A. F.
T. for no additional cost.
So we actually are the one to
represent the A. F. T. retirees
and in New Mexico that coalition
does not represent a of teen New
Mexico retirees but people have
a right right they have a right
to join another association if
they so choose but they do not
represent the official stance of
AFT New Mexico retirees that
comes through AFP New Mexico.
So let us know we have somebody
signed up to speak in opposition
to this bill and that is the.
At in the E. R. B. misgendered
one welcome to school.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the way first of all
I want to correct that I am in
opposition to the bill when I
was allowed to sign up to speak
if I had to choose between
support and oppose.
My board has visited this issue
at its last board meeting on the
nineteenth and the board voted
to take no position on this bill
while they requested a study be
done to look at that membership
of that year the board this is
something that is done can be
done on a fairly regular basis
by working with a fiduciary
expert a governance expert to
see what would be the ideal
membership for that year be
bored taking into account its
different constituencies and
responsibilities rather than to
just arbitrarily and two other
new members the board is not
opposed to adding new members
but they thought to be
worthwhile to study to determine
what the ideal composition would
be.
Were they suggesting.
Who should do the study the
board would have that study
done.
They would hire somebody to do a
study I see okay share your.
No that's it.
Very good well in this code is
there anybody else in the
audience who wants to to join in
this discussion with the
government or against.
We'll go to the committee.
Members of the committee.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr Senator I was just
going to ask Miss light if you
wouldn't mind of question if
that's permissible of early.
Mr chairman.
Miss
I'm trying to find out so
currently on the board you have
any a New Mexico do they not
give you a broad enough view of
what educators want in the
state.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee thank you for that
question Senator we actually
represent different people and
so what they're members may ask
for
you know that doesn't have any
bearing and wide AFP New Mexico
members you know ask for or
you know believe in or anything
like that and so they have a
legal responsibility to
represent their members and we
have a legal responsibility to
represent ours and so my long
answer to your question is they
are not in the position to
represent our members.
Mr chairman miss lady
what are the differences in the
people between the two
educational organizations.
Mr chair members of the
committee I can't speak for
eight for any eight because I am
not and.
I'm not involved at the state
level or at a local level with
how they run I can only speak
for AFT New Mexico so I can't
really accurately answer that
question.
Mr Chairman.
Senator this leaves the reason
I'm wondering is if.
Educators are gonna get a double
portion of the discussion of the
table I mean you've got other
groups are only in their having
a voice once and if you have
both unions and I would think
that you guys can combine your
forces
twenty two and be able to speak
for
one voice but what that all all
yield but I I just couldn't
understand why we would need
both groups table there are
fighting for the workers at the
same time so what are you thank
you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator Ingle.
Senator.
That better.
Over there you are you wearing
hearing you loud and clear okay
I was just curious did the
investment pension Committee
endorsed this bill.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm not aware that they endorsed
this bill Mr chair.
Well I'm on the committee after
I don't remember it and I've
been on the committee for a
number of years and dealt with
these pension plans and I just I
really I'm sorry I have to
propose this until we get to get
the investment pension plan to
take a look at this and see
where to go on and do some
research on whether we need to
do this or not we have the best
pension programs in the United
States and it's because they're
wrong without too many of the
folks that are backed basically
getting money out of it on the
boards because those decisions
are tough to make and I up.
I'll have to oppose this bill Mr
chairman thank you and senator I
I certainly admire the teachers
of the state we've got the best
teacher retirement in the United
States right now nobody comes
close to us except Alaska you
really can't count them because
there's no people up there
they've that's all government
property with oil on but anyway
I I think we need to take a look
at this for we go this far thank
you.
Thank you senator.
Else on the committee.
Questions or comments.
What will the committee.
Retable a motion.
All second.
These are not debatable motion.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
To table Senate bill three oh
three Senator Gallegos yes.
Santo Domingo yes.
Yes.
Sir Senator Lopez no.
Thanks now.
So tell.
Senator.
Your vote.
Okay.
Senator Tallman your vote.
Motioned to table of who made by
you.
Sorry Senator.
Ingle.
Okay yes.
You can.
This back to you.
Thank you.
what I can't.
Everybody else is already Mr
chair you didn't want to vote.
Mr chair Senator.
In call center Schmidt noted now
Senator yes stateLee yes I'm
sorry yes Senator McKenna
Senator Sedillo Lopez centers
the fan exponent known.
Thank you for correcting I think
you saw with us.
No.
or to see additional no.
So.
Hey owner is there an
alternative motion.
I move into past Senator.
That's why Senator Sedillo this
is our second thank.
Second
seconded by Senator
and the clerk will secretary
will call the roll Senator.
Senator Gallegos.
No matter.
Ingle.
No.
Yes.
There is a Lopez yes.
There's.
Yes there are common.
Sir Tom.
Yes.
You know.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair.
Yes I do agree margin.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
so now we'll go to Senator
Campos bill Senate bill two
ninety five.
Disaster funding changes.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the of the committee
in essence the Senate bill two
ninety five has been endorsed by
legislative finance committee
and it revises the system for
the governor to allocate
emergency funding from the
general fund in three key ways
number one clarifying the
emergency or disaster situations
which such funding may be
allocated number two
redistricting excuse me
restricting the allowable
funding sources and amounts that
may be allotted and then number
three establishing that
requirements for reporting on
allocations and expenditures if
I may Mister chair members of
the committee also with me is
Miss Dawn Iglesias who is
analysis though with the
legislative finance committee to
further assist me in terms of
our some of the additional
description and then of course
will stand for a for questions
if I if I may a different this
time and Miss Iglesias please.
Thank you senator Miss Iglesias
welcome.
Sh thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it's a pleasure to
be here with you all today so
just as Senator Campos describes
the bill does repeat things and
and basically we're trying to
solve some issues that had come
up in terms of a different
interpretations of allowable
funding sources for emergency
funding that have been on used
in the past two years as well as
issues in terms of reporting
requirements in the notification
to the legislature in terms of
when disaster emergency funding
is using clarifying exactly what
that emergency funding I can be
used for so right now as extent
as it stands our existing
statute provides limited but
unspecified probation that the
governor may allocate and
certain emergency.
S. as currently there are no
limits on how much money can be
allocated in total and given
school year and in FY twenty
grant you know given the the
COVID nineteen pandemic those
expenditures I went to a high of
nearly sixty million that's the
highest appropriations hat or
excuse me allotments that we had
any given fiscal year for
disaster funding prior averages
have been around fifteen million
and given fiscal year.
there are
And with that funding
It generally comes from a
specific funding source the
appropriation contingency fund
but in the last two years some
of that funding has been
allocated by the executive from
the operating reserve and there
is a different interpretation on
whether or not the operating
reserve could potentially be
used for disaster funding in
which the Legislative Council
Service along with LFC maintains
the current statute does not
allow for the operating research
backs but we do use for disaster
funding so this bill would
actually clarify
in statute that the
appropriation contingency fund
ease the designated source of
funding for emergency allotments
and also allows for up to twenty
million to be a designated from
the operating reserve if there's
a circumstance in which the
appropriation contingency fund
is insufficient to cover
disasters needed in this in the
school year and I'm happy to go
into more detail on that there
are additional questions.
Also on the current statute
allows for allotments to be in
increments of seven hundred and
fifty thousand
for each eligible qualified
applicants typically the
executive for many years has
circumvented that seven hundred
fifty thousand limit I am
issuing multiple executive
orders for seven hundred fifty
thousand in order to meet the
total funding need so in
recognition that that individual
seven hundred fifty thousand
limits on is likely or has been
insufficient in order to meet
and get a disaster this bill
actually increases that limit
per executive order to up to
five billion
which we believe that that five
million dollar limit should be
sufficient for individual orders
in most cases however it does
not restrict the ability if
needed for the governor to issue
multiple consecutive orders get
that five million dollar limit
is insufficient for a particular
emergency
lastly the bill requires Senator
reporting requirements one when
the initial executive order is
given within five days the
legislature is to be notified on
the details of that emergency
funding that's being allotted at
the intended sources or where
that funding is to come from
copies of requests from the
agencies requested that funding
and any details on federal
matching dollars that are
intended and this is so that the
legislature can get a prompt
notification of when an
executive order has been issued
in those dollars have been a lot
and right now there is no system
in place for the legislature to
be notified when that bird
hunting is a lot of on this bill
also requires quarterly
reporting on those expenditures
so that
Within each quarter will now how
much of the allocated funds have
actually been allotted to that
emergency how much remains out
and how much remains outstanding
on the last thing that this bill
does is require any emergency
funds that have been allocated
to be reverted to its original
funding so first but then on the
following fiscal year out right
now any time that an executive
issues an executive order that
allocation remains outstanding
for an indefinite period of time
until it is closed out and
record it there are some
executive orders that had been
out standing with those funds on
available for you know five or
ten years at which point on
multiple legislative sessions
that come through ability for
the legislature to appropriate
those dollars is available
during that time period so it's
the belief of the legislative
finance committee that after
approximately two years up to
two years if that funding that
emergency funding that had been
allocated if they had not been
you is an issue revert funding
source be available for other
emergencies as needed and if
something pops up in those in
that subsequent time period to
gives the opportunity to express
that through the normal
appropriations process with that
I will stand for any questions
that the committee may have but
I also want to introduce we have
available on the call as well
are LFC analyst Alan raven who
works very has worked very
closely on this issue and can
also help answer questions as
the.
Thank you.
Did you want to say anything
initially mistreatment.
Thank you Mr chair I think that
Miss Iglesias explained the bill
very well.
Senator Campos anything else
thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the
committee in essence as we work
through the intro the intent is
to to provide accountability and
that to be able to move this
forward in
it in a better fashion than what
we've dealt with some of these
emergencies in the past as Mr
glasses it indicated one of the
things that we've been across
have been some of these
emergencies and and in some
cases their main flash flooding
in McKinley county and other
counties seven hundred fifty
thousand was
the necessary but ten years
later it still has not been been
fully spent and that
particular emergency has
continued to be left open what
this does is it ensures that is
going to be closure of the
particular case and full
accountability as we move
forward and then what it also
does is it listen amount from
seven hundred fifty thousand
as we move forward up to a
larger amount and again the
reason for that given the nature
of a lot of our disasters of
their they're expensive and
they're costing a lot more than
the initial seven hundred fifty.
That's basically it Mr chairman
and were available for questions
one side note the staff for LFC
are not here to go ahead and the
proponents or opponents to the
legislation just to go ahead and
find us with the information in
order make a good decision thank
you very much Mr chair members
of the committee.
Thank you Senator Campos
is there anybody else in the
audience who wants to speak to
this bill.
For again stirred.
You will go to the committee and
we'll start with Senator
Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos for bringing this
forward
is mostly.
Reporting.
Bill from the executive or is
this a transfer of money for.
Of.
Transferring or like a.
Authorizing a higher amount for
regencies I'm a little confused
so so Mister chair if I may it's
a reporting mechanism for
accountability purposes and what
it does is it raises the amount
from the seven hundred fifty
thousand to the five million of
per emergency.
Mr chair Senator if I may yes.
I just wanted to also add that
right now there there is no
limitation on how much the
executive can issue in terms of
the total amount issued for an
emergency and this bill does not
change that so what this does is
up the amount that can be issued
in a single executive order but
right now if the governor needs
access to two and a half billion
dollars like for example what
was needed to cover for us out
million dollars for winter
storms that were experienced
that this past year the governor
issued multiple executive orders
in order to be at two million
what this would allow is to be
able to issue one executive
order for the full two million
rather than having to issue
multiple ones that believe this
increases accountability and
transparency so that we don't
have to sift through multiple
executive orders trying to
understand exactly how much to
spend on a single emergency but
it does not increase or reduce
how much in total the executive
can spend on a single executive
order.
Yeah.
Go ahead chair Senator Campos
and and miss Iglesias so the
reporting requirement that is
ninety days.
Mr chair Senator Stefanics the
reporting requirements that
within five days of issuing the
executive order the executive is
required to notify the council
service any LFC that that'll
allocation has been made for
that emergency and then every
ninety days or every quarter
there then required to follow up
with the council service and LFC
in terms of what has been spent
what's been allocated how much
is outstanding.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Campos for bringing
this.
Use.
And I just wanted to follow up
on that Miss Iglesias.
You said there is no limit but
in effect there is a the forty
million dollar limit right then
they can the state depletes for
whatever reason the first twenty
million you can transfer in
another twenty million as long
as well I guess is twenty
million is the limit because he
can be more than twenty million
in any one fiscal year.
I'm Mr chair
Just to clarify that so what
this does by establishing the
appropriation contingency fund
as the first source of funding
there is no limit whatsoever in
a given year what can be spent
from the appropriation
contingency fund except for the
balance of that fund and house
bill two as it currently stands
coming out HSC is appropriating
fifty million dollars into the
appropriation contingency fund
in order to restore that balance
so if that passes as it stands
now that would be fifteen
million dollars available in the
appropriation to HSD fund for
future emergencies are for the
next fiscal year if for some
reason between now and the next
legislative session but fifty
back fifty million is
insufficient to deal with all of
the emergency center needed in
that year then with board of
finance approval the governor
can get an additional twenty
million from the operating rates
And and then that balances carry
forward.
Twenty million or is restored to
fifty million at the end of the
year.
Mr chair so it will be up to
twenty million from the
operating reserve every single
year it will be the
responsibility of the
Legislature to revisit the
balance of the appropriation
contingency fund every year when
it's doing house bill two to
make sure that the appropriation
contingency fund has the amount
of funding that the legislature
wants to have available that
fund for emergencies once the
twenty million each fiscal year.
No no we've senator and and Miss
Iglesias we've had a fund and we
have the same provision didn't
we that federal money.
Right comes to the state to deal
with the crisis.
Emergency would go into the fund
to replenish it Senator
provision previously is that
right.
Mr chair and think I'm maybe a
little confused I just want to
clarify are you talking about
like the the federal cares funds
that was helping your clothes
just disorders like the latest
report citing in McKinley county
for example is the federal
government allocated we
responded immediately or regency
response from but it's in
federal government sends money
we we use that to restore the
fund.
That's where this says it would
work and and I think that's the
way it's been done in the past.
So what I was getting at is when
we ever have reached a stage
where we we do we depleted the
fund.
Prison federal money usually
comes in and where we have we
actually depleted.
Yes Mr chair and that's actually
why part of the reason we're
bringing this bill forward so in
both fiscal year twenty nineteen
and in fiscal year twenty twenty
it was an oversight in terms of
what was the remaining balance
of that appropriation
contingency fund and for the
first time and what we can tell
for the first time ever in our
data history the the
appropriation contingency fund
didn't have enough money in it
to respond to disasters
typically that frontier has
always been replenished each
year to make sure that it had
sufficient funding in FY
nineteen that was not done any
executive did not have a source
of funding because the
appropriation contingency fund
had no money in it they didn't
have the funding to draw from
for disasters so thank you for
from the operating reserve and
they use and interpretation of
how the operating reserve works
in order to do that so the the
current emergency statute says
that any surplus on appropriated
money in the general fund can be
used for emergencies however
the operating dollars are not
surplus on appropriated monies
that the operating reserve is a
very specific funding that has
very specific requirements and
how that funds can be spent and
we do not interpret that you
know we're in the operating
reserve does it say it can be
spent for disasters we are not
trying to retroactively do
anything about the fact that the
operating has been reserve has
been used in the past however
moving forward we do want to
make very clear that the
appropriation contingency fund
is the first designated
successor funding for
emergencies and we we are
providing now a very clear
method for the operating reserve
to be use up to twenty million
dollars in the event that the
appropriation contingency fund
does not have sufficient funding
so actually trying to which.
Press the issue that just came
up in the past years when the
ACF didn't happen.
A large enough balance to cover
disaster.
Thank you one last question and
and and and you ARE alluded to
the leave the chair's Act and
the pandemic.
That would make the the
definition of this the use of
this new fund would entail.
I'm so so Mister chairman
understanding years asking you
what is the pandemic.
And it actually did Mr chair so
pop thirty five million in
fiscal year twenty was
allocated from the operating
reserve because there was no
money in the appropriation
contingency fund at thirty five
million was allocated in FY
twenty in order to deal with the
pandemic however after we
received the federal cares
dollars in order to respond to
that the executive did not
replenish the operating reserve
for the thirty five million
dollars that it spent I'm so
another thing that this bill
does is there's a provision in
the bill that makes very clear
that says yes federal dollars
are receipts are received to
remediate the same disaster from
which these two funds have been
utilized then some of those
federal dollars shall be used to
reimburse that I think.
Thank you Liz it sounds like
interim committees of
legislation thank you senator
countless for.
Or taking taking this up and is
there any other questions or
discussions on the committee.
Was senator Davis.
Mr chairman and senator Campos
and miss let's just just a few
questions I understand your job
put up twenty million are you
talked earlier suggestions about
two million for the storms why
would you go that far that fast.
Twenty million.
Mr chair Senator guy a ghosts so
the the twenty million which is
the amount that can be drawn
from the operating reserve has
to do with total amounts that
can be allocated in a given
fiscal year not necessarily for
a particular singular executive
order or disaster so you might
have two million for winter
storms six million for fires
thirty five million for comment
given that you can have multiple
disasters occur within a fiscal
year so this says you can use up
to the the executive can use
whatever is in the appropriation
contingency fund which we will
designate each year in our
appropriation process the amount
that we think it's sufficient to
be in that fund
and then if for some reason
there are disasters large enough
in a given fiscal year that
Allen's of the the ACS is
insufficient to deal with those
disasters in the executive has
an expat Val if you will to take
up to another twenty million
dollars from the operating
reserve but it is not
necessarily for a specific
disaster say going from two
million to twenty million that's
dealing with total amounts that
can be allocated in a single
fiscal year.
Mr chairman Sir composition Mr
let's just so if we had a mild
winter we had very few fires you
could potentially have a large
user in this fund if the
governor whoever the governor's
time did not have to use that is
that correct.
Mr chair Senator datas that is
absolutely correct so if we have
the million dollars in the
appropriation contingency fund
and in a single year the
executive only needs ten million
and ten million as all that gets
allocated they're still forty
million dollars in the A. C. F.
and B. twenty million
available in the operating
reserve would have never been
touched.
Mr chair Senator Campos and
missing glasses then my next
question is.
the allocation to this account.
From house bill two are there
certain areas so we're taking
this from public safety
transportation how are we coming
up with this amount to started
up.
Absolutely Mr chair Senator guy
a goes this is actually a
transfer between reserve
accounts we are taking monies
from the operating reserve that
are currently in there and
putting it into the A. C. F. so
it is simply a transfer in
between reserve accounts and
does not affect normal budgeting
for things like transportation
or public safety at all.
Thank you Mr Senator Campos
missing let's just but you'd
made a statement that the
legislature would have to
evaluate thank you to every year
to be able to give to the
appropriate amount for that ACS
cap that not right yes Mr chair
Senator dago so say for example
when we come back to the
legislative session next fiscal
year let's say there's there's
fifty million in the account
this year but we just put in
there and current apps twenty
million is spent in the next
fiscal year for disasters so
when we come back to the next
legislative session they'll be
thirty million dollars that left
in the C. at it will be up to
the legislature to decide if a
thirty million dollar balance is
sufficient and nothing needs to
be done or up to the legislature
to decide if additional monies
need to be re deposited into
that fund but it will be a
choice the legislature makes
each year.
Okay thank you for that Mr
missing lessons on try to wrap
this up so in understanding the
second did not replenished the
fund do we know of what those
allocations went to.
Whether or not but back in fund
I and I understand you're
working in this bill corrects
that but I would have thought we
do get the federal cares Act
money I thought that was the
intent.
Wondering if there's any of
clarity to where that money went
and why it will stop
Representative just to to
discretion of the executive.
I'm Mr chair Senator guidance
then answer that as best I can
so in terms of what was
appropriated out from the excuse
me what was allocated out from
the operating reserve for
comment there was monies that
went to the Department of Health
monies that went to various
state agencies to respond this
disaster
we is the LFC believe that it
was entirely allowable and
permissible under the cares Act
for the that money to be repaid
when asked into the operating
reserve and to be honest we
fully expected that to happen
and we're rather surprised at
the end of the fiscal year with
that did not happen
there were certain allocations
of the cares money that was
appropriated by the legislature
but other attempts to
appropriate some of the other
funds received by carers was
actually vetoed in the June
twenty twenty special session
those monies went directly to
the agency so I cannot answer
the question in terms of why the
executive chose not to replenish
those funds we expect that that
could have been happened could
have happened would have been
allowable under the cares Act
and we're actually surprised to
see that that did not happen.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
missing less yes this will be my
last question so in both
scenarios the governor not
replenishing and your bill is
there a trackable mechanism that
for the allocations of the
public can see or is it all done
blindly that thank they they
will not be able to understand
what the money is going to.
I'm Mr chair Senator Gallegos
not to be facetious but the
answer is kind of both in the
way that I mean that is.
All executive orders and
allotments are public they are
posted on the executive websites
every time they make an
executive order it is posted and
how much is a lot but this is
part of the issue that we have
with transparency is that if
there are multiple executive
orders issued a fiscal year some
of them go to the exact same
disaster you have to sort
through every single executive
order determine what it was for
and those accounts together to
try and figure out how much you
spend on a single disaster and I
see our analyst Ellen right and
smiling now because she actually
was passed with very fast over
this interim up we'll be down
every single PDF executive order
and digging through and trying
to create a spreadsheet on what
exactly those went to so it is
it is no easy feat and so in
that way we don't believe that
it is transparent there's no
simple way to see how much is
been allocated how much has been
spent and then what the
remaining balance or outstanding
amount of those funds are which
is I believe that this reporting
requirement is so important.
So Mister chair and Senator
Campos and miss less as so what
I'm understanding if your bill
passes get signed by the
governor then everything she
does we'll be transparent for
the people of state New Mexico
is that correct Mr chair on that
issue correct.
Okay well that answers all my
questions Mr chairman Mr
chairman I yield.
Thank you senator I
responsibility committee.
Senator McKenna.
Chairman I move I do pass
please.
Sect motion will introduce dress
from Senator McKenna seconded by
Senator Stefanics any other
discussion.
Senator Ingle did you have a
question I I'm sorry I
didn't notice
your can you hear me yes are you
sure so if you Senator Campos
getting is normal commission off
some of these funds I'm teasing
you.
And I have a great relationship.
Yes the secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill two nine five
Senator Gallegos.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote
learning goal yes.
Thermacare.
Yes.
Well.
Yes.
So that makes yes.
Toman yes.
There are too you know yes NO
explained my vote to Senator
so I gave a stress claim has.
Mr chair committee I appreciate
it I have a lot of problems with
different questions state
amounts the the how fast they
went up the department to gets
me is the transparency I know
the we need that because of
communities our constituents had
no clue what we were doing as
far as in the legislature was
part of it but the executive in
the spending the amounts during
the pandemic of virtually was
done in the dark we just really
hard to follow not that it was
totally her fault that it
displays a ground rule on that
transparency thanks for the work
so with that are you thank you.
Thank you senator goes and then
my comments were similar the.
I really do think this is a very
good.
moved to may and
I think we have enough time to
get all the way through this
year is it plugs up some glaring
weaknesses that have been
demonstrated in our current
system.
It's gonna be very interesting
is yes all the way through to
make sure that it gets signed.
The real ale trail
In.
Collaboration between branches
of government to get signed so
thank you Senator Campos thank
you miss Iglesias Mr chairman
and and we'll go now to the
final bill on our agenda today
Senate bill three oh four
senator McCain is voting
district geographic data.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you chairman RTZ Pino and
members of the committee today I
present SP three oh four voting
districts geographic data to
you.
Rationale for the state
legislation is to address what
officials voted and
organizations such as the league
of women voters have expressed
and that is frustration because.
The difficulty accessing New
Mexico district map data or
geographic information system
data easily fast and with no
cost.
If we have such mapping data it
provide uniformity across
counties and in districts are
how they're all set up.
The lack of this GIS data to New
Mexico voters has meant ram for
example it's hard to for motors
to find out what districts
theirM and impossible for them
to visualize who else is in
their district.
It's also hard for legislators
to know exactly where their
districts extend.
It's difficult for an
organization such as the legal
women voters to develop useful
web applications like vote for
one one that depend on voting
districts.
Currently San Juan County has
the information as Avid
acceptable.
Only one of.
Levy is County to work with to
get G. I. S. data right now.
Other counties however will
respond with okay we can't vouch
for its accuracy it's not all in
one place.
Additionally when the league of
women voters inquired for the
GIS data.
Asked to pay in a range of ten
dollars and for the data to be
put on just.
And yet another County.
Wanted a hundred and fifty
dollars for an electronic file.
The secretary of state supports
this bill.
She believes her office can
meet.
The requested date moreover her
office has a federal grant.
To hire a contractor to carry
out the project.
This is included in the FIR.
I'm also chairman and members.
When we first went in front of
the rules committee.
The press Senator of friendly
amendments that we accepted.
And if there's any question
about them I can explain them to
you.
I do have to subject matter
experts with us today they are
Mr Khanna pack she's an open
data expert and a volunteer with
the league of women voters and
we also have miss Carrie Rosco
S. she's have of secretary of
state Maggie to OSAP all Oliver
pardon me.
Mr chairman and committee
members I would like to invite
the subject matter experts to
hope to offer opening statements
about the legislation would that
be okay.
Yes our senators so let's go to.
Residents of the secretary of
state's office and then we'll go
to miss.
We we change you Jerry for some
reason.
That a little bit better yes it
is.
Right okay thank you thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Kerry
fresco as I'm the director of
legislative and executive
affairs for not loud enough can
you raise the volume yeah yeah
let's see.
Okay and I'm gonna talk loud to
hopefully.
I think my zoom gets a little
bit tired by the end of the day
may be.
I would we want to thank the
what legal women voters and
Senator the economic for
bringing this legislation as
senator mechanic's planes
currently there is no
centralized clearing house for
this voter districting data in
New Mexico we think it makes a
lot of sense to create a
clearing house and it makes
sense that it would be
maintained and contained at the
secretary of state's office.
We are currently initiating a
project to begin collecting and
creating these data files using
some federal grant money once
this project is complete members
of the state local governments
campaigns and just the general
public advocate advocacy groups
will all have access to an
interactive and intuitive tool
to view the mapping data for the
various voter voting districts
within the state.
I'm the at G. I. S. data files
as supported by this legislation
will actually make the provided
a graphical view as as compared
to what we currently maintain
witcher's list files non
graphical files of the voting
data so we think this graphical
data will make for more
effective decisions in the
election round and just in
general make that the data more
meaningful and more accessible
to those interested parties and
I'll I'll hang around for the
duration of the bill if there's
any questions or anything
related to any of these types of
procedures and our project that
we plan to undertake within our
office thank you very much for
the opportunity.
Thank you mistress there we go
to Atlanta.
For thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
This bill came out of the league
of women voters a nonpartisan
voter guide as Senator McKenna
said.
Last year for the first time we
made an online voter guide
covering the entire state of New
Mexico and the way it worked was
that each voter would enter and
addressed in the state would
show customize ballot for that
location and to do that we
needed to find all the voting
districts for every address in
New Mexico and that turned out
to be way harder than we
expected.
So this bill would fix that it
would and as mistrust because
said it would make the data
available.
In a geographic form so it's
possible to draw maps and show
voters exactly where they're
districts extend it's possible
to give a customized ballot like
we wanted to do on the voter
guide.
And it would ensure that it's
always available to the public
without charge so any voter any
organization like the league of
women voters could provide this
data could provide interactive
maps and I believe the secretary
of state is planning to do that
also.
And and voters could download
the data and make their own maps
if they wanted.
So we're looking forward to
working with the secretary of
state's office they're terrific
and I'm happy to answer any
questions you have thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anyone in the audience
who wants to speak on this is
anyone in the audience to tell
you the truth.
No there isn't anybody in the
audience so we'll go to the
committee.
Any questions from members of
the committee.
Mr chair.
I'd like to inquire about the
cost and the coverage of the
expenses.
Please.
Senator are you are you are
thank.
Yes thank you chairman and thank
you senator stuff phonics.
It's my understanding senator
and chairman that the agency
estimates the cost is going to
be twenty to thirty to sixty
thousand and it's my
understanding and this press
guests can.
And I confirm for us that the
secretary of state's office has
a federal grant that will Hey
for this project.
Mistress.
Thank thank you Mr chair that is
correct we do have confirmation
that an existing federal grant
will cover the costs of of this
project we do know that a lot of
the GIS data
that this bill speaks of does
exist out in local jurisdictions
at the county level and so the
contract would actually help
provide the resources to just
gather all of that data up and
put it in a single clearing
house and then we'll be able to
identify what data maybe does
not exist and that contract will
help to create that data so that
we have a uniform set of data of
all voting districts all in one
one place paid for by that the
federal grant.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator McKenna.
Thank you senator Senator guy
analyst United Russian.
Thank you Mr got ninety minutes
questions but I'm gonna reduces
char Sunday meeting all goes
wrong either but Mr chairman and
Center and mistrust because I
was just gonna pass I've had.
What you're doing I've never had
the problem looking at the maps
were Act my first year on the
wrong side of the street when I
started campaigning
they told me my hand some
opposition well then my
opposition one mansion so I
figured out I wasn't wrong tree
but Mr chairman and and Mr
Burciaga and etcetera.
Just got my order is in line at
understand what you're doing but
if we look at anything on the
voter rolls I think it is harder
than the mapping to go through
the voter rolls I sent out
letters every year and get huge
amounts that is there any way to
combine this thought as we clean
up our mapping to clean up our
voter rolls also.
Chairman and
Senator.
I'm going to deferred that
question if I may to R. one or
both of our subject matter
experts.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
and senator thank you for the
the question so I think what
this particular bill offers in
regard to the voter rolls is it
it's an important first step in
in what we would consider geo
coding or geo enabling the voter
rolls so rather than having it
simply the the voter
address and then it kind of a
linear mapping of their precinct
in districting information we
will be able to geo code or
place eight ten points on a map
of our voters and it will help
to better identify that we have
voters assigned to the correct
voter and districts you know in
which where they're voting so it
does it just makes the election
administrators work easier
because it brings like a visual
layer to the effort of
maintaining voters into their
correct districts so that they
get their correct ballots.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator and this press
because then in the geo coding
would that be the point of
correction for move in move out
says as constituents move in and
and out is that where the
clarity will come in as geo
coding.
Mr chair and senator
this bill does not address any
changes to how voter all
maintenance is done and I can I
can certainly go into the the
federal process that mandates
what happens to the voter rolls
and and how the process works
when when someone moves and the
effort it takes to get them to
update their their address on
the voter roll and what what it
takes to remove someone from the
voter roll there there is some
federal law that regulates that
and there are numerous
maintenance programs in place at
that that the secretary of
state's office and at the county
clerk's office to help with
maintenance related to to voter
addresses and I I'd be happy to
go into that with you at link I
love talking about what what
process and everything but it is
outside the scope of this
particular bill but I am happy
be happy to visit with you about
it at some point.
Thank you for that Mr Mr
Chairman.
Senator and Mr Burciaga I will
get busy with young lot offline
because I think there's a lot of
money she wondered because we're
getting letters back in the
capitol street the postage so my
last question Mr chair and
senator is in the bill and it's
see amended bill page two when
we get back to it
Thanks to a line to it's in
section eight of our S. R. C.
struck no later than January
first twenty two.
Twenty two is there a reason why
we didn't give a proposed date
to start.
I'm senator and chairman of C.
so in rules the.
Chairman did revert move the
date to no later than and so
your question is.
Why isn't there a date for the
work to commence is that
accurate.
Mr chair Senator yes because I
think we leave it open an open
ended it could start in two
years from now if the process
took longer than expected
there's no of forced timeline
and that was my concern.
Okay thank you very much Senator
chairman I'm.
Yes because you're more
knowledgeable about the federal
grant that the secretary of
state's office has do you have
an idea of when the work would
possibly commence.
Absolutely and Mister chair
members of the the committee
what we we are negotiating a
contract with the U. N. M.
geospatial group I'm actually
right right now in order to get
that work started and then just
just a point of clarification on
the bill
M. as amended in Senate rules if
you look down at the new amended
in section two it was it was a
step a preference of the chair
of the Senate rules that the
that date be moved out of the
language inside the bill so
there is an effective date still
they just moved out of the body
of the the.
And as I see that now thank you
Mr chairman Senator an expert
witness that solved my problem
because I've already done with
on page two it tried blue so
thank you know you.
Thank you senator and this issue
is that what you're gonna say to
you're gonna incident.
Yes okay very good all right
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Your muted Senator.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is a fantastic idea I was
wondering can this also because
it will also improve
transparency about how well the
legislature does with me
redistricting I think as well
because the lines will be very
clear and will be able to see
continue the contiguity unity of
interest a non dilution of
minority districts which are the
legal requirements for
redistricting so my question is
is can this be used as we enter
the redistricting
Process.
Thank you chairman and senator
Sabina Lopez I'm going to defer
to our subject matter experts
because that are redistricting
process is going to be delayed a
bit this year.
Mistress.
Absolutely Mr chair and and
senator I I think that's a great
question
and certainly at at a minimum I
think the benefit to
redistricting is is in a couple
of places so so we know right
redistricting is is going to
occur it's it's going to you
know occur out outside of our
office so then the map drawing
and and the legislative effort
to approve the the eventual maps
will happen outside of what
we're doing here with this bill
but what what where the benefit
comes in is once the
Once all the redistricting is is
finalized at the legislative
level all of those final mapping
shape files those data files
will come into our clearing
house and they'll be accessible
to anybody who's interested in
them and then the other benefit
is once the legislators get done
with that with the state level
redistricting there's a
provision in law that requires
the special districts at the
local level to begin there
redistricting process I think by
having a clearing house of our
political subdivisions available
at the secretary of state's
office and and what we really
see the practice project growing
into is is not only having all
of the years of the voting
districts but we'll have some of
the
years that senator Sedillo Lopez
referenced in regards to
geographical boundaries and some
of the other aspects of terrain
that is use for redistricting
while also have those years
available and I I really think
that it's going to be of value
add to the local districts once
they start redistricting to be
able to have a tool available
with all the data set needed in
order to be able to do the local
level special district
redistricting so I think that's
where we're gonna really see
this this tool shine.
Well well thank you senator and
thank you Mr is that that's a
very helpful I think this is
such a great bills.
Senator Sedillo Lopez will go to
Senator Tallman next.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
For bringing this forward.
So.
These maps
these maps occurring maybe.
Available to the public they are
available now.
Chairman and I'm.
Senator Tallman so some are
available but there's a huge
inconsistency I think San Juan
county is the only county that
they are readily available
other counties are charging
anywhere from.
Ten two hundred and fifty
dollars.
And other.
I'm are I'm sure where the data
is and and yet I think another
one even told legal women voters
they're not sure about the
accuracy.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your answer also the.
The analysis says is built as I
to provide public oversight.
On the redistrict process to
avoid gerrymandering houses set.
You can you can you can see
gerrymandering now why do you
need more information.
Chairman and senator Tom and I
would like to re for our that
technical question to miss
practice goes and our agency
pack thank you.
Okay I'll speak
Would.
This is the intent of the bill I
should mention I we wouldn't.
We didn't introduce a bill to
try to stop gerrymandering but
it would be useful tool for that
because as mistrust and said you
can take multiple years for
instance you could take a layer
showing
Yeah right racial or cultural
divisions geographically and you
could combine that with the
districts and take a look at how
the districts.
Work out you know how hello even
they were or how it and even and
you could also look for natural
boundaries like a mountain or
river or whatever that may or
may not divide people within the
same district so it does make in
Alice's is here.
Okay okay might make it.
I guess my make it easier even
though it's.
That certainly impossible to
determine gerrymandering.
With the information that we
currently have right now.
So.
Mr chair and the Senator and
now.
Miss pack.
It's a.
Did you understand the question.
I repeat it.
yes one thing I should mention
also is that mostly what people
are thinking about when you talk
about gerrymandering is
statewide districts for instance
the the representative and
Senate districts and those maps
are available so in that sense
this probably wouldn't help very
much this is more for the other
districts like the judicial
districts the county
representatives and school were
districts and things like that
and I'm not sure people are that
worried about gerrymandering for
those districts although would
make it easier to if if you were
worried about it you it would
make the analysis is here I did
did that help any Mr Senator
thank.
Yes and one final question Mr
chair.
And
Senator all those questions the
COVID this kind of cynical but.
So long as the the public so as
we don't have redistricting
commission.
And the.
Register conceptually being done
by the legislature.
So why are we so worried about.
The public having all this
information when they're not
involved.
And Senator Tallman.
I.
So I have some thoughts there
but
because I want us to have a
really accurate technical
response for you I do want to
defer to the staff and or
mistrust guess.
Okay thank you for that.
This.
Miss Mister chair and and
members of the committee and set
senator Clemente I I certainly
appreciate where where you're
going with your your questions
and and respected a great deal
I I would agree with miss pack
that
The the right redistricting
efforts are are definitely
outside of the scope of what
this this bill and under takes
however it it will make the map.
Files the data files that are a
result of any redistricting
effort however it ends up
you know being completed and and
whoever ends up involved the
eventuality is is if this bill
passes there is a requirement
that all of those data files
have a place to to live and and
exist and be maintained
and that would be a clearing
house at the secretary of
state's office for it so.
From that for that for that
since it at least starts putting
the data collectively into one
place which I think there's a
lot of value and it does then
you know what once there's a
clearing house of district to
data I I think there there is an
an off handed repercussion of
that of just bringing visibility
economic data is available than
visibility
is kind of a and natural flow
out from that so I think
eventually we we do end up with
more visibility into our voting
districts and potentially
redistricting you know at least
as an after effect.
Mr chair Senator in the.
There is.
Wrong with but this would enable
the public to
Critique.
What the legislature is doing.
Senator is the from our
discussion in the rules
committee essential tenure we
discuss is still in rules and
and tested out and and it really
is distinct from the
redistricting answer is is this
this is gone on regardless
because what this really is is
geared to as I remember and
please correct me this rescue so
I'm wrong is not so ensuring
districts were on a city map you
can readily find where thirty
four twelve element is but is
for those rural areas where.
The person lives you know.
Thirteen point seven miles east
of the rodeo many crosses the
state road to thirty two.
That's what this is really about
is it's it's weird when people
don't have a precise undress
intends down their location
usually but it's is it starts
getting kind of because you need
a map to be able to say you know
you're not really in that
precinct here in the in the next
reset because the Royals about
three line something like that.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
prolong this out I'm gonna
support this bill is just.
One a better understanding thank
you for that explanation.
Thank you senator dole in
senators readies.
Thank you Mr chair.
yeah I have enjoyed that the
debate here and I
you know Bernalillo county has
some of the state and that.
I just wanna make sure I have
this right this is the kind of
data that's required by the
there's an airplane that'll fly
over large areas every once a
year every other year is that is
that right is that how a lot of
the state is acquired.
Chairman and senator committee
I'm gonna defer that question to
Mr packed she's our open data
expert and I I see that she's
really excited about responding
to your question okay and I
don't need a lot of detail I
just wanna make sure I'm on the
right in the right ballpark.
As senator Mr chair no it
probably wouldn't be gathered by
our plan up it would probably be
gathered.
From a list of addresses
initially in in addition to.
What the gentleman said about
you know living four miles down.
Rural route five or whatever of
people who don't have normal
addresses
but you don't really need an
airplane for it because they're
already very good maps of the
area and most people know what
they where they live they can
even come up with you know you
you could take a place on the
map and come up with its core
net for it and that would tell
you where it would go in the GIS
datasets.
I see I see okay okay thank you
Mr chair yeah I mean I I've had
it you know Bernalillo county
has some of the state on certain
things and and you know it's
it's kind of fun to look at it
I'm just I think a you know a
listen to the bill I I think
respectfully going to propose a
bill today I just want to
briefly say why I think with.
with with our society I mean I
think we've we've over
complicated our election process
certainly I I a hundred percent
thousand percent agree with
Sierra about all the
gerrymandering stuff you know I
and at that but I think that you
know we we've really over
complicate it and I this is a no
fault of this legislation
but.
I.
You know I I mean I I like on
the support of a or support of
just doing election day holiday
you know if the federal on a
national holiday trying to
really simple file these things
we've had
there's a there is a gentleman
down and I think Sikora or treat
tier C. who who you know his
door was knocked on twenty days
in a row people kind of you know
just just getting kind of all in
into his business about about
voting in and I kind of wrap
this bill up up into that whole
concept and I think if we had a
simpler a just a simpler process
for voting without all the all
the other in all bells and
whistles we can add on to it and
we continue to revise our
election code seems like every
year and I just ask the question
why why we're doing this why we
need more and more data what we
need centralized data
you know I I think we need to
have a little more more privacy
where I I don't think it's
anybody's business you know
kinda looking up all these
things in these third parties
that come into our lections and
and and and it just seems to me
that the individual it is kind
of a almost harassed at this
point with all the data that's
available to these web very very
well funded third parties that
get into these election
databases from different states
and they use it to to go kind of
in my opinion kind of bother
people and I that's why I
respectfully isn't that you know
oppose this bill because I I
understand that I think some
some people would really like
this but but my district I just
don't think they will and that
my constituents wanted me to
come up here and and fight for
limited government and you know
simplify our election process
and I I get the argument about
how some of the state can be
used but I have that that
concern about how house how
these third parties are gonna
come and I potentially partisan
third parties either if they're
on the left or the right or
whoever they are and and how
they gonna can.
In you to use this to to just.
I don't know just get people
riled up and and do all their
you know go around with their I.
pads to everybody's houses all
the time and I'm just kind of
tired of that my constituents
are tired of it and I hope we
can simplify things instead of
just getting more and more data
and so I very much appreciate
what what you guys are doing and
and and I I I think the data
personally is is very
fascinating but I I kind of wrap
it up with this I just not sure
how the average New Mexican is
going to use this too much I
think we get in our political
bubble a lot think that you know
everyone is thinking about these
issues all the time and election
season and campaigning and and
that's what we all kind of think
about but the average New
Mexicans I just want to kind of
know who the who the candidates
are who's who they think is
going to be an honest person and
and do a good job has no
represent their values and so I
I just don't know if that does
that for the average New Mexico
and I think it's going to mainly
empower these big you know third
parties to to continue to wrap
things up so that's why I I just
respectfully would oppose the
bill that thank you very much.
Thank you senator trees and for
the second time Senator gave us.
Mr chairman and senator just a
real quick question I'd like to
go Senator schmidti said
Representative is but I I in in
talking about the G. I just had
risen using this already
consider under nine one one
address and I know to do the the
in rural areas Riley.
They actually have a person go
out there with the G. A. at G.
I. S. stick and they take a
reading at the entrance to the
house the driveway of the house
you know somewhere in the
vicinity so that way when a an
ambulance our department police
department has to respond into
rural New Mexico it gives and
location is not similar to what
this is doing Mr chair Senator.
Chairman and senator gray goes I
think this might be two
different databases but I'm not
going to lean on my speculation
I'd prefer to defer to this pack
or mistrust just about that.
Mr chairman and members thank
thank you for the question and
it sounds like there's there's
just a little bit of confusion
perhaps the regarding the scope
of this particular legislation
so this legislation provides the
the G. I. S. that the graphical
data financial in regards to a
voting district so it's the
Ballinderry later it's it's the
boundary of you know
congressional district one that
the boundary of a you know
special water conservation
district and when you have the
that the GIS type of file what
that allows a person to do is is
open and up in software that's
able to understand and recognize
those files and you're able to
see those years on each you know
what on top of each other
perhaps so that if you wanted to
go in and and provide your
address on a map sure you could
and then you can see the the
voting do that late that the
boundary layers that your
addresses with in but that the
scope of this legislation really
is just the files with those
boundaries being kept in a
central location and made freely
accessible to anybody who would
want to access them.
So Mister chairman Senator and
this press less than if I
understand this right so you're
looking at the boundaries not
the individual construction
average so then you would add on
if you later in the address and
that is somewhat usable because
like a state a lot of mail back
using the secretary states
constituent role but so it
you're talking about just the
outside boundary district forty
one whatever the precinct is not
the actual construction address
is that correct Mr chair and
senator.
Mr chair that that is correct it
is just that boundary layer and
and we do get questions at the
secretary of state's office
quite frequently during
candidate campaign season and
new new candidates wanting to
run in there downloading their a
petition signature pages in
October ahead of the primary and
right along with their petition
signatures they want to know who
and where their boundaries are
so that they can start targeting
their campaigns so again that's
that's one potential use at this
legislation does not
you know articulate or even
suspect it on any particular use
of the data but it certainly
would be valuable to I campaign
for that reason to figure out
where the downed trees of
district forty one are so that
you can target your voters in
your signatures and your support
accordingly.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
Senator all yield I really
dislike way the center stage
brought in the third party use
of this and that doesn't bring
up other considerations are
concerned but I thank you for
your time all you.
Senator Gallegos anybody else on
the committee was questions or
concerns.
What is more.
I will would you pass.
Thank you senator is there a
second.
Second from Senator McKenna
sponsor.
Any other debate centering on
any questions.
Thank you secretary will call
the roll.
Senate bill three oh four.
Senator Gallegos.
No matter.
There are angle.
Sermon.
Yes there Schmidt is.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tom on.
Yes.
Thirteen you know.
Yes.
Graduation so Senator you have a
new president and I think you go
to the floor next on June yes
thank you chairman thank you
committee members and thank you
to our subject matter experts.
And thank you thank you and
distressing Mr it also well I
would just say to the committee
we finish our agendas and I
think and we will meet on Sunday
afternoon at one thirty.
We have a meeting on Friday
first.
We only have one roll over and
that was a three professionals
the sponsors of.
Good one today we have a lot of
ground.
Hello good evening get some rest
and we'll see in the morning.
Thank you Mr chair.
When yes.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay.
