items come up and tell your
grandchildren you were part of
making this happen.
But we did by the general public
in Santa Fe and the other was
one of the students said well I
really like the way rain smells
on the desert.
Which is another one that is a
very unique but again we don't
have desert everywhere in the
state it's a little bit more
localized
In the earlier committees
somebody commented about the
dairies and the students.
The students very deftly Weston.
That the differences are
everywhere and not everybody
likes that smell everybody likes
the smell of Chile roasting
okay.
We are now the the web is
working everything is in place
and we are first bill will be
Senate bill one eighty eight
Senator souls.
Setting is built on a state
aroma.
In center I'll be a lot shorter
than the the first time around
we're waiting for the web to
come up but I've been working
with some fifth graders a modest
elementary school to make the
smell of Chile roasting the
official a roll out of the state
of New Mexico it came about from
a
in Richmond day that I spent
with them talking about New
Mexico is a teacher trying to
engage them about their stated
the various official pieces of
that and after we talked about
the official question of red or
green one of the students
commented about they love the
smell of Chile roasting and that
got me thinking about an idea
I'd had a while back about
aromas and Mexico will have an
opportunity to be the very first
date have an official aroma the
smell of Chile roasting in the
fall.
they were scheduled to be my
expert witnesses were not able
to because they had to get on
the bus at two thirty and
therefore I am presenting on
their behalf.
Okay let's go to the audience
and see if there's any support
in the audience for this measure
he said your wife.
You can go ahead and vote for
its or.
All those in favor signify by
raising your hand and let's get
ahead for you I think you've
you've you've done a great job
of route three this anybody want
to speak on this from among
those.
Nobody's so supported that
actually want to have their name
associated.
Anybody opposed.
Members of the committee
opportunity for a full
discussion of this issue Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator souls and.
Thank you to your students who
are on a bus somewhere right
okay so this is really exciting
and I really
Appreciate are participating in
this bill I am curious chairman
and senator and students
if you would entertain.
The idea of in the summer be.
amended for the the title of the
bill.
I'm not sure what you're asking
okay let me hold on.
because your last year years
sentences actually green Chile
roasting in the fall yeah I'm
sorry I just at the wrong us
that season okay so chairman and
senator and students I'm
wondering if you would entertain
amending the bill so it reads
the aroma of green Chile
roasting.
And to strike in the fall.
The.
Then we we we could do that or
we could add it to the title
either way.
The students were you able to
ask them and I would refer the
question to them I'm gonna
channel there is uncertain I
suspect they would agree that we
roasted green Chile year round
here when it's available and
limiting it to the fall of is
too narrow and so that would be
a very friendly amendment to the
strike from on line nineteen in
the fall and I don't think it
needs to be changed in the
title.
If you want to make that motion
yes I would like to make that
motion chairman that's on page
three.
Line nineteen.
That would be a friendly
amendment deleted delete in the
fall.
Got it.
We have a second for the
amendment any opposition to that
many discussion of the first of
all.
Accepted as a friendly amendment
any opposition will consider the
bills have been amended.
And anybody else in the
committee want to discuss the
bill Senator Maestas thank you I
I'm sorry I already had run off
with your next Senator Sedillo
Lopez thank you Mr chair and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I think it really is a a
topical issue and I'm glad that
there's been so so much interest
in it but I don't know I'm just
really having a tough time
because Pignon.
Burning.
Anywhere in the state is just
really really powerful so I just
want to know what you what you
think of I mean I and that makes
me a little bit concerned about
the bill.
I don't disagree Mr chair and
senator I don't disagree that's
another one of the smells when I
come up and I tend to smell it
more when we're up here in Santa
Fe I do occasionally my
fireplace in that in Los crucis
burn pin down but we were get
pecan wood down there most of
the time of.
I I agree and and similar to the
smell of chili it is promotions
are very close to our of sense
of smell and more so than almost
any of the other senses
I would not want that because
I'm not sure that the pain known
has quite the economic and
tourism impact that Chile does
we're chilly really is broader
in the the overall
marketing of New Mexico the
overall tourism The New Mexico
true branding that we have and
probably deeper into our
identity then the smell opinion
smoke would be okay well since
my colleague has amended the
bill to take out the fall then I
suppose we can't amended to say
chilly in the fall can you
winter but I I'm I'm not gonna
require.
I'm not gonna require that but
there is a concern that was
raised in the in the analysis of
the bill about the legislation
waiting the the state question
red or green swaying the answer
towards green.
How do you spot how do you
respond to that concern.
It again I would refer to my
experts but in most cases.
Green chili has in a Roman
because we roasted most times in
Leicester doing wet red chili we
don't roast red chili we dry it
and then process it differently
and so we doesn't have as much
of a role model and so what
we're talking about a Roma it
truly is green Chile that has
the aroma and so I think it
really does it interfere with
the red or green issue.
Well I will just say.
Red chili cooking with pork in a
month done so in the spring is
something we need to think
about.
But I will give it consideration
I really appreciate you bringing
forth this bill.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator souls and and for the
folks on the webcast they can't
see you I can attest you answer
that stress you you answer that
question with a straight face.
But it's need a Mister chairman
Senator sold to look at this
statute I've never looked at the
statue before but you know for
the folks at home it it it's one
section law it lists all of the
state stuff
And so as if this wind its way
through.
It says it on page one line
twenty four the chaparral bird.
Commonly called road runner is
the official bird you may want
to like to strike the word bird
and just say chaparral but it
but of and then and then just
some.
And then the the official tie up
Mr chair as you know the bolo
ties were not allowed on the
house floor for for debt decades
and decades and decades and so
the only way to allow a tie on
the house floor was to pass the
bolo ties adopted as the
official tie in so there was a
spirited debate between Roger
Mullin who wanted the bow tie in
and the late been Lujan who was.
Was going to the mattress is
trying to prevent so but but now
the will of ties the official
state tie and then also.
The the house passed back in the
day red or green is the official
question which was awesome Bill.
And then I got amended.
When it left the house and and
it and it added a an official
question which is red and green
or you know the official
official to answer question is
red and green efficient answer
is Christmas and and I did not
concur with that amendment Mr.
But I lost that one what up but
what I would ask Mister chairman
Senator is is that not now but
maybe if this winds its way
through is the aroma of roasted
green Chile sometimes when you
open that bag months later you
get you get a beautiful with but
but I think that I agree with
the gentleman Mr chairman that
that green chili above all other
aromas I think exceeds sees all
that so it I think it's worthy
it's worthy of a state of a
state distinction thank you Mr.
Any of the debate.
What is the will of the
committee.
Senator Tallman moves do pest.
And just as amended and those
Senator McKenna seconds it any
other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center my just
the.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes and explain my vote.
Senator Tallman yes center to
the piano yes and to explain her
vote.
So I thought really long and
hard about this.
And I remember when my mother
sent green chili when I was
living in Washington DC and we
lived in this one of those
restored homes that was turned
into apartments and the smell of
the green Chile has I was
roasting it wafted through the
whole building and everybody
came to our apartment to see
what was and that's what tilted
me toward.
Thank you
Mr chair budget maybe just a
final comment yes let me just
announce the vote then on a
straight party vote.
But I need to do I in the
affirmative zero in the negative
with four excused your bill
passes do you want to make a
final statement thank you
very much.
This is a fund bill but it's not
frivolous because is very much
is the marketing for New Mexico
the secretary we do of this
department the agricultural
department tells a story where
they take of them around to
grocery stores and other parts
of the country with the roaster
and roast Chiles and they were
outside Washington DC in
Arlington Virginia and a lady
came up with tears streaming
down her face she's from New
Mexico had been back in about
fifteen years she smelled the
Chile roasting and follow the
smell there because it reminded
her of home so it's very
important to us so thank you
committee thank you senator.
Please please just keep your did
demonstrations.
Of my practice in this committee
is to hold my bills for the very
end I'm sorry I do that because
when the committee is tired we
get things through real fast
and.
so we'll go next to
Senator committees will will
wait until they come Senator by
the it will take both your bills
now Mr Chairman.
Senate Bill.
to to is it to ten yes to ten a
yes if we can start with you can
yes thank you.
Returns of items I can't seem to
sit down with.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I will
tell you that we saw great
success with this bill simply
begin we ran out of time the
last time we attempted to do
this I do have an expert witness
that I will introduce in a
little bit he is a brigadier
general
Jamison had at a and I'll just
tell you a little bit about it
right now reader General Jamison
had at as a native New Mexican
and he grew up in in New Mexico
just down the road and is a
graduate of Pojoaque valley high
school he has thirty four years
of service to our great state
and nation he enlisted as a
private first class in nineteen
eighty nine as a member of the
five hundred fifteenth
maintenance battalion in Santa
Fe and went to receive his
Commission through the officer
candidate school class of thirty
three dash ninety one he's
currently assigned as deputy
adjutant general the New Mexico
National Guard general operator
gentle headed a is a graduate of
the continuous improvement.
Continuous process improvement
black belt training programs
Joint Task Force commanders
course and the dual course
commander course that dual
status commander course he holds
a bachelor's of the university
studies with an emphasis in
education from the university of
New Mexico and became a licensed
teacher for the state of New
Mexico teaching at the
elementary and middle school
levels he also holds a masters
of Strategic Studies from the
United States Army War College I
could probably go on for about
another half hour there is this
this is a very very
distinguished individual here in
New Mexico and also the skill
set that he brings is just
phenomenal to the National Guard
so essentially what said Senate
Bill tenement asked the general
to say just a few more comments
from a little bit the bill
recognizes the contribution of
National Guard members who
respond to state emergencies
such as fires that we recently
dealt with here in northern New
Mexico as you as we all know
floods that can pop up it at
different times based on what's
going on and in in New Mexico
and most recently in response to
the COVID nineteen pandemic
pandemic pandemic epidemic
alongside first responders such
as police and firefighters the
bill will create parity for
National Guard members as first
responders which I know is all
very important all of us and it
and should they be killed while
serving in the state active duty
status by paying a death benefit
of five hundred thousand dollars
to the surviving spouse we don't
do that today Mr chairman
members of the committee a child
or the parent of a member of the
National Guard or state defense
force who's killed while serving
on state active duty the bill
establish establishes the New
Mexico National Guard death
benefit with a fund of two
million dollars it is said it is
not recurring we have to come
every year and ensure that that
two million dollars was
reestablished in re up every
year
that's is that legislation is
right now I just to make sure
that it's fully funded whenever
these these would occur we
haven't had in in recent years
anyone that would require this
or would have this benefit paid
to them but I it but we do want
to make sure that we're prepared
for that whenever that would
happen we have had you know the
these fires in northern New
Mexico we've had the pandemic
we've had a full.
Adding in various areas it's
just a matter of time before
we're gonna have to enforce the
deal with something like this I
am an ask the brigadier general
Saif you comments and we keep
two three six six.
Thank you that in the Mr chair
and committee members thank you
for the opportunity to address
you today
Senator Padilla most welcome the
stated.
We're just trying to make a of a
bill here to have parity with
other first responders and as
you know as we have served on
several the incidences is
documented for the last three
years and understood active duty
the only benefits that are
afforded to our service members
should date of errors on in line
would be R. four hundred
thousand SQ ally our servicemen
services group life insurance
currently in March it refers to
the increases to five hundred
thousand hence the the ask for
the five hundred thousand in the
state of.
Bring parity with the of course
I I.
As the.
The we.
Stated
we we do everything we can to
mitigate the risk for our
service members but it's
inevitable that we do much many
dangerous things in and there's
risk in all that we do and we
just a.
Because it really.
So they are.
Thank you Mr chairman we're.
Where we like to go now so let's
go to the audience you don't
have any amendments right so
we'll switch to the audience is
there anyone here who is in
support of this bill who wants
to Mr chairman my co sponsor
senator Carol pope is here with
this is okay I invited him to
join this we did attempt at this
in nineteen but I thought let's
bring in some good experience to
to and and do you have anything
you want to add to what the
general and and the the sponsor
of said Senator first time Mr
chair okay great let's go to the
audience anybody here in support
let's see a show of hands.
So we have a couple in support
three three and support anybody
in opposition.
Seeing none members of the
committee.
Senator tell me a question.
Okay good so thank you thank you
Mr chair thank yous.
Senators for bringing this
forward so.
If the the city that you want to
bring it into parity with.
Firefighters are at million a
year on us.
For a half a million that's not
parity.
I thank you Mr chairman and vice
chairman toman so that there
would be five hundred thousand
coming from this fund and it
would be five hundred thousand
coming from R. S. July our
service group life insurance
from the federal side it it is
already paid so that would make
the balance so that make the.
Budget one million dollars it's
not that they don't get anything
they just get that one.
Of great interest payments this
just yes Mr chair Senator thank
you Mr chair one more question
sure.
So.
That's too Mr chair Senator
that's two million dollars.
We we current reoccurring.
No.
This is actually apologize the
final version that we did actual
file fund actually file is
referring.
For page I'm sorry page three
This is the starting on line one
really if you read that entire
paragraph with the most
important part is is a.
And subsequent fiscal years and
I do also want to say which I
apologize distributed so this is
a governor bill also so you'll
see the designation in the
bottom of the of the language Mr
chair Senator so if you get more
than four claims you won't have
enough money.
Four times.
Five hundred two million Mr
chairman Mr vice chairman that
that is feasible I will say that
we have not had this happened
in.
Has it ever happened.
I I don't recall that we've had
at a distance certainly the last
ten years there's not had a
death of state active duty so Mr
chair Senator this year that
worried about it so how is it is
non reverting so the fund would
grow we would then as a
legislature or future
legislatures would determine the
funds from two large there's no
need for that amount there would
be changes made like we change
thing although it does say.
That any unexpended and
unencumbered balance remaining
at the end of fiscal year shall
not revert so this is going to
go back to two million a year
and for go to zero when you put
in two million readers.
That's all I have Mister
chairman thanks again for.
Presenting this bill thank you
Senator McKenna then Senator
Maestas.
I thank you chairman thank you
senators pope and the
and is it Bridget your general
that at a
this is
this is a very good bill has a
lot of honor behind it
a question that I have which is
the same question that I had for
the woman who visited me to tell
me about this bill is.
And I.
My my brain have the word for it
now it's elected scapes me buddy
chairman Senators Bridger
General what is the word when we
want to make it a retro isn't
retroactive.
What is how can we explore make
make the retroactivity for the
loss that we that New Mexico had
this past year we didn't miss.
So Mr chair innocence Senator
McKenna the loss that we had.
The counties a helicopter going
down that individual was in is
firefighter capacity was not on
state active duty although he
was a member of our Air National
Guard.
Okay so chairman senators and
Bridger General so because of
his working in that capacity we
couldn't possibly entertain
making it retroactive so that
his family could possibly get
this benefit.
Mr chair Senator mechanic
because I believe he would have
to be compensated in his
capacity as a firefighter at the
time he was not in the capacity
is under our state active duty
and so Mister chairman and and
Senator that he the generals of
the greater generals actually
right that would open up a whole
other section of law that we
would have to
re right and it would I I'm I'm
not saying that it's you know I
I support and I appreciate that
you're find of trying to find a
way to to to write that but
occurred and that's instance but
it was handled properly based on
the capacity that the
individuals at that moment.
Okay and he did the family did
get it was a full firefighters
benefit we to the firefighters
benefiting this up to.
The.
our chairman Senators Pritchard
a general one more follow up
question so the the loss that
we're talking about he'd his
family did get the one million
okay.
So he received from the military
side from the of the four
hundred thousand life insurance
from.
Okay four thousand okay I would
be received from the
firefighters the current budget
what he received there also okay
all right again I you know I I
the scratch that Mr Chairman is
one of the very very since on
this I don't have the exact
facts on with that family
received but I can certainly try
to gather those for you yeah I
just because I am expressing
because I'm concerned and I just
think is very timely and I'm
just thinking.
So concerned about our recent
loss.
So thank you chairman thank you
senators thank you senator
Senator might just help you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center for the S. R. pope
General want to thank the the
leadership but that your
department
you know for the work that that
they do and talking about this
bill the because it did there
there it is deserving of clarity
with regards to police and fire
in those circumstances but what
is and it says that
That the adjutant general shall
determine.
Whether a person has been killed
while on state active duty so
just just kind of educators on
the reserves of someone someone
signs up with their commitment
what's there.
But you know what is there job
duties with are so that can and
Mr chair Senator minus the.
we currently have a of that for
any death and any status of of
duty we actually do a line of
duty investigation of so as a
service members are are brought
on duty on on our orders either
state active duty or federal
orders seem to be included.
They're injured or killed in the
line of duty a line of duty
manifestation is is an automatic
thing that is done and it's
investigated
for all aspects of the the
incident and at that time to
recommendations made to the as
it in general to to determine if
that person was actually in the
line of duty when they were they
were they were killed or
injured.
So that's a common practice
within the the the the military
thank you Mr chairman thank you
general so regardless of this
there is a determination as to
whether someone was killed
during active duty yes while on
active duty Sir.
And then what is that active
duty just briefly to for example
if someone signed up to be in
the the National Guard.
To the center for two years four
years ten years and then what
what does that entail.
Mr chair Senator my sister.
When when we initially do in
less then you can be for as
little as one year try when
you're all the way up through
eight years to being covered and
they signed up to be a member of
the of the New Mexico National
Guard to uphold the constitution
of the United States as well as
the state of New Mexico and
serve the governor and the
citizens of New Mexico and
president the United States but
but in this case we're just
talking about those instances
when the unit is been mobilized
for state duty like in times of
a flood fire fire not when
they're offered basic training
or off or even on their weekend
duty I don't think this would
cover that that is correct Mr
chair so the for for
clarification.
When we enter and state
activities under the executive
order of of the governor they
know exactly what status the
rand and they're not in the
federal census and they're paid
by the state of New Mexico to
get into that duty.
So like for example for the
fires we brought in we mobilized
a certain individuals that have
skill sets that we require for
the response to the firefighting
activities in law enforcement
support we brought those
individuals and they knew
exactly the scope of time that
they would be assisting the
first responders to the state of
New Mexico thank you and and I
want to I'm just curious so it's
not so I don't take more the
committee's time but I don't
know but if someone has a
commitment to to report one week
out of every six weeks or
whatever that during that week
would they be on active duty.
If it is long as they're in a
duty status yes there there
there there pay that that state
active duty right and as long as
they're performing the duties of
if if they're at home and fall
off the couch hit their head
obviously that's not in the line
of duty okay thank you thank you
Mr chairman general so it's not
just when they're ordered to do
something but when they're in
their capacity as as a training
or whatnot whatever that
capacity as it is for commitment
as part great then and then also
let's just follow up on that to
make sure we understand but this
if if there if there are basic
training or if there even is
summer camp for two weeks and
summer camp.
And there's an accident in their
kids twelve and in in serving in
that situation this fund
wouldn't be too.
Montoya the benefit is that
right that is correct Mr chair.
Mr chairman general this is just
for state to see that no.
no I understand but it I mean it
says is that old while on active
duty and I asked on state active
duty this operative word is
State underlying aligned to line
their search line twelve of the
so the word state about three
three words and forward to.
So their normal commitment
wouldn't trigger this only like
us.
Required by the governor yes.
So what is a non state active
duty what is is there such thing
as I could do this not state
active duty manager if I could
please Mrs
so there's three different duty
services were commonly on title
ten is we're federalize under
active duty so we're side to an
active duty base that would be
for our training outside of the
state well we're mobilized
overseas two four operational
endeavors.
Title thirty two is what we're
normally under which is still
controlled by the state but
under federal authority for our
drills in our eighties as a as
as Mr chair called our summer
camp
and then the state active duty
is under schools of the
different set the status that
is.
Driven by the executive order by
the governor ordering us active
duty to assist the state and
that is where this fund would be
utilized okay we would not
encumbered for any schools or
any of our other title tenor
title thirty two status is thank
you Mr chairman general so
thirty act thirty two of thirty
two status for whatever the.
Would not trigger the statute in
your in your opinion that is
correct.
Okay great thank you and then
also what I would consider Mr
chairman up there for their
center because here's what the
bummer about about the statute
as it relates to other first
responders is because we can
give the executive a blank check
we have to appropriate it so
what we do is we put money in a
trust in a fund which I hate
doing it just putting money in
funds in trust and it just sits
there and so thank you know
hopefully it is never ever
utilized
So I think for the two hundred
fifty thousand dollar benefit
that was old law for the for law
enforcement I think we had to
have at least a million dollars
in the fund to cover that
So what we may want to consider
if we do more these is maybe
have a separate statute in which
we just have a funding DFA has
the ability to pay out the money
as opposed to just kind of hope
you know having three million
this month remain in this with
three men in this fund this
language is that it shall not
revert.
so after ten years there's gonna
be twenty million dollars just
sitting there you know haven't
with locally there's twenty then
as opposed to.
It does revert to do you have a
I'm looking Mr chairman at up
Page three line seven Riverview
at the end of the fiscal year
shall not revert to the general
fund is that it might the right
one.
Okay so anyway so it doesn't
he's actually right so
it's there so I think a two
million.
Can cover it ifs if that will
cover for bit that was five
folks kids they would just be
paid the next fiscal year
but just yes this winds through
a Centers pope Center tidy I
just
Keep that in mind that week last
question Mr chairman make sure
to give it to CCS so so that's
where I was going earlier when I
was trying to I want to so we
have all these funds all over
the place and we're going
through a broader discussion is
not not for this bill alone but
we're we're gonna be taking a
look at all of our funds and how
are they designed is the
language that you're.
Pointing out Mr chairman and
senator Maestas is that you know
accurate is usable for them what
went to went up by a piece of
legislation like this hits maybe
years to five seven and ten or
whatever I missed I'm guessing
the legislature will come back
and say well gosh this thing is
going to twenty million dollars
you know we need to do something
to this fund so but it is the
way it's designed right now you
are correct it would continue to
add two million dollars a year
but but a future legislature
could come in and say well gosh
and we want to we want all to
that.
Thank you Mr Chairman said are
but they're Senator that would
be a.
That would be tricky because the
messaging on that but it would
be very very.
The folks taking money you know
from people death Medicine stuff
I'd like lastly Mr Chairman us
in a pop Senator up by the a
general general this this is the
same language as used in the law
enforcement and in the
firefighter when I I'm referring
to page two paragraph be
starting online nineteen benefit
shall be paid first to the
surviving spouse and so that
that's not reflective of a
modern family in my opinion for
example someone's married for
twenty years has three kids they
get divorced they get married a
week you know a week before they
die the new wife gets gets gets
all the money and that maybe
just and fair but that's a with
that people may consider that
funfair partly the three
children the three surviving
children so you may want to
consider
That that budget shall be rate
of consistent with the
beneficiary document in other
words have the person just like
an insurance policy fill out a
form as to where they want to
have more knowledge to go and
they could modify that important
down the road but I'll have that
conversation with the Senators
to see if there's some language
we could put in because it's
just that was this was in my
bill a couple years back up
we're doing please police reform
we want to up the benefit and
that was a.
That was some of the concerns
from the law enforcement
committee that was with no
wasn't reflective of a modern
family so so so just a couple of
things thank you so Mister
chairman Senator so the next
stop is finance I do serve on
that committee could do some
more work to this I'd love to
chat with you offline if we if
we are lucky enough to move
beyond today in the journal had
a comment on the on so we did
have this discussion in two
thousand nineteen and so I I I
felt like we could fix that but
I'm I'm open to discussing.
All of what a clarification Mr
chair Senator less this is up on
the federal side we actually
have on our end as July we have
a beneficiary identification
document that the service member
of these annually four point of.
Where there are significant life
events that would add
beneficiaries or remove them so
that way
you know of a former spouse
would not be awarded or the most
encouraging because we left
also.
Kind of puts the.
Beneficiary because of the
substantial and beneficial thank
you no it Mr chair chairman I
just want I want this to be
consistent with that because
that's good public policy but so
should we do it here right now
can we do it here do is a
language so trick I'm open to
that absolutely I don't want
that thing to go on without them
committee then come to I called
turn it back over you Mr
chairman and give me a minute I
just want to go back to that
anybody else have anything.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators and general and maybe I
missed some of the language
through our discussion but what
if.
Having to bid.
There's another accident and
we've had more casualties.
That exceeds this two million.
What then so Mr chairman and and
senator what typically happens
when a fund is not so the the
right sized properly in a
particular year there would be a
supplemental that would come
from a department there would be
a I think it's called the bar
adjustment or something along
those lines it would would
funded to the letter of the law
based on what the the need would
be.
At the end of that the
department would come forward
and ask for it you know we have
a fifth and we need to have this
and but it would be reviewed by.
In in in the following session
of the legislature there would
probably be a request as senator
pointed out for a supplemental
to an expense incurred the
previous years okay it would be
a one time it wouldn't change
the site the two million dollars
but we would have to come
forward so we need to
supplemental to make this right
so very good chairman senators
in general so on the federal
side would that supplemental
come through as well.
If it doesn't on the state side
Mr chairman this is a state the
state matter.
Okay I thought there was a
federal match tied to this maybe
I just heard something this is
the state National Guard so okay
in general did you want to
explain about the there is a
federal budget today we can so
so the federal budget in place
is is is paid for
and it is it is there a pop up
on the death of a service member
once once it's been adjudicated
okay so we would require
supplemental at that point from
the federal side so the five
hundred thousand would be there
elected by the service member
okay so in fact even though.
Our legislation can't have any
influence on that you're
confirming that the federal
would be there yes Senator yes
okay thank you that just wasn't
ready access to customer in I am
in.
So Mister chairman Senator by
the S. center pope General if I
could I should look on page two
on line nineteen.
Essentially insert the following
between.
About rate in first so it reads
the budget shall be paid.
And I would I would insert new
language which would say the
budget shall be paid.
To any number of beneficiaries.
predetermined.
Up by written signature of the
member.
Which can be changed at any time
by the members could you just
referred to that important
that's Bill that annually well I
mean I was going to go there Mr
think that is not one once a
year.
Is it once a year committee of
they they they change it in any
life event.
It's it's an SUV ninety three I
know that that was going to know
that that's going to add with
plus Mr chairman senators
general they can theoretically
they could have one beneficiary
here and another beneficiary
there.
The if we would have state
beneficiaries consistent with
that form.
That important kinda locks them
in to this one as well with a
life occurred to the change
happens they would fill a new
format and resubmitted.
At any time of the year that
they can change it but I'm not
for Mr Chairman they wouldn't be
able to differentiate between
that pay out and this one.
No no of you if they went to the
phone if you put that in here it
would have to follow the same at
that's where I would and would
not be the way it would work on
that point you want to just make
it consistent with what they put
on the for I would not Mister
chairman Senator Lopez because.
This if you were to write it
that way.
Their stock with what's on the
form they're stuck with that
beneficiary I don't know if
they're if they're locked into
one beneficiary multiple this is
a new benefit and so I want to
give them the opportunity to.
Create a their own beneficiaries
consistent or inconsistent with
that form.
I'm gonna give it to their kids
and maybe so maybe there with a
wife the beneficiary and that in
this when their kids the budget
chair I don't know but I want to
give them that opportunity
please look at that point so
it's it'll create a new
administrative responsibility.
So Mister chairman I want to
take one item at a time so I I
think you're right Senator my
sis is based on what the experts
here said
You could go in and say you want
a portion of your benefit to go
to one spouse and a portion of
to go to the other spouse and
Mister chairman Senator so you
look at your correct there might
be some changes in the changes
that the need to happen to that
form.
On that point.
Are you this is is that
acceptable to it is the burden
of changing the form on okay.
It's great to have much better
language two if I may have
please so the beneficiation the
budget shall be paid.
To any number of beneficiaries
designated in writing by the
service member.
Can we get up Mr Chairman thank
you.
Not like you find something at
the house.
Designated in writing.
The department is no but this
gentleman to provide some
additional a great I have a
professional from a an executive
from the department of like to
ever say just a few words on the
matter with this did come up in
nineteen.
That you introduce yourself and.
Good afternoon.
If the keep it down good
afternoon Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Sonia
Carrasco tree on the general
counsel for the department of
military affairs
so just to clarify the STI is a
benefit that we as service
members pay into every time we
drill that money comes directly
out of our check it's a low cost
insurance program that we can
elect into so that on for that
insurance every year or every
time we have a mobilizing events
if it's a federal mobilization
or if it's state active duty we
gather up our soldiers we go
through the form and we allow
them to change that election so
I could leave my just delight to
you Senator masses has nothing
to do with anything else other
than what I put on that form
when we created this bill we
were attending to me here what
happens for our police officers
and their death benefit and our
firefighters in for those
individuals should they have to
realize the fund there's no
paperwork there is no form there
I believe for the the police
there is the committee that
gathers to make the
determination that the death
happened in the line of duty and
then the benefit is given to the
survivor in whatever order
there's there's nothing for them
to fill out I believe it's the
same way for the firefighters so
should we changed this bill
to designate the survivors this
way then we're gonna have to
have a mechanism
to reflect that because
currently for the other two
first responder groups there is
not one so that would make this
different than the other two
groups that were trying to have
parity with.
Mr chair.
Hello Mr chairman.
Senator pope general agency got
also threo that's exactly the
point you're absolutely correct
thank you for that because the
firefighter benefit and the law
enforcement benefit is surviving
spouse.
Regardless of how many kids
regardless of how many ex wives
and so the conversations that
were occurring on the law
enforcement benefit.
was the was this conversation
we're having now but it just
didn't get into the bill they
just didn't get into the bill
but I'm just conveying what a
lot of law enforcement folks
told me when I was caring that
bill.
That that the surviving spouse
is like from the fifties.
Now we have you could have an ex
wife you're good up to children
from two different wives and so
I just want to give the member
the opportunity to decide where
the money goes as opposed to an
arc what I in my opinion is an
archaic funding which of are you
on the form.
On the form currently used for
the insurance policy agency
Carrasco Correa.
Are there multiple designations
possible or is it a single
designation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I believe you could
make
more than one designation I
haven't filled out a form yet
this year but
I think what we always council
our soldiers amid judge advocate
as well is that the reason that
they need to updated every year
is because of those life events
because you've been divorced or
remarried or not made at all you
have a child who is now over
twenty one C. wanted different
designees I have to look at it
Mr chairman members of the
committee to see if there could
be more than one survivor does
need your do you remember during
I mean of the general can you do
it to multiple seizure yes
currently I'll tell you how I
have a designated online I have
my wife and my two kids
identified with percentages
assigned to each so what
amounted so could we use that
same form Senator would that
make it simpler.
A new second form would be
awesome it is the same form
would be better than the statute
for better than the Neville
brothers in my opinion.
Mr chair on that point may I ask
a question Senator could finish
one thing before starting the of
so Senator Maestas are you
saying.
If there use that same form it
just have them fill out a
separate this the same form but
used only for the state benefit
not for the federal but for
their insurance benefits.
Forgive me I was writing the
special so you're saying if they
could could we do it that way
that they would that they would
fill out two of these forms
every time.
One for the insurance benefit
one for the state budget the
supplemental budget supplemental
benefits.
That Mr Chairman another all new
form and all the rest of it so
Mr Chairman another option might
be and and I think we have.
Two maybe three attorneys in
this to committee as well that
we go to page two and and lines
nineteen through twenty five.
And just
I'm not sure with what is the
term guys I'm kind of tired
right now but Mexico that that
delete them or get rid of them
or scratch them or whatever and
then just require that the
department develop a form
appropriate for this for for
distribution of benefits.
That's just what the let's see
what senator Maestas says
because he still has his
amendment under federation of
basically which.
The Mr Chairman seperti I think
either one gets there and we
could we come up with the
language after today
Or I could restate my motion.
Read restate your motion thank
you the budget shall be paid.
To any any number beneficiaries
as this as designated in writing
by the member on a form of form
provided by the by the
department I we support that
that's fine.
So it is great we would you
delete the whole rest of the
thank you Mr chairman I would
delete starting on page on line
nineteen first throughout
through the through the entire
program so you leave the budget
shall be paid and you delete
everything else.
And it reads the budget shall be
paid to any number of
beneficiaries as designated in
writing by the member on the
form provided.
By the department.
That we're that works that's
friendly.
We want to make that motion so
is our second.
Seconded by Senator Tallman
discussion of the members
Senator so my question about
this is that it puts an
administrative burden on on the
agency and I would just like to
know from whether that
administrative burden of which
I've asked before if you but I'd
also be interested in what
general counsel has to say about
the burden and thank you Mr
chairman and senator I'd like
the department respond they are
the ones that brought this to us
but I think they're comfortable
with it but I want them to want
to hear from them.
Mister chairman Senator again
when we activate service members
for state active duty part of
their on boarding is that they
have different sessions with the
department of military affairs
to go through all of their
paperwork to make sure that we
can pay them because when
they're on state active duty
they are ordered by the governor
and they're paid by the state we
have to go through and make sure
that there and share that they
can receive their paychecks so
this would be another form that
we would have them fill out and
I do not think that it would
increase the administrative
burden at all.
Excellent Mr chair I just wanted
to hear that thank you is there
any opposition to the amendment.
Senator Schmedes you're okay
wasn't any seeing no opposition
will consider this amendment to
have been adopted and we'll
continue the discussion on the
bill.
Any other senators I move into
passed as amended has amended
seconded by Senator Tallman.
The secretary with any
discussion at all at this point
anything else secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes it'd
like to make a quick comment
Like you'd general I was a
member of the five fifteen also
like you I started as a private.
Unlike you.
Six years later I exited as a
private.
But if there was a great
experience panelists so thank
you for your service thank you
senator for for your flexes both
senators for your flexibility
and although he didn't say
anything I know that senator
both was active in the in the
discussions of we appreciate you
Mr chairman it dawned on me and
I'm gonna go to our colleague
who has experience in this area
and have them help me do some
things and he was happy to do it
right now thank you center my
sister we we now have the arm
wrestling contest to see which
of US reproach presenters second
bill today I'm just gonna walk
and let him do it so if you have
an elements of another one I do
yes thank the methadone yes and
and senator pope has the space
force so just to go.
To the bill.
Are you is your the committee
meeting right now is fine is in
the running across the hall so
as you can let your down then
we'll let you go and and senator
Paul can we thank you very much
better Mr chair thank you
senator and I have an expert
that's going to drain here's
well you're definitely.
You know what okay you had a
busy today yeah thank you so
much for being here.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee we are
now coming in forward with
Senate bill two thirteen
essentially this is on an opioid
treatment programs and we're
looking to revise something that
has already been we're looking
to codify something that we were
able to get done in the interim
through the department of health
and essentially change the way
that the professional the the
the the required professionals
on site when methadone is being
dispensed and we're we're
methadone can be.
packaged or pre packaged and
then distributed so we did go to
the Department health it was
quite the effort I never got to
experience like that and and
they were very helpful in in
altering their rules and so now
we would just something like to
clarify that which means that
the methadone clinic does not
have to be this really does have
to be a pharmacy it has to have
a trained registered nurses that
has skill the skill set in this
area thank you and is able to
then that becomes the certifying
professional in the facility to
to to to do the dispensation of
the dispensing
It saves lives Mr Chairman in in
many parts of really rural parts
of New Mexico the inconsistent
delivery of methadone is one of
the reasons that stretches the
the the the level of addiction
You know it if this legislation
improves access to get a
codifies as I mentioned a little
while ago it it enables patients
to enter treatment in and opioid
treatment program really any day
of the week that the clinic is
open and it allows clue to
clinicians to make necessary
decisions on on dosage and then
it reduces risk of relapse as I
mentioned a little while ago
because we we have this shortage
in in every walk of life in
every profession it is effecting
this one as well so I'm gonna
ask a doctor air catch and these
medical doctor emergency
medicine in Santa Fe Espanola at
the Presbyterian health care
system he does have specialties
in addiction medicine he's been
a director of clinical
implementation at the bridge of
New Mexico macro the bridge
program he's also in the medical
director of the New Mexico
treatment services in Farmington
it is the co founder and past
year the national ACT P. and I
will let him tell you exactly
what that acronym means I I
didn't I didn't defined that
before walking apologize Mr
chairman but essentially it's
pain management and addiction
medicine section he's the past
president of the New Mexico a
CDP also catching.
Dr welcome thank you
ACP stands for the American
college of emergency physicians
can you do so we could use a
hand held Mike just to make the
film picks it all up okay thank
you chairman the at a C. P.
stands for the American colleges
of of emergency physicians.
Right did you have anything else
you wanted to add to with the
senator said yes we could so
just to clarify making these
changes would bring us in
alignment with thirty three
other states and the district of
Columbia and of course federal
requirements as well so this
requirement we have New Mexico
is not a federal requirement
this would also bring us into
alignment with not only almost
all western states but of course
all of our neighboring states
thirty three states over.
And but but the key here is this
really is about improving access
to treatment what this does is
it enables one to patients and
enter a treatment on let's say
of a Friday for example or
Thursday but some day of the
week where there's not a
pharmacist that comes into than
make take home doses so many
clinics have a pharmacist Emily
come in one day a week
particularly in rural
communities so this is about
keeping people in treatment if
we enter them into treatment
then we but if we can't adjust
their dose and timely manner if
we can't give them a take on
those for the weekend the same
we could start treatment or if
they missed a couple days but
they want to come back one star
treatment so all of the things
this this does is it helps
improve retention in treatment
if we retain people treatment
they're more likely to keep from
using and this therefore reduces
the rate of relapse to illicit
opioid use which of course
primarily is now street fentanyl
with the very high mortality
that that occurs so this
once again we're just trying to
codified in statute would have
already been done on a regular
tweet perspective but just for.
Just add these points that
By far and away medication based
therapy for opioid use disorder
is the most effective way to
treat opioid use disorder non
medication based treatments have
a very high rate of failure rate
of relapse greater than ninety
percent and M. O. U. T. M.
medications for opioid use
disorder reduce overdose
mortality by sixty percent so
this is a tremendous mortality
no benefit Kane and
unfortunately as you probably
are aware that the overdose
mortality has been steadily
rising.
Over a hundred and seven
thousand Americans died last
year from drug overdose this is
it increased twenty five percent
from the year before New Mexico
has an overdose death rate
almost twice the national
average and our death rate is
also increasing at a steady pace
but where has this been
affecting us the worst the last
few years in rural counties so
this doubled in the last few
years in Sapporo County in
Sierra County even in curry
county and granted we know it's
continue to rise and Bernalillo
county in Rio Arriba county but
rural counties are particularly
hard hit because the have a
greater shortage of access to
pharmacists so this will really
trying to rectify this improve
access to treatment.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
the wealth I have a letter of
support that I'll just re
whenever you go to the yeah we I
think we all got come did get it
okay thank you of and I just had
a quick question before we go to
the audience this is methadone
exclusively not so box on not
the not the shots is just the
methadone so this is methadone
and buprenorphine and so teepees
generally only handle to
medications methadone which is
in the form of a liquid and
given our fan which is a
sublingual tablet so there
really is no way to confuse the
two medications but those are at
the only medication that this
day would not permit.
This is to give out twenty seven
days of the tablets of yes it
would be exactly what effect
given Arsene as well as
methadone if buprenorphine is
administered in the in an OTP
that's what I wanted to check
because this is specifically
methadone the way the bill is
written I.
It doesn't it doesn't say
anything about the selection.
I would think that would be a
very simple amendment though if
citizens were methadone you
could use the word medication
for opioid use disorder or to
spell and both that I guess.
We would take that as a friendly
amendment let me just pass that
would be.
Diverted as as these and in
Macedonski's there's no point in
diverting methadone but it but
sevaks and would there be some
of the potential for diverting
some oxygen into street use so
methadone some of them does get
diverted some people are being
does get diverted but whether
it's sent package and take home
doses by a pharmacist or whether
it's packaging to take home
doses by a nurse does not affect
that right now.
It also to say that this does
not increase the number of take
home doses that a patient could
get it's just as improving their
access to be able to get those
take home doses and have a list
of suggested and having them get
them on weekends when they
return to treatment or their
doses adjusted before the
weekend.
So that is my only thought
methadone is it is it is a
liquid.
And and from what people tell me
it does not get you particularly
higher anything for us a box on
people tell me does so I would
like to dispel that myth if I
could so it's it's completely
not true so
methadone has a very low street
value given Arsene hasn't even
lower street value for example
of oxycodone has a very high
street value range to
oxycodone street value is
between a dollar and a dollar
twenty per milligram right so a
hundred milligrams of oxy code
own has a street value between a
hundred and a hundred and twenty
dollars the street value of
eight milligrams of you put our
feet which is a standard
milligram tablet which can
replace a hundred milligrams of
oxy code own and allow the
patient to take this medication
which is very safe very hard to
overdose on which does not
create euphoria has no street
value it has basically the cost
that you would pay if you pay
cash at the pharmacy the street
value eight milligrams be put
our fans about five Bucks now to
the higher street value in jail
yes why is that because so many
people are suffering and
withdrawing and therefore it has
a long half life it's very
effective at relieving those
symptoms but it has induces very
little euphoria and otherwise
taken in healthy adults and
adolescents by itself without
combining it with lots of other
medications it's almost
impossible to overdose.
Use the so Senator you for you
to be comfortable with an
amendment that would I had just
a few.
If an orphan or for your is that
the word we should use a sense
of oxen yes people often is the
actual chemical names of oxen is
a brand name implies it's paired
with another medication and so
Mister chairman that would be on
on what's a one half a page bill
here a line fourteen in the
title we have to have and you've
been or frame for take home
purposes and less and less I
need to use another word and and
not and but then on twenty four
by twenty four methadone and
buprenorphine for take home
purposes would be the amendment
is it.
I would need some guidance on
that I I I you know.
Mr.
So what did you get did you get.
Senator did you want to spell it
out for us well of the quick on
that point.
Trouble.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator so if we don't
if we just save you from or fund
and we don't include naloxone I
I'm I'm curious that's a combo
in this box is an awesome or
that the other one the other
antagonists yes okay so I I
wanna make sure we know what
we're doing so if if we only
include those two drug names
they're gonna say you can't
dispense anything with locks on
it so is that the intention of
the amendment.
Can I propose that you think is
the term given our fine
products.
You could or could save you put
are faint and slash or and our
fans last naloxone.
So you said you've been orphan
product is available naloxone.
The the ones joined with the
locks on and the other one yes.
I don't know if I mean thirty
six the doctor I Senators
committees Mr chair so I I would
I would suggest just let me
listing them out you know speak
explicitly.
Mr chairman I I hate to do that
because and we're calling out a
product produced by.
A specific brand name.
Always accurate no no don't use
the brand.
So so so multiple I I don't know
the terminology there but I you
know it's a good start for you
have I think it's either if you
want to see buprenorphine and.
Four people are friends last no
locks on I think that's fine.
They are using flash naloxone
I'm sorry but our friends slash
naloxone slashed more.
Do I
know.
With with.
That.
Thank you for your feedback for
you or fifteen with no luck so.
That we're that would be fine
that's fine.
Okay so we need somebody to make
such a moment.
The.
One point.
Twenty twenty four.
Isn't it or it's or you would
need you would dispense one or
the other not both.
It's kind of what I thought.
The latest issue for medically
but sometimes prophetically as
in the.
So.
Okay well but that there's three
yeah.
Methadone come up you can orphan
come up for.
Buprenorphine with naloxone.
The best hi I get that motion.
Since
their second Senator my sister
wants seconded.
Make sure Berwick is in good
shape.
In title and in yeah okay.
Thank you.
Any other discussion of that we
we cover all the bases that's
it.
Those are the only two chairman
would like me to spell people
are fine.
Do you have the spelling of
buprenorphine.
The only he can spell it out for
you right now.
It's B. U. P..
B. U. E..
Do you.
That the really opened up
Representative your mouth and do
you P. R. E..
N. O. R. P. H. I. N. E. in our
building.
You can also find that a doctor
Google's office to.
All right any other discussion
on the amendment Senator
Schmedes you you're okay with
it.
What made one question is are
you drinking extra resource
books in here to that we don't
have access to.
Okay go ahead bill yeah just
just one one question on this is
The plane not the combo but just
to be from or fun
Is okay is there a.
A real a reasonably expected
scenario that we would need to
dispense that instead of.
The suboxone.
Mr
Fraser.
Please so I'm.
The the value of the combination
medicine people are fine with
the locks on it.
Is unfortunately greatly
overstated and in fact because
of the exaggeration of the
results of the research and the
inflation of the price of the
product indeed your the
manufacturer recently was fined
one point four billion dollars
because of how this affected the
economy so the truth is despite
the stated pharmaceutical
research there are patients
probably ten percent or so who
do not tolerate the combination
medicine despite their advice
and I say this is an addiction
specialist who for many years
stated that and stated their
research before we really looked
into it realized a research was
not well stated we know that are
at least ten percent of patients
don't tolerate the combination
medicine we also know that the
combination medicine is not
really much of a deterrent or
the plane product the plane
product is less expensive it
saves the state money
so it stays Medicaid money which
is why now most of the Medicaid
HMOS have dropped the prior
authorization requirement for
the plane medication as we learn
more more about it that is just
as safe as the combination
medicine the the combination
medicine was created basically
because the plane medication was
already FDA approved in United
States in nineteen eighty five
so as a money making means and
this and in part also to get the
federal government to pass the
bill in two thousand data two
thousand drug addiction
treatment act of two thousand so
there had to be in new products
to convince that that this
greater value and unfortunately
was a whole lot of
Not well evaluated drug company
data so we now know that the
value of a combination medicine
is far less than that so that
was so that's why I really I
think it is minimal value over
the plan product it there is a
myth that the plane product is
misused and injected or whatever
more than the combination
medicine.
True so
As an addiction specialist I'm
just interested in how do I save
more lives and how do we keep
more patients in treatment so
and and Mr center I made and
raised a problem you're not
going to go yet is I'm not you
know this is I mean I'm just
make sure we get this right I'm
just saying you know what where
we intended to provide the the
plane product verses the combo
and.
I mean my because my I'm just
thinking through this is not a
chair is not a challenge the
amendment I'm just saying I'm
wondering if you know I want to
be very you know of specific and
with this and so I guess it let
me ask you more tardy question
and is the plan product used
four main for long term
maintenance therapy now.
Yes okay okay and because I
think Mr chair Senator and
that's what you're getting at
we're getting I mean is there
for you so that was really then
revenues even though it's not my
state is not it's not FDA
approved for maintenance or is
it the point product absolute it
is it is okay that I thought was
only proof reduction but that
I'm not that's not my area of
expertise not absolute approved
for long term and Serpe
it is certainly the preferred
formulation for pregnant women
but also now that we know that
many patients don't really
tolerate the combination
medicine up it is also the
formulation we use in the
hospital most.
The reason is a combination
medicine in the hospital so it's
just an additional expense all
right now I I think it makes
sense Mr chairman of the the
the.
The whole purpose of the bill
really is to make Representative
ready access want to so the long
term care the moment you don't
receive this you don't fall are
you fall off it just the
recidivism and that all the
other things come with it yeah
any any other discussion on the
amendment is there any
opposition then to the amendment
as as presented by Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Seeing none will consider the
bills to that amendment will go
to the audience is there any.
No we haven't got anybody to the
anybody in the audience of those
in the audience in support of
this could you raise your hand.
Okay good any of you want to
actually make a statement about
it Eric Martinez.
That is a Mike please whoever's
going to speak please use the
mikes of the Zuma pick you up
good afternoon Mister get a hold
the button down the.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
name's Act Martinez I'm the a
lobbyist for American parent
company of New Mexico treatment
yes we we stand in support of
this bill we've came a long way
with this bill and and in this
committee we've we've seen
support the past but there are
no members some got there's some
more clarification as well too
we did also change this changes
by rules with what will this
October with the governor's
office as well they've done
they've they saw the P.
charitable trust a of a study
that showed that our nurses can
dispense package and and and
send out a call methadone and
they've they followed suit so
what we're trying to do now as
well as have the statue reflect
the rule as well too so in the
future any other administrations
would have to still abide by the
statue whenever things change so
with that we we we support this
bill thank thank your anybody
else want to speak on the bill
anybody in opposition to the
bill.
And nobody on the misery of it
all and zoom early being watched
at all they are thank you.
Members of the committee Senator
Sedillo.
Thank you Mr chair of one of the
comments from the fiscal impact
reports was it the board of
nursing reports that the concern
is unclear what supervision
means so my question is do we
need to define supervision or
should we take out under the
supervision or what what might
be the rest of the best response
Mr chair Senator.
Drive to the.
To that question.
Thank you Mr chair Senator red
hat pulled.
To whether this is a minister
but farmers are poured by a
pharmacist or whether it's
administered directly to the
patient because remember during
the week patients come up you
know to a window and the nurse
looks at how the medication is
scheduled whether it's people
are fine whether it's methadone
there is an order you know I
position there potentially
reading through the more
medication administration record
right so then moving your
buttoned up yes my still allowed
a tricycle discussed my mouth
really okay sorry about that
okay I didn't to be honest to
all right so
sue the current process right is
that patients come to the window
of the and the nurse verify
surname they very have a picture
of the patients they always
verify you know if it this is
the rate for the patients as
they are and so once they verify
that the patient they then look
through the orders and the order
says how much the patient is
scheduled to receive that day
they've and verify that the
patient is tolerating that those
and if the patient is the then
it for that if the pharmacist
for the take home bottle they
use the exact same equipment
vaccine process so nothing is
changing and all of this is
happening of course under the
order of a physician all orders
in the OTP are entered you know
by a licensed practitioner.
Mr chair so that should that say
under the orders of a licensed
physician.
So Mr chairman when the
department I'm sure the board of
pharmacy with the ones that that
did this in rules and that's
what we're coming out codified
so I want to correct that
earlier I think I said the
department health it's X. the
board of pharmacy so every
nurses under the supervision of
a doctor anyway and when the
rules report were the rules
promulgated through the board of
pharmacy all of this was laid
out for them I don't have that
in front of me yes we get a that
hold up for you on how that over
then and the and the specific
process that was just described
by the doctor of how the act of
and and this exchange in the
dispensation of course that was
all laid out in the the board of
pharmacy's actions.
Thank you Mr chair my concern
and I'm not this isn't takeaway
my support for the bill I
support the bill I think it's a
great thing to expand resources
my concern is is the nurses
and you can certainly fix this
on the way to Judiciary but it's
it seems like a significant
significant question that the
borders.
We ought to address.
Yeah I I will I will the poll
those of the board of pharmacy's
actions that they took and the
requirements that they laid out
in the process and I'll have
that available we go to the
district thank you because it
could easily easily be amended
to define supervision has you as
you just did for me to or be
specific here but thank you Mr
chair that was really my only
question I think this is a great
bill and and expanding access is
something we need to do.
Thank you senator anybody else
we have a motion from the Mexico
Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair I I did want
to explore that a little bit
more with you all about the
definition of supervision what
what is your legislative intent
for that word.
I don't have a.
Then in the end it by that
language that was used in the
rules.
So I have to pull that specific
role for you and I will get all
that for you secretary what does
it mean to you well you know I
don't.
Oh sorry I was just in to answer
her question in your.
This you know what I really love
Mr chairman is one a half a page
bill turns into three singles
it's.
As a physician I will say that
whatever terminology is
acceptable to the lawyers
to me there's really no
difference so whatever you are
comfortable with as long as the
nurse can administer this
medication to the patient and as
long as the nurse can prepare
the take home bottle all of this
as the medical director of the
clinic is happening under my
watch anyway.
Okay and Mr center and I'm I'm
you know echo what's that
Senator Lopez that I I I have no
no problem with the bill I want
to just make sure it's it's tied
so you know we we do defined
supervision pretty explicitly in
statute in other areas for
example the relationship of
supervision between a physician
physician assistant which has
changed over the years and weeks
we know we have certain PA's are
doing certain things and they
have a big bigger definition of
what it what it means to
supervise
so I I think it
You know I I I strongly feel
that that that word does need to
be defined
once again open to other counter
arguments would you define it
that would tie it down two years
as well okay by me so for
example I you know wanting to
get back to the intent so it is
the intent for the super.
Revising physician to physically
be on site when the medication
is dispensed is is that the
intent or not I don't know okay
so I I think we should but you
know so.
Mr chair Senator we should
probably put that in there
something about
You know under the supervision
of a licensed physician who you
know who who has
Order order the medication or
something I mean set you know
something a little more explicit
the.
For under the supervision of the
license physician who has who
has ordered that you know the
for the of the product I think
physicians the other the
prescribing physician.
What it's like by just to say
upon the order of a licensed
physician.
that well M. and Mr Mr chair
Senator so here's here's my.
Once again I'm just asking how
this works.
Let's say we have one physician.
Make the order.
And then we but but they're not
really maybe they are
supervising maybe they're not
and maybe the.
From the statue the it just says
a licensed physician so it
doesn't necessarily say it's the
physician that has made the
prescription of the order it
could it according to this
statue how it's written it's any
physician at all you know we're
not specifying that is what
physician we're asking you so
yeah that's you want to specify
it yeah no I mean I I think we
should and I'm but I want to
make sure it's from the
amendment I'm not trying to mess
of the bill I'm just once again
one know the intent thank you Mr
chairman and and senator sneeze
I'm gonna ask you to put your
other hand on and
where where under what
circumstances would happen were
a licensed physician would send
in order to restaurants for
these purposes with the Reese
this.
Mr chair Senator I I think that
that implicitly means they're
they're gonna be supervising
but it would also qualify a
physician who has not sent a
prescription in order
prescription and but in the in
the in this is a physician Ryan
could be anybody in New Mexico
Dr weights written.
If I could offer that I would
defer to department of Human
Services division of behavior
health services division state
opioid treatment authority who
administer all the regulations
about how
teepees our administered and the
process by which a physician in
relation order and how this is
entered so
and I just say that for the sake
of being consistent and I get
that we all want to make this
work and as not a lawyer all I
can just tell you the way it
does work and and OTP doesn't
accept an order from an outside
position of the only a
practitioners who can write
orders at the no TP or those who
are privileged there and are
working on it a lot better than
I did so but then also I'm
assuming there's a chain of
events with each dispensation
and who touched it who
interacted with the word of the
order come from so that way you
would care you would have a
guarantee in the in in the chain
of events that the license
position was with an appropriate
person to.
Supervise the registered nurse.
Basis Mr chair Senator I
I don't know if we'll be able to
just come up with the language
here I I just think as it's
written it you just and I
understand we're saying how this
happens you have to have a
special prescribing authority
and all that stuff I I get that
but it's just the plain reading
of it it just it just says.
To to meet the qualification
here all I have to do is I have
to be a licensed physician
In New Mexico it it doesn't and
doesn't specify that I just feel
like we should I don't know I
mean that's all it takes to
prescribe these medications so.
Mr Chairman so I'm not a lawyer
but might I just suggest that in
the interim between this
committee and going to Judiciary
Committee that there may be
opportunity to amend this
language to make sure it is in
alignment with the current to
Mexico of regulations as set
forth by be HSD the state and
the state opioid treatment forty
which which is the body in New
Mexico enters the body in all
states but we all states have an
Asota state opioid treatment
forty which then overseas these
practices and sets these
regulatory guidelines for hello
TV's function Mr Chairman I will
also commit to the committee
that I will go to Legislative
Council find out that's how this
type of.
Of Act is actually written.
I just for this purpose but many
others I mean.
Under the supervision of a
licensed physician and I've seen
that myself before in many other
pieces of legislation more
didn't clearly it didn't also
specifically say.
Yeah Mr center and and I think
if we if we said prescribed of
the you know the prescribed
vision that them actually cause
trouble because you know you can
write a prescription and then
you can well the position could.
Could divert coming capacity
could leave or or whatever in
but you need someone else that's
in a you know.
Like a colleague that picks that
up so yeah I I think that's fine
just want to bring up if you
guys are okay with it and
everybody talks about agency
talks about it works I mean it's
it's fine just want to bring up
for discussion so appreciate
them thank you and I will commit
to the committee that we will
dive into that but I I know I've
seen this multiple times before
the way it's written that is a
language at the pharmacy board
approved right so on that point.
I just want justice when little
suggestion and that is that you
ask the board of nursing since
they raised the issue.
Yes we will do.
Mr of one last question whenever
you Senators committee
is Mr center can the nurses that
dispense can they change dosing
as well.
So I'm we have protocols for how
we re re initiate patients who
have missed days of of practice
so standard protocols of patient
misses a few days the doses
reduces gradually reduced back
to the previous those so but all
of those those changes have to
be signed off by the clinician
but a licensed practitioner of
but adjusting doses further
orders to increase it does those
all have to be entered by the
license commission well that's
the medical director or another
practitioner who is an employee
reporting to the medical
director's license and privilege
at the clinic.
Thank you I'll take that as a
yes but that's all you know I
was gonna critically according
to the protocols that are still
yeah no it's not possible laid
out for in the in the what the
board the board of pharmacy did
when they put this into their
building tool.
Anything else senator I think
that's a so this so I I moved
past within the state.
If this is the overview
education.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This is the standard we don't
have to worry about judiciary
thing they will do it all in all
on their own they will do that
so second for the motion for due
process Senator Sedillo Lopez
any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes Senators
equipment this Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes center Thomas.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes and by
the six six three zero.
They do that the as a mentor we
really appreciate you let me do
both and thank you center focal
so perfect for both.
Are you done here thank you for.
Thank you doctor thank you for
now we're gonna Senator pope's
Bill.
Adding space forced to military
definition's SB twelve to
twelve.
Thank you for welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman hoping I
could be the shortest one this
evening.
That would be that would be
appreciated.
The with I think we all
appreciated Mr chair of Senate
bill two twelve and all of this
bill basically does even though
it's a bunch of pages in the
bill it's basically it adding
space force and amending the
definitions throughout our our
statutes for armed forces in
uniform services and the reason
we need to do this just to make
sure that folks that are joining
the space force that was founded
in twenty nineteen that when
they come back here that they're
able to get those benefits and
entitlements for serving in the
space force as a military branch
of with that that's all I have
Mister chair and that's really
what this bill does.
I'm just looking for work there
was a change made a.
Where the check other if they're
kind of they're they're
scattered throughout so
The line with us.
We amend section one one five
point four.
Eleven dash eight B. one article
to the interstate compact on
educational opportunity for
children.
We amend.
Twenty one one four point five
We amend forty dash ten D. dash
two
I have a little synopsis sheet
that hopes to get all you're
doing is adding space first also
we're doing so basically where
there's uniformed services
aren't services where there's
like army navy or Air Force we
just want include space force.
Okay for a second the motion for
a do tests is there anybody in
the other Mr McCorkle did you
want to speak on this bill.
Somebody else does yep or come
up and use the money please.
Thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee Paul Cassidy with the
current partnership committee
our founding member sure quick
respect that but he said a lot
in way in the back edge that
behind you could all right it
and I I'm also a member of the
commission of the New Mexico
military base Planning
Commission we strongly support
this bill
the defense lawyers on office.
Rupe of people that assist
states in adopting legislation
has put this on the list of
things they're doing currently
four states have adopted similar
legislation as a result of the
spaceport being part of the year
force in two thousand nineteen
and there are nine states
including New Mexico currently
considering this and he's taken
on a huge load on a number of
other items that the military is
really important for them thank
you for encourage your support
in the past great thank you for.
Mr McCorkle July say something
Mr chairman members of the
commission.
Mr chairman members of the
commission this is it academic
correction to the state statute
we strongly support the bill
thank you.
Very good thank you.
Members of the committee any
other discussion photo is there
any opposition I forgot us that
anybody on we do.
Of a gene Dickerson zoom zoom.
That you want to say something
Joan Dickerson.
Mr chair members of the
committee of I'm John Dickerson
I'm representing the veterans
and military families caucus and
we stand in support of this bill
and if Mr chair will allow me
something off topic I'd like to
go on the record for supporting
Senate bill to town which was
heard earlier as well.
That was the death benefit bill.
Thank thank you Mr Chris and
thank you very much.
And so is there anybody here in
opposition nobody on the zoom in
opposition we have a motion with
the second.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator guy goes Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
So your eloquence prevails and
by a five vote.
Senate bill two twelve passes
thank you Mr chair was worried.
Okay let's go then to that we
most will get your bill Senators
committees all of the above they
just brought the subject
for so at the role we just
couldn't get it in time both so
we're gonna roll Senator
committee's bill.
To Monday.
can I get with you offline for
yeah okay we we live they just
brought down during okay so I
think you start.
So.
Okay
Everybody on zoom wants to hear
of my bill.
What can I say.
Yeah.
Hang on the.
Thank you.
It
is working.
We have an.
That one.
Okay go requests.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah that's a good.
It just and if we could do is
schedule to to see.
To.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of Senate bill two or
three is a the culmination of a
two year process or maybe longer
three years actually isn't in
which
The.
Will that work in direct service
for the developmental disability
and the aging and frail elderly
communities those.
Personal care attendants or
aides working in the different
agencies
order in legislation we tried
last year to make sure that any
increase in reimbursement.
Filter down to them that they
would get it increase in their
wages as result some of the some
of the agencies that employ
these persons
felt that.
This was gonna be very difficult
to carry out because there are a
number of other things they were
involved in raising wages and so
and other expenses that the
agencies encouraged that didn't
necessarily all get translated
into just raising the wages of
the direct service person.
And so the organization that
that that that does this kind of
work The New Mexico a caregivers
coalition the representative
those people that the
legislative direct service the
care given the actual caregivers
agreed to meet over the interim
with the agencies that employ
them and together they worked.
through a number of the meetings
and came up with the with the
bill that you had before you
today and basically I also
wanted to give credit to
adjacent Cornwell the the head
of the developmental disability
services division who actively
participated in this and to
else the Ellis because that's
right analyst New McCloy from
the
developmental disabilities
council all of with all of them
participated in trying to shape
something and we're juggling a
variety of issues one is.
The right the the amount of
money appropriated by the state.
The comparison with with other
states and what they pay for
these jobs is or kind of the
right analysis.
And the need to do something
about the the long waiting list
and the than the fact that if
you raise the wages the the you
may not have enough money to
serve all the people there were
all sorts of of moving parts to
this deliberation and ultimately
what they came up with was this
bill and I'm going to ask
Adrienne Smith who
is the head of the New Mexico
caregiver's Association and who
is active in the those
deliberations to explain what
we're asking for in this bill
and then I think we have Jim
Copeland ahead of the ad cap the
and association of developmental
disabilities community providers
who's I think on zoom with us to
give their position and then
we'll talk about the the
amendment that that we've come
up with so Adrian did you want
to say something to the
committee is what I would
suggest you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and it was
Adrienne Smith I'm the president
and CEO The New Mexico
caregivers coalition we started
in two thousand nine in the
state of New Mexico and we train
and we advocate for direct care
workers.
There are two goals to this bill
number one it will require that
developmental disabilities way
for providers or those agencies
that employ the care givers or
direct support professionals
that work those jobs.
It requires the department of
health to collect workforce data
from the agency providers.
And then number two the second
requirement of this bill.
Up we conduct cost studies the
department health conducts cost
studies every five years to
determine what the recommended
rates ought to be paid to
providers.
The department of health and
brings those numbers to you as
the Legislature.
And recommends
you know what they should be
reimbursed so the second goal of
this bill establishes a
valuation of the direct support
professional at one hundred
fifty percent of minimum wage
those are the two things that
this bill does.
The what this bill does not do
is there's no budget request in
this bill so there's no
appropriation in fact there's of
the preparation and house bill
forty one which does request
seven point six million and
that's we're doing supporting
that in partnership with the
association of developmental
disabilities community
providers.
This bill also does not require
that developmental disabilities
waiver provider agencies pay one
hundred fifty percent of the
minimum wage to their direct
support professionals it's
simply establishes that direct
support professionals are valued
in the right studies in the cost
studies that we conduct at our
state level.
The third thing that they're
this bill does not do there is
nothing in this bill that
changes any
of any part of the
appropriations process
Department of Health request
or the governor's request you
are or the way that the
legislature funds anything
parenthetically your fiscal
impact report that's associated
with this bill as of one thirty
this afternoon I'm told by the
department of health public
affairs department office that
there was there's a revision
coming to that that that was the
incorrectly transmitted and
there's a there's a revised
version of that coming.
Thank you Mr chair.
And Mr chairman I'd I'd ask if
we can go to Jim Copeland online
on the zoom.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee Jim
Copeland executive director of
the association of developmental
disabilities community providers
and as has been stated we have
had this bill under
consideration for a long time
it's been worked we come up with
the version of the bill that we
can support our our twenty seven
at cap provider members from all
regions of the state of New
Mexico providing services and
supports to people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities and we are
certainly in support of this
legislation and would request
the committee to I have a due
pass amendment R. two passed
vote on this bill.
Thank you Mr Copeland the.
So I take the other up.
One June I don't know I know I
think we go to the amendment now
Mr chairman.
so the amendment was was brought
to us of the the by Mr Robert
caygle
Who is.
The parent to the the the the
the developmentally disabled
person who is being served by
the waiver program
he did too he discovered and I
think this is pretty.
Is pretty awful but this is what
happened he discovered that many
agencies were advised when the
there was not enough money for
the for the state to increase
their rates.
That the agencies were advised
that well you can live within
the current range if you convert
some of your employees to
contractors and if you do that
then you won't have to pay all
the fringe benefits and the.
States in the employer's share
of the tax.
So they did and that went on for
several years this came to light
recently when some of them some
of those employees begin getting
billed by the by the taxation
and revenue department for
unpaid taxes.
And it turns out that that was
kind of a of an under the table
arrangement that was suggested
by by people of within the the
past administration that that
really was.
Pretty pretty clearly a
violation of federal law they
should not these are not true
contractors in any sense but to
cover them and until that is
rectified this amendment
proposes that on page two line
twenty two.
We add after none administrative
employee.
Or subcontractors.
And then some of the on page
three.
Line ten.
After employees we insert or
subcontracts with.
And I would hope that that
practice gets wiped out during
this this rate review analysis
and and isn't suing contracts
with the developmental
disabilities division but until
it does this would kind of
protect the those those people
that were made contractors
Is that pretty much captured the
capture of well it doesn't
protect.
We got a real problem we're
trying to find a solution for
okay everybody's with.
Thank you.
For the expiration of the menus
question among the.
Senator a.
City opens thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman Mr
chair my
I think you heard I I just
didn't see how we I was gonna
ask how do you think it would
protect them because I don't
think it protects them and
there's another issue and that
is the liability of the people
who employed them falsely has
subcontractors that I'm outraged
by that behavior and they were
basically violating the law
because their very clearly
controlled it is not so great in
place so
I support the amendment but I
just wanted to make clear it
doesn't solve that problem this
Roberts said to.
Any other numbers I would move
the amendment second okay we
have a
Motion the second.
And
Please call the roll.
Nobody supposed to
I'm sorry.
We did and we had a we have a
motion and a second for for the
amendment.
So you'll have to call the roll
on right okay because nobody's a
poster okay so now we move on to
The the bill itself those whose.
We have a further.
We're ready to go to the
audience of the audience
personal tech people than
anybody here in opposition.
Okay the one that the so how
many people are.
Leisure hands of those who are
in support.
So since we're only have three
or four of.
So take everyone if you would
please line up to in order to
expedite
The
During that would appreciate it
Mr chair did you mean you only
take three or four.
so we'll take them all.
There's more than three or four
well I'd.
Didn't come out currently has a
quick take everybody Mr chair
members of the committee up I
will give you a hand out to a
two page handout which is
details
statistics of a neglect abuse
and exploitation in the waiver
This typifies in most of these
are in the supported living
portion the waiver which is a
little over two thousand maybe
twenty five hundred people so in
a year we would abuse six
hundred people in these are
substantiated abuses of in my
experience over thirty eight
years with this program
substantiated is probably less
than half of the occurrences.
While the bill does want to
increase pay for care givers in
my experience and also
Department of Health improvement
has found the care giver pay
incentive the costs of this
neglect it's the three major
causes you'll find in that hand
out our health care plans which
is nursing supervision which is
administrative and oversight
which is both up when we that
providers have to find a staff
member to be there giving care
where they cut this bill the
services and stuff is in there
nursing an oversight and that's
where we get the abuse and
neglect and while it's admirable
to increase the wages for the
staff that's not why they're
quitting when they're alone I've
got a text in my phone where one
care giver is calling another
care giver because they can't
get a hold of the nurse and she
wants to find out how to re
packet tunneling bed sore okay
that's for real.
And that went to DH I a year ago
nine months ago and they
couldn't find that was neglect
okay
the that kind of stuff and lack
of nursing it is common in the
program and the reason these
care givers are quitting is when
they're grossly overworked it
they just can't take it anymore
so grand we need more
Wages are better wages but if
you're in the hospital and
you've got one the best are in
the world taken care of fifty
five patients in your one up on
you probably rather have three
maybe slightly less paid nurses
so we need to look at this
overall and that's our our right
studies work up we have to keep
in mind that we have a history
of grossly abusing this
population in terms of how we
fund it we're add grossly out of
compliance with federal law now
because we have shut down
providers all over the state
that will not take new clients
despite the fact we're trying to
put people on the waiver we
funded it we don't have
providers are willing to take it
our star agencies live question
sober city closed because it
couldn't pay overtime right
there are nonprofit they
couldn't do the subcontractor
scam trust co a Los crucis just
quit taking the waiver people
because of the exact same reason
so we've got a huge problem with
that
and.
There are number of historic
reasons we've done it but one of
the most.
Discussed in was a number of
years ago we had it was the feds
withhold a hundred million
dollars in Medicaid funding for
failure to collect data on
another program and we took it
out of the way for and cut the
rates and cut the services and
we have yet to replace those
numbers.
So that's where we are so I I
think we're really going to have
to take a look at this the other
thing I want to point out is
typically waiver rates are
capped by what we spend in our
immediate care facilities is
there is I can tell we're the
only state in the union that
didn't give our ICS for the
inner intellectually disabled
any comment money and in fact it
appears that they got a rate
decrease in the last three
years.
And we use those to cap the
waiver rates so we got a serious
problem thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee my name is
crystal.
The community navigation
coordinator Mandy's farm I am
providing public comment on the
health of Bendis farm the
provider agency in Albuquerque
the service of new one
individuals requiring
developmental disabilities
waiver services we employ this
of of eighty three.
Fifty one of whom will our
direct support professionals for
comparison purposes in March of
twenty twenty we served a
hundred and forty eight
individuals requiring do deliver
services and we deployed eighty
five direct support
professionals the significant
decrease in our service reaches
directly related to yield P.
recruitment and retention I am
speaking in support of S. P. two
three developmental disabilities
bill.
Our agency has benefited from
the American rescue plan Act
funding that was distributed to
all the the river providers when
these funds were distributed to
us we were strongly encouraged
by the department of health
developmental disabilities
supports division to use these
funds for DSP wages we did
exactly the at Mandy's farm
doing these workers are the key
to delivering individuals
needing services in addition we
have used our dollars from PPP
loans and other relief one is
slowly toward steel speed
recruitment and retention.
We have provided over a hundred
and sixty thousand and direct
bonuses over the past eighteen
months DSPs are the most
important week in our business
model.
As You of heard from the need
during the solution these funds
are temporary and future
consistent funding.
Is central to the stability of
community support services.
This bill gets is closer to
paying these essential workers.
What they're worth.
The bill also remains the DSP
in.
Can come to Legislature of
return we complete a system wide
range of the with the objective
analysis and recommendations of
third party analysts on what we
should be paying these workers
we personally like that there is
a cost of living adjustment
built into this bill to a future
that and will ensure that
analysts conducting the right
studies include a coal every two
years something we've never done
before there is another
component and this bill will
serve the loss as providers will
it directs the DD OC to ask us
about our company's workforce.
The bill till Steve yes to the
surface annually on our
workforce numbers whether lose
for workers are full time or
part time staff turnover.
Job vacancies compensation and
availability of budget
collection of this type of data
has been needed for a long time
this is a very common practice
in other states that provide TV
services we just providers
cannot plan for the future DD
river system and our yield P.
needs without doubt a like this
we think the data collection
selection of this bill will
actually strengthen the
relationships the providers of
with previously because we will
be meeting and talking about the
needs of the system not just
funding.
Mr chair and members of the
committee our agency wants to
work with all of our colleagues
advocates and stakeholders to
creatively come up with a
solution to our workforce
Crawley Crysis Mendis form truly
believe supporting the
developmental disabilities the
addresses many of the common
barriers to service delivery in
retention though we've shared
with you all over these past few
days is.
Thank you for giving me a few
minutes of your time
to speak with in support of the
bill thank you thank you for
your comments.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Stephanie Welch and I'm an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center online poverty the
Senators supports this bill
because the people doing this
important care giving work
should receive fair wages
unfortunately too many people
doing this work receive low
wages.
The don't match the importance
of their work the difficulty of
their work or the health and
safety risks that they face
every day because this care is
funded by the state and federal
government the funding actually
works to suppress wages
by setting the amounts that are
paid to providers.
The low wages are consistent
with the systemic and historical
undervaluing of care and of care
workers themselves most direct
support professionals are women
most are people of color they
have faced historical and
current employment
discrimination they provide for
others in their activities of
daily living yet they themselves
are not compensated enough to
have the security of knowing
that they can provide for their
own families.
People who work taking care of
other should not have to worry
where their next meal is coming
from or how they're gonna pay
the rent this bill addresses
this issue but generating data
about wages and working
conditions and supporting future
reimbursement rates sufficient
to pay these care givers wages
that are more fair more
competitive in the reporting
requirements would help the
state develop sound policy to
ensure the work force is
adequately supported to provide
these important services so we
need to pass this bill thank
you.
Thank you for your comment to
anyone else in the audience
would like to speak in support
of this bill.
The hearing on
anyone in opposition.
Okay hearing none will.
We have a three folks zoom.
What wishing to speak in support
the first one is Chris looks
like L. E. R. O. online.
This Chris on okay yes.
Yes my name is Chris Lori
chairman and members of the
committee I am the public policy
officer with our New Mexico we
work in advocating and
representing people with
disabilities both intellectual
and developmental and we stand
in strong support of this bill
our office assisted Adrienne
Smith and the care givers
coalition and coming up with
this bill and also supporting
house bill forty one so thank
you very much as we stand in
strong support of thank you
Chris so next up we have Jared.
Even REC.
hello can you hear me.
Yes hopefully so great thank you
yes my name's Jared Evan wreck I
am family caregiver for my
mother with Alzheimer's a public
health graduate student at UNM
and a policy intern with caring
across generations a national
partner in advocacy for care
work I want to thank you for
your time and consideration
today and point out that that's
really what we are all doing
here today right it's time in
consideration that caring takes
that's what draws us all
together we all need or will
need care many of us care for
others in this room right now.
For me that means helping mom
wake up get claim to make food
give meds sharing the anxiety of
her condition and remember to
center her dignity at every
moment we last we hug we saying.
The attunement of care is like
playing music I have to feel the
rhythm of mom stated being
beyond words to songs of gesture
and grace.
When a family member doesn't
offer care Medicaid pays for
direct support workers to do it
they care for elders and people
with developmental disabilities
and help navigate daily tasks
that support full lives in the
community but we don't value the
work of care wages are low they
average around eleven dollars an
hour turnover is high and the
workers themselves often need
Medicaid The New Mexico lacks
the data we need to make smart
choices for care.
We cannot value a language we
refuse to speak yet care is
invisible and like the air we
breathe we know when care is
absent.
What this legislation does is
make the work of caring visible
in detail providing the
information needed to build a
competent and well compensated
caring workforce in New Mexico
we cannot support what we don't
see.
In closing as a family caregiver
I speak in solidarity with my
direct support professional
peers when I ask you and also my
senator Daniel Ivey Soto to
support SB two oh threes goal of
developing a database with no
more detail about direct support
workers caring for those with
developmental disabilities thank
you for listening.
Thank you Jerry for your
comments next up we have Paul
Austin bird.
Yes I'm posting group I've as a
in the past in a grant writer
for non profits that employee
direct care process direct
support professionals in care
for the development
developmentally disabled.
I'm presently a long term care
insurance agent and long term
care insurance policies perform
rather utilized direct support
professionals and finally my
spouse is on the New Mexico
caregivers coalition and the
board of heart is home
cooperative care a non a worker
owned non medical home care
provider the wage levels which
this bill would help improve I
believe of those workers are so
important there aren't enough
workers who are willing to
provide the services that are
needed at the wage levels
because they can earn more in
working for McDonald's which is
truly sad because it's not past
speakers have just noted the
importance of being of having
effective care givers is so
important thank you very much.
Thank you all for your comments.
We have a long by the name of of
Pat see I can't Rio last name
who
Is in support of the bill but
doesn't wish to speak.
could be Patsy Romero yes I
couldn't read it yes see CEO of.
Santa Maria will meet other.
So the next person on the list
is Pamela Stafford.
She.
Okay.
And I guess the the the the the
three all of these don't want to
speak right okay then we have a
maybe Lopez Alan.
P. I. N. A. us at a Megan.
Read all all of which will
support the bill but they don't
wish to speak so.
Thank you of those of you who
Are expressing your support but
don't want to speak that
concludes the comments from the
people on zoom so next we'll
turn to the.
Members of this committee
anyone.
Members wishing to speak the S.
questions or comments done.
I move it to press second.
Okay we have a motion and a do
pass.
please the.
Call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes thank
you very much Mr chairman we
have a due pass of
congratulations and the final
count was six.
Six yes yes.
Four X. three X. three.
Thank
you so.
Next yeah what do Senator said
this to bills now.
That's it.
well I don't know if o'neill's
gonna come.
Okay very good rules will be
representatives.
Yes it has.
And then the work with.
Are you starting with the two
twenty three secretary of.
For two different for two twenty
three is fine.
Mr chair for.
Thank you Mr chair let me just
say if anyone is here for the
child abuse best interest
standards two oh seven the.
Roll that over till a later
meeting.
Okay so Senator Sedillo Lopez
please thank you Mr chair the
problem that this bill is trying
to address is the the
relationship between federal and
state law under federal law we
have an obligation to review the
child support guidelines at at
least every four years and what
that requires is the department
to work on a revision to create
a commission to get that
recommendations from the
commission prepare a bill and
try to get it passed
in in the session sometimes are
short sessions and we have been
out of compliance with federal
guidelines which threatens our
federal funding.
So the solution to the problem.
So the solution to the problem
is to amend the child support
guidelines to remove this the
child support a table that
you're probably familiar with
that we approve every year or
not every year but every time
the bill comes up we end up
approving the table.
And and to require the Human
Services Department to
promulgate a new table when the
department determines it's
necessary to update it based on
the factors in the child support
guidelines also to require the
Human Services department to
consider certain factors when
updating the child support
including all the income of the
noncustodial parent basic
subsistence needs of low income
non custodial parent economic
data on the cost of raising
children late labor market data
and regional and national trends
in child support guidelines all
of this is required by federal
law to also require specific
considerations for the initial
just child support schedule.
Promulgated by the Human
Services Department.
Including not decrease not
decreasing the yearly basic
support obligation for any level
of combined parental income by
more than one dollar change in
the federal poverty guidelines.
It also requires the posting of
the promulgated child support
tables on the supreme court's
website and the Human Services
website with the first update to
be Pat published no later than
January first twenty twenty
four.
the these will go into effect
July first has as we said
With that I want to share with
you that I have my experts here
and I will turn it over to them
to discuss it this was a bill
that so I served on the
commission the child support
commission and I got to see all
the work that goes into it and
that's how this bill came up
came about and I'd like to have
my experts express there's point
view about the bill this army
hello welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I'll be I'll be
pretty brief care but I'd like
to start by thanking you for the
chance presented to child
support bills today and by
recognizing the partnership of
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
representative Nibert who works
with the HSD during the interim
to continue our focus on
modernizing and improving New
Mexico child support program
with a very simple goal which is
to get more money to kids so
they can worry less about basic
necessities like food and
shelter and do what kids do best
which is just be kids so and I
would be remiss if I didn't
introduce are amazing child
support director at Bettina
Gonzales McCracken has really
been spearheading our
modernization efforts that the
HSD so as Senator Sedillo Lopez
said the bill really seeks to
remove the detail child support
schedule so those specific
specify dollar amounts that you
see in the law today and move
them to the New Mexico ministry
of code some of you may recall
that the child support
guidelines statue was brought
before the legislature during
the twenty twenty one session so
that we can update the
guidelines to comply with
federal rules so here we are
again as long as those detail
dollar amounts remain in the
statute legislative action to
update that based on current
economic data in the cost of
raising a child will be required
at least every four years more
often if the data requires it
and if we fail to do that which
is what has occurred in the past
New Mexico will be at risk of
losing a total of a hundred and
sixty million dollars in federal
funding we currently receive for
our town F. and child support
programs as Senator Sedillo
Lopez mentioned to the bill does
not give full authority to the
executive to just set the
schedule without any parameters
we've included some important
guardrails to ensure that the
guidelines have both upper and
lower limits that are tied to
the statute today and to make
sure that future changes are
tied to the child support work
sheets that are used by the
courts.
the detail child support
schedules would be promulgated
in full transparency to the
public and published in
regulation as well as on the
websites of both HSD and the New
Mexico Supreme Court so they can
be easily located by anyone who
needs to provide them and I I
Senator Sedillo Lopez mentioned
this change was recommended by
the twenty twenty two New Mexico
child support guideline
Commission it is also supported
by the judiciary so it great
example of the three branches of
government working together
on these important stakeholders
just recognize the ability to
keep the statute current will be
a challenge as long as it
contains those detail dollar
amounts of that require updates
every four years and the impact
of not doing so risks the loss
of substantial federal funding
to the state so with that Mr
chair thank you for your
consideration this afternoon and
all look forward to answering
any questions you might thank
you did you want to add anything
Mr reckon or.
Your for any.
Thank you great let's go to the
audience and is there anyone
here who wants to speak in
support of this bill.
Yes.
This Martin welcome.
I think you're just hanging
around for Senators committee
bill.
Mr chair I just like to hang
around.
Use the Mike.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director
protective protective services
at CYFD we stand in support of
this bill providing port
allowing for that removal and of
the out of date schedule and
support this thank you great
thank you anybody else.
Seeing none will go to anybody
else no let's go to the
committee
any questions from the committee
this is this looks like a really
just common sense thing on
budget in the Senator my
mechanic.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator Sergio Lopez and
And expert witness witnesses I'm
curious seen commission here in
the bill
what is the role of the child
support guideline review
commission.
It's not clear to me.
Thank you Mr chair that that is
a really important question
because what what we thought
about when we were doing this in
the commission is that the child
support Rick review commission
would initiate would draft the
initial proposed rule but the
statute doesn't say that
specifically so I would would
like to on page thirty two.
To make an amendment saying.
Right after the word.
By rule comma.
Using the recommendations of the
child support review commission
has the initial proposed rule.
But line was a fine line one.
All right at the very top at the
very top by rural comment
there's a comma there.
Hang on just saying let's get
our our analyst able to.
Thank you that's right at the
very top line one on page thirty
two.
So go ahead and say what you say
inserting something by rural
come up to leave I rural comment
and then insert using the
recommendations of the child
support review commission has
the initial proposed rule.
And I noticed that the FIR said
do you know do we need the
commission and the answer is
absolutely yes as required by
federal law.
So I I would be the
recommendations of the child
support commission what's arrest
child support review commission
has the initial proposed rule.
As as the issue has initial
propose rule so that the rest of
the way it would work is there
recommendations would be the
rule that there would be comment
and input has required by the
the process is and then then
they would probably gate the
rules.
And this would provide for much
more impact input from the
public than is currently
available.
Well we are yes.
you know not strike Lee Lee by
rule.
And then just insert after the
comma after rule.
Using the recommendations.
Of the child support review
commission has the initial
proposed rule.
Comma.
Okay so we have a motion is
there a second a second seconded
by Senator Tallman.
Any questions on this the
amendment.
Is that does that satisfy your
your question Senator McKenna
yeah thank you chairman thank
you senator.
Is there any opposition to
adopting this amendment.
Seeing then will consider the
bills to the amended.
And will look for any further
discussion do you have anything
else center we can.
No chairman thank you.
Anybody else what what what's
the.
Quick question go ahead.
Thank you Mr thank you for
bringing this bill for will
confuse are we in compliance or
noncompliance.
You mean right now.
Has the has of today we're in
compliance because I believe in
twenty twenty one we amended I
don't remember that but we would
be amended I remember I remember
quite well Representative river
ridge amended the child support
guidelines so right at this
moment we're in compliance but
then that means we have to
amendment three years and well
Mr chair Senator tall that do
you want
Mr chair by experts know a lot
more about what I'm playing with
federal law than I do we just
had a child support guideline
Commission in twenty twenty two
and they did make
recommendations commend chan
changes so what we could now
move forward to promulgate rules
based on those recommended
changes from the commission but
we are currently compliance to
answer your question and that
will keep us in compliance if we
think that this thank you thank
you senator that's all I have
Mister chair.
Okay good section thank you so
we have we have a motion.
All Senator John moved to to
second and seconded the
Representative do yes motion to
to do.
The motion.
As a member as I mentioned.
And the secretary will call the
roll Senator guy Aigles Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle center
Maestas Senator McKenna.
Senators metes yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes.
But I in the affirmative five
votes in favor and zero against
with.
For members excuse to have a due
pass on Senate bill two to three
now of that Senate bill two to
four.
Thank you Mr chair and so again
I have Mister mako and this but
you know because it's also a big
crack in his experts on two to
four and this actual this also.
Comes out of the commission.
Thank you.
thank you when you have a you
actually have a chart about this
that I actually didn't realize
was prepared to thank you they
feel great
wonderful to work with.
With this with this Division so
this problem is an interesting
one because at one time under
federal law.
It was required that the
obligor for providing insurance
have to contribute at least five
dollars a month and so we
amended state law to require
that the all the gore that was
you know the person is obligated
to provide medical insurance
would pay would contribute.
at least five dollars a month so
we have all these five dollar a
month orders.
And the other thing that this
bill does that is really good is
it clarifies that health of
health care coverage which about
half the people in New Mexico
get it through a public entity
in other words Medicaid is
considered a health coverage
plan for the purposes of medical
support orders.
So
And then it also requires the
person who is eligible for the
Medicaid to maintain the re
certification so that those are
really important things that is
and kind of been a problem in
the in the child support area.
Now this five dollars it costs
more to collect then it does add
to the budget in any way shape
or form and federal law no
longer requires it so what we
would like to stop requiring it
to seven years ago yes yes and
meanwhile we've and seven
hundred and forty one dollars a
year collecting.
For all this time that's correct
no wonder we have such as.
That forget it okay and
So that that is our bills and it
did it really corrects of a
problem in in the child support
enforcement arena sorry how did
you want to say anything more Mr
chair and members of the
committee I guess I I just want
to highlight a couple of
additional numbers so as Senator
Sedillo Lopez mentioned that
establishing and enforcing a
single five dollar medical
support order costs the Human
Services department seven
hundred and forty one dollars so
we take a parent twelve years
and three months reimbursed the
state for the cost of
establishing enforcing the order
you can see in the data on the
worksheet that we gave you in
the upper of the graft on the
upper right that HSD has spent
three point four million dollars
and administrative costs since
two thousand nine to establish
and enforce these orders and
that we are collecting an
average of a hundred thirty
seven thousand dollars per year
we would be able to deliver a
better return on investment for
New Mexico if we spent the time
and administrative effort that
we currently expand on these
cases by helping noncustodial
parents receive the training and
support they need to find
employment so they can make more
consistent child support
payments for their kids I also
want to mention that parents who
fail to pay the five dollar fee
after two months so in just ten
dollars to the state are
considered delinquent they're
subject to license revocation
attorney fees and damages credit
reports all of these things make
it very difficult or impossible
for them to retain employment
which is the exact opposite of
what we're trying to achieve for
the children these parents are
obligated to support without a
job parents can't support their
kids we've seen improve
performance and about ten
percent higher collections on
child support cases when we
partner with the department of
workforce solutions to help
parents find employment we think
it makes more sense to move our
energy and effort away from
administratively expensive
activities that don't deliver
results and toward programs that
are proven to help parents
adequately support their
children so I think.
The bill is really important in
achieving that goal Mr chair
members of the committee was
actually aware of this a five
dollar charge until I about the
I think we were doing the
commission I came to my
attention so I wanted to change
that right away as soon as we
found out about it so I just
want to note that this
recommendation was also part of
the commission's final report
and is supported by the
judiciary everyone all the
stakeholders recognize the
inefficiencies and costs that
that were spent establishing and
enforcing this five dollar
medical support order we could
be doing so much more for New
Mexico's kids thank you an awful
for quite a thank you and did
you want to add anything this
for correct thank you very much
for.
Is there anyone in the audience
wants to speak on this.
This Martin.
Mr chair members of the
committee we we are in full
support of HSD and and taking us
away and very much to agree when
you engage and partner with
parents rather than take
a punitive approach and the
funding that even five dollars
can go towards our children
we've we felt that is much more
well use of a time thank you.
Thank you.
Okay members of the committee
anybody on to the.
And members of the committee
senator Senator McCracken I mean
the correction.
She's McCracken.
Do you like to.
At five o'clock I started
getting very to the sundowner
effective thank you state.
Who
sure when you're ready I I would
offer a do pass okay do you have
a credit this quick.
just a clarification so it.
So the seven R. forty once per
year.
And so.
Mr chair Senator seven hundred
and forty one is just to
establish the the order and then
to get that at the time to
enforce it.
So sixty dollars a year five
times twelve on.
That cost.
How much the collected sixty
dollars.
Seven hundred forty one at least
that's what investors that yes
that's absolutely right and and
that's at least if the case gets
any kind of complication it's
more.
This just give the case because
it kind of hard to believe so
you spent.
Over three million dollars and
cents two thousand nineteen.
To collect.
Yes that that was the only
twenty thousand dollars Mr chair
Senator that is the folly of the
law has it was enacted in the
first place and the folly of not
fixing it as long as federal law
permitted us to fix it I think
there was this idea back then
that
if people pay they meet.
I was kind of punitive I guess
to make people pay for that have
a
with the words of state senators
committee likes to use the
phrase have a
Thank a stake in the.
Skin in the game.
What is Senator but as a result.
I heard
the word he uses but.
We have a
I.
Is it in the game.
Since the game that's what.
Okay.
So what and one last question
Senator African dispatchers.
Why it took so long to
Correct this is about the
federal law didn't allow you to
a federal law didn't didn't
allow this and so I mean federal
law required this and so the
state complied by passing a law
requiring this and it's just
taken a while to undo it I'm
actually I believe the
department hasn't been
collecting it for the last
during.
Yes since November of this year
just because it's ridiculous
thank you Mr thank you for
bringing this bill forward
that's all I have thank you.
So so we have a motion by
Senator McKenna and seconded by
Senator Tallman any other
discussion of the senators
committee you have anything you
want to bring.
Secretary called the roll
Senator Taos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Congratulations Senator but I I
voted in favor of zero against
four excused the other do pass
on Senate bill two to four that
we have one less bill on the
agenda.
Currently neither the sponsors
are here but.
Senator Sedillo Lopez do you
know anything about bankruptcy.
I'm I'm happy to present to you
put it on to you put it on I was
going to look for Senator
Maestas but he says you have
here Representative has.
It's going to get we see here
what masters webmasters be
better I don't know if you know
no I I actually understand the I
understand the bill.
I understand the bill I'm happy
to to Representative and I
believe there experts as well.
We have an amendment sentiment
okay let's press of the
amendment to the okay this is.
With.
Of course you know anything
about bankruptcy Senator much.
I
have Senator Sedillo Lopez put
this bill on for Senator
o'neill.
Is he apparently is he in
finance in judiciary's that
would happen we don't know where
he is.
Yes yeah and he can't leave or
they will have a quorum if he
leaves Judiciary to come here
they lose their quorum and.
This guy's fault is just
terrible.
This is
going.
So Senator Sedillo Lopez do you
want to say anything or if you
just turn it over to the experts
well I'm happy to turn it over
the experts but what I
understand this this is a
benefit to New Mexico citizens
citizens because it works on
what the state offers in terms
of exemptions
when you declare bankruptcy you
can either use the federal
exemptions or the state
exemptions and now the state
exemptions are out of date so
it's time to to update them with
that I'll turn it over to of the
experts in this area which I
have William ivory who is an
attorney in Santa Fe he's had
his own law practice for thirty
five years he specializes in
representing individuals folks
small business debtors in
bankruptcy for closure than
collection cases and I have
Mister what from the Santo
online poverty so this is a nice
combination to present this bill
for lunch to go first.
I can start out Senator well
will provide greater is actually
very endearing to hear someone
calling Mr wolf because I use
the public defender in this all
my clients called me which I was
that was very sweet this is a
home mines will bomb Gardner I'm
attorney with the Center online
poverty we're etcetera Senator
works as an average organization
for lowincome New Mexicans to
increase opportunity to Vance
equity
start off I just want to briefly
point out that on this bill
wasn't just written by FC
organizations like ours
throughout the last three years
that this built and worked on
we've been working with the New
Mexico bankers association as
well
I think it's because we can all
agree that people should be able
to meet their basic needs while
paying down debt.
currently
forty percent of New Mexicans
are dealing with that is in
collections thousands of New
Mexicans file for bankruptcy
every year and poor communities
committees of color are
disproportionately impacted the
bill which passed the house
unanimously in twenty twenty one
up for grabs from the Senate
updates New Mexico law to
increase the value of property
of families can keep when they
go to the are we haven't come
garnished.
Twenty twenty two inflation
increased by nine percent the
highest in four years it's the
reason that so many states
around us really at every state
that we touch
has increased these values over
the last few years New Mexico
what hasn't been updated in
decades if at all in this area
and I'm here with Mr bill every
I'll turn it over to and speak
about the bankruptcy portions of
this bill and then I can.
Striving welcome.
The process of.
Thank you president thank you Mr
Chairman said senators on the
committee yeah my name's bill
every have a private practice
lawyer in our have a private
practice in Santa Fe
specializes in bankruptcy
representing debtors small
businesses and bankruptcy
foreclosure and collection cases
and for those who don't know the
purpose of the exemption statute
is to allow people to keep a
certain amount of.
Their property whether it's a
house or cars up to a certain
amount of money if they are if
there's a judgment against them
or if they file bankruptcy.
You know you can keep a certain
amount of things and anything
above that the creditor or that
bankruptcy trustee can take and
the New Mexico exemption laws
have not been changed since
they're written over forty five
years ago the values of cars and
jewelry and what you can keep in
the value of a car jewelry and.
Tools of the trade and cash.
Are what they haven't changed
since nineteen at least nineteen
seventy eight if not before that
the only thing that has changed
there's been a couple of
amendments to increase the
homestead exemption which is now
sixty thousand which has not
been changed since the year two
thousand seven.
so the purpose of this bill is
really three fold one is to
increase the values of personal
tangible property of what they
can keep under the old law you
can keep up a car up to four one
car up to four thousand dollars
you could keep five fifteen
hundred dollars in jewelry
maybe fifteen hundred dollars
into the trade under the present
on the field all the present law
and five hundred dollars in the
bank account anything above
that.
The granular can take or the
bankruptcy trustee can take
weaving you know obviously the
cost of I mean fifth times have
changed is forty five years ago
and things are worth a lot more
money so this bill increases the
value of what you keep in the
car waiting keep potatoes with
trade what you keep for jewelry
and.
And
And the cash exception increases
the values to make a more up to
date the more in line with the
federal statute because as
senator to the other Lopez says
up a debtor is a choice and
bankers is a choice of taking
the federal or the state
exemptions.
the second part of the bill is
specify what a household goods
is the old bill just says you
can exempt household goods.
Judges.
Don't know what household good
as I've had cases in magistrate
court where magistrate judge
that said a computer is not a
household good a TV is not a
house so good about the the
creditor take those items of how
to yield and District Court got
overturned but it's just it's
been a lot of litigation with
the house or good the question
is is it gonna house of god is
a.
artwork household goods to this
bill really specifies exactly
what a house would good is
includes certain amount of art
includes musical instruments
electronics I mean there are no
computers and cellphones when
this bill was written so that
was the question of whether
those are considered also goods
today this bill really specifies
what is a house or a good
analogy to keep two guns somehow
works musical instruments.
And so it's just well avoid the
necessity of litigation in the
future because the specified
what is the house of god and
what is not a house or good.
And the third part of the bill
which is probably the most
important is increasing the
homestead exemption obviously
the price of real estate has
gone up significantly in the
last fifteen years since it was
last for seventeen years as the
bill was last changed amended to
sixty thousand we I met with the
New Mexico bankers Association
the independent community
bankers in two years ago we
agreed to increase the homestead
exemption the ninety thousand
but since the pandemic the
The values of real estate of
really increased in the state
and part of
And I can tell you how many
bankruptcy cases I've lost where
people at and tons of unsecured
debt.
Have no income that we're living
on a fixed income but they can't
file bankruptcy because the
house is worth more than sixty
thousand dollars illusion it's
paid off so they can't file
bankruptcy in the cat creditors
can foreclose on their house so
I I met with the you know I
propose to increase the
homestead exemption the two
hundred thousand Arizona just
increased there's two fifty and
Colorado increase there's to two
fifty in the last last year so
we want to get in line with
those states I met with the
independent bankers association
and that Mexico bankers
association they had a little
problems with two hundred
thousand for single person four
hundred for a married couple so
we agreed to compromise at a
hundred fifty thousand and three
hundred thousand for homestead
exemption which would definitely
be a huge two and a half times
with the exceptions to that
that's the amendment at the
amendment that was signed by
Senator on the island has been
submitted.
So I think.
The only mothers then other nice
thing this bill does is it
increases the value every two
years based on the consumer
price index so we want to come
back here in four years to try
to get these numbers increase to
automatically be increased or
decreased depending on the
consumer price index.
Therefore I think this bill is
well over way over needed and
should be passed.
Very briefly I'll go over on the
garnishment or Mr will yes thank
you Mr chair.
so garnishment is when a
creditor can
got to thank you Garcia is one
twelve can take money from a
paycheck or bank accounts
creditors filed garnishment to
begin the process through
directs an employer or financial
institution to hold the funds to
satisfy the debt under it also
gives a complicated set of
instructions to employers and
their banks to notify the person
the debtor with that that they
can seek exemption and how do
that.
The process is confusing the
value of the exempt income is
actually quite low according to
the next the national consumer
law center only twelve states
section of was protections in
garnishment in New Mexico as a
briefly mentioned earlier over
the last couple years Arizona
Colorado Nevada Texas have all
of the the garnishment laws to
better protect families this
bill would bring similar
protections as those states and
much needed updates to this
decades old law the first change
that it does is that the bill
would protect the highest
minimum wage applicable instead
of just the federal law on the
federal minimum wage so right
now the statute protects only
the federal minimum wage which
is seven fifty this page changes
so that its the the highest
applicable minimum wage whether
it's the state or Santa fe's
minimum wage or someone second
bill would automatically
protects twenty four hundred
dollars in the bank account the
reason we went with twenty four
hundred dollars it's roughly
four weeks of the minimum wage
here it's enough to cover about
two months of the average rent
in New Mexico.
third the bill would protect so
security fee a unemployment
workers compensation those sorts
of benefits automatically when
those funds are deposited into a
bank account right now creditors
can see those benefits after
they've been put into a bank
account this and make sure that
people can hold on to their
benefits even if they're
deposited.
These protections have two
budget ensures the families have
enough to live survive paycheck
to paycheck here ensures that
people can participate their
local economies the bill also
improves the garnishment notice
process because getting into
earlier it it's quite confusing
process right now where a range
filed but the actual debtor
doesn't get any notice right
them and also the onus is on the
bank account of the person or
the person's employer to tell
the debtor that they have
certain rights so they can try
to seek out.
the process is very confusing
for families for employers even
for banks and leads to exempt
funds being frozen and
prematurely turned over to
creditors just as an example
we had a client at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
could had wages inappropriately
garnished for medical debt
and before she could dispute the
writ the employer turned over
those funds the creditor.
now publicly she she had
attorneys who could help her but
the vast majority of folks don't
have attorneys who can help them
through this process and that
just means that they're losing
money that they are actually
entitled to so this bill would
require creditors following for
garnishment notify the family
when that is being garnished and
it also of the court forms to
improve directions for third
parties like employers and banks
so that they're clear on what
their obligations are.
so to conclude the these are
important updates that bring New
Mexico law into compliant excuse
me into alignment thank you
senator with the states around
us and would allow families to
recover and pay off their debts
well paying for basic
necessities.
We take up the amendment yes
Mister chair I move the
amendment
if you don't have a chance to
look at this is the one that.
The bankers that we are being
unnecessarily generous to people
who were desperate and so the
wanted they were willing to
compromise the the lower figure.
Mr chair at one hundred fifty
thousand dollars exemption is of
modest home if it's very modest
home today maybe roan of that in
the Albuquerque or Santa Fe.
This is the equity in the equity
in that the equity you're
correct Senator and and actually
that is a lot of equity.
Okay all right.
My apologies to the banking
industry I.
Your truck Mr chair I understand
you're trying to be cute this.
So we have a motion on the
minimal budget by the sponsor
Senator but the person acting as
a sponsor centers of the look
with is there a second on the
amendment Senator Tallman
seconded.
We have a question you know I
just wanted to this is that
which in New Mexico this.
you think that this is equity so
it's a little different yeah
good point.
Senator McKenna on the
amendment.
Thank you chairman thank you
center city a lot of those in
our experts joining us this
afternoon maybe I missed some of
the conversation is this
friendly this they proposed it
they pay that yes okay we're
proposing it after there was it
looks like this process has
involved a lot of stakeholders
which is always helpful I think
Mr ivory met with the bankers
and I met with Mr Anderson who
is actually here to about four
thirty city out of the falcon
okay but we made a compromise
that we did two years two years
ago because you want to get them
on board they were they I
propose two hundred eight balked
at one twenty eight we
compromised at one fifty in
there in support of the one
fifty slash three hundred for a
married couple the one thing we
did take out is our the actual
bill has up a little extra
homestead exemption for people
over sixty five are on
disability.
no other states do that we kind
of got creative two years ago
and put that in there the
bankers were crazy because we
took it out says that's been
deleted and the.
Okay.
Thank you chairman I just I
missed that conversation that's
good want any sure any other
questions from the on the
amendment the clerk any
opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
amendment been adopted and we'll
go to the audience.
Is there anyone in the audience
was to speak on this bill Mr
Jeffries hi I hear protected
because I have I have a case of
pro bono case because the guy
has no money is dog went out and
did a postman which but post
woman which is not unusual in
Albuquerque apparently it occurs
twenty times a year for those
who have you who have
homeowner's policies that's not
a big deal because the insurance
company comes and to deal with
this my client pro bono
his dog bit the post proposed
women and did serious damage to
your the plaintiffs counsel has
assured me that she will try to
get the title to the house the
house is worth two hundred and
twenty thousand dollars now
after his ownership for thirty
seven years he lives in it with
his blind son and if he is the
judgment I imagine is going to
be in the six figures maybe
multiple so that could be
certainly six figures and that
house will be sold and under the
present statute at sixty
thousand dollars he will lose
everything you'll have sixty
thousand dollars he can go out
and try to buy a new house in
Albuquerque you can make a down
payment for sixty thousand
dollars but he makes ten
thousand less than ten thousand
dollars a year as a handy man
and tuning pianos is in his
sixties he's not going to hit a
big bonus up here pretty soon so
he he cannot make the payments
on a three hundred thousand
dollar home he will be homeless
with his blind son and I'd very
much urge you to pass this at
least at a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars he may be able
to keep this house the rest of
it may well be taken in a
judgment but at least he'll have
is home.
Thank you thank you that now is
this going to go into effect in
time to save them effective date
is July one because if they have
to get a judgment and I assure
you that I will you can drag it
out.
The good internet.
Any other questions the leave it
up to the amendment anything
else about the bill itself.
Service center where senator Tom
you Mr thank you
Senator filling in on this so.
Why is it taking so long if you
change something.
Decades.
This is the.
Mr chair Senator alternate over
to my experts.
Mr chair Senator Thoman
To be honest nobody's done that
we thought about doing the
amendment of the sections until
two years ago we never and we
just the back of some of the
bankruptcy lawyers got together
two years ago this is crazy we
have to change this this law
they change the homestead in two
thousand seven the sixty
thousand but suddenly a few of
us got together in two thousand
twenty one is that.
This loss got nobody took the
initiative to amend that and to
get sick excellent question we
got a passed unanimously in the
house two years ago but
unfortunately we ran out of time
in the Senate so.
We and we had a pretty raw build
we did about twelve reach wraps
and now we were pretty solid
bill and hopefully you will get
going this year to Stephanie
much needed this way way overdue
thank you senator thank you for
the answer that's all I have and
I neglected to tune the to give
the person who signed up online
to support this bill current
regular with the Lutheran
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
a chance to speak Mr regular up
yes good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
great rigor on the director of
Lujan FC minister New Mexico we
also expressed position of both
the Mexican foods of churches in
the press you're at Santa Fe
here of course to offer strong
support for SB to sixteen at
this late hour also the state
that is paid communities some
moral imperative we hold is to
seek sufficient and sustainable
why was that for all in this
case and our state's public
policy all New Mexicans should
be able to live lives work at a
minimum they are able to meet
their basic needs regardless
that that status these updates
are long overdue as I hope
you'll agree with it Avenatti
Mexico on our partner
organizations urged support for
SD to sixteen and thank you for
the opportunity to share
position with the.
And then there is the second
person who wanted to speak thank
you Kurt next pursuant to speak
is Tammy.
Good evening members of the
committee and senators my name's
Tammy Schneider on the internet
in Santa Fe who also practices
in the area of bankruptcy and
get the fans and foreclosure
defense and I'd just like to
support everything Mr average it
has said and to point out that
for older couples with almost.
Paid off for rate of the
mortgages the amount of
homestead exemption we are
proposing is extremely modest in
Maine at you can support them.
Keep them from the losing their
houses thank you very much.
So thank you thank you attend
the.
Yep you're right especially in
in these these tell Santa Fe
Albuquerque Los Alamos you're
you're absolutely right.
But we can we can get right now
and and
Mr chair really help a lot of
people in the rural community
started off with Jeff very
important but they're out there
if they had their house paid off
it'll say their vote Mr chair so
you can see why I was happy to
step in and get this bill
secretary will call the roll.
We have a motion.
We have a motion from Senator
Schmedes for a do pass in the
second from Senator Tallman.
Okay.
Senator make any other question
I'm sorry one more question
about the bill that
chairman senators experts
I'm trying to find my sheet I
was reading up on this bill
previously but the doctor Mr
Baumgartner gave me.
You have an idea of how many
this
how many New Mexicans are going
to benefit from passage of this
bill that is you know you're not
gonna lose their house for
instance thank you.
I can give you an exact number
on any individual part of the
bill but forty percent New
Mexicans have debt that's in
collections so all of them will
benefit to some extent from this
will forty percent and that's
that that's in collections
and and thousands filed for
bankruptcy every year on the
number's been going down to some
extent but we actually are
hopeful that moral feel like
they can get the protection of
bankruptcy if we update the law.
Mister chairman Senator McKenna
I can just just for my own
private practice I've had
literally at least twenty cases
in the last the year where
someone had to much equity in
your house but I think if they
have if they're married years
three and they have less than
three hundred thousand more than
sixty I think this bill will
definitely benefit about more
people on one that the bankers
image out seventy percent of New
Mexico and it's not because
we're having a wonderful economy
it's because I think essential
reason is because people would
lose their house or even their
cars because they have more than
four thousand equity in their
cars if they file bankruptcy so
even though they have tended
that in even though they have no
income they just if they want to
file bankruptcy and lose our
house or car so that I can
assure you bankruptcies will
definitely increase in people
bill take advantage of the
United States bankruptcy code if
these exceptions are increased.
Right thank you I have no idea
was so high thank you very much.
Thank you if anybody else any
other questions secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator COVID yes center to
the piano yes and by a vote of
six six yes is zero nose and
three excuse you have a new path
thank you very much for the work
you put in.
And with that the this year it
Friday the tenth of February
meeting of the health and public
affairs committee for the Senate
is over.
