I have emails it's crazy.
Because Representative our our
webcast ten starting because he
thought we were gonna started to
PM.
Well as two thirty did you
three it is daylight savings
time any at.
So we should be up any minute
now.
He's as aware of.
Okay I'd probably Senator
waiting for an important to
gather I just wanted to make a
couple of and this is for the
for the public and then they may
be here to join the.
March fourteenth meeting of the
Senate health and public affairs
committee.
We have a a
revise that went out additional
relief today we have the number
of bills that were on the
original had their status change
so if you remember bill by
Senator Diamond she's full that.
Representative number if you're
here for a bill number four
thirty the originally and then
scheduled and Senator that sort
of P. R. A. board Senator Ingle
was gonna.
The state was not sure that he's
pull that off the agenda.
And we.
Change the status of the Senate
bill two sixteen still to sixty
nine as amended returns that is
a duplicate of full to click on
the bill in order to us out of
here.
So when we just started we're
going to deal with that one
first.
Then we're going to do the other
three house bills on our
calendar.
Fourteen
Representative Dixon or jazz.
there are and senator he's
still.
And then we're gonna switch to
Senate house bill two seventy
seven Representative Harper is
still
Only one star we start rejection
we're kind of waiting for
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Then we'll take up the Senate
memorial encouraged that we
prepared three memorials on the
red.
And then the Senate bills.
Only these first aid items of
business won't take very long
we'll be able to get right into
the inner set of bills currently
Mr chair you didn't mention to
seventy two.
Well that was the one that
someone.
Yeah well we are we're gonna do
is I think you representative
will deal with that right after
fourteen okay thank you.
We should take any action
dollars over your form so
Senator chairman Basco.
Your question yes for House Bill
fourteen I have an amendment.
Your should all have received
and so would you like that.
Address on the front end of the.
Did you get that amendment on
house bill fourteen.
I'm looking now Senator through
my folder.
And then I'm here should also
have maybe Schardin receives the
information for my expert
witness as well.
And that's Terry Bruner.
Senator we have.
Quarter back number
Representative I don't believe I
have an amendment from fourteen
thank you renewed violence
right.
Yeah I got a **** Amendment
point two two zero five six
point one.
That is.
Thank god we're OK thanks that
is a short notes so we can put
it up on the screen and review
is going to get your bill.
Yes.
Looking in the wrong folder I
apologize I have.
Okay.
And so little that up on the
screen we get your bill and
we'll deal with that right after
the start of our discussion of
your bill Representative thank
you.
Share any feedback for many
really committee members.
Not saying I've tried to call
again and I'm I've sent emails.
No response.
Eight one three four one.
It is all in.
Tax business and transportation
which is meeting so he's
probably over there.
In that one.
so we need the Republicans.
I think Sedillo will be here
shortly but that is for we need
at least one of the Republicans.
Do
we have to seven seven five here
already thanks Mr chairman
taxes doing
House bill twenty so common may
be for a while.
you're on that issue and then
next many to.
Fifteen people waiting to
testify so.
Okay.
Thank.
Will do yeah I can.
Hi I can text and to see if we
can drop over from all.
What we show one of the problems
so I think what we'll do is
start with the subcommittee.
Summary.
And then hold the votes when we
had the court.
So let's start then with the
with your medical record
disclosure this bill to sixty
nine is amended.
We cast your version of this
Senator energy you want to say
anything about that until we
take action we can take action
before we move on to something
else.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator is we have heard this
bill in this committee it's two
eighty two it in three allows
the health information exchange
which is clinical digital
information
to the.
We are a by providers and
hospitals around the state
without having to go through in
the men's number of troops that
were at the time appropriately
set up in the help medical
records act in two thousand and
nine but this bill and does
so schools and makes it fully
HIPAA compliant and again the
committee I believe.
was very positive and it and
because it had to go to
Judiciary as we put it together
we have sent excuse me represent
different areas in the house it
did go through Judiciary in the
house and health in the house so
it has had a judicial review and
so it's the same bill and now
it's back here the one referral
so I can go to the floor in the
Senate and then get the
sent to the fourth floor.
Either of our current members
have any discussion on this bill
before we.
We actually take a motion are
and then just hold the motion so
I would just.
Is there a second.
Senator mission are you there
Senator thanks are you there.
I'm here chairman I'll I'll let
move the second okay good thank
you we'll just leave it right
there then and as soon as we get
it for will finish action on
Senator thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Welcome to house bill fourteen.
and this is a bill that the
Representative Dixon
Representative Ortez
representative and senator here
or here for anybody else welcome
to join in areas a lot of
Sanchez and recently
Representative Dixon are you are
you the lead sponsor us.
Yes correct and Terry Bruner is
expert witness in the waiting
room I believe.
Jerry Brown inverters.
So.
I.
I good to see you Mr chairman
see you that we may issue in the
neighborhood.
I miss the neighborhood thank
you.
Go ahead and give you my
thoughts.
Well let's let's let's let's
Representative say a few words
for someone will come to
insuring.
Representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
also explain the bill first and
then will discuss the amendment
which is a very simple sort of
clerical fix.
So we'll fourteen is about
increasing revenue and investing
in New Mexico by leveraging
federal funds and philanthropic
dollars so that we can build a
better New Mexico.
We all know that our budget is
heavily dependent on oil and gas
revenue and so it is very
important that we maximize and
leverage any additional funding
opportunities that we have.
So
we know though that New Mexico
misses out on tens of millions
of dollars every year for a
variety of reasons including a
lack of sufficient coordination
and collaboration between state
agencies counties municipalities
and tribal governments with
respect to grant funding.
In fact publicly available data
shows that New Mexico
consistently trails our
neighbors are in its ability to
attract funding so in order to
maximize and leverage federal
funding our state agencies local
and regional entities tribal
governments they need to have
access to resources and support
in order to effect effectively
seek out apply for and
capitalize on more funding
opportunities.
So house bill fourteen seeks to
remedy that situation I doing
three things first it creates
Mexico granted ministration it
sets up a New Mexico grant
opportunities council which is
an Advisory Council and sets up
in New Mexico matching grant
fund.
So the purpose of the grant
administration is to increase
the number of grant dollars our
state receives by reducing and
removing barriers to federal
grant funding and national
philanthropic dollars.
The grant administration will
serve as a centralized location
within the state for
coordination between state
county local and tribal entities
and it'll assist entities
ineffectively seeking funds.
These services are designed to
supplement not replace existing
resources.
The New Mexico grant
opportunities council will
provide annual recommendations
to the legislature the governor
and grant administration on ways
to continue to address barriers
increase grant revenue and
propose legislation for
consideration and
implementation.
And finally the matching grant
fund which I should note is not
currently funded
so it will be set up for the
future.
I'm will reduce the number of
Mister grant opportunities and
increase grant funding coming
into New Mexico especially for
our smaller more rural
communities by providing access
to matching grant funds when
they need it to leverage a
larger federal grant.
So with that what I'd like to do
I would like for my co sponsors
to have just a minute to speak
or write like to pass it to my
expert witness so if we could
start with Senator Hickey that
would be okay.
Thank you Representative Dixon
and Mr chairman and senators I
appreciate being able to make a
few comments here in the
beginning because I have to get
back over to the tax
when Representative Dixon I came
to me I said you know I have
been so frustrated as a grant of
fire for health information
exchange throughout the previous
administration
it did require coordination
among departments and never came
together it was a thirty million
dollar grant in New Mexico only
have to put up three and
fortunately at the last minute
we were able to get things for
native and get it in just in the
Nick of time that that reminds
me of how many other requests we
are missing in the state the
other components that are there
is we would likely get some sort
of infrastructure bill a lot of
that will be grant directed and
you don't want to miss out on
that I am a large part of
broadband and that is in fifteen
different departments at the
moment there is a coordinating
department coming together but
again it does sound as if we are
missing some grant opportunities
as we speak so this office makes
sense coming from a background
in academia of virtually every
medical school has a grants
office that'd be and and they
are scouring and one of the
things that comes with most
federal grants and I applied for
the grant and started to health
information exchange is the
ability to have what are called
the in directs usually
universities are getting forty
percent of the grant money that
goes to thanks costs around the
university administrative and
while the grants this see in
these situations without to the
grant T. department you will be
executing against the grant.
there will be the ability to put
money aside
for interference to the grant
but the federal grants as they
they you you that they do
measure whether you're doing
what you say you're doing it in
the fall of money they don't get
the part in the beginning it's
only if you're meeting the
staffs I experience that and
establishing the co ops and but
read that was able to put bring
and project managers and so
forth so the key point I want to
emphasize years while there is
some small start up money here
this office can be self
sustaining in a matter of a year
or two
and in fact actually bring in
somebody that potentially have
some other departments as well
in their administrative costs so
well again we don't do dynamic
scoring in the state are if you
do dynamic scoring that is if
you invest now which you're are
alive later on it will be very
very to navigate himself I stand
in very strong support and
applaud Representative Dixon for
bringing this and again it's a
huge win for the state and if if
you need any if you have any
other questions for me text me
I've gotta go to house bill
twenty
which is going to be I just a
significant debate and I thank
you Mr chair representative
Jackson and fellow senators for
giving me this time see thank
you.
Thank you senator.
What was which other of this
function once you're next.
Representative you want to say
anything and we'll go to
Representative works as.
I just make this real quick and
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for those of you
who don't know I was
instrumental in starting the
northern New Mexico college
foundation analysts almost
national laboratory foundation
raising millions of dollars in
northern New Mexico over the
years this is really so I mean I
think it will operate much like
our congressional office does
with the grant administrator
letting people know what grants
are available how they can put
that together help inform the
team that will put that together
I it's it's really necessary for
New Mexico and I think it's been
a long time coming I think it
will set the stage it'll pay for
itself in probably a year I
began making I think hundreds of
millions of dollars over the
next five years for the state so
I I think we have the US Senate
I grant office in place and I
think from from here on out we
just go up so with that I I
believe the committee and I
thank you for your consideration
I think this is an important
step for New Mexico thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative and
then Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I I want to talk
about this from the perspective
of rural New Mexico and local
government you I run a nonprofit
inTaos where I I grew this thing
so we we work together all the
nonprofits I think they're more
more nonprofits intestine
anywhere else part of the reason
is because we don't really have
the capacity at the local level
to bring in that state and
federal funding so nonprofits to
do a lot of work there and I
know with a comment that should
a big bright light on on some of
the challenges that are local
governments are facing in terms
of you know getting cares Act
funding there there is no grant
writer at towns county it's a
contract position that they
sometimes have funding for so I
look at this office this
division as an opportunity for
local communities like mine
except yes land grants political
subdivisions to be able to work
with the state to identify those
those requests there available
available to state level of
course leveraging federal funds
is is so key but you nonprofits
can take advantage of of the
state funding and and nor should
we the local governments can and
this office offers that
opportunity for counties like
mine small communities like mine
to get the training that they
need I think even more
importantly the networking
working together to identify
those requests and and then of
course bring the nonprofit
partners and so so thank you
Representative Dixon and thank
you members of the committee.
Thank you so much.
We should go to your amendment
representative thank your for
whoever can put it up however
can you the amendment share the
screen with us so we can
actually.
Great yep a wonderful.
Okay.
So on page seven.
Winds for inside.
Mr chairman this amendment is
very simple in that it removes
The are we initially had
suggested that to
representatives of nonprofit
organizations B. R. serve on the
opportunity grant opportunities
council and because of concerns
with the anti donation clause
this we are striking that
reference.
The manager
Are there any questions from the
committee about to this and who
wants to move the amendment.
I will some of the amendment
chairman thank you
Representative Senator of
mission I'll second seconded by
Senator banks discussion on the
amendment Senator Sedillo Lopez
welcomed.
Thank you and I'm still driving
I'm in court of but now I'm
alright so I'll go be there soon
but to my question about the
amendment is I didn't understand
how serving on the council if
you're nonprofit would violate
the anti donation clause.
Representative.
I thank you Mr chairman and
senator city Lopez there were
there was concern that it might
find
representatives of the nonprofit
an unfair advantage in other
ways and so after conferring
with my co sponsors and our
folks are concerned about that
particular aspect we determined
that the the role of nonprofits
and sort of the interaction and
information gathering can still
be accomplished through
stakeholder meetings.
So we we recognize that
nonprofits have a very critical
role to play in that
distribution of federal grants
here in New Mexico but that can
be accomplished in the near term
through other means thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president it just
have a concern about I just
don't understand the connection
between serving our lord the
entire donation because because.
The primary concern is the
competitiveness and and apos
yeah.
Okay and and that does make
sense to me and and I'll support
the amendment but
I just wanted to say anti
donation doesn't there are
ethics rules in place to prevent
people taking advantage but like
I said I support the minutes
just curious about that
reference.
Any any other discussion of the
amendment.
We have a motion is and seconded
is there any opposition to the
amendment.
In the bill to them and then and
we'll go next year thanks for
awareness Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and US
senators and Representative
Dixon my name is Terry Brunner
and I run an organization
Albuquerque called pivotal New
Mexico and we assist nonprofits
and public entities around the
state with grant writing and
grant advisory services and
we've been doing that for a few
years my background is in
federal government at having
service center building immense
stage director for many years
and Barack Obama's appointee to
head USDA rural development in
New Mexico where I saw time and
time the state agency out of
federal opportunities this bill
H. B. fourteen will help us be
more competitive and coordinated
in our state's approach to
funding needed projects we are
simply not playing at the same
level as other states were
missing out in twenty eighteen
New Mexico received less than
half a percent discretionary
money and those are
discretionary grants you can
apply for we're missing the boat
on that front in the cares Act
we missed out on certified
community behavioral health
grants in the amount of two
hundred fifty million dollars at
a time when we're facing a
behavioral health crisis we
missed out in Hobbs two hundred
thousand dollars in homelessness
money through high because we
had didn't have authorization to
apply and now we have a new
recovery act with a hundred and
eight million dollars for arts
and humanities programs in the
state a hundred million dollars
for small business
administration navigators and
state government to help small
businesses eight hundred million
dollars in airport funding we
could be using all of those
funds in a better way if we had
a grant office coordinating our
efforts there's an executive
order at the federal level
executive order one two three
seven two that allows states to
coordinate better on grants and
streamline the process so when
the federal government.
Gets a grant from the state of
New Mexico and part of that
program that executive order it
gets more consideration of our
level but we don't participate
in the executive order program
for grants administration
because we don't have an office
to do so and the grants office
and some states are able to make
notices available to communities
and nonprofits of upcoming
opportunities and does get more
information out there time and
time again we see small towns
that have no idea that a lot of
these funds even exist in so
this is just something that
adult will says into a much
better position as a state at a
time when we no we will fall
behind if we are more interested
in our attempts to get funding
for the impactful projects we
need so I thank you for the time
Mr chairman.
And I just want to support
passage of this legislation.
Thank you Terry I just want to
commented.
All over this morning when we
have our meetings around the
state are all over in rural
areas you will point to projects
issue help to them.
Yes when you are the USDA
community worker as.
A straighter in the state Jerry
so your work continues I see
thank you.
You members of the committee we
have some of the people and
signed up to speak on this one
is missing or here strategies
three sixty and the other is met
promises in the APA corporation
are they yes of course there
election of persons for your.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Missy Currier a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixty speaking on behalf of our
clients Occidental petroleum and
plains all American pipeline but
Occidental and planes are part
of the seventeen member Permian
strategic partnership we speak
in support of HB fourteen and we
would like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this legislation
forward federal grant dollars
are pivotal to ensuring New
Mexico continues to improve its
options and access for health
care transportation income
security education job training
social services community
development environmental
protection and beyond this bill
would allow for increased and
complementary opportunities
continuing to improve New
Mexicans quality of life thank
you for the chance to testify in
for your consideration and
support.
Thank you Mr Currier the next is
Medical Center of the eighty
eight corporation.
Thank you chairman members I'm
at Thompson registered lobbyist
for Apache corporation.
She is also one of the seventeen
members of the prime minister to
partnership an organization
created to strengthen improve
quality of life for Permian
basin residents by fostering
superior schools safer roads
quality health care affordable
housing in a trained workforce
in two thousand nineteen because
of an existing need to assist
New Mexico department of
transportation with grant
writing for federal grants which
are resulted in a twelve point
five million dollar bill grant
the partnership established in
New Mexico grants initiative.
Program through which PS P.
funded grant writing assistance
for public and nonprofit
entities in the Lea and Eddy
counties the program has been
very successful and allowed
communities to leverage a small
investment of thirty eight
thousand five hundred dollars
from PSP to generate nearly one
million dollars to support
schools first responders and
those experiencing food
insecurity that's an R. Y. of
almost twenty five hundred
percent because we've seen
first hand how will the grant
model can work we think
Representative Dixon and the
other authors for bringing this
bill and strongly encourage and
thank you for your support.
Thank you Mr Thompson.
Anybody else in the
Representative admitted into
the.
assuming more and more commented
for or against this bill please
raise your hand.
Seeing that.
What is the discussion was
started.
I would just a question I.
Yeah I remember that we used to
have an office in Washington DC.
This is largely just.
Role playing and sources do we
still have such an office
Representative R. Mr mirror.
Mr Mr chairman there's a on.
there is a New Mexico office in
Washington DC that governor
Lujan Grisham has restarted and
the governor's office has said
that they would
is certainly
have collaboration between a
grants administration their
office and then the federal
delegation as well.
Okay good so is the governor's
supporters I imagine I can
imagine she would be right have
you heard from her that she
supported this proposal in
discussions with staff they have
been supportive I have not
spoken directly with the
governor.
The appropriation of million
dollar matching fund was
stricken.
Is there money in the DFA budget
this year that would give it the
I just need to do this.
Thank you Mr chairman there is
money in house bill two of two
hundred thousand dollars as well
as two hundred thousand dollars
in the supplemental
appropriations bill so there
would be a total of four hundred
thousand dollars that would go
to DFA to set up the grant
administration funding for the
matching grant fund would have
to be done separately in a
future here and could also be
done with philanthropic dollars.
Thank you
I think it's a great idea
Senator stability to the next.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this forward
Representative my concern is
that you are that partial empty
it DFA yes thank you short
staffed as it is especially in
assisting the local communities
and I'm not talking about
grants administration I'm
talking about.
What we appropriate capital
funds a lot of the projects
aren't even being accomplished
because there's not enough staff
to assist our community so
in some ways.
I see you prioritizing the grant
administration over.
Existing capital money which
millions and millions of dollars
are sitting there not being
utilized so could you respond to
that a little bit.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Stefanics I think that's
a great question and something
that we certainly discussed and
House Appropriations with regard
to house bill two of one of the
things.
You know I'm not sure that I can
speak to
How the funds the local grant
give birth sorry the local
government division is staffed
and spending its resources
getting the capital outlay money
out but what I can say is that
one of the reasons that we
certainly want to do this now is
because we know that there will
be a return on investment given
the data that we've seen in
other places I'm not just the
Permian strategic partnership
but also other states there are
twenty other states that have.
Ran offices Nevada for instance
had a return on investment of
over two hundred dollars for
every dollar that they put into
staffing in the first two and a
half years and with the Biden
administration's commitment to
investing in infrastructure
dollars we can make sure that we
are more effectively leveraging
some of our capital outlay funds
and so I realize that it.
it may appear to be.
Apples or oranges but I think
that the effort will work
together and benefit both.
Representative I'm not opposed
hello I just the US.
Enlarging.
The responsibilities while
current responsibilities I take
being taken care of that's all
thank you Mr chair.
Senator Cervantes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is such a great idea I was just
curious are there any is there
any possibility of using some of
the the rescue Act money that's
coming from the federal
government to
To help with this.
Thank you Mr chair
representative please thank you
Mr chair and Senator Sedillo
Lopez if I could trying to Mr
Brunner for insight on that.
Yes thank you Mr chair Senators
Representative Dixon I'm I
wanted to really highlight the
point that most of the federal
funds for capital projects that
are contained in the recovery
act set aside up to ten percent
for administration of those
funds and so if states are smart
about it as they administer the
large CABG programs are the
large large I. programs or this
hundred eight million for state
arts and humanities offices that
they're pulling down those
administrative funds to to help
in the disbursement of federal
funds and grant writing such so
there is that opportunity.
Excellent when you're ready for
motion Mr chair I'm available we
are ready here the last one on
their end of Senator Gallegos
just judging by going major
motion reason debated will.
Go ahead passionate.
Sedillo this motion and I I move
it to pass.
Service.
I can't seconded by Senator
budget no discussion on the
motion Senator years welcoming
you just missed two people from
your neck of the woods and
testified in support of this
bill and said they would be
amazed if anybody opposed it now
what is your question Sir well
in opposition Mister chair I got
a question.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'll be brief apologize I was in
an interview and I just now got
into my office here it's capital
so I didn't get here of all of
it but I know on if I'm correct
wrong house bill fourteen is
that correct.
Okay Michael
Thompson and Missy Currier from
the thank you control your and
the the four years in this
business organization strategies
three sixteen Permian basin they
able testified in support of
this.
Okay well thank you I just got a
question Hey if we have a new
layer of review for that grant
applications does that inhibit
any the agency's ability to
respond in timely manner Mr.
Question Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator gray goes the short
answer would be no but Mr
Brunner up could elaborate on
that further.
Yes Mr chairman and senator it
does not require a review and
and
so that that should be a
complicating factor on most
requests.
When Senator think they're
talking about.
Clearinghouses information today
would get out the local groups
rather than one that would
you know screen the application
H. I. to encourage rather than
screen out.
On Senate I just thank you Mr
just one more quick question so
We already do this and leave IT
County are you trying to say
that this will statewide is that
same organization or how's that
handled Mr Representative.
Okay good that is a fabulous
point this would actually be
done it would be a grant
administration would be set up
in DFA and it would work
throughout the state with state
agencies local governments cogs
and tribal entities so it would
have a much broader scope but if
you were to scale up the impact
of the Permian strategic
partnership what they manage to
do in one year the cost would be
about six hundred and thirty
five thousand dollars and up
that would be equivalent in size
that staffing costs
we could expect that they would
have brought in ninety nine
requests that were not otherwise
here in New Mexico
at in increased revenue of
sixteen point one million
dollars.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative has just trying
to get some other clarification
then I noticed in the house
there's a lot of
Negative votes from the
Republicans do you know why they
stood in opposition.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Gallegos yes and there
was concern about the anti
donation clause and so non
profits have been removed both
from receiving services and from
serving on the a grant
opportunities council now that's
not to say that folks could have
been opposed otherwise however
when this bill was heard in
house state elections and Indian
Affairs Committee it did receive
a unanimous vote from both
Democrats and Republicans.
Well thank.
Before you got here I I just
need to talk about we just
amended the bill Senator change
of the two nonprofit
representatives are going to be
on the Advisory Council they've
been removed from the bill now
we actually amended earlier
before you got here.
Okay I thank you for that in
the.
I wish I did not miss the debate
thank you.
Thank you Mr ideal.
Past Senator Ingle moves we are
we just had a we already had a
motion we'll go ahead and take
center go ahead and call the
roll.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Double.
Yes.
Yes there are two.
Yes congratulations you have a
new press.
Thank you for coming all the
representatives and senators
making great idea and Jerry is
always good to see you in order
to hear again.
Members we have another bill
that we didn't have before
before but we heard and we have
a motion pending on the floor
that was Representative cokes
House Bill to sixty nine the
medical record disclosure it was
a it is identical to a bill that
we passed out the senator who
need sponsor here.
The number two eighty two it was
Mr.
Or two seventy two a
appropriation thank you for
waiting.
To a teacher and so we have a
motion and a second do pass
recommendation and penny will
call the roll.
I have to sixty nine as amended
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Ingle.
Representative Jack cook yes.
I've got I've never voted for
anything he did.
No I'm teasing Senator yes thank
you
I thought you were there
McKenna.
Yes.
Lopez yes
thanks yes Sir Tom.
There are too you know yes.
So now we are going to say we're
going to go to two seventy seven
Senator Sedillo businesses and
building we heard the other
night Representative Harper is
still on the G. E. R. a
beneficiary issue.
And we rolled over to give you a
chance to meet with the G. R. A.
of.
The staff to see here.
The concerns you expressed been
resolved
What's your feeling about it
now.
This is a little bit of a
problem we were we met while I
was driving to Santa Fe and I
wasn't able to look at the bill
that representation was and all
look at it a look at the bill
again that the.
So this is my I'll just explain
my problem and and maybe they
can answer the question if
that's appropriate.
What I was concerned about is we
have so many people in New
Mexico to do their own divorced
and when they do their own
divorce they usually do not or a
lot of times they do not do what
lawyers know has a qualified
domestic relations order which
would allocate the pension.
And so community property is
vested and and and exist for the
pension plans or whatever the
pension is and the way I read
the bill that night was this
might allow somebody who had not
gotten their qualified domestic
relations order in.
To be married to somebody who or
to be divorced from somebody who
might a change the pension plan
and affect the first spouses and
shin writes.
Now it was represented to me and
I will pull up the bill now and
and look at this or they can
expect
that.
The ability to change to a
second spouse.
Would only be triggered if they
had already moved to plan eight
so a plan B. and C. spouse could
not.
Could not use this procedure and
if that's okay if that's true
then I'm okay with the bill I
did hear from the family law
section
I don't know if anybody in the
family law section is here but
they they had a similar concern
to line
and if you could call on the
audience to see if anybody
signed up to talk about it that
would be helpful meanwhile I'll
go look at the language of the
bill because that was
represented to me in the car but
I just got into my office and I
had a had I have not had time to
look in the bill of sale.
Yes there are a couple of people
who signed up and who are you
thinker here.
I just saw the name Sir
Armstrong.
Are you are you do you want to
speak on this bill.
At yes Mr chair thank you.
And I think the senator.
Excuse.
I'm sorry the members I think
that Senator Sedillo Lopez
correctly identified what is
maybe just a concern at and that
if this change was reviver
beneficiary designation would
potentially implicates
community property rights if a
survivor beneficiary has been
designated at the time course
which had been injured and so it
may be that it's just an answer
the sponsor can give other acts
and and that will clarify for
sure and I just wasn't quite
there.
That go ahead Representative.
Thank you chairman we do have
the Susan Pettitt who is the
parent general counsel on I I
appreciate the trust that yes
very good thank you
Representative Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
There are there are two are
parts of this bill the first
being that if a.
Our.
retired member.
Means they're they're spouse
retirement they can I
Act while they remain married
change their beneficiary with
the consent of the spouse or
after becoming divorced from the
spouse and with the court order
can have the beneficiary change
drive B. or C. to another
beneficiary normally a second
spouse
the point that members are
Senator Sedillo Lopez was
brought up regarding a pop up to
eight is a separate section of
the bill which is under section
G. E..
So I understand the concern that
there is a there may be
community property that is not
protected by a court order but
but for someone to do so at
their spouse state and
designated new beneficiary they
would need to get a court order
which allows them to do so so it
will provide notice to the
former spouse.
Senator Sedillo because we had a
chance to look at the bill and.
I do not I do not see the
provision that they would be
have to be in section eight.
I mean that they would have to
make option a.
to change the beneficiary I'm
not seeing it would you point
that out to me.
Mr chair yes I.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
members of the committee that
portion of the bill is section
do.
I'm in section G..
And it says a retired member who
was previously being paid a
pension under former of payment
B. or C. but because of the
death or divorce from the
designated survivor beneficiary
is currently receiving a pension
under form of payment Hey.
May exercise a one time your
vocal option designated another
individual.
Okay.
This is.
Thank you and like I said I
apologize I had had a chance to
review the bill without without
insurance and that of them
pointing that out I I'm
satisfied that
that's adequate protection to
the former spouse thanks for
thank you thank you Mr Mr chair
here you and signed up as well
and if you need to say anything
else or are you are you just
available for any other
questions Mr chairman I think
everything's been covered I'm
available for questions if they
come up.
Right any other discussion for
many of the committee members
are on this house bill two
seventy seven.
What will.
We would do past chairman.
Those seconded by Senator guy in
our.
And there's I notice you have a
new picture of when when you
have your video on.
And it's I thought it was makes
it first but I guess since you
actually is is that correct yes
Sir I was on a cattle drive on
that picture.
What is posted.
Thank you very very to.
Citing the secretary will call
the roll.
There are.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
There are common.
Yes.
There are too you know yes seven
yes system one excuse.
Thank you Sir Representative
Harper good to see you in the
bill in the future thank you
chairman members and thank you
to Senator Sedillo Lopez for
taking the time and interest to
make sure we got this right I
really appreciate thank you
thanks Representative.
And are there will
representative Thompson and
Senator McKenna.
Hello easy enrollment program.
Thank you Mr chair so this is a
really important bill and it's
called easy enrollment what it
does Mr chair and members of the
committee when you file your
taxes there will be a box that
you can check that will say I or
someone in this household does
not have health insurance and
when you check that box that
information will then be
transmitted to the health
insurance exchange who does this
all the time they look at at
financial income and decide if
people are qualified for
Medicaid or for for eighty four
a plan on the exchange and then
they will get back in touch with
the with the tax filer and the
reason this is so important I
mean we all know that it's
important for people to have
health insurance coverage in in
lots of ways but but the a
recent study of a paper this
month from families USA said
that
Let's see.
At ten percent increase in
proportion of a counties
residents who lacked health
insurance was associated with
that seventy percent increase in
COVID nineteen cases and the
forty eight percent increase in
COVID nineteen def nationally
roughly one out of every three
COVID nineteen deaths are linked
to a health insurance gap.
And more than forty percent of
all COVID nineteen infections
are associated with health
insurance gaps and just quickly
the reason that happens is when
people start to feel ill if they
don't have health insurance
they're going to
that hope that it's a cold or
just put off getting testing and
getting
and and finding a positive
result and all the while they're
they're spreading it through
their families and their
communities so so Mister Mister
chair I also have Gabby Rivera
from Health Action New Mexico as
my expert witness and in that in
that I'm.
For time I walk in there and let
her just add a little bit.
Mr chair your muted.
Judiciary so could Senator
Tallman takeover well I run
Judiciary with the committee are
you there Sierra.
Yeah.
Sure well I leave I appreciated
and then does your testimony
chair representative Thompson
that wasn't that wasn't the
point.
Senator.
We got a problem that they might
be calling me any minute to vote
on the.
On the sick leave bill.
Senator many many years so we'll
do we'll turn it over to Senator
McKenna judge to chair and well
we will we run to our various
committees enjoyed idyllic back
here okay thank thank you thank
you Representative are very very
quickly.
And thank you madam chair I
guess it is now I'm so if Gabby
could say a few words and will
stand for questions.
Madam chair committee members
and get her parents public's
Mexico thank you for having me
and representative Thompson has
done a great job of summarizing
the bill so I'll just add a
couple more details I want to
emphasize what a significant
problem is when people are
community go without health
insurance so we know that about
two hundred fourteen thousand
New Mexicans are uninsured about
fifty percent of those already
qualified for Medicaid or low
cost insurance on the exchange
so this is what we're trying to
do is get them insured and on an
individual and family level
force when someone's uninsured
we know it means that people
don't go to the doctor don't
take their medications and
overall have much for health
outcomes and people with health
insurance and as community this
means higher premiums higher
state costs for uncompensated
care and as Representative
Thompson alluded to have higher
rates of infection and disease
as we've seen COVID.
I also mention that we model
this after program Maryland and
they started in twenty twenty
and even in the chaos of the
pandemic and with only parts of
the program in place three
thousand five hundred sixty
people signed up for coverage
through the program and the most
exciting part is that twenty
percent twenty seven percent
excuse me of enrollees for
Children and another forty
percent or between eighteen and
thirty five years old that means
over two thirds of total
enrollment where young people
under thirty five years old we
know that having that group
insured improves the risk pool
and drive down costs for
everyone.
I also want to emphasize the way
this program will be implemented
taxpayers will be absolutely
fully aware but their creature
on the consent box will have
clear language informing you of
what information will be sure to
check the box to whom and for
what purpose more two debt sorry
more detail about the specific
items from the tax form form
like income and household size
that'll be outlined in the
instructions and participation
is completely voluntary on every
level this is really about
meeting people where they are
empowering taxpayers to get
another layer of utility from
the effort they put into filing
and if they don't want that and
then they won't be affected by
this program at all.
We've experienced broad bi
partisan support this
legislation everywhere we
presented over the last two
years we've heard so much
testimony on why this is
desperately needed and why this
mechanism in particular is one
of the best tools we have to
reach the uninsured we've are in
our minds from diverse variety
of community groups and
organizations and bill self is
built on just a very successful
interagency collaboration
between TRD exchange office the
superintendent of insurance and
Human Services department we
make sure this works on every
level agencies involved have
improved drastically agreed to
their roles and community has
affirmed that the so welcome
solution to a problem that
affects all of us.
We put in a lot of work as a
state and as a country to make
health insurance more accessible
that works I'm finished if
people are still unable to take
advantage of the coverage and
discounts they qualify for we
believe easy enrollment is
nonpartisan common sense
solution to this problem madam
chair committee members we hope
you will thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Thompson I
Committee members I was really.
Impressed in honor to a co
sponsor this legislation with
representative Thompson and I I
have to say I was so impressed
because.
it's such a plus for New Mexico
because as miss Rivera shared
with me.
Chairman are you back.
I am I am a great.
I was delayed so they moved to
another building still takes me
back from the Great chairman if
you don't mind can I continue my
comment as the co sponsor about
this legislation okay great
thank you chairman so once again
chairman and members I was
really impressed with the what
representative Thompson and miss
Rivera have done.
Of with this legislation
is really meaningful and will
really help our state because.
I'm for for the Medicaid dollars
and this may have already been
mentioned but I I I think it
needs emphasizing.
Every Medicaid dollar seventy
five percent seventy six seventy
six percent of that is from
better the federal government
and twenty five percent is that
is from the state money.
And we Mister Vera was sharing
with me once someone gets health
insurance they really tend to
keep it and why is it so
important for your New Mexico
well if they're keeping if
they're signed up for their
insurance chairman and and
members.
And they have to go the hospital
urgent care E. are what have you
that is less burden on.
On and on our state indigent.
Health care fund because they're
using Medicaid dollars seventy
five percent from the Feds
twenty five percent from from
the state verses one hundred
percent from the indigent
health care fund and so to me
that's just really tremendous
are once again once people have
their insurance they tend to
keep it
The something very recent also
Representative Thomson that I I
learned to miss Rivera the other
day is that
There's gonna be no
in between between the the tax
payer and the exchange so that's
even more privacy protection for
the taxpayer and the exchange
and it's also my understanding
chairman and committee members
that the items
pork poised in the in the FIR
about.
About employees.
Accommodating the the workload
that's really negligible because
The New Mexico well the health
care exchange they have enough
staff to accommodate this and
importantly to the tax and
Revenue Department they have a
very adjustable flexible
contract are so they can
accommodate staffing up and down
to accommodate the demand so
with that chairman and committee
members thank you and thank you
representative Thompson I'm
really a privilege to be a
partner with you in this and
thank you Mr Vera.
Thank you senator
Representative Thompson was
there anyone else you'd have any
extra witnesses or anybody else
you want to speak on this bill
the chair Gabby Rivera is my
expert and she's already spoken
Jerry okay next there are a
number of people the same data
the from the from the public on
this bill all in support of a
and I'm gonna ask you to keep
your current your comments as
brief as possible so we don't we
don't delay action on no other
measures this afternoon first
one up there is an
administrative issues and when
he does go from the cell women's
Law Center are you with this.
I don't see her actually how
about Jackie Cooper from A. R.
P. I see you here here here in
the school for.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee members I am
Jackie Cooper I'm a volunteer.
Advocacy of lead with a a RP in
New Mexico and I want to start
by thanking Representative
Thomson for bring this forward
access to health care for all
New Mexicans is so essential to
a healthy workforce that helps
us helps protect all of us and
the contributes to health or
welfare for families thank you
very much.
Thank you right here was a
Lutheran and you can see
administrative.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kurt regular on the director
of litter ebix you Mr New Mexico
also speak on behalf of the
concert you're just the interest
of time also please say that we
concur with all the Art
Institute and made already by
the bill Sanchez in a previous
speakers and urge your support
for this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Nicholas scored from the Santo
online poverty.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee also in the interest
of time I'll just keep my brief
I summon attorney at the New
Mexico Center on poverty when we
support HB two seven two I'd
every New Mexicans should be
able to access quality
affordable healthcare coverage
and H. B. two seven two is a
cost effective way for the state
to take an active role in
helping New Mexicans get the
coverage they need and deserve
and for which there qualified so
this bill is a win for everyone
for patients get access to
coverage providers get more
compensation for their services
in the state brings in more
federal dollars that right now
are being left on the table
thank you we urge to pass.
Thank you for I mean it was a
challenge would look followed by
Bill Jordan.
I don't see chairman.
Let's go to Bill Jordan to be
followed by Barbara Webber.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we're also the
conveners of the New Mexico
Medicaid coalition and we know
that one of the challenges we
face in getting more people
covered you're on Medicaid or
the exchange is big that is that
they don't know that they are
actually eligible.
We also work with governor Gary
Johnson in the early years of
this century to include a letter
with a tax refund checks that's
back when we actually mailed
refund checks and it led tax
filers note that because of
their income it appeared that
their children might be eligible
for Medicaid.
That effort help to enroll
thousands of children.
Now it's not just kids but it's
all of those other eligible but
uninsured adults that includes a
lot of working parents who may
not know that they too are
eligible for coverage this is an
innovative program and I really
want to thank the Human Services
Department and tax department
for their cooperation and
helping develop and support this
effort thank you.
Thank you bill however we're
we're to resolve by Jerry
remainder.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Barbara
Webber executive director Health
Action New Mexico I just want
to.
However a little bit on of some
of the numbers we heard actually
went into new merit New Mexicans
is uninsured that's two hundred
fourteen thousand people in New
Mexico who do not have insurance
currently the horrible lesson
that we learned from COVID is
the price that they pay and we
pay when people are not insured
of the forty eight percent of
people who contracted of COVID
that were uninsured forty eight
percent ninety thousand two
hundred and forty people our
neighbors our friends the
essential workers that brings
all the essential services.
Of those fifteen hundred and
forty probably did not have to
die but died from COVID had
they've gotten to health
insurance earlier are to Health
care earlier in their disease
process they could have been
saved we also know that fifty
seven percent of the deaths were
native Americans in New Mexico
and sixteen percent of native
Americans the highest percentage
of any population is uninsured
in New Mexico is that community
so we learn said lessons and we
think that getting half of the
people that are uninsured aware
that they could be insured and
hopefully signing up for
insurance is very important.
For the help of our state and
for the health of our citizens
we strongly urge your support on
this bill.
Thank you Barbara cherry for
under three called in by Jason
Weaks.
Hello Mr chairman and members
the committee care robin printer
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico Medical Society on
behalf of the physicians in the
state we do support this
legislation we know that health
care is an interconnected
partnership including insurance
carriers Medicaid and the
doctors we view this as a very
easy way for patients throughout
the state of New Mexico to get
enrolled in insurance whether
that is private insurance on the
exchange or government sponsored
program which has become one of
the number one barriers to
access of healthcare so in order
to make sure that we're taking
care of our patients we would
urge support and passage of the
legislation thank you so much.
Thank you very Jason Weaks
followed by Scott Scanlon.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee Jason Weaks are
registered lobbyists Papen
medical group for the largest
physician management group in
the US state we very much
support this legislation getting
people enrollment parents is
critical you have a lot of folks
that are eligible and I think we
need to start with promoting our
registration and education
relative to that eligibility and
given capacity to actually get
on the government sponsored
plans and exchange plans that
they're already eligible for
this is a fantastic piece of
legislation it is a well needed
step in the right direction and
often stands in full support
thank you so much.
Thank you Jason US one followed
by calling by your.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
common chair a LL see it's a
manufacturing company new to New
Mexico that is very much
concerned about
health care for their employees
and others and we really like
the the private aspect the how
the insurance exchange upon the
affirmative consent by the
taxpayer be well New Mexico can
can look to see if if these
individuals do qualify for some
of the private offerings out
there along with some of the
government sponsored program so
we stand in full support and we
urge your support of the bill to
thank you Mr chairman.
And I would just come in Scott
what you just sentences we've
been reading over the new
American recovery act the new
one point nine trillion dollar
federal the bill that was just
signed into law and it has
significant
subsidies for people on the
exchange so people who
previously liability exchange in
the state the gentleman that.
Not only would be able to so
this is a particularly well time
to bill yes Sir the less they
are thank you Sir the last the
speaker of the sign up in
advance is a book was struggling
with Human Services Department
it moved for you with us today.
I am Mr chair thank you my
district over Colin bio first
what I'm sorry I forgot area IT
field involves name.
Colin value to be followed by a
new course our.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I I think we
sometimes get that mistaken for
one another in the halls so
that's probably the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee column by with the
office superintendent of
insurance you know one of those
has top priorities is getting as
many people as we can signed up
for health care coverage and
this bill is a really creative
and innovative way to reach
people where they are and to
connect them with coverage on
this committee heard a bill
earlier today about the
importance of leveraging federal
dollars and this bill will do
that by helping people sign up
for both Medicaid and private
coverage we can leverage both
the Senate Bill Medicaid dollars
as well as a premium tax credits
to the exchange and those
dollars will directly supports
our health care providers and
give people access to those
critical preventive services
like screenings and mental
health health check ups that
help people you know stay well
and avoid potential medical
problems that could spiral into
an emergency and because many
people simply don't know that
they qualify for coverage
we need to find these new ways
to reach them and so in addition
to you know community outreach
and some of the wide scale
marketing this is going to be
another critical tool in our
toolbox to be able to reach
people so we really want to
thank the sponsor and the
advocates for bringing this
forward and urged the committee
to support thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you all and and now we go
to address our.
Thank you Mr chair I think Colin
and I are affectionately known
as the roundhouses Frick and
frack so.
But thank you Mr chair members
of the committee we'd like to
thank the the sponsor for for
bringing forth this legislation
the Human Services department's
official stances is neutral on
this as you know increased
enrollment would increase the
Medicaid budget however we did
leave the urban institute study
on the uninsured demographics
that miss Rivera and and the
sponsor referenced in their
testimony and we we really do
want to ensure as a department
that as many New Mexicans as
possible and get access to
health care coverage and we do
think that this is a smart
sensible bill help facilitate
access to that coverage thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Is there anybody else want to
comment and then sign up in
advance so just raise your hand
and we'll hear from you.
Seeing the or not.
Yes.
Jeffrey there please.
Yes I mean I I it indicated
interest but I'm sure I missed
that so in the interest of time
I'll make this quick but good
afternoon chair and committee
members I'm Jeffery Bustamante
CEO of the New Mexico health
insurance exchange the exchange
stand in support of this
legislation as noted by Senator
McKenna we've been aggressive to
model our organization to make
sure we can facilitate state
level innovations as well
federalization the mentioned
earlier today we're really
excited about both of these are
all all keep it concise but it
really trying to it the
awareness remains a major
barrier of getting New Mexicans
connected to that coverage and
this allows us to pursue some
novel ideas and break down some
of those barriers between even
our state partners and ourselves
to make sure we get New Mexicans
covered so thank you very much
for your consideration today and
strongly encouraged to pass.
Thank you Mr Bustamante.
Okay now we'll go to the million
will start the senator said the
Lopez and.
Thank you Mr chair I was I was
reading the FY are in I do I
think it's it would be FY are
written before the committee
substitute.
Mr chair.
The
agency representative Thompson I
believe that one has but I will
let the Senator go ahead with
your question I may have.
That the answer you're looking
for when I know what your
question is okay good because
it's said that it conflicted
with SB seventy five which is
which even though it's so okay
which is not correct because SB
seventy five has if it's
necessary for the function of
the agency so that that would
just be seventy five I think is
a great bill for encouraging
collaboration among the agencies
because all of them will have
the same standards of
confidentiality so you won't
have to do and use before
between agencies so I just
thought the FIR was wrong about
this P. seventy five and I
wanted to point that out but I
also noticed the committee
substitute address the issue.
So that was that was good and so
I just wanted to compliment you
would say I didn't think that
that it was necessary but I
think I could see how the
amendment would give people
comfort
about the sensitivity of their
data which is what the SB five
is designed to do as well so
it's double comfort and for that
reason
I thank you for addressing it
and then the other thing I was
going to say is the FIR also
says.
In I did.
I don't.
Reserves.
That you thought or maybe to
think is necessary they thought
that it should be tax filer
instead of tax payer and do you
not agree with that or because
you just you didn't change it in
the committee substitute Mr
chair and Senator Sedillo Lopez
we do have another amendment
that did that cleans up some of
the things another one was
I just had it pulled up and
pictures that might bring but a
couple of I'm I'm just a couple
of minor changes
and I think the way that we
refer to income they pointed out
was different so we do have a
floor amendment I I had.
We like the rest of you I'm
having a hard time keeping up
with what I'm doing at what time
and what committee if what so we
drop the amendment I dropped the
amendment so it will be amended
on the floor to fix those
issues.
We don't you don't want to amend
it now what we do have the
amendment prepared in actually I
emailed it to the chair
about an hour ago if you want me
to I can tell you what the
amendment is and give you that
you are two number if you if
that's if that's possible to do
now.
Sure we can do.
Yeah I just think it would be
easier than doing it on the
floor if we can we can fix it
now.
Okay Mister chair.
Yeah.
I can find it or if you just
you know you want to send it to
the.
The secretary was sent to me so
let me see if I can yeah Mister
Mister chair I sent it to both
your legislative and your
personal email.
Let me see if I can find a.
I think we've been has it has Mr
chair I think we've been up more
flexible on these amendments as
we get closer to the end of the
session.
More would be a good thing.
Okay so I'm going to read it to
you guys because I have no way
of.
Coming up on the screen I'm not
that into on page two.
One twenty one.
What advice.
Senator incoming search and
other types of reported income
used to assess eligibility for
health coverage programs.
So we modified.
No I would really really gross
adjusted gross income and other
types of reporting jobs used to
assess eligibility for health
coverage programs.
And then to is on page three
line twenty five.
Mr chair that's just fixing and
are a spelling error it's just
spelled with just ask ask so
it's just a big thing and I do
here I did get a couple of texts
that the office of the
superintendent of insurance is
okay with tax payer and then ms
Rivera reminded me that Texas is
the correct term confirmed by
TRD and our website.
Okay for this.
We went in
we'll have to do that when
separately let me forward this
lunch.
I'm not another one this is just
just.
Acting tax payer is the correct
term and that was confirmed by
both G. R. T. and OSI.
This kind of visionary terms
yes.
So you do not going to pay
anything you're still considered
taxpayer because all of the
things we do are considered to
be credits for taxes you pay.
Correct Mr chair.
For this reason.
To.
We'll get it Jareth that even
but it's pretty simple what is
just to sell a spelling error on
page three line twenty five.
The other one is just kind of
trying to it's not.
I.
Okay thank you for this is penny
their tool to number on.
Yes Mr chair let me say it is
point two two zero four four one
point one one.
There are four.
For one point one.
Zero four four one point one in
my career.
Thank you.
Have you able to forward
injection everybody.
She's working on it right now
thank you Mr.
Yeah
we can get it done that early
grade and then you're at the
remote on the floor I I truly
appreciate it.
So.
The illness you have other
discussion what we're waiting
for that amendment to come up.
no I'm just going to have the
option to clarify about seventy
five and and and the the double
protection so thank you that's
that's all I have and I'll be
happy when you're ready to move
the amendment.
Any.
larger when it goes out Senator
she's still working on okay.
Is there any other discussion on
the bill itself the committee.
There is wonderful.
Let's take the amendment which.
Any questions on the on the
amendment.
Two passed.
Okay we have a motion for a new
path selling amendment to
section from.
Second.
Sentences or words to that
okay.
Right.
Any any discussion of any any
opposition to the adopting this
amendment.
C. will consider the amendment
been adopted.
There we go back to the
committee any other any other
questions Senator Sedillo
office.
No thank you Mr chair I think
it's a great bill and very
exciting congratulations on
bringing in.
Okay Senator Gallegos your
question Mr I do.
Representative I'm just
wondering in the F. I. R. it
shows a seven million dollar
reoccurring to general fund as
children FY twenty three have we
dress up with.
In finance committees.
Mr chairman and gentle I'm I'm
I'm used to being on the floor
Senate Senator diagnose it the
Medicaid rolls kind of go up and
down and and that's what this is
this would be increased
enrollment I have spoken with
the Medicaid director and she.
Well as as Mr Estrada said they
they can't be in support or
against and and if you would
like I think you could probably
address this but that's kind of
the the nature of Medicaid there
is there is increased enrollment
and decreased enrollment
depending on a lot of things I
including seasonal thanks so
their budget frequently at
varies by quite a bit depending
on what the enrollment is but if
a book on the to add to that I
appreciate it
do you want to comment on the
Senator Gallegos question.
Chair Mister chair Senator
Gallegos is a request chart on
the coverage innovation officer
for the Human Services
Department the representative
Thompson is right you know our
our budget does fluctuate
throughout the year this was
just an estimate that we put
together on you know a high
level sort of take up right from
this potential program as it's
ramping up but we certainly
could see a smaller pickup right
and then maybe something a
little bit larger in the future.
But again you know our our
budget does fluctuate regardless
of whether this built in place
we'll certainly see more folks
come on to the rules throughout
the year.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative Mr Estrada do we
see you're doing no what the
federal disbursement will be for
the next few years do we have
any kind of gauge on that Mr.
Mr chair of the members of the
committee the the current
recovery act didn't include an
additional bond.
For for Medicaid however if we
do assume that most of these
folks are going to be adults
getting coverage to the tax tax
filing process that is a nine to
one return on New Mexico's
investments so for every dollar
we put and we'll get back line
from the federal government if
you do include kids in that
right then it's about an eighty
twenty match.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
Representative my last question
there is in my information it
shows that the office tenant I
know Senator Sedillo Lopez
talked about Senate bill seventy
five but it shows there may be a
possibility of conflict between
this bill and house bill one
twenty four if you address that.
Mr.
Representative Thomson yes that
would be for you yes thank thank
you I think I'm gonna let call
and take this one or maybe I'm.
Hello Richard.
Mr chairman the is calling for
most sites I'm happy to speak to
this as senator studio Lopez
noted this was fixed in the
amendment I think we tried to
take it out of our bill analysis
but it may not be reflected in
if the FIR so I I think we're
okay on this one.
Okay Mister.
And those are all my questions
and are you thank you thank you
is there any other discussion on
this bill Mr chair.
Senator.
I would move do you pass on the
committee substitute as amended.
Thank you.
Discussion the secretary will
call the roll.
I'm sorry Senator I didn't hear
who seconded the motion Senator
Sedillo there's thank you.
On house bill two seven two
amended.
No ma'am.
Go.
Yes.
Yes.
The deal Lopez yes.
Yes Thoman yes there are two
Pino.
Yes.
Asians Representative given to
pass.
Good luck.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and senator
Senator yeah you're the co
sponsor thank you also.
Representative.
Members of the committee those
that are finishes up the house
built on our agenda.
So I'm gonna leave your
committee meeting now and I mean
call to Judiciary finally and
Senator Tallman if you can
surely Committee for and
starting with the the memorial
and then moving into the bills.
Senator estrogenic someone if I
could ask you to to handle if
I'm not back for a Senate
memorial thirteen the J. Paul
Taylor
Task Force.
Okay thank you Mr chair good
luck in the judiciary.
To move to Senate Joint Memorial
for.
Is a dress institutional racism
is Senator Lopez.
Available.
Are you with the senator.
Hearing nothing will move to the
center of oil nineteen reduce
cliff affect and generational
poverty.
Senator Gaydos.
Mr chairman of this I am Mr
chairman and committee.
The.
What.
Well proceed please thank you
thank thank you appreciate the
opportunity to bring this before
you I have a a discussion in
years past on
there's got to be aware that we
can look at
the cliff effect from the
federal side and this would
basically ask our congressional
delegation to look at it what
brought this to pass in Lee
County a years long siege for
years ago of the McDonald's are
due to the cost of
of just the oil field they move
their minimum wage to fifteen
dollars an hour and I typically
would be there at opening to get
my breakfast on the way to work
in right after it happened I
would say within two days I got
there at six o'clock nothing
happened nothing happened
finally pulled up to the window
and asked him what the deal was
in of the lady told me they had
a crew of nine.
In only three showed up and I
thought was really odd I've got
a friend that works there so I
asked her what the deal was and
there's a of Hispanic group
they're in Italy Canada told
them because the increase in
wages that if they did not
reduce their hours they would
reduce their subsidies so
instead of working a thirty hour
week they determined they could
make as much in twenty hours at
fifteen dollars an hour just
what they made in order to keep
their subsidy and what I thought
that does restricts their growth
going forward and what I would
like to do is get our delegation
to look at is the income
increases not all of the
subsidies decrease all at one
time so I would like it tiered
levels so my wife works for
housing forty and your your rent
is dependent on your income and
I think that's a fair way to do
it so that way
for instance on the cliff effect
you may lose all your subsidy
after you see the dollar amount
and I'm just wanting to get to
the congressional congressional
delegation and have them think
through how we can fix it in
Washington in order to give them
a gradual out so as they go from
fifteen to twenty dollars an
hour possibly they would still
have some subsidies for the
family and for the children for
medical what that'll stand for
questions.
thank you.
Thank you senator.
I don't have a list of the.
Sign up anyone that signed up to
speak in behalf in the for
against this memorial.
Not hearing no one I will open
this up to a.
The members of the committee.
And
I don't see any hands up.
Is anybody any committee member
wishing to speak here we are
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Please proceed with your
question thank you thank you Mr
chair this is just another
opportunity for me to say if we
did if we had universal health
care we wouldn't have this
problem would be in large part
eliminated because what I've
seen is that is the biggest fear
of people is to lose their
subsidized health care as they
move up the the wage ladder and
I I hope that we're able to get
that otherwise I think of.
I mean it is an issue and I
think it is I mean it's a
memorial and and I don't think
that it's a bad idea to suggest
that I know that a lot of people
are already concerned about it.
So I don't know I don't feel
strongly one way or another
about the memorial but I did
want to make that case again
it's health insurance that
scares people the most about
losing and we did if we had
Medicare for all we would not
have that problem thank you
thank you senator
Next up is so Senator Stefanics
go ahead please.
Thank you Mr chair the only
comment.
Try to be there okay the only
comment I would have is that the
cliff effect.
and what the federal government
the guidelines that they set up
really is not going to take
care.
The poverty in our state.
And so.
obviously it is something to be
bridged.
The state has the initiative can
create the initiative to set up
programs for example.
Many years ago the state had a
program with not federal money
but state money.
That allowed people that while
they were working in the first
six months they still receive
the subsidy from the state in
order to pick up the extra work
thanks.
Los.
Lost her.
Sorry did you hear anything
nothing.
Okay so and people are working
and they exceed the.
Financial limit there were some
coverage for them for about six
months.
That would allow them to
Have that cushion and be phased
out and we've had this discussed
in this committee and others so
I am not against this memorial
at all I guess in saying that I
think that the whole issue of.
The cliff effect in poverty can
also be addressed by our state
not just the federal government
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator
just handed a up.
She of this thing Mrs.
And.
I have a.
David Ripley listed here as an
expert witness and and this.
Mr that's my that's my other
bill.
Are you okay they and you're
right that's.
Well they indicate what anyway
anyday educated this one so okay
well anyway I guess so many
other I guess we'll see yes I
see another hand up Senator
McKenna please proceed.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator Gallegos Senator
Gallegos Senator Stefano X. has
already touched on what
What I'm curious about is your
memorial has the federal
government.
A name in.
For study and I'm curious why
not the state of New Mexico
because I would think there's
some.
Services and resources that are
eligible to folks who have a
certain income
and yeah I'm just curious why
New Mexico was not part of the
memorial study.
Mr chairman and senator I
appreciate the question and
actually when I was talking to
Maria the lady that helped me
think through this process our
main issue was she's gonna lose
first map it just a in in her
eyes and I did not know about
the six month phase out and I'm
gonna try to learn more about
that because I think that would
be good but I think this goes
beyond a six month issue so if
you were to get another raise in
six months that my recover
beyond that dollar amount but I
think that's a great way to look
at it is we as a state and our
congressional delegation may be
looking at because I think it's
going to take all of us to get
them as their increments Inc
comments go up that their
liabilities go down and I just
never thought through The New
Mexico would have anything in I
was just looking just at the
federal side.
Very good chairman thank you
thank you senator yes thank you
for considering it and
thank you for your
thoughtfulness on this.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Senator
okay what else wishing to speak
on behalf of this moral.
I don't see anyone so what's the
pleasure of the committee
reviewed plans I'll second so we
have a do pass from Senator
Ingle and expected from Senator
McKenna please call the roll
Hany.
I'm sorry nineteen center guy
New Mexico yes ma'am Senator
Ingle yes.
Gentleman.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Panics.
Yes.
Madam.
Yes.
You have yes no nos.
Thank you the congratulations
Sir Senator you have a do pass.
Thank you chairman thank you
committee.
next we have several oil
thirteen reconvene the J. Paul
Taylor yes force well that I am
presenting that for the chair
yes.
Okay Mr and I Mr chair I don't
have it exactly in front of me
but this is a repeat of prior
years the J. Paul Taylor task
Force addresses how we can
assist you in crisis and those
with issues and dealing with
problems and I understand that
we've had a very positive
collaborative
crisis over the past years and
the chair would like to see it
keep going that's the purpose of
this memorial.
Okay.
Thank you thank you senator
eight.
I don't see anyone listed to.
We
do press Mr chairman I'm
familiar with aeration we've
been doing this for a long time
it's something we need to
continue doing.
Second thank you for your.
We have a motion and a second
thank you center angle for
rescuing the.
Your little capital outlay but
other than that don't worry
about well I don't have much
left.
Sure I'd already got it anyway
the.
So
I'm penny we have a motion a
second please call the roll.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle yes.
They're making.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a six.
Yes to excuse.
Okay sec thank you penny of
Senator he's hoping is that here
to congratulate.
So that.
Next we have US Senate bill
three six.
Three sixty four public health
order business occupancy.
Senator Sanchez senator Sanchez
are you.
In the.
In the building.
Nothing.
We will.
I think there is I see his name
maybe he's really.
Senator Sanchez.
Perhaps the step with.
He's.
The state had to step where did
use so I'm just saying perhaps
he stepped away for half okay
thank you.
Thank you people keep telling me
I need a hearing aid thank.
So Mister chairman.
Yes yes Senator Ingle.
Usual way around that Senate
bill four thirty is not going to
get a hearing today we're gonna
let that bill sleeper sleep for
a while.
Four thirty yeah that's my built
adults.
Right down on the bottom Mr
chair on the new agenda we took
that one off okay good
Okay.
The new I don't have the new
agenda I guess so.
Anyway I used to think they were
purposely at.
Leaving you out of the picture I
wanted him to yeah.
Well that would.
It
ended taking taking that off
then maybe I'll stop stop all
messages I'm getting about that
bill well that you're the last
person I want to leave out so it
wasn't my god love your heart it
wasn't my doing.
I worry about it.
Yes
Senator Sanchez just showed told
me that he's getting on now okay
good just sent me a text.
Senators Sanchez can you yes Mr
chairman here I was in awe with
you on the other side their tax
rate I jumped off there to
Come to your committee Mr chair.
Okay.
Yeah we both have the same
problem but both committees yes
Sir are going at the same time
so up please proceed with your
your bill's.
Okay and on this computer my
camera is still not working Mr
chair so you can hear me others
will still got that fixed but
they'll get to it I guess we can
hear I can hear you fine okay so
I bring today Mr chair Senate
bill three sixty four and it's
an act
Forcing that if we have.
The of the health
and emigration that comes back
again that our businesses here
in New Mexico will be able to
stay open at least a minimum of
fifty percent this is what I'm
bringing today the only part
that I am inserting is on page
three line twelve through twenty
the rest is current law Mr chair
and with that I will.
Take questions.
Okay thank you thank you
senator.
Look at the let's see if we have
anybody.
Three six.
For.
As one and all and signed up so
now we'll turn to the.
The public anyone in the public
sphere of wishing to speak
Regarding this bill three six of
fifty four.
hearing no I will now turn to
the committee anyway and then
the committee wishing to speak.
Regarding this bill.
Mr I'd move to pass one program.
Okay we have a due pass I want
to table.
And we have a.
The table which is non
debatable.
Please.
Because penny please call the
roll.
Motioned to table on Senate bill
three six four Center guy goes.
No to table.
Ingle
Thermacare.
Yes.
There is a deal okay.
Yes.
There's.
Yes Sir Thomas.
Yes.
The move to table passed.
Senators.
Sanchez.
Unfortunately your bills is been
tabled thank you for.
Presenting the bill thank you
for being here this afternoon
and now we will move on to
Senate bill three seventy three
restrict snap program food
purchases.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle in the house.
So give them about ten to
fifteen seconds.
Before we.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator per I guess does not.
Want to be with us today so we
will move on to Senate Bill.
Three ninety I see what you why
FTE administrative hearing
senator Candelaria Mr chair can
I ask did we roll over three
seventy one.
No we didn't.
Mr chair.
I'm sorry I didn't mean to it
was a deliberate Senator souls.
But my hearing's going and so is
my site so please proceed with
your bill.
Thank you Mr chair three seventy
one a let me start with I do not
want to vote on this today this
bill is not ready of this bill
payment wait but I think it's
important that we have some
hearing in some discussion about
it so that when it is right that
we move forward the main thing
that's not ready about this
particular bill is it has a very
large fiscal impact and it also
has some parts to it where every
local law enforcement agency
would have to have a licensed
psychologist on yet we don't
have a license I colleges to do
that.
I know that I understand that
this particular bill payments a
result of the sessions with a
friend of mine you.
In the state police down in Los
crucis and the concern was with
everything that we saw from the
George would killing the the
others he said yeah people don't
understand the incredible stress
and strain that we put on our
law enforcement and yet they're
expected to be added to tough it
out to not have mental health
issues and he said most of what
he sees R. his officers have
really difficult mental health
issues but they are in some ways
by the system discouraged from
getting help and there
distortion a couple of ways.
One of them is if they go and
think help from a fellow officer
anything they tell the fellow
officer is there something that
can be holed up in a court of
law if there was something
tragic happened or something of
that sort and so they often hold
all of that in into as we have
seen some of the officers of
they they they lose it they
might have been a good person
but you know was just one thing
too many what this bill would do
is set up for law enforcement
and to have mechanisms for
getting the medical help that
they need of the key provisions
of it though it is all new
material is it set up a here
are.
What officer who is also a state
police officer who have been
trained in working with others
on those issues and on the legal
side of it that anything that is
they are told to be told in
confidence so that they it is
not something that can come out
later in the trial against them
with the this concerns that if
it if it is criminal if it has
to do with a
Who are violations of a child
anything of those and I think
and Senator Sedillo Lopez
probably knows them by heart but
the various kinds of exceptions
that even psychologists the
clergy and employers are exempt
from those particular things
that they must report but it
gives confidentiality to the
officer so that they can go and
seek help before it becomes
catastrophic to where somebody
gets seriously injured right now
officers that have seen things
that are feeling different
things if they tell another
officer that officer under court
of law could be bound to reveal
what they did that talked about
before it became a serious
problem and so this really sets
up a volunteer point here
support officer system and
mechanism for them to get the
help that they need up and I'd
be happy to have some discussion
with this bill was drafted by
council service but in direct
contact with state police
officers that are working on
trying to find some of the
mental health services but under
current situations anything
they're told should be called up
in a court of law they don't
have that confidentiality
mechanism so as as I said this
need lots more work but I hope
over the agreement others that
we start looking at providing
mental health services for
officers what we provide
training on physical fitness on
firearm use on driving skills
that we need to deal with the
mental illness and the mental
health side of it because we put
these officers under serious
serious staff and we expect them
to remain cool in a stressful
situation that afterwards and
for for some that's just an
untenable situation with that
I'd be happy to have some
discussion about it and as I
said hope over the next two
years we talk about this very
openly instead of in the shadows
in.
Closets where mental health so
often is talked about now.
Thank you thank you senator.
Understand you say the bills not
ready.
Hi Mister chair I do not want to
vote on the committee wants to
vote that's fine but yeah we
will die and find that you have
no chance of going through it's
not prepared to be okay.
Thank you so you want me to
solicit some.
Discussion that correct I would
like to discussion is if you're
going to vote on it but then I
will be withdrawn before about
how is that.
Okay do we have anyone in the
committee.
Let's see if we have anyone
signed up to seventy one.
I don't see anyone signed up now
we turn to the committee anyone
on the committee wishing to
speak I CS sentences deal Lopez
you have your hand up you
wishing to this address is on
this issue.
I just think the idea of for
We're peace officers who have
such a stressful stressful job
of providing support for them in
this manner it is a good one
I was also concerned about the
confidentiality issue that the
department of public safety
mentioned in in the FIR
Yeah there are really good rules
about confidentiality that
that are already in in force
with the counselors and
therapists and so trying to
modify that in this way I didn't
I didn't think was a a good idea
And there may be a lot of ways
to provide these peers services
one thing that I'm really
appreciate you bringing the bill
forward because it will start
discussions and I hope that
The departments police
departments see this and and
really think about how this
could be such a great wellness
benefit for their officers there
also is a possibility and I I
don't know
Some some departments may have
the benefit of having this
counseling benefit.
either.
It helps that will health
insurance probably depending on
the plan could be a a good
source of this benefit I think
the issue that you addresses the
stigma.
and and that I think is a big
education program but I really
appreciate you starting this
discussion I think I've
mentioned a few times of my
father was a I share influence
the county and
I I actually think that that
kind of stress is what led to an
early death frankly because it
is a very very stressful job.
So I I appreciate you bringing
it forward
And hope to continue the
discussion over the next few
years.
Could respond the you indicated
about the support therefore
counselors and other kinds of
things the concern that they
brought to the is hello first of
their pets are not police
officers they don't with this
light they don't understand the
the intricacies and the things
that they deal with on an
everyday basis and so what this
would do is it's almost like a
counselor like the volunteer
peer support officer who is a
police officer but then has some
of those same confidentiality
protections that a counselor
psychologist might have and
certainly could also referred to
a counselor and psychology if
appropriate but the important
part is this is somebody who's
in that same job and understand
but have specialized training to
deal with those mental health
conditions.
Thank you Mr chairman and then
respond when you have when you
have these kinds of counseling
programs that if they're working
under the direction of a
clinical director if they
they're covered by the
confidentiality
that's my understanding.
The the confidentiality rules
but you know at least that's
what we operated is in what
state is
You know we have these kinds of
programs the clinical director
maintains confidentiality and
did the did the
the agreements and everything
necessary to protect it because
that was the clinical directors
Ethical obligation so but I I
really I as I said I appreciate
the bill I think it's a very
very important issue and could
be a huge benefit to the
departments around around the
state thank you thank you thank
you senator.
And next we have a Senator
McKenna please proceed.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator Sauls I just discovered
the answer to my inquiry about
and is going to be about best
practices and I asked what it
was going to ask you what other
states in the nation of Dundas
and the FIR does show here that
there is a.
There's several of agencies that
do this nationwide the first one
being in New Jersey called cop
to cop so I think you know I.
Whenever New Mexicans think of
something I always ask how this
best practices so I think
Senator souls and and chairman
you get there's a really good
some really good roadmaps as
this develops further and I
applaud you for.
For bringing this to discussion
today.
And yes it's a terribly
stressful occupation and
something I've never done but I
am a very empathetic to what our
law four law enforcement and
first responders experienced
everyday so thank you very much.
Okay thank you senator Senator
souls.
Are you.
So
that all of the questions he is
no one out so I don't see anyone
else hand up so
Is that this I would you want to
do today yes very much and I
will will pull it from
consideration at this point of
the things that still need to be
worked on is as that came out is
it says every law enforcement
agency in the state we have some
sheriff's offices that are two
people or three people in some
of the counties and that
certainly would not be work
avoid it might need to be a
regional a consortium for
instance there would need to be
some funding I think those are
the biggest pieces of certainly
I appreciate the comments from
center city a Lopez that it
might be and it's something we
need to check that under the
clinical director that these
peer support officers may
already have the immunity but
they're under the understanding
that that is not the case at
this point so they would be
clarification.
Okay so with that I will pull it
and hopefully that over the next
two years in the health and
Human Services Committee are
possibly in and I'm not sure
what the interim one is that
deals with all these issues but
that this will come up and
hopefully in two years I will
bring it back for a fully
fleshed out with mechanisms for
starting and maybe we started
with just the state police.
Thank you Senator for your
parents today and we look
forward to.
Reviewing and discussing your
bill in the future thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Mr chairman I'll just consensus
Senator paroles name on the page
yeah this is going to give him
another opportunity thank you
senator okay thank you Senator
Pirtle you in the house.
Mr chair I am here thank you.
Thank you for.
Making here parents today and
please proceed with your bill
thank you Mr chair I apologize
to to the committee for not be
any and we're we're in Judiciary
and as all of us are we're in
three places at once all the
time so I have a Senate bill
three seventy three restricts
that program food purchases this
bill would simply request the
the feds to limit the food
available on separate justice to
those on wick wick is the food
that is more nutritious it's
what most of us would actually
think of this food it's not the
candies the coax the junk food
that can currently be purchased
under snap you know New Mexico
has a high obesity rate high
rate of diabetes and so this is
really just to to address that
issue it's kind of funny I get
emails from you know some of the
most liberal or or.
Democrats say we love this
because it's healthy choices of
food for people and then the
conservatives love it because my
tax dollars should be buying
oreo cookies so it's kind of one
of those interesting issues that
brings in people from from all
areas of the political spectrum
and with that all stand for
questions.
Thank you senator.
We have a.
Yes once one person signed up to
speak against Tim Davis are you
are you available.
Yes Mr chair I'm here thank you
for the opportunity to speak on
to Davis with the New Mexico
Center receives and let me just
start by saying that everyone in
New Mexico should have access to
nutritious food and families to
decide for themselves which
foods they can purchase however
the center poses any public
policy that creates a
differential treatment Sumer
about virtue of having low
incomes are already limited in
their choices we do appreciate
the Sanchez intent with this
bill we support promoting an
atrocious diet however limiting
food choices will just not
achieve this goal instead it
will be really costly and
administratively burdensome for
the Human Services Department
and for grocers to implement the
wick program is premised on the
nutritional analysis of people
already receiving staff which is
meant as a supplement for snap
households and there's no
nutritional analysis to support
families just getting WIC foods
limiting food choices would also
undermine efforts to expand
access to strengthen the snap
program instead of limiting food
choice the state to invest in
expanding staff budget because
increase benefit amounts have
actually been proven to lead to
an increase in the purchase of
nutritious food for these
reasons the center opposes this
bill thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr Davis for your
comments
Anyone.
In the audience wishing to speak
of in favor of this bill.
Well.
Mr Chairman.
Go ahead and actually like to
speak in opposition of the bill.
Please go ahead Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee that
this car regular again let's
let's run FC ministry New Mexico
also speaking on behalf New
Mexico conference of churches
and we're here also today just
in our opposition to SB three
seventy three certainly snap is
been incredibly efficient and
effective program for many years
and data shows that this led to
millions of Americans out of
poverty.
There are better policy options
for promoting healthy eating
patterns among snap recipients
and for all Americans stand
limiting options for food
purchase and it also like to
point out that two thousand
sixteen the USDA did report on
typical for to purchase patterns
by both snap participants and
non participants and found that
they all have extremely similar
spending patterns it's simply
unfair to limit to make the
first choice limiting choice on
on a particular group of people
and not on everybody we would
recommend that you vote against
this bill thank you.
Thank you Sir
Anyone the.
In the US wishing to speak in
favor of this bill.
Hearing none with that I'll turn
to the committee and one of the
committee wishing to speak
at regarding this bill we have a
Senator.
Okay goes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman center
rural just wondering what the
snap stand for.
Mr chair for metal supplementals
supplemental nutritional.
Assistance program I believe yes
yes.
Mr and center you're right and I
I guess my thought is on that I
like your your entry your
introduction
I'm with you on I'd rather see
that our nutritional value is is
what's brought this
on it as far as in our town
right now and you know as we do
have quite a few people that are
obese
If I got on scale might be one
of them but Mr chairman and
senator I was just wondering
Do we know if if which is or or
snap are if they've been.
Are there been a lot of fraud
with these programs.
You know Mister chairman Senator
that there has and and I think
the going rate currently and
from what I understand because
we do not require a photo ID
with the staff cards is about
twenty five cents on the dollar
so a lot of these snap benefits
cards of a pretty large amount
of them actually get sold to
people and so they sell their
snap benefits for about twenty
five cents on the dollar.
Mister chairman Senator I I
guess my thought on that line of
question is if we reduce what.
The general public use it before
then it may not be as
marketable.
Want to throw those two items
after because I like the
interesting part of what you're
trying to do and I would love to
curve the accessibility in the
demand form after so I thank you
know you'll think.
So.
Thank you so no thanks we'll
move on to Senator McKenna go
ahead please.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Graeco Senator Pirtle
I'm sorry
So I absolutely applaud more
nutritious meals for for
everyone of fruits vegetables
nuts and and the like what
concerns me chairman and senator
I don't see a list.
When I look at something that's
trying to exclude something I
look I like to look for a list
of things that would be excluded
and and so I don't see that.
And that leads me to my second
concern chairman and senator New
Mexico has a lot of food
deserts.
And.
Depending upon what's excluded
my concern is a family trying to
redeem their snap.
Budget their snap purchases
are they gonna have to go to one
two or three different stores in
order to.
Find something that's snap
eligible under this legislation.
So Mr chair members of the
committee I I appreciate that
question and no I mean what's
being excluded Mr chair Senator
McKenna is your oreo cookies
Year coca Cola your processed
foods your foods that that have
been deemed to be on healthy by
the federal federal government
you know on that list there's
breakfast cereal there's milk
cheese
lagoon speaking about fruits
vegetables canned fish whole
wheat bread Jews eggs and then
all of your canned goods as well
so if it includes pretty much
everything that is actual food
and not the things that that we
see that you know donuts and
hand things that that aren't
food and so that we try to
increase the amount of
nutritious food that that people
are purchasing and and eating.
Thank you chair thank you
senator yep for for me to really
consider this I'd have to see
those foods that are excluded so
that I could fully.
I appreciate what a family would
have to go through I'm again I'm
really concerned about our many
food deserts here in New Mexico
but I absolutely applaud.
How you are supporting healthy
nutrition
especially for kids so thank you
very much.
Mr your muted.
There was talking on the phone
thank you for telling me anyone
else on the committee wishing to
speak regarding this.
Go ahead senator do gives.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez before me.
First go ahead Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you thank you Mr chair the
FIR points out that we.
Is a supplemental program that
targets pregnant and postpartum
women infants and young children
and what this would do is it
would limit snap purchases to
approximately twenty types of
food and to only certain brands
of food.
So I don't think they did
actually achieves the goal that
you thank you set up and you
know if the problem that you
identify again I always think
what is it that we're trying to
accomplish if the problem is
for nutrition this this does not
address the problem and there
are better ways to address the
problem like education instead
of this this kind of the unitive
approach and then if you think
it but then you also addressed a
different problem and that was
the sale of these ideas ID's the
sale of these the card stamped
cards.
We and there are much better
ways to address that you could
just of require some kind of
I do or put a picture on it are
there many many other ways of
addressing the the other problem
that you that you seem to want
to address with this I have a
lot of problems with this bill
and I I I can't support it.
This limiting food options to
people who are most vulnerable
especially with all of the food
does is we have and then to be
so punitive like you can't have
an oreo cookie oh my gosh I I'm
sorry I really have a lot of
problems with this.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair you muted.
Senator update stated that
because you have your hand up.
Yes Mr just real briefly and I'm
gonna well just a sponsor Mr
launcher I I may have brought up
that.
Selling of the staff card
and and and the may not have
been here ten Senator Sedillo
Lopez just brought up and I
thought that was my comment to
you but I was going to ask you
and if before her comments might
my only other question was
Mr chairman Senator Pirtle if we
ever had and I'm trying to think
back in Lee County it would have
been about five years ago but
I'm not totally certain do you
know if we've ever had these
sold for drugs or I traded for
drugs Mr center.
And and Mr chair and senator I
do appreciate that question that
that is a huge a huge issue it
does happen and and this thing I
mean these FIR is our garbage if
you're still reading these
things then you have a problem
these are garbage I don't know
who they're getting to write
these but anybody that reads
those and and takes those
seriously probably
I don't know just just don't do
it I would I would caution you
not to read those
but you know an important part
to think about with the sap
cards they also come with cash
so that's not gonna limit a
hundred percent so they'll still
have a couple hundred Bucks on
their snap card to purchase
whatever they want so that's
that's what they would used by
the oreos or coca Cola things
like that we're just in the
actual snap benefit part of it
the portion is supposed to be
for nutrition is going to be
limit to nutritious foods just
wanted to twenty foods is
actually quite open as to what
they can use it to but to answer
your question Mr chair Senator
it has been a big issue of
trading staff for either drug
money or for drugs period and
end to to get to the Senators
point on the ID how many times
since you've been here Senate Mr
chair Senator Gallegos that we
try to run that and not get that
bill out of the committee you
know it seems like a simple
solution to put an IDA or
required ID for snap purchases
but that all the sudden that
argument just falls quickly so
maybe I'll try again next year
and Senator Sedillo Lopez would
be happy to sign on with me
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that I was hoping to
get to do our ado pass no wreck
with the option of having the I
do done before we get to the
floor but I'll leave that to you
and Senator Sedillo Lopez to
work out the details but I liked
that idea that she had and I
just a to me where I could see
some benefit is in removing some
of the.
Outline benefits for others that
are not just basically take care
of their family needs but
wanting if for no other.
I in all clarity Mr chairman and
senator I eight four oreos
earlier in this conversation but
I just I just know that it's
better to have a good group of
foods for our families and I
think mothers and fathers that
are looking at supply and the
need for their family would look
to that as a budget so with that
I yield thank you Mr thank you
senator.
Thank you senator next up we
have a senator Jerry or.
T. C. panel jury go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Senator Pirtle I have some
sympathy for your bill is you
know a couple years ago I tried
to.
get some upgrades eliminated
from the Senate budget.
What the limit is the Feds.
Basically do you these it is
very difficult we just could
that we almost impossible to get
the waiver that you're talking
about.
Read into that way for you to
get.
Cool.
Committee members is removed
because not only do we not
collect taxes on them they're
dangerous means I I can see
foods that may not be as good as
other phones we need probably
isn't as good as total for the
kids but.
No.
You seven choices but when you
say switch okay to buy soft
drinks your potentially damaging
the children's health and so.
I I I understand I sympathize
but I just think your bills and
work will because of no matter
what we say here Senator
probably just gonna.
Thank you for the same list as
they always have.
So Mr chairman I would move to
table.
Right so.
Not debatable so please call the
roll penny.
Senate bill three seven three to
table Senator Gallegos no ma'am
during.
Yes.
Thank you all.
Yes to table.
All right.
Judiciary Mr chair.
I'm I didn't get that I'm sorry
she's not here
she's presenting and Judiciary I
agree Sierra.
Yes.
There are too you know.
Yes.
Okay.
The vote is for you to know and
to excuse.
S. okay thank you penny yes
Senator.
Early have a table I just took
Senator with forty eight can't
let your twenty five percent.
Fraud go one challenge has set
served on the run the food bank
for several years I remember we
had a a long excellent
presentation about.
US program and the director said
it was like one percent I just
Google that.
And that says over ninety nine
percent of those receiving snap
benefits are eligible and
payment accuracy was ninety six
point two percent in two
thousand eleven.
Airs are less than half what
they were ten years ago which is
reduce improper payments by
three point six.
Billion goes on to talk about
of.
The they require a social
security master file it's a
security prison verification
system it goes on and on
explained in detail their their
fraud system so I just couldn't
let your to your twenty five
percent is totally bogus and.
I just it is not right well
Mister chair I I said twenty
five cents on the dollar and
I've had people knock on my door
selling their snap cards for
twenty five cents on the dollar
so I wasn't trying to to defraud
the committee and and I don't
appreciate being accused of
doing such that is the the fact
so but I'll just take my table
the motion and and go back to
Judiciary thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator thank.
Senator Tallman where are we on
the agenda if you tell me and I
I attention liability Judiciary
so I'm back here.
Our our we we just finished a.
Three seventy three seventy
three all right bye
Senator souls Bill yes well.
We discussed it but he says bill
wasn't ready to to be noted that
okay.
And how much are Senator Sanchez
Bill univalent.
yes.
Senator love this is a memorial
as soon as she can join us she's
of course in Judiciary and that
was certainly glad she was there
she saved money by the bill from
extinguishment.
The.
She will join us whenever she
can she can as soon as she comes
will take over Senate Joint
Memorial for.
So we'll go to the senator
Candelaria with this.
Can you notify senator
Candelaria a very group were.
Sharon or whoever's doing.
Mr we did not do my for all
three and I don't mind doing a
fall while we wait shouldn't
take long I think it's good
bill.
We heard from senator
Candelaria.
Mr Chairman representative there
is co sponsoring here.
Your your nose funds
Yes Sir okay Willis and
gentleman ordered we'll get you
senator Senator guidelines also
Senate bill three ninety five
and the CYFD administrative
hearings and the representative
Taos please go ahead thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee of the committee
this bill utilizes the
administrative offices to
provide an independent.
Actual and fair Avenue for
stakeholders within the child
welfare system to resolve
administrative disputes with
CYFD we know what Mr chairman I
do have to mention I do that
members.
I'm having a hard time here
there's an echo in your in your.
So so do you state you have an
amendment yes Sir.
Three.
Mr chair we did get that
amendment I think Frank should
have that and that was sent out.
What are you Representative why
don't you go ahead and explain
the bill more we all dig around
in our files and internal to
that amendment thank you Mr
chairman can you guys hear me
better now.
I'm not sure if anybody else is
having trouble is just as funny
as COVID but I can make it out.
To me it's very to me okay.
Your piece but I would have to
grab it.
What would you like me to do.
Representative is.
Okay thank you Mr chairman so
house this bill and it utilizes
the administrative hearings
office to provide an independent
impartial and fair Avenue for
stakeholders within the child
welfare system to resolve
administrative disputes with
CYFD as it currently stands.
Wants to protest a decision by
CYFD the only place to protest
this to see why this order.
These administrative hearing
system is entirely internal and
he is itself a source of
retaliation against grievances
including foster parents and
relatives seeking to protect the
rights of youth in foster care
in the fiscal impact reports
CYFD contents of the provision
of the bill are duplicative
because he might be already has
been in this process up to
address protest related to these
decisions but what CYFD fails to
understand and what this bill
addresses is both the perception
and the real conflict of
interest inherent in the
existing only internal
administrative hearings
procedure so the current process
includes a hearing officer that
is an employee CYFD and
appointed by the CYFD secretary
who oversees Review and records
described on the decision.
Yes we received information from
sources that in choosing to
remain anonymous because they
fear retaliation that the
current appeals process is
pretty much there were H. out
the workers would receive an
appeal in writing the worker in
the supervisor would sit in a
county office review the report
protest just a few minutes
mostly just talking about the
decision that they already made
and that there.
Not a real process so this
creates a simple and logical fix
to this broken and unfair
administrative hearing process
it moves the administrative
hearings outside of CYFD to the
administrator's office this was
created in two thousand fifteen
I a bill passed by Senator
Candelaria and provide both
bodies signed by the governor
and so did yes to educate
administrative hearings an
affair.
Act and impartial manner
independent of an executive
agency as party to proceed
because it's party to the
proceedings session.
To the hearing administrative
office lemonades the appearance
of conflict of in here if
interest that is inherent to the
existing structure within CYFD
it increases transparency and
dependence on knowledge and one
of these administrative failings
will foster better experience
and still more confidence and
our child with your system.
Sample of a story that's
personal and from my district a
couple in my district many years
ago they were foster parents and
they took you at risk teens
they.
Fostered and at risk team when
they came to them have been
shifted to many many homes
schools was also conceptions
abuse issues since you issue and
so they were brought in the
tribal team they ended up
adopting him and he still
continue to have.
Adverse childhood experiences
that resulted in the struggles
and live at one point the kids
his children were in and out of
foster care seeking.
And they became the relative
foster parents of his children
off and on depending on when he
had tested his children if the
statewide testing the
grandparents raising a child at
one twenty while the sun had
custody of his children.
Was under the influence of
substance and he was injured to
the point where she she I don't
as a date in this body and he
was in the hospital on life
support.
The grandparents were foster
parents of the children asked a
and another foster parent to
address that you have to ask
another foster parent to do
respite care so this other
foster parent who was a project
to respite care for the children
while the the.
The parents went to stay with
their silence.
It'll for two weeks before I to
support any passed away in two
week period the I'm CYFD file
negligent some charges were
filed against these these that
relatives grandparents who are
doing relative foster care they
were substantiated the bank
elector differential by staying
with their side of the hospital
as he died and they put the
children up for adoption so
these just bilingual families
and children Representative
months adopted by a white family
there was never an appeals
there's never any process they
never had your current job did
away from the family and stories
like this are pundits I would
think that this year.
You can hear and one more crisis
with CYFD many of the efforts to
reform and see I do have failed
during the sixty day session
this is the last bill remaining
that creates an independent
process and we would be twenty
thirty nine other states in the
United States but having all
those men what independent sales
process outside of the child
welfare system and so with that
I do have an expert witness that
is Jason Espinoza if we could
move him in.
He's here he's.
J. Jason do you want to say
something on this bill before we
go to the amendment.
On chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
accurate The New Mexico child
first network and.
Just just really quickly I had
the opportunity to work with
senator Candelaria and
Representative Harper and twenty
fifteen when the administrative
hearings office was created by
the legislature in really at
that time it was focused on the
tax office to really deal with
the exact same situation we have
here yeah hearing officer who is
an employee of the same
department that made a decision
that your protest and and that
was really before by the
legislature to create this
during office to make sure that
both the reality and the
perception of bias was removed
from the process since the tax
hearings the tax returns from of
over they're also doing the W. I
am I consent and and some
insurance matters as well so
this is just continuing to make
all of these variants more fair
and impartial thank you
chairman.
Thank you James so
Representative why don't you go
ahead and schedule some of the
amendment can you believe that
back up again driver if any or
were those.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee of this house and your
bill in the house side and CYFD
spoke strongly against that they
oppose the bill I'm sure they
will again today.
Are suggesting that if we have
an independent appeals process
even though thirty nine other
states do that we would
jeopardize our federal I the
funding we do not want to do
that we do not want that to be a
reason for this funding to stall
and so what we have done with
this amendment is still right in
page two line I in its entirety
and that is the part that allows
foster parents to use this.
Feels process so by striking
that there is absolutely no risk
even though that's a proceed
rest we could find no of federal
assurances that would jeopardize
the funds we're just gonna
simply strike it.
Eighty six line twenty seven
about
when Jason can you explain that
one the chairman and members the
committee representative.
The striking the administrative
procedures act online sick is
clean up in the F. I. R. the
ministry to pop a hearings
office didn't know that they are
not under the administrative
procedures act so that was
really a rainy just to have that
reference in there so we
districts that
He page eleven online ten the
insertion of that language was
again done in response to
suggestions from the
administrative hearings office
to make it explicit that we're
authorizing the disclosure of
records to the H. I wonder that
confidentiality section in law.
Okay very good we just comments
that when you remove that the.
Two one line one line private
page two you probably eliminated
an awful lot of these public
comment and we were going to
here today.
What would you say are
Representative.
The chairman can I make a
clarification on on that point
yeah.
So what we stroke what we
structure the languages that the
ability
to protest the removal of a
child from a foster home very
specifically because that was
the concern from CYFD that would
jeopardize the title for E.
signing up foster parents and
other constituents that are
outlined in the legislation
would still be able to protest
the revocation or suspension of
foster home license anything
related to the reimbursement of
expenses or anything that they
believe did conflict with the
existing law department or
policy or rule so all it does is
strike the removal of the child
from foster home as part.
But I yeah I and I understand
what you would do it I just
think that a lot of the letter
written to me about additional
and and talked about how there
was retribution in the form of
having to shell removed and so
on.
Mr chairman I agree with you and
it was really heartbreaking to
strike that and it just shows
how much these foster families
care of the children at about
reforms to CYFD unit process if
they would suggest that we
strike in order to help this
bill move forward instead of
seeing it died.
Okay you can remove the
amendment from the screen
program.
Let's go to the committee for
discussion of the amendment as
proposed we have a motion to
reception to adoption.
Mr I'm of the amendment.
Thank you senator this is our
second.
The show will seconded.
Then the is there any opposition
to adopting this amendment.
Seeing will consider the bills
have been amended and we'll go
now to a long list I have a long
list of a dozen people.
just to speak on this bill.
I have nobody was asked to speak
against it.
All of these features are in
support of it I want to ask if
there is any representation from
CYFD in the room with us today.
You are yes.
Is there someone from CYFD here.
We're seeing we'll go to the
list now keep in mind a year.
Hi.
Try to be diplomatic and I say
this it would not be helpful.
Lows stories of what happened to
you but if you focus on what
this bill might mean for future
foster parents are for you if
you're still there that would be
the most hopeful as strict
emphasized in your testimony
that you can try to keep it
brief because we don't have an
unlimited amount of time so I
will show with Maryland at the
New Mexico child first network
Chile followed by Christine
boomer.
Thank you speaker and and
committee members famous Allen
back I am a former foster care
right with over thirty nine
children in my care ranging from
newborn to seventeen and a half
years old and through that
experience I am now the proud
founder of New Mexico child
first network eighty five oh one
C. three nonprofit organ
organization in Mexico dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care and
hiring and supporting those
families to support and help
them our powers comes from the
ability to make empowered
choices about the children in
are problems like advocates for
those children in foster care
listen to me president respected
and valued by other stakeholders
as a community we have to
remember that CYFD is bound to
server are faster use that they
work for us four decades the
lady's decision making has
happened under a cloak of
darkness and secretive and for
decades retaliation described as
part of its culture we know that
the current internal reasons
policy insisting has not scratch
the surface of systematic
retaliation outside review of
agency decision making as long
overdue the current unhealthy
part was insane right the reason
culture we're stakeholders are
travel for system including
current and former welfare
protective services please do
not feel comfortable speaking up
for themselves or the children
in their care they do not
perspective they feel alone and
they feel intimidated the
current process reinforces the
unhealthy power dynamics can
perpetuate policies and
practices that disadvantaged and
marginalized stakeholders within
the system the culture created
is similar to an abusive
relationship where one partner
friends the other night when
than if they speak out of turn
stand up for themselves and they
will take with the children in
their care this act this must
and Senate bill two eighty four
minutes as the right direction
creating an independent and
impartial process for
stakeholders to protest certain
decisions by the ref do well I
created administer.
In the programs also children in
their care and alternately
people who get by.
I will tell you very quickly
that one of the first woman in
my care is an eighteen month old
toddler and because I have
connections with legislators New
Mexico resources that committee
chair for five and a half months
and I specifically asked for
early intervention family infant
toddler I'm so diagnostic
including peachy and see and I
was school and feel better in
Delhi services for the family
and I have family and I was told
by my case worker if I continue
to ask for services for the
family and for that child that
it would appear that I do not
support reunification with the
family I did not support the I
care it's right to carry their
own children and it would move
out of here that's how to make
sure it under six months I think
again I understand the amendment
I support the amendment this is
long overdue and I think you for
hearing us.
Thank you thank you Maryland
Christine Pollard budget will
chasing you already spoken
Angelina mills and other will be
under Christie Wilmer.
It's clear CYFD needs oversight
James Dunkley Cruz age for
deceased in two thousand
nineteen well with family under
CYFD approval hello my stand
shows deceased aged out of CYFD
foster care just a few months
earlier.
Samantha Rubino eight eight
deceased two thousand twenty
well with her father who had
prior had prior investigations
and charges for see what for
child abuse with CYFD.
Maybe three months old abuse so
badly she is now permanently
blind well with her parents
under CYFD safety plan.
Not only so the data one year
old school fractures and
injuries leaving her permanently
blinded well missing with her
three siblings well with her
family under CYFD approval.
Alisa Covington H. three and
brother the bond was Alice age
six kidnapped in two thousand
twenty one while in CYFD
custody.
Baby boy strano one month
suffocated to death in two
thousand twenty.
All of these children have died
or experienced things no child
should ever indoor while under
CYFD sole discretion.
There are many others
experiencing further abuse or
trauma that don't make the news
headlines.
My name is Christy Bremer and I
am adoptive parent you're CYFD
foster care a foster family and
child mentor and advocate I
support this bill because I care
about the well being and safety
of New Mexico kids CYFD is
failing them.
This bill may not be perfect but
it places a check on CYFD
unfettered power by creating an
outside and Ms partial entity to
protect the children and CYFD is
care so we can prevent another
tragedy like the death of James
Dunkley Cruz from happening
again thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr.
Usually involved in other colors
by ID Woodward.
Hello my name is Angelina
Maldonado and I'm a former
licensed foster parents I also
volunteer as a court appointed
special advocate and I work as
an early intervention provider
I've been able to collaborate
with CYFD in several different
ways and I've experienced how
conflicts within the department
of managed and how their
attempts to resolve disagreement
is handled the children youth
and families department lacks
transparency and accountability
within their system and this is
a parent when there's
significant disputes from
professionals foster parents and
other individuals working
closely with their employees.
I honestly believe that if there
had been an established impair
administrative hearing process
in place I would possibly still
hold their Oster parent my sins
I would still be providing a
loving safe and happy home for
these children in the foster
care system.
I felt that I can advocate
better for these children as a
professional than as a foster
parent SP three ninety five will
help to create a and there are
create a fix for the current
broken CYFD system that is in
place for keeping every child's
best interest in mind at all
times and not letting personal
emotions drive decisions for
these kiddos we need to make a
different we need to work
together to make a difference of
the the positive change for New
Mexico's most vulnerable
children so I urge you to
support Senate bill three ninety
five thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Judy Woodward followed by Jill
Jones.
Hello Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Judy Woodward
I am a former CYFD employee a
former CYFD supervisor and I can
attest to personal experience
for how broken the appellate
process is
as Representative Dow did state
earlier
these decisions are already made
going into the process so the
process isn't fair and I do
believe that of Bill although
this bill does have its
imperfections such as this would
help level the playing field and
give foster parents and
stakeholders of more valid and
better opportunity to express
their feelings on how the system
is working thank you for your
time thank you thank you I Joe
Jones followed by Amanda
Williams.
Hello Mister chair and members
of the committee my name is Joe
Johns and I into enough for more
foster parent of New Mexico and
also an adopted mother of three
children out of the foster care
system Thursday why do my
support as we three ninety five
and I'd like to tell you why I'm
in two thousand nineteen we
became a foster family for.
When
and regulate the other two were
who are placed into another home
a similar before we kept them
every weekend for almost a year
so we came to know all of the
kids I'm very and very well and
we grew to love them all as well
and when it was clear CYFD was
going to seriously.
Endanger the children and put
them back with their biological
parents without proper training
or any safeguards in place many
people spoke up for the kids who
can speak for themselves at CYFD
did tell me at that time I was
becoming to local and they may
have to remove the children from
my home.
What I kept thinking because
nobody else was there to do so
I'm without you diligence on
trial basis the children return
return to the parents and they
never demonstrated the ability
to protect and take care of them
the parents disappeared with the
four children who were still in
CYFD custody statewide you never
report the missing or endangered
and the foster mom she did what
any other I would would you and
she went to social media and
reported the children misting
herself in an attempt to find
children.
Six months later the baby was
abandoned Carolina hospital with
the school fracture and severe
injuries to her brain and she is
now firmly blind and the parents
fled but were later apprehended
by US marshals the babies were
placed in foster homes
when there was a family who knew
him and loved him very much and
wanted them back and still on
going back to this day but can't
because they're going through
the appeals process that
everyone is speaking of now.
The story is me and in
retaliation the children were
not placed back in my home and I
can share assure you the process
I'm going through right now is
not fair and it's not balance
and I urge you I urge you for
myself my family and the
children who are suffering to
please please pass this bill I'm
like I said do I do about my
license they're stealing me I've
been forced to obtain an
attorney to try to part because
I tried to protect the children
was delighted you would not and
there's many other foster
parents like me who are now more
afraid to speak on a child we
have did you like the
retaliation so for the children
who do not have a voice and
foster parents were afraid to
speak on their behalf we have
an us that you support this bill
and for the baby who can no
longer see I know just should
look you and I and ask you.
Bill so instead I will do it for
her in braille thank you Mr
chairman members committee.
Thank you John.
Amanda Williams followed by an
mentioning.
Thank you for your time I am a
current foster parents in the
county New Mexico and I have
filed a grievance you are you
are are.
I'm a on court order process is
not being followed through with
and reports that I've given to
the case worker being falsified.
I was later informed that
representative was resolved but
I was not informed as to how I
was also.
It's important that people that
were part of the reason or part
of the team that resulted
why do you need to be held
accountable and the and for.
Foster care are being
traumatized because of the
retaliation that is taking place
when foster care in protection
of the children please vote to
protect the children of New
Mexico.
Thank you miss Williams
Any followed by one month or.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator my name is and McKinney
and I am strongly in support of
SB three ninety five.
In the past couple years as I've
been called an honorary foster
grandma I and many children in
state care as I've met many of
our volunteer foster families I
have heard stories first hand of
foster care until this I would
not have known that need to
establish an independent
impartial administrative appeals
procedure for grievances against
CYFD I am speaking out today as
I believe this is simply good
government because of the cost
confidential nature of caring
for our New Mexico check when
care children's stories cannot
be publicized so I'd like most
just trusted the system to do
everything right for these
children.
From my professional business
background I was disturbed to
learn that we do not have an
independent appeals electric
grievances and concerns of CYFD
everyone everyone in any other
situation has a path to
independent oversight.
The practice of oversight for
child protective services and
child welfare is at best
practice in thirty nine other
states I think it is imperative
to pass SB three ninety five as
a safeguard and a way to further
and improve child welfare in New
Mexico please vote yes and put
our children first.
Thank you Mr.
Christina Christian.
Hi my name is don Mont that
I did not plan on speaking today
but I did want to share
something actually
because I am a foster parent of
a high profile case
and I graciously didn't want to
say anything I'm to protect the
children
That are currently in my home
and I was just gonna say that I
support SB three ninety five and
with respect of the chair as he
asked that we not share every
experience that we have I do
want to say that
what if this bill passes that
foster families and others
including social workers
guardian of my items nurses
doctors even CYFD workers will
speak up for what is right
and they will not need to go to
court and spend thousands of
dollars on
attorneys I will also say that
you will retain good foster
parents resulting in better care
for children children will have
less trauma needing to be moved
and shuffled around the the
system
and you will have less children
with that severe injuries and
undocumented disappearances
there will be less control over
one entity and more oversight
for the children in our state
and I ask that you vote yes to
just two ninety five thank you.
Next is the Christina Christian
told by Alexander Harris and.
Chairman vice chairman and
senators my name is Christina
Christian I care for many foster
children in the dental field.
I'm I'm also a mother and I've
also lived in Albuquerque my
whole life I thank you for
hearing bill SB three ninety
five.
Today I stand for the gap for
the foster families will take
care of many children in our
community home are free to speak
up due to this fear of
retaliation.
They fear that children will be
moved from their home and they
don't speak up so to protect the
children and they say nothing
today I ask that you stand in
the gap also for those who are
afraid.
Why are they afraid you ask
because they love and care for
the children that CYFD controls
CYFD has the power to take these
children as well as the foster
families licenses if you speak
up for the children again CYFD
for there's their content
certains.
These children have enough
turmoil and their lives please
allow all who stand for the
children a fair chance to please
stop the retaliation and please
pass this bill I support SB
three ninety five.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Christian
so then Alexander Harrison
followed by Jackson the
negatives.
Hello.
My name is Alexander Harrison
and I appreciate all the
senators today taking the time
to hear from the public on
Senate bill three ninety five in
my particular case.
The family relatives fictive
can't everyone is losing a
family member due to the
retaliation and abuse of the
administrative appeals process
that no families but he will see
are caused in for over a year
this is recently reported on by
care queue we also the current
grieves grievance processes
within CYFD did not work as
intended when a person it tends
to have agreements addressed by
senior manager or constituent
affairs CYFD can and does
weaponize the administrative
appeals process by issuing a
relocation a foster parent
letter C. in our case this is
this Representative did a
relative a doctrine that was a
month or two from being
completed it goes against the
family first preventive services
act on a federal level and just
C. O. ideas for self family
relatives to fictive kin to
request a visitation or kinship
placement through sick I do
general counsel which is.
Been ignored even though these
people have not been party Mr
process you should not be
they're using it against on.
I was stuck in this Mr appeal
process for over four hundred
fifty K. ironies current New
Mexico a minute administrative
code eight point eight point
four this process should only
take about a hundred eighty days
they have utilized these could
yes allegations in the
relocation letter against me in
the family in court so we can't
even intervene into the K. as
put us in a complete gridlock
this is even with the subs you
care Advisory Council issued a
report calling into question
CYFD actions in this matter in
issuing favorable guidance to
the courts about restoring
visitation and looking at family
for the adoption of this Tyler.
I do implore you to please
supporters Senate bill three
ninety five to move the
administrative appeals process
out of CYFD is offices so they
will stop using the re
vocational licenses a tactical
nuke to shut down any real
grievances raised about
retaliation discrimination and
violations of the faster trials
bill of rights thank you.
Thank you.
Jacksonville megas followed by
Douglas Michelle.
Jackson and I guess I didn't see
his name but I thought maybe
somebody else.
Douglas Michelle dollar by
Michelle Burge.
Don't miss Michelle Michael or
Michelle.
It's it's Michelle committee
members thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is that with
Michelle and I'm an adoptive
father and been a foster parent
for over ten years in September
of twenty nineteen CYFD our own
children and family services
plan submitted to the federal
government's children services
bureau had a goal of creating a
foster parent grievance policy
by July of twenty twenty by
December first of twenty twenty
the cabinet settlement required
a grievance procedure for
resources research families be
implemented by CYFD please note
the distinction between policy
and procedure also note that
this the former never happened
and the latter was lights I
submitted in April to see with
the for these policies and
procedures on December
fourteenth of twenty twenty CYFD
replied stating that they would
respond by December twenty ninth
foster parents began to receive
a copy of procedure P. R. eleven
on December twenty fourth from
their social workers this
procedure with the grievance
process for resource families
and was debated stated that
December twenty third on
December twenty ninth a request
for information was declared
brought in burdensome each month
like clockwork the schedule
response has been pushed later
this week on March nineteenth I
may receive a response the
takeaway here is that CYFD is
very much in need of independent
oversight and significant
changes are required retaliation
for pastor parents for speaking
up is just one of many examples
of this this functional
organization truth be told there
is no foster parent grievance
policy The New Mexico
administrative code eight twenty
six to foster care and adoption
placement services is where this
policy should reside just
recently on March fifth it was
announced a twenty six to is
being updated and public
comments are being heard in
early April the changes are
published on the CYFD website
and they make no mention of a
grievance policy instead they
got this is and this update is
now called foster parents
resource families as for the
grievance procedure.
Which the cabinet settlement may
happen in the latter part of
December it was developed solely
by CYFD and created two levels
of self monitoring with no
accountability I emphatically
request this body passed Senate
bill three ninety five so that
we may have independent and
impartial administrative
hearings thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Michelle called in by Marci
Oliver Starr.
yes Michelle's with this Marci
Oliver Starr you followed by
Molly whatever your last name I
just see one one were involved.
So
More C. N. N. O. N..
Hello my name is Marcy over star
and educational decision maker
for children in foster care as
well as a foster parent sh this
is an educational decision maker
that I speak to you I
Representative child in foster
care he was retaliated against.
Lost a year of special education
services due to the retaliation
Buffy westie they fought me
twelve people almost twelve
people showed up to it AP
meeting where I was requesting
an evaluation and thought that.
I eventually fell the second
flight through PED and the
district was required to.
Not only provide the evaluation
and services but compensatory
services for the entire year
that was missed I urge you to to
yes this bill thank you so much
have a great day.
Thank you Marci and the last
person signed up as a Molly and
if you could identify yourself
please hello my name is Molly
Jacobson I am calling from or
again I had three children play
could put with us as a pre
adoptive home and said to say it
didn't work out of most of it
was because of retaliation with
holding them for information
falsifying documents
And that process mints with the
ended up having to go to court
just as the previous lady was
talking about getting this just
meant it took a court order when
we did get an assessment in the
annual report that he why FTEs
puts out they say that they have
many people trained to
administer the cans they
administer the can't it took
about six months for the hi my
do it
and but every but they can't was
administered in such a way that
every single protocol was
violated I had no way to yield
except to go to court it took a
court order to remove.
To remove the social worker from
the case to a court order to get
assessments that in Oregon it
would have been granted like
hands down within the first
thirty days it would have been
done.
in Oregon the appeals process is
through and are independent
agency
and it has worked wonders for
our kids and so I would
encourage you to support this
bill one hundred percent I think
we need to have more than this
bill in New Mexico to protect
the children but I think it's a
start
it's not just the foster parents
to review her kids they're being
hurt.
Yeah thank you.
The committee I wonder of
Representative if you could just
just bring as of today and you
said there was a companion bill
in the house the amendment we
put on today more something that
was done in the house and what's
happened to the house bill and
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee in the
we have not had the opportunity
to add the amendment and we are
stalled in Judiciary and as of
recent chairman Casey has said
that they probably will not be
hearing any more house bill's
they are now focusing on bills
so we this you know the fate of
this this effort this year is is
in your hands and you know I I a
lot of people to testify that
were foster parents but I do
want to let you know that this
bill addresses the special
advocates the child child
attorney custodian the guardian
the guardian Adlai item Indian
tribe parents any any person
fictive kin the mental health
worker the school staff for
protective services division
they yield and without this in
place it does take a court
hearing and that does cost money
I have been so and I I week we
can stand for questions.
And I would I would just the
committee we used to have
citizen review boards.
We use of citizen review boards
for that where a lot of this.
Opportunities to bring things
that would happen we pretty much
eliminated that we went to the
some signature by right so.
And we just found this year.
Nobody reads the report nobody
talks to them they're basically
operating in a in a vacuum and.
So I I I thank you
Representative working on this
and we'll go to Senator Gallegos
your question Senator.
Mr chair thank you
Representative down centered on
the line if you're on I just
wanted to clarify a few things
on a co signer on this bill I
wanna give the committee a
little bit of understanding I've
got a daughter we're talking
about the malaise of the day
issue well that's a Lee County
issue one of my daughters work
for CYFD as investigative of
Madam the other daughter work
for costs of and both my
daughters were involved in this
and just because C. Y. yield the
list then and I don't want
anyone put in harm's way neither
my daughters well when I ask me
detail they always say that they
neither confirm nor deny and the
we have that
Issue in my house I get more
information from outside my home
one children welfare even though
their job is children's welfare
and they do a great job but Mr
and in centers I want to tell
you so I've been I've been
following this Representative
Dow Representative for hard on
my I myself worked the last few
years you know we had the are
trying to get other issues taken
care of we had the
Bussmann we had the.
Task force last year and just a
really sad I I made a trip down
from Lee County to go the task
force only be turned away and
Senator Kernan I've also met
with the secretary multiple
times in trying to resolve this
because there's a lot of detail
out there the secretary says
it's inaccurate information I
keep telling him well if we had
someone to go to like sub to
Care Advisory Council the could
put the truth out and still
protect the names the would be
able to resolve a lot of
problems out there in the public
side I think we have a huge
black eye Lea County over the
Mona Lisa issue
we we allow them a brief
Is it with our children that was
not well did not have oversight
in in that thirty minute time
frame they they left my only six
one found was blind for life and
I really take of that to heart
Mr chair and Representative Dow
because I think being in our
custody.
The state of New Mexico should
have some kind of mechanism in
place to be able to protect the
kids in and I'd say Mr in
Representative Dow and and I
appreciate everyone testifying I
know that I was told so much yes
but in house help has already
been notified that they're gonna
be retaliated and and that's not
a good position for the state I
know everyone the speech because
we show your name ends up
but yourself out there on the
line but I do think the parents
are you know the the prosper and
saying that it's more about the
children and the adults because
that's where our focus needs to
be Mr chairman and
Representative doubt and I'm
just wondering and I I do
understand
eight three two eighty four is
talking Judiciary up I'm just
wondering have we had any kind
of push back in and I appreciate
your amendment I'm not consider
that just push back but if we
ever have we had any pushback or
conversation recently from CYFD
on the direction of this bill Mr
Chairman Representative Dow.
Thank thank you Mr chair and and
thank you senator guy it goes I
would say yeah we did get a
hearing and and Health Human
Services and it use a unanimous
to pass but also during that
hearing at CYFD did say that
they oppose the bill so the
reasons that they gave what was
that there was a cost and so
that is true but have you put a
cost on Mona Lisa's life.
They say that it jeopardizes the
federal funding which is why we
struck that from this seven
minutes they're saying that a
duplicate other efforts and it
simply does not what it does
anybody can go to court but it
costs money and so even at gill
who is so great and told her
story today is for ten thousand
dollars in the legal fees not
only defending herself but you
know at trying to go through
this appeals process so
and they are they were referring
another bill which is no longer
going forward that they support
the thanks to care by three
council being the place where
people yield but this and called
independence so if if if the sub
to Care by three council
committee an independent hearing
officer why can't this
administration why can't we do
it through the Senate the the
choosing of this body because of
the such you cared by the
council is nine appointed
members and those are for
Representative state agencies
and and I are appointed by the
governor so those that is we
feel this is much more
independent and it falls best
practices in that is at
Representative it in thirty nine
other states so those were the
reasons for opposing and I think
we address those internment.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative in and I was
really impressed and Mr keeps
impressing me understanding what
we had in the past and in that
we are not listing to substitute
Care Advisory Council and that's
a huge problem well we have them
in place for a reason and it
does fall on deaf ears it just
a.
You're talking about cost Mr and
and Representative Dow I think
if you look at the cost of what
we're gonna Mona Lisa.
For her blindness for life
because she was in and is still
in our custody when that
happened I feel totally
responsible for that and I think
that's going to be a huge cost
to the state and I think we just
need to make sure that we
whether.
It's a department whether it's
an office whether it's a person
whatever the fault was we just
need to be able clarify that
and put the
the blame where it goes I I
think that the children of state
New Mexico deserve to have an
organization that is truly.
In their corner and not just in
the corner the parents.
Mr Jones and I had had
discussion years ago and she
brought up that is a parent of
program it wasn't about the
children and I stood in
opposition with her at that time
because I had a child work for
CYFD but the longer that I hear
the stories the more detail I
get it is about the parents and
not as much about the child so I
truly support your your bill I
just want to make sure that the
you knew in in the in in the
committee knew that
it is that you know I do have
children in in the business and
I I I I fear.
The retaliation on them I hope
it doesn't come but it's just
one of those things I think at
the end of the day it should be
about the child and not the
adults so what that all yield
but I think you Representative
out for all you're doing
continued support to an all you
do our protect our children said
New Mexico Mr all you'll.
Thank you Sir.
And I have been contacted by.
The Nico Stallis from CYFD uses
of we didn't realize there was a
hearing on the bill today will
be there for Judiciary.
But I would say if you want to
know the reasons for CYFD is
opposition read the FIR which is
almost exclusively provided by
CYFD and talks about.
More clear that for you funding
would be threatened and some
other stuff you know you can
read right you are here to say
whether opposed to it you can
read our opposition in the of
our what is the will of the
committee.
Do.
Senator Ingle we would.
Seconded by Senator Gallegos is
there any other discussion of
this bill I want to thank the
foster parents of former foster
parents for the most for and
that's just a comment I wanted
to make.
We have an
extracting foster parents in the
state why department would.
So.
Consciously just.
Thanks.
When they're when they're
wonderful families that just
boggles the mind that.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you are
doing the right the and the
motion.
Senator.
Let me on the chair.
I don't know if I want to debate
as much as say have depressing
this was I think I'm just
speechless.
I hate it it's interesting that
this is the the last four by I
think that the idea of the
independent is very good I'm
just worried about the timeline
to getting it in place
and also I'm very disappointed
not to see CYFD here
to to address some of the the.
The complaints and I think
taking out the faster
Well I guess there is one
question I didn't understand how
taking out the foster care
parents threatened federal
funding was that because of it
what are what what what's the
issue there.
Representative.
Mr chair I'm gonna let states
and answer that
so I don't get it wrong I think
I know the answer but he really
does.
In the in the FIR to go ahead
Dawn it's on page I really
applaud our budget Hey Jason
what would you say.
Chairman members of the
committee Senator I see why if
these contention is that under
the the federal law that the
CYFD has to have sole discretion
for placement as a child and
that they are the Department
vested with that interest in if
we allow this protest to take
place because the decisions by
the administrative hearing
officer would be finding that
they're saying we would be in
conflict with that and therefore
would be jeopardizing those
titles were you funds.
Mr chair and senator the only
thing that I would add to that
is that we ask provided those
services to research the federal
law and to confirm that for us
and they were unable to confirm
that we would jeopardize those
funds at we also went to in C.
S. L. and looks forward states
that do have an independent
process and they are not losing
their federal dollars from that
thirty nine states do this in
one way or another and they have
not lost their federal funds but
we were told that's one of the
reasons why the bills installed
and and so we the foster
families came forward in fact
remove that piece removal of a
child from a foster home so
that's that's that's what we
struck and that should resolve
the right these concern about
federal funding.
If this bill do doesn't make it
because there's no there's no
citations to the federal law
that it would violate it in in
the FIR so
Exactly what you said if other
states doing how are they able
to do it and it seems to me that
that I mean there are.
The retaliation is the most
bothers bothering some thank and
I think due process requires
independence
now I know that these these
cases can be very very emotional
and I know that they're they're
very hard but the threats the
threats are just unacceptable
and certainly I I'm sure CYFD is
listening and I think they need
to really look at those
questions but I like I said I
I'm going to support the bill I
don't know that the time line is
workable.
but
and I really do would be
interested in in
In hearing what CYFD has to say
about this and what they're up
plans are for reforming.
Thank you senator.
Any other comments or questions
on the bill we have a motion a
new press motion by Senator
Ingle seconded by Senator gray
and blue.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill three ninety five
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Go yes.
Chairman.
Chairman I need some advice.
I'm really not I'm not that CYFD
is is it is not here.
And I just I don't have enough
information to vote.
This I'm just.
I'm gonna pass chairman.
Yes in to explain my vote.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
She's just permanently okay.
Thank okay.
to subpoena.
Yes.
The lotus to explain her both.
I think it's it's interesting
because I think Senator McKenna
really has a good point about
I'm not hearing from CYFD but
the evidence that was presented
to us is extremely disturbing
and you know what the
Representative Dow said that
CYFD would likely come and
oppose it and is concerns me
that they they didn't present
anything and that is a big
factor in why I'm up I'm voting
for where this bill I am
concerned about implementation
timelines I mean I think that
there are our issues
but I think that when these
kinds of things happen in light
is shed on them even if the bill
doesn't make it there are some
positive things that come from
having light shed on it and so
thank you for doing that
Representative Dow and in
standing up for for these
parents these foster parents and
and people who've been harmed by
the agency again understanding
that you know there's more than
one side and and all of that I I
know very well because I've been
involved in some of these cases
but hopefully you shed some
light and the departments will
make some reforms and we'll see
where we go and thank you for
working on this issue.
Thank you.
Senator Mr chair so.
Yeah I just like to add that to
just want to applaud this
Representative Dow for during
this I found her to be very
credible hard working person and
very strong advocate for
children thank you.
Thank you senator Tom and let's
not forget the Senator Gallegos
is a co sponsor of this bill
along with senator Candelaria
they are also heard raging
because for children thank you
Representative Dow.
Okay good looking Judiciary if
you can get on the line there's
a long line it goes around the
block thank you Mr chairman
thank you members thank you all
all of you the chairman
testified in support of this
bill Senator Gallegos we moved
here bill Nelson Millsboro three
ridges the dispatchers as police
under P. E. R. A..
Thank you Mr thank you the
committee this is a bill that
came before me and
in in Lee County us talk to our
nine one one dispatchers and
they had a an issue where
they're not considered in P. R.
A. but they still do have a lot
of the same issues as the police
officers just give you a little
insight here a couple of.
I guess is about four years ago
I met a of an army gentleman in
here in Santa Fe one of the
hotels and he told me he was
totally disabled looking very
good condition and couldn't tell
what was wrong with him but what
he did he never went out in the
field everyone and combat state
here in the states but he had to
enter the detail of what was
happening in Iraq it got to the
point he couldn't sleep at night
he got checked and they gave him
PTSD full disability and so when
R. nine one one dispatchers was
work tell us they're definitely.
Mr.
All up there treated differently
in.
Era in but they still have to go
through the same type of
traumatic experiences that are
police officers do in our fire
and first responders to so we've
looked at trying to get them a
bill this year to be of
considered in that.
As they are dispatching the nine
one one operators they're
hearing from the person that's
called.
There dispatching the police
officers are there typing it in
and then they also have to make
a report at the end of the
incident and so they've got
three to four ways that it
enters our mind and enter Sir
bodies and I truly believe that
even though they're in a safe
environment there are out there
but themselves at risk just
hearing the detail that's going
on and Mister I have a the
gentleman that so from San Juan
County David Ripley is my expert
witness today and I just
wondered if he can go ahead and
do a brief introduction also I
told was gonna use David
Ripley's believe it or not Mr
would he be able to speak.
Your mood your meter.
Your mate are your muted Mr.
Yes you can certainly speak to
other people signed up one form
one again so Mister Ridley go
ahead very are extra witness.
Months I am Dave Ripley the
director of the San Juan County
communications authority which
is and I'm on one dispatch
center in San Juan County.
I am also the chair of the New
Mexico association of counties
I'm on directors of Philly at I
also set on two boards that are
New Mexico chapters of
organizations the representative
dispatchers sent nationwide and
internationally I've been in
this business thirty seven years
and what I began my career and
I'm a one the expected life
expectancy from from a
professional standpoint was
seven and nine years for a
dispatcher and at that point
they would be so burned out.
They couldn't continue and
a lot of at that point seven and
nine years were having trouble
with substance abuse trying to
dull the pain of all that
terrible issues that they have
to deal with on a daily basis.
Passage of this bill would be
and significant step forward and
recognizing the the serious
negative impacts experienced
final one dispatchers.
Ross the state of New Mexico on
a daily basis and throughout
their careers.
and
In April of twenty twelve a
professor of clinical psychology
by the name of Michelle lowly
published a study in the journal
of traumatic stress that pointer
to the fact that.
Twenty five percent to thirty
three percent of dispatchers
across the nation suffer from
PTSD previously I'm I'm
diagnosed this is a really
serious issue for dispatchers
and expecting them to do thirty
years before they can retire is
almost untenable
very few people are able to make
it to thirty years and the last
slides I encourage you to
support this bill will stand for
any questions.
Thank you thank you Mr Ripley
but we have a politician who
wants to speak against this.
The Jews early she signed a red
and I'm did you enter the room.
Mr chair.
I don't see her in the room so
we'll know then to Greg Trujillo
from G. R. A. who support since.
Mr chairman
Ready to speak in opposition of
support
what are you gonna sport to
Hendrix.
Mr Chairman not not to take it
away from anything that our
dispatchers do one of the issues
from Karia perspective is any
data that we gather does not
Show job descriptions or job
title so we we have no
information on how to gauge the
financial impact of moving
dispatchers into the municipal
police or the state police plans
so until we have that additional
information Mr chairman to gauge
the impact of the bear board
opposes this eight.
So you so Mister trio every year
viewing just how many people
there would be is that what
you're you're getting a.
Yes Sir this.
Thank.
Thank you.
Anything else you are right.
Well thank you Mr and and I'm
wondering if Mister Ridley would
have any indication on how many
of.
Dispatchers as would be
statewide committees chairman of
the nine one one affiliate.
Agency report would you have
that by chance Mr.
Mr chair Senator I'm sorry I
don't have the exact numbers on
that but it is.
several hundred.
Probably under a thousand.
I'm Mr Chairman and Mr plea
if we go forward in this
committee I'd like you to help
me get the detailed Mr Trujillo
because I'd like to resolve that
because I think it's important
that they support this because
well we're giving them new
members of but we we want to
make sure that they are they are
whole in a and I don't see to me
the problem with the add ons I I
know everything's gonna cost to
it but I think the state of New
Mexico post navigation to those
nine one one dispatchers and
with that Mr will we are yield
to the question for the
committee.
Thank you.
The guardian passionate FIR
which does give a good.
provided by TRA a good idea of
what of legislation I mean and
basically as I read it the the
dispatchers would we be paying
slightly more each month and
their employers would be.
Slightly more each month but it
would make them eligible for
slightly larger retirement
thirteen difference would be a
be eligible earlier is that
three you understand it
Senator.
Mr chairman and senator is yes
that's way it was explained to
us yes no they wouldn't would
they lose out on social security
I guess some of them already
been covered by social security
for enough quarters.
They might already an
established social security
eligibility even if subsequently
they they would no longer be
covered.
Is that right Mr.
Mr chairman and members that is
correct most members in in
public safety plans are not
eligible for social security
dispatchers from what I know R.
so that that would be something
that would need further
investigation Mr Chairman okay.
Members of the committee.
Other comments or discussion.
Committees.
yes Senator is here.
Senator.
Go ahead Mr sorry apology.
Yeah well they're they're
they're they're they're they're
just they're.
Trying to follow what's going on
and of the committees as well
Senator Hemphill your hand your
your you want to do something
over the past.
Discussion no we will discuss it
after we have the motions are is
a motion as their second all
second.
State senator Senator Sedillo
this year discussion.
Thank you Mr chair and and I
apologize I was trying to also
track of bill of money that was
in the house and so I I was a
little bit distracted so if this
is already been addressed just
let me know you will recall that
when we have a similar issue
earlier with the fire department
Eight the issue was a
constitutionality of of creating
a new liability under article
twenty I believe is section
twenty two.
Maybe twenty three
That
You know that when you that the
legislature may not create a new
liability without providing
funding for it now what I did at
that time was I added because I
wanted the bill to go forward.
I added an appropriation to it
and then it went to finance I
guess this is go to finance
afterwards Mr chair.
Where does next.
She said he goes to finance.
Yes hi it went to to finance and
then I heard that they changed
the change that however they did
find for you know because I I
used the estimate that was in
the FY are on page one of your
colleagues recently just really
had negative things to say about
FY ours but I I rely on them and
and find them the helpful if not
always you know perfect
And so I there is a
constitutional problem with this
doubt I have an incredible
empathy for the emergency
dispatchers I've taken tors of
their facilities and and what
they have to do and I agree with
you and that the stress and the
trauma of of that work is is
very hard and and I understand
the need but I think that more
ground work needs to be made in
able been enabled so that we
don't so we avoid the
constitutional problem of not
having sufficient funding or
change in the in the P. E. R.
eight so Mister chair I mean if
if an amendment.
To the.
The costs which were what was it
emergency will well here's
here's a problem we don't know
how many there are there's
there's no estimate of the cost
so the so there's not and that's
not even a possibility so I I
think the date is gonna fail
constitutional flaw and I make
it a policy to not slow it not.
Vote for bills that I know are
unconstitutional just on their
face
you Mr Senator Mr trio did want
to make really didn't for a
second there you want to make a
comment Mr trio.
Mr Chairman yeah yes and and I
just wanted to emphasize were
happy to work with the sponsor
in the expert to try to gather
that data we do have similar
bills as center city Lopez
mentioned with the
state police as well as
municipal firefighters that we
gather data that we can gauge of
cost if we can gauge of cost
I'm happy to to chat with our
board about this and engage the
impact but at this point we we
don't have enough information to
even understand what what it
would cost.
And then Senator the some of the
dispatchers are in the municipal
others are in the state system
so it.
Clear how many there are it's
complex I think you've
identified a very important
issue and I'm pleased that you
did I think that it's not quite
ready
to to move forward.
And for just.
I make it a policy if I know on
its face the bill by a violate
the constitutional provision I
feel a responsibility as a
legislature not to vote for it
and I fixed I thought I fixed
the fireman's bill by adding the
appropriation that's not even a
possibility here so for that
reason I I have to vote for I I
I will not be able to vote for
this bill but I appreciate you
bringing the issue up and
hopefully maybe addressing it in
the inner and you know really
studying what the costs are what
the benefits are and I and all
of that but so thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator.
Mr can I respond
yes please out well we go to the
Senate finance next in what I'd
like to visit with Mr Trujillo
see if we could good could get
that detail out I'm wondering
why
Legislative Council didn't flag
that forced out of in the FIR
so.
If we are able to go forward
we'll work on that between your
incentive finance I don't know
how much time in all reality we
have to get it out but I'd like
the opportunity to make that
discussion happened so that way
as we go forward next year we
have a clean bill ready to go
and will bill passes through
this committee with that very
much discussion so we'll go with
will committee thank you Mr
thank you senator anybody else's
other questions or comments on
this measure we have a due
process motion already by
Senator Ingle was in session by
Senator Gallegos.
And the secretary will call the
roll and we know it's a Senator
Tallman is stuck in Judiciary
Senator McKenna you have a
common for a moment.
I I do you chairman thank you
Senator.
Most would be time for you to
get the information that Senator
Sedillo Lopez is asking for
because I really like the spirit
of the bill and I'm sensitive to
that community.
Mr chairman and in center I'm
hoping that tomorrow morning we
can get on this and try to get a
detail before it goes to the
Senate finance I don't know if
they're hearing bills and if how
long it'll take to to be heard
because we are number four oh
three but I'd like to have that
done if there's any chance that
Senate finance can look at that
in at least have the detail I
think it's great in annexure I
told miss Martinez the of Lee
County that I really looked at
this year's just a discussion
piece anyway but I would like to
get through as far as it could
in order to fix any errors are
out there and training
professionals that we have so
that would be better prepared
for next year so I'm I'm hopeful
and tomorrow will tell once I
talk let's just Legislative
Council and Mr Trujillo.
Okay with that thank.
You're gonna talk to Mr Trujillo
I can supported today be because
I I I appreciate the spirit of
the bill and I'm very sensitive
to the committee on what they
experience.
Thank you.
Thank you senator.
but I stand corrected Senator
Tallman was just relaying
information from Senator Lopez
says she's starting Judiciary he
is very much with us here so the
secretary will call the roll.
I'm bill four oh three center
guy it goes yes ma'am Marengo
yes.
McKenna.
Yes.
Welcome
to explain my vote.
Tallman yes.
You know yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez to explainable.
Thank you I just feel it it's
very important for me to
constituency stint and I I've I
let bills go through that need
fixing in the other committee
when it's like a little minor
thing I think it's you know not
not that big a deal there's
plenty of time to be fixes fixed
when it's something so
significant has obviously
constitutionally on its face.
Constitution requires that any
adjustment to the P. R. A. B. R.
any retirement state retirement
plan be funded on and I don't
even see a plan for funding I I
just need to be consistent with
with that position but I very
much sympathize with the then
intent and spirit of the bill
and if you could get the
information and bring it back
you would get my vote but you
don't need it since you got you
got past this committee Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
congratulations Senators.
You will do your research with
the one committees indicating
they like the idea.
Thank you Sir thank you do we
are we are Senator Lopez.
I am I am going to ask Miss the
committee to.
Raul.
My bill of four forty three.
unless Senator pope is in the
room because he and I are co
sponsors of interpolation to be
here for a it's mostly to plant
the seed for future action and
so will roll that went over.
To
Next meeting.
Leases just a Senator Bob is
bill and I think she's probably
on the same.
Situation that it does Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez Senator Tallman
she feel comfortable if we
picked up our memorial without
her.
Okay I I'll check.
For the latest.
We are less bill in the Senator
Baca you can hear it and get
away from Judiciary intervals
caught in there.
I I just text surviving a caller
texture.
But destruction is fine okay.
Committee chairman.
I'm awaiting her answer well
letting her answer I wanted to
give the committee of and did it
right and so you have a chance
to really stretch your legs
before you go on the floor at
seven.
Complex memorial and and we
could do it for what what other
approval.
As she said.
The message is typing a message.
Sure I have that feature yes the
little not we'll we'll see a.
The smartphones.
They must be a long message
because.
Getting at I'm not getting a
message.
Since.
Questioning or something.
Right now under office.
Well.
But what I'll do that you can
that is it you don't have any
other bills that
we had to others on the on the
calendar we're gonna roll them
both over.
I'll run down there I don't
mind.
Thanks.
Members of the committees of the
last two weeks Senate bills we
have assigned to us.
More revenue for forty three so
we'll.
We'll roll them over digital of
tomorrow really meeting
tomorrow.
Then
very we have very many house
bill so he's probably listening
in on the other.
Senator no we I think right now
we have one additional house
bill one soon gets some
additional ones this evening
we'll just keep putting them on
as we can okay.
Schedule tomorrow and senator
Graham's.
Mr Mr chairman and I apologize.
David Ripley called me trying to
figure out the constitutionality
of my last bill but I was just
one let you know Senator Baca
had called tension center yes
text us to be rolled.
Okay so I don't know if you
address that thank you.
That's great we'll we'll we'll
hear has built more than
Senator.
Thank you.
So we're just waiting for word
about Senator Lopez and made
sure she can your little noted
she can't or won't let us rural
during.
Almost by Representative ranch
in Colorado.
In.
It would take senators on the
screen hello okay.
Okay thanks.
You're you're wrenching Colorado
the original on this the the one
I'm using now we had a three day
categorize took a hundred head
of Longhorns on the old good
night trail then that issues on
it so all the work Mr.
Hello we will take ten Senate
Joint Memorial four and as soon
as Senator Tallman gets back
from running down to check
Senator Lopez.
We will there is you don't mind
sharing Senator well I've put on
Senator Lopez memorial.
Okay.
We're not going to hear Sierra
Romeo four address institutional
racism
Senator.
Thank you Sir impresses
Eurovision who first all the way
back and you can still share the
meeting.
You're in great shape that's
current.
Members of the committee this is
a joint memorial.
Seeing the Senator Lopez in
working on for for several years
and that is trying to get at.
Ways in which state agencies
departments might be.
Consciously or inadvertently
fostering the practice of
institutional racism so this is
a.
The memorial that just a
Legislative Council.
To.
Take a look at legislative
entities.
That might be doing the same
thing and then the develop and
implement policies to identify
assess and decrease and so.
The Midwest closes but the.
The the gist of the matter is is
of the now therefore be it
resolved that the.
Legislative Council directives
building service.
So services finance committee
Education steady Committee.
The office of the chief clerk of
the Senate the others the chief
clerk of the house the office of
the speaker of the house the
macro office president pro tem.
In each of the four leadership
offices to conduct an evaluation
of race so I I operations
candidates employees as related
to hiring promotion retention
period.
What she's getting at is ways in
which we need to.
The first assessing ourselves
are we doing this without
realizing it.
and then.
That we would
we do that self analysis that
we.
Find the
situational racism training for
all of our employees.
So she worked on the executive
branch in the past and now she's
she's turning right we.
Microscope on our own we
legislators and our and our
employees.
And
to see more.
Thank you for the results.
Find demographics assistance for
all employees including race for
those employees who self
identified.
And so that's what it's all
about Mr chairman.
Okay.
Thank you.
Senator I don't I see anyone
that signed up for against this.
They want me on switching to a
speaker.
Regarding the Senate Joint
Memorial for.
Hearing no one.
We now turn to the committee
anyone wishing to speak I see
Senator McKenna go ahead.
Senator McKenna you with us.
Yes chairman I I'd like to make
a do pass.
Okay we have a due pass so do we
have a second second second from
a Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Please call the roll any.
As chairman for.
Yes ma'am.
Thank.
When we get there.
Yes.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes.
You know.
Yes.
Okay.
You have
yes three absent.
Okay.
Thank you thank you we can
relate the good news to Senator
Lopez and I will.
Turn the meeting over to
Senator.
For TV panel who will of
make some closing remarks said
is we close out this meeting and
go to the floor thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and thank you all for a lot of
good work this afternoon and and
just let the public know that
this committee will meet again
tomorrow.
But
the.
The floor session may be
extended because the Republican
caucus as a dinner tomorrow
night.
And so there will be an evening
floor session so he may have a
more extended daytime for
session.
If we have time will meet
tomorrow right after the floor
session.
But we will be with the
Republicans can be present.
So we don't meet tomorrow will
federal everything over to when
she.
Any other comments anything we
left out.
And we want to thank the public
concern with us today for the
for sticking with us and see you
tomorrow.
Or when she.
Then you can turn off the web
just a drummer thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chair.
