Welcome everyone to the first
meeting of the health and human
health and public affairs
committee meeting.
And we're going to start with
the are sergeant in arms
explaining some procedures
Miguel.
Thank you Mr chairman Dr
welcome.
The help.
Yeah the.
Food for.
there are.
Through all that you have to one
of the committee reviewed the
committee so I.
We.
Thank you for for the.
what.
What are you all of this
information now we can have a
doctor that you.
Representative and what position
of taking.
Senator
thank you.
Thank you and
We passed out
of the do we get to circulate
the whole thing is survey got
his.
With pesto to information about
this committee for the committee
members.
But will take a few minutes now
just introduce ourselves
and we'll start with the
senators defect.
Good afternoon I'm list appendix
Senate district thirty nine
Representative parts of six
counties San Miguel Santa Fe
Torrance Valencia twenty with
the Bernalillo Abraham Lincoln
County it's a pleasure to be
here thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez I
represent Senate district
sixteen which is it's a little
bit different now it's
University area but also moving
up
northeast including part of for
help part of for health.
Mexico is here okay okay.
But that doesn't happen till
twenty twenty four that's true
but I'm still going to
communicate with them and
introduce introduce myself.
Senator McKenna.
Good afternoon chairman and
colleagues my name is Brenda
McKenna and this is my second
time serving on this committee
we started last year and hi
Representative Senate district
nine which encompasses bit
Albuquerque Rio Rancho other
Donna's **** to us the problems
of us Sandia paralysis and
pleased to be with you today
chairman.
Thank you senator.
in our ranking members Senator
committees.
Thank you everyone good to see
you all here district nineteen
so have the east mountains east
of Albuquerque and a little
corner pocket of of Albuquerque
proffering can in between their
was on health committee in the
house for a couple years and now
happy to be here health health
and sh back as senator Neil
loves to emphasize and anyway
happy to be over on the Senate
side in person very nice very
nice thank you very very much
yes last year all of our
meetings were held virtually so
this is the first time.
Some of the members have
actually been seated in a
committee meeting so it's a
little it'll take a little
getting used to.
our our vice chairman is senator
Tom and I thought I thought and
often and you must have to go
out just for a second but will
it in interviews himself when he
comes in in the meantime I'd
like our staff our analysts and
Committee secretary to to
introduce themselves but we
start with you Frank and we'll
go over a.
Our primary.
And analysts for this committee.
Order six seven years.
And for the I was pulling out
and with.
about sixteen years total
service in the Senate an
attorney and basically I'm
retired except for the the
Senate to one it's in session
each year I I because I enjoy
working with the good people in
the Senate and it's just
intriguing to see all the bills
and see what's happening so
welcome everybody and thank you
thank you Frank Senator Tallman
you want to come in introduce
yourselves are vice chairman.
The.
Everyone.
Go to all the district eighteen
representing a portion of the.
Produced by a very good to be
here look forward to this
discussion thank you thank you
senator.
Derek let's go do that and for
your introduction up there will
have been with Representative
public affairs and that'll help
and public affairs.
Eighteen.
Good luck I enjoy the work and
the could be of any help to any
of the senators or others that's
what we do thank you so much
right thank you very and then
our pool analysts are with us
today hello.
Federally in both.
Carol Parker I.
This is my third year have this
is a great group of guys folks.
Legislative.
Ben Franklin also with the
different.
Years she's over here last year.
It's a great.
It's always parties.
Thank you all and then
early.
Well supporting.
Our our state for the public
health service.
Thirty years okay wonderful
backgrounds first after.
David R. as soon computer
support is provided by.
Mary Jane and managing talent
very happy to be here my first
year working at thirty days
after.
And we're up and running we
think everyone being recorded
online we have eighty one
attendees.
And Committee yes eighty one
eighty one people watching out
there in the best radio New
Mexico yes.
All the best to everyone good
thank you.
And then our ours of.
Security for the yeah go ahead
I'm sorry introduce yourself.
Sierra.
Sting operation of I have to
other committees.
Okay thank you step in and said
you wanted to do so and said
don't know which number eight
I am sergeant at arms attended
are working this is my only
committees wanted to help you.
My seventh year yes.
Yes Sen Miguel you you go ahead
and introduce yourself formally.
Thank you Mr chairman again
global go.
The W. seven arms for for for
this committee and the other one
and they'll give you here Sir
the committee and we discussed
that everybody in the audience
get welcome is what's by the
control and then have attendees
are doing as well as the fact
that you proposed rules in the
state of the committee go
forward.
Right thank you again and then
there are other attendant.
And I did orange now for years.
The forward working with you
Great thank you moment.
And then our committee
secretary.
And some and.
This is not my first year.
This will be my twenty first
year you're working for the
Senate always for public affairs
help from public affairs now I
live in Kerala us with a lot of
cats and I'm known as a cat lady
and formally.
The store tell you that.
Thank you thank you all right
let's get up to a the let me
just give a little a quick
overview of the kind of things
this committee deals with.
His health is pretty clear what
we deal with but public affairs
can be a little fuzzy at times
among the issues that we deal
with in this committee or
licensure for professions.
Municipal and county government
issues.
Public safety.
Public health and health
facilities.
Boards and commissions.
Public employees and officers
public assistance.
Firearms alcohol and drug
issues.
Property and insurance motor
vehicles.
In gaming and lottery so that's
a it's a huge span of of the
topics that we that we deal with
we are the first stop for
legislation not the last up for
most of those bills and so much
of the time we will have a
hearing here and try to get into
the content and then send it on
to either typically finance.
For Judiciary.
And
The.
Occasionally they'll go to
another committee but most of
the time to go to one of those
two.
With that let's get started
Senator Stewart you're hearing
your first up.
Members this is Senate bill
forty one college research park
and economic development
exchanges Madam pro tempore
you're welcome thank you so much
Mr chairman and I'm joined today
by saying you don't sues the
attorney that works with the
labor unions so I'll talk a
little bit about the bill and
then I'll turn it over to Shane
and hill correct anything I've
said incorrectly had his own of
a two so.
In nineteen eighty nine was when
we set up what's called pita
State University research park
and Economic Development Act.
time we did not have the public
employee bargaining Act
from the certainly of the staff
to put in place if you look on
page two sections C.
this Peter the research park its
officers directors employees
shall be granted immunity from
liability for any tort has
provided the tort claims act
which is for public employees so
this anticipated a public
employee however we what we are
proposing is that we amended to
ensure that for the purposes of
the public employee bargaining
Act their employees are public
employees so we have a situation
right now where we have a
regional Medical Center.
Six hundred employees but they
would like to negotiate for me
you and they're not being
allowed to because of this pita
statute.
So
I believe isn't very unintended
consequence to leave that out of
course at that time we just put
this in place we didn't have our
public employee bargaining Act
that came three years later so
So these workers at the central
regional Medical Center are the
only health workers in the whole
state who cannot for me you.
docks a Klay they're also the
only public health workers in
the state to construct.
because they're not being
treated as public employees
under the public employee
bargaining Act so
We do believe that this you know
leaves this pizza in place of
and certainly doesn't affect any
of the rest of that but if
you're working as a public
employee under a university we
believe you remain a public
employee so this just add that.
To the definition and if I can
ask seeing to make some comments
right thank you senator J.
Senator Stewart Mr chair I think
that this legislation fixes a
historic there the workers at
the university of New Mexico
Santa wholesaler cannot
currently organized under the
public employees bargaining Act
but because they are employees
of the university of New Mexico
they also cannot organize under
the private sector law the
national labor relations act so
they are put in unbelievably
unique position in New Mexico
that they're the only workers
who presently can't have
representation in the workplace
as Senator Stewart said in
nineteen eighty nine when the R.
Peter was passed there was no
public employees bargaining Act
it was passed in nineteen ninety
two and I believe that clearly
when the pastor Pete in nineteen
eighty nine they intended for
their employees to be public
employees and the indicated as
such indicating that they would
be public employees for purposes
of the tort claims act this law
extends or expands the
definition of public employees
to allow them to organize under
New Mexico's public employees
bargaining.
I think regardless of what I
what what side of the aisle you
are on this is a law that makes
sense because it puts the
employees in a situation where
they cannot strike which is the
public policy of the state of
New Mexico for public sector
employees right now they are in
the unique position that in the
middle of a pandemic at a very
important public hospital in the
state of New Mexico they have
the right to strike and that is
contrary to the policy of the
state of New Mexico as set out
in the public employees
bargaining Act this last simply
fixes this historical air.
Very good thank you.
Let's see if there's anyone in
the audience who wishes to speak
on this bill would you raise
your hand.
Okay let's start over here will
go right around and just
indicate if you're for or
against it and would you like to
sit and identify yourself
please.
The committee found that youth
Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO
it is wrong for the.
Well about as Representative
Morgan.
All of their I have been working
on the oil well thank you thank
you John yes.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is as isn't
here.
You representative sheet metal
workers union we started strong
support this measure and we also
stand with the health care
workers of the central regional
Medical Center with that as the
committee to support.
Thank you.
Yes chairman members of the
committee part of what he was
asked me for the reasons stated
we stand in strong support of
this bill as well.
Carter yes the.
Right right the next council
reviews grant funds for this
legislation and judge depression
this committee thank you very
good is there anyone else who
wants to speak either for or
against it in person.
How about on zoom what we have
there.
People that we speak okay.
And then you can finish you call
their name okay and do we know
if they're for or against no
weekend okay.
Okay we have four names right to
start with Adrian.
We're gonna need to know that
our culture name agents.
Okay what's your view on this
bill.
Hi I stand in support of this
bill good afternoon a chairman
or cheesy piano and on a new
members my name is a turning
House number registered nurses
handle regional Medical Center
and I thank you for your time
today I come before you and ask
you to pass Senate bill forty
one out of this committee with a
recommendation for unanimous
this is for a pass a yea on the
floor
I think that I know that
that pita has actually been used
against New Mexicans not only
has a few to the news to ask
direct or for tax levy dollars
and then there's no
accountability about where those
tax dollars go R. P. that has
been used to have hiring
practices that are oppositional
to the state of New Mexico R.
pida has been used to work
contracts outside of the state
of Mexico over looking Mexican
businesses right now our Pete is
being used to violate our right
to unionize and with the nurses
and health professionals at
central regional Medical Center
we have taking care of this
community and this state of.
Six comment patients through a
pandemic and now when we stand
up and ask for our right to be
recognized University of New
Mexico once again is standing
against the wall of New Mexico
I'm asking you to stand with us
and make a recommendation for
Senate bill forty one to be
passed out of this committee to
the floor for the recommendation
house and the.
Thank you for your time today I
appreciate all of your service.
Can I.
Okay.
Very good thank you Adrian
actually long you're next.
Actually run muted now.
Good afternoon chairman RTZ Pino
members of the committee can you
hear me OK yes.
Super thank you so much good
afternoon everyone so I'm gonna
be quick about it there's been
beautiful testimony given so far
when it comes down to brass
tacks two things you all of the
legislature
past the public employee
bargaining Act provision
revisions couple of years back
we support reinforcing that the
employees the health care
workers at Santa regional
Medical Center public employees
second of all health care
workers have been on the front
lines since day one during this
pandemic and I think it's it's
it's just a small act to support
their right to unionize so with
that eight again my name is
Ashley and president of the
international association of
machinists and aerospace workers
local lodge seven nine four ask
you to support Senator forty one
thank you thank you Ashlee
Whitney Haaland your next and
you'll be unmuted.
Go ahead.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Whitney Holland and president of
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico I'm here to
stand in strong support of
Senate bill forty nine which
provides a technical fix recent
changes made to the public
employees marketing at we
support Senate bill forty one
because it will remove the
loophole currently being used
nine hardworking frontline
health care workers the ability
to join together as public
employees and former you we
believe that all New Mexicans
should have this right and state
facts you cannot stand in their
way as we've all experienced
during the ongoing COVID
nineteen pandemic our classrooms
in health care settings have
been placed under unprecedented
pressures we believe Senate bill
forty one help to alleviate some
of those pressures for health
care professionals at the end of
all regional Medical Center we
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this piece of
legislation for and on behalf of
New Mexicos workers and urged
the committee to vote yes thank
you thank you would need
Samantha Hines your next.
Go ahead.
Are you there Samantha.
Can you hear me yes.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Samantha Hines I'm a
registered nurse at some of our
regional Medical Center and I
ask you to vote yes on this
bill.
Very good thank you Samantha but
we have two other names.
That have contacted us for that
testimony one is again reduces
get.
Okay I think you've been
unmuted.
Are you Sir are you there Mr
reduces.
Can you do need sorry.
Hi.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is you reduces
I'm ignoring it Sandoval
regional Medical Center.
the people that we service rural
C. are entitled to excellent and
consistent medical care we
health care workers are entitled
to union representation there's
no ethical reason to deny us the
ability to organize in order to
safely voice concerns and ensure
a better work environment please
support us vote yes on Senate
bill forty one thank you thank
you Gigi next I have Gino's.
Just twenty one ultra.
Section.
Your unmuted.
Yes.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee I would Rio
Rancho was you know I'm also
with the health care and I'll go
all the distance and stand in
support of this bill for our
public ways and health care
workers.
Thank you.
A Patrick Kane.
Can you can you guys hear me
yes.
good afternoon chairman and
committee members my name is
Patrick Kane I've been a
registered respiratory therapist
from one thirty years this month
the last eight of which I have
been at S. R. N. C..
I've also been a resident of
Santa Fe County for about to for
just about as long as I'm gonna
respiratory therapist and the
residents the community members
of Santa Fe County and the
surrounding areas deserve top
level health care health care
workers at Esperance he deserved
to have union representation in
effort to improve the care
provided as well as improved
working conditions and and
working environment.
I'd like to respectfully ask
that you support our efforts in
both yes on Senate bill forty
one.
Thank you.
Thank you Patrick the Daryl
there will.
Thank you Mr chair good
afternoon members of the
committee my name is generally a
little I service the president
of the levers you local sixteen
Representative neighbors in the
construction industry across the
state of New Mexico West Texas
and the Navajo Nation.
Just asking that the this
committee we support.
Well the reason previously
stated the we also stand this
from support of this bill thank.
Thank you very much Mr there
would've.
All right that concludes the
public input on this bill.
Any members of the committee
with questions or comments.
Yes we have a motion for it to
pass seconded by Senator
Stefanics the motion is from
Senator Sedillo Lopez any did
any debate or discussion.
Seeing under the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
There is no.
There are several yes.
Thanks yes.
Ther Tallman yes.
Thirty six
yes congratulations Senator
would do best thank you so much
Senator Lopez who you've we've
got you here what we think is
the LESC notification under
Linda look listen and I will
come back use.
Usually hold up the committee
members fully with.
So this is the.
In.
Senate Bill.
Thirteen missing in New Mexico
that.
Yes Mister chairman and thank
you
Mr chairman I do have two of my
expert witnesses I believe who
are on zoom.
who will be joining me also and
that will be a Stephanie
setasides.
And Regina check on.
We have them on.
If okay seventy seven sentence
record thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee I sit here in front of
you was Senate bill thirteen.
And Senate bill thirteen Mr
chairman members of the
committee
Senator Browne establishing a
missing in New Mexico event.
And Mr chairman for this
Emanates from is I've been
honored to serve on the missing
and murdered indigenous women
and relatives task force.
and during our our hearings Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
we have heard the frustration of
the feelings of isolation that
families
experience with regards to their
missing loved ones.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee as you know that I'm
here in New Mexico
are missing persons data as of
January first this year just a
few weeks back New Mexico has
nine hundred and forty six
missing person cases
and of course our twenty
unidentified missing persons
also other reporting the NCAC.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is this one cut
hits close to home also for me
in my community if you remember
about eleven years ago
there is a kind of what I call a
mass grave where there were
ten women and the fetus who were
very
on the with their on the
southwest mesa and they were
discovered because a woman was
walking her dog into a human
bone was discovered by the dog
that was the name of the dog.
And that Mr Chairman
you may remember that as we were
going through the discussion and
trying to find out who these
persons were it came to light at
that point in time as to how
families report their loved ones
when they're missing what are we
not doing the extent of
misinformation
just a whole lot of different
factors that included.
So Mr chairman members of the
committee when I was asked to
serve on this task force
listening to the testimony the
sorrow and the hurt that many of
these families are experiencing
I I could say that yes I've I've
listened also to members in my
community who are who have gone
through and still go through the
pain.
I'm so Mister chairman again
this is setting up simply
missing persons day here in New
Mexico when we can bring
together law enforcement.
through the department of public
safety that also includes local
law enforcement other.
Related
Agencies who can come together
and help and work with a lot of
the families
who can access more information
we are also amending the
clearing house information that
you can see on their that
specifically our listing on
the declaring a missing person
state of New Mexico and I mean
there's there's much more that
we could also answer Mr chairman
but what I would like to do is
to allow.
Just give
Stephanie Salazar who is lead
counsel at the Indian Affairs
Department.
And Regina check on who is
bureau chief of the department
of public safety of both of them
but also like to offer some
opening testimony.
Very good so miss Salazar did
you want to say something on
this bill.
I don't see him online.
I think we need to check on that
let's go to Regina and then
hopefully Stephanie will get
back on Mr Cohen would you like
to give us your testimony.
Afternoon chairman and members
of the committee
I'd like to just but Canadian
now kind
And and the audience of how
lucky that the department of
public safety is to be able to
use to partner with
the task force and the part of
the person's date events we
believe that this is a
is a crucial part of.
That correlation and we're
meeting of law enforcement
missing missing persons family
members resources and I'm.
Really you know bringing light
to missing persons in New Mexico
as Senator Lopez mentions there
are nine hundred forty six
missing people in New Mexico
today and as a you know a couple
weeks ago which those those
numbers are are just throwing
and we are very excited to have
an exactly in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr Cohen
did Stephanie Salazar join us
yet.
Now can.
Still not okay well let's go to
the audience anything else
Senator that you are Mr Chairman
let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in the room
who wanted to speak on this bill
please yes Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee very around with
lobbyist we'll see.
I need to have
you here indigenous women are
much higher rate you and
unfortunately homicide levels
and the I support the
legislation is in the process
for and also public safety in
any Affairs Department getting
on December thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Larry anyone else want
to speak in support of this
measure.
Is there anyone on zoom whose
just to.
Make public comment.
Yes chairman five people have
raised okay I have you.
all right needs them for.
There.
You'll be next senator Munoz.
Yeah.
Okay let's start with Lynn
Trujillo the cabinet secretary
for the department of Indian
affairs.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
happy new year my name is Lynn
Trujillo and I am the cabinet
secretary Indian Affairs
Department I also served as the
chair for the missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives task force I want to
commend the leadership of
Stephanie Salazar under her
leadership the task force has
made tremendous strides since it
was created in twenty nineteen
the task force has met with
families connected with various
partners around the country and
develop policy recommendations
to address this issue and Senate
bill thirteen is one of those
policy recommendations that came
from the task force we hear from
families that they don't know
where to start when a family
member goes Missy and they talk
about the challenges that they
face this bill would provide
families with an opportunity to
provide director instructional
bodies to work with submit
information and receive updates
on the status of their loved
ones cases and have access to
emotional support that families
need unfortunately our state has
some of the highest numbers of
these cases so we need to act
quickly and provide resources to
families that are suffering the
Indian Affairs Department in the
MMI W. R. task force strongly
urge you to support this bill
thank you Senator Lopez for
being a champion on this issue
and caring this legislation
thank you chairman and members
of the committee.
Thank you madam secretary drew
Center your next.
Your.
Yeah go ahead.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is three setter and on behalf of
my registered clients the public
of this letter sent late pay
Santa Clara okay when we get
into any we support the
legislation very strongly want
to thank the efforts of the
sponsors Center Lopez and the
department running affairs for
bringing this forward this'll
help give this opportunity to
families to to to address their
concerns and and and hopefully
move forward in resolving some
of their some of these issues
going forward thank you for your
time.
Thank you drew.
Austin we aqui.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee sting
the political director for and.
and we stand today in strong
support Senator thirteen
because our families deserve
closer because our our relatives
deserve safety and a right to
the resources that they need as
well as the recognition that
this is an issue within our
state I want to commend the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward and urged members of the
committee to pass this bill.
Thank you Austin Austin is a
third generation of the
legislative advocates of.
The the torch gets passed on
Alexandria Taylor you're next.
Good afternoon good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee I'm Alexandria Taylor
deputy director of the New
Mexico coalition sexual assault
programs and I think Senator
Lopez for sponsoring this bill
and come into the work of the
task force we stand in strong
support of SB thirteen most
missing persons cases go on
publicized and for indigenous
black Latina and trans women we
almost never will know their
names this bill allows us to
speak their names and for all
the reasons at that secretary
Trujillo and Mr reactie have
expressed to have stated we ask
for you to support SB thirteen
thank you.
Thank you Alexandria.
Then we have somebody from the
another person from the New
Mexico Indian Affairs
Department.
I think you're on mute go ahead.
That we lost in.
Okay not all right lily Irvin
Vitela.
Committee members my name is
more than.
And I have the opportunity to
bear witness to the work of the
task force and one of the things
that I want to share the most
inspiring about the work of the
task force is that when they
learned about Arizona's approach
to missing in Arizona day they
were able to see the wisdom and
what are we doing but to
approach it in a way that is
even more strongly connected
with or not so I'm only missing
the New Mexico date three
awareness around the.
Academic levels of violence
against indigenous women in New
Mexico.
It would also do that in a way
that.
You know the family strengths
and in their healing and healing
journey survivors and the
families of that.
Resources that would allow for
their traditional healers of
the.
and support would go a long way
to breaking the cycle of re
traumatizing people already
experienced tremendous tragedy
so for those reasons and all of
the other ones that you've heard
encouraging you all to strongly
support this legislation.
Thank you.
Conroy Chino.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Khan or
Chino and I and the rest of this
for the problems of Towson
Achomawi support legislation
because the two problems really
the drawing attention to
a major issue through an annual
event will then roll greater
attention to the emotional
impact that this crisis had on
families and survivors and
tribal communities of the two
photos also believe that is for
us a critically important not
just for the public to become
aware of this issue but for law
enforcement and as well as state
federal local and how these
To
really fully understand the need
to direct resources to this
issue
the two levels I Representative
that someone needs to be held
accountable for the crimes that
may have occurred in connection
with someone going missing and
the need for
Investigations and prosecution
to occur and lastly the the the
two poles and Representative say
that in many instances of crime
most likely happen with the two
of them ended up being are going
missing and unaccounted for in
some cases died tragically and
so for those reasons Mr chairman
members of the committee we
asked that the committee given
as we Thirtytwo past thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Chino.
We've also find they've been
joined by Stephanie Salazar.
The expert witness so did you
want to speak please micelles
are.
Thank you chairman TCP nine
committee members I apologize
for that delay some confusion on
my part All I Want to say on
that you know just to kind of
fill in a little bit of
information that you provide
will be hosted in collaboration
with the national missing and
unidentified persons data please
This is a really important
federal resource that brings
with it the ability for families
to provide biometric data which
includes DNA fingerprints images
and other types of relevant
information that may not have
been available when the initial
missing persons report was filed
so the agency will partner with
the state on this important
event collect that critical
information and supplement
reports that that national that
information going to a national
database and hopefully have
matches to resolve further cases
so that's why I want to say and
I'm happy to stand for questions
thank you very good thank you
micelles are we have three other
people at the site or two other
people have signed up Shelly
Begay.
Okay you're on mute it Shelly go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Shelly Begay I am the native
American liaison for HSD office
of the secretary HSD stances
strong support of Santa and
Senate bill thirteen we would
like to commend the leadership
in sponsoring of this important
bill agency is committed to
assisting with Indian Affairs
Department and members of the
missing murdered indigenous
indigenous women and relatives
task force
we appreciate the past thank
you.
And finally thank you very much
Mr gate and finally we have the
JD.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for recognizing a this
is JD bowling to the registered
lobbyists for the public good no
I just want to express publicly
their support for this
legislation thank thank you
senator for bringing a full.
Thank you Judy.
Members of the committee did you
have anything else situated at
Mr Chairman let's go to the
committee that any questions or
issues bring up Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman I simply want
to offer my sincere thanks and
recognition to the senator and
her supporters Senator Pinto the
secretary Lynn Trujillo for
supporting this is
This legislation I I think for
decades and decades
Women girls boys men of color on
indigenous people.
have.
Have really been lost.
And do not receive the.
The investigation the urgency
when they're missing and when
they're found tragically
murdered and their families
carry on the torch to find what
happened to them who did it and
many times as we've found out
especially through the work of
the task force.
Hello jurisdictions are crossed
and.
And it it needs remedy and I
think the.
Designate a day like this only
helps to address.
And reduce the crime against
indigenous people and people of
color thank you chairman.
Thank you senator McCain Senator
Sedillo Lopez I move it to pass.
A second the motion for to pass
in the second
I have a question just in a I
want to ask you about something
that might lead to an amendment
on page one.
Line twenty three you talk about
this would occur in one
location.
And I wondered if it's that.
Might preclude the possibility
of doing something virtually as
well.
so that maybe on that day.
There might be two or three
locations linked virtually or or
whatever I just wondered if
you're limiting the the nature
of this event by saying it has
to be in one location might be
very hard for those nine hundred
families to come to one side
would you be open to adding
virtually to that.
I'm Mr Chairman I I think would
be open so we would add and or
virtually of however the
committee would I think that
would be fine we're doing it
here yes I think that would be.
I'm open to that any any
committee discussion of that I
I'd like to move that that we
add of after in one location and
the words.
Virtually to assist families
Senator would continue so we
just sat in and virtually to and
is already there.
On the second that.
Senator I have one.
One thought on that just
on the fly.
With their potentially be any
security concerns with that
sometimes you know when these
issues have come up there are
families that are disagreeing on
how to proceed with the missing
person so how are you know
potentially factor in if someone
was logging on with the in
person people be informed of
that a member of their family
was potentially watching online
participating how can how would
that work I'd love to hear from
some other members on that one.
I'm Mr chairman if I could
Mister Khan may be able to
answer some of the concerns that
Senator Schmedes has brought up.
This is
yes.
Chairman as issues the the the
department of public safety has
has dedicated themselves to
security this event so we will
have Mexico state officers that
would be on site and then also
other law enforcement if if it's
done on location we do
understand that there are times
when there is a disagreement in
how the missing persons cases is
going forward so we we are do
you are going to take that into
consideration and and develop
some guidelines and training
that that for our law
enforcement partners and
resources that we act the I
think that.
Thank you thank you for that
famous chairman center I just in
and I figured the in person with
GPS would be easier to do and so
my concern really was
specifically if we're opening it
up to online stuff and all those
cybersecurity issues we've seen
so I'm not against it at all I
think it's a great idea and can
improve accessibility I just
wanted to make sure that that's
not going to compromise things
from a from a web based secure
that's a whole other.
Issue of security you know so
well we deal with that same
issue last year we started up
the committee meetings at a lot
of security problems people were
jumping in.
Making statements and that
insults and so on but as time
went on we figured out how to
control for that and we pretty
pretty.
If somebody started in you could
shut him up and I think that the
department of public safety
would we have similar
technological security the
provisions built into their
system so
Missed by a two Mr chairman you
know they'll be registration
Senator that we do to other
events that we've all logged on
to at some point
and as Mr Khan just mentioned
also is working on some security
concerns that that I think that
they will be able to address but
there's always registration that
they'd have to go through.
Good thank you senator so maybe
any other discussion we have a
motion and a second to amended
seconded by Senator you look did
you get the wording okay guys.
Is there any discussion any
opposition to the motion.
This.
Was senator gave us your honor I
didn't realize you were a do you
have a question.
No Sir I didn't know my handle
so I apologize it is I had a
hard time getting on June and I
did catch the majority of this
bill so I'm here just roll.
Okay well you'll be able to vote
if you do you have any
opposition to this amendment.
No Sir so many opposition from
anyone this seeing under the the
if a bill will be amended and
will move now to Senator Sedillo
Lopez this motion.
Seconded by Senator Stefanics
road to pass it on Senate bill.
Thirteen thirteen as amended.
The secretary will call the roll
and Senators that guy Senator
Gallegos is here.
Both.
Yes ma'am.
Very well yeah.
Yes
yes.
Are still open yes there's an
excess serotonin.
in senators.
Third to see pandemic yes.
If they do pass senator
congradulations thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you senator
Munoz state employee no
enhancing death benefits for law
enforcement.
Senate bill three.
Thank you Mr chairman and will
just be kind of brief Senate
bill three makes two changes
The way we fund the distribution
from the law enforcement
protection fund and what it does
it increase the death benefit
for an author that fallen.
From two hundred fifty one
million dollars which I think I
believe is the highest in the
nation increases the
distribution for police
departments and officers in
there setting up our sheet right
now and you can look through the
examples of increases what they
can use them for.
In all general all the fund
revenues or go to law
enforcement instead of us
dividing them off to other
things they would receive the
total amount of the fund in
appropriations which is the
correct way to funding.
if you look at what leap of
funds are L. E. S. L. E. PF
funds are used for leadership
programming management training
per diem and travel vehicles I
don't know how many get us
capital request for police
vehicles every single year.
Body cameras and bull will
improving trauma kits and and
overdose kits and trading with
to deal with mental health
issues going on people.
With me I have a need for the
from the agency fully as my
expert witness.
Do you have you have an
amendment bill will yes well
let's let's let's hear the Mr
Stewart go ahead and and and
give us the your information
then we'll deal with you then
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee aged forty with
the minutes police and our
briefing sheet Mr chair members
really does summarize what the
bill does this bill is a
continuation of house bill one
eighty four from the twenty
nineteen session where as the
receipts of increase from the
ten percent fewer turns
products.
if we're putting it into the
distribution so every department
will get the ninety five
thousands we protect the small
ones don't have as many officers
and for the larger departments
they get that increase up to
fifteen hundred dollars for
officer.
This is we've all seen we always
keep saying we need better
officers it comes a training for
the main focus of this is giving
our officers and our departments
the tools through more funding
to get this training one of the
premier training entities in the
country's northwestern that's a
forty six hundred dollar
training per officer plus per
diem this doesn't quite get us
there but it helps the small
departments in our large
apartments with more officers
this helps cover those costs.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr forty so do you
want to it's just explain
quickly Senator the the
amendment that you're proposing
I frankly touched on it strikes
the forty five thousand in
search ninety five thousand
because we got the updated
balance on the.
So with that.
Is there can we get a motion on
the on the amendment please what
page.
The the the bills the that I
think the front page for like
ten all of also moved.
They want to move the amendment
all of the above the amendment
okay thirty seconds.
Senator committee seconded.
Any discussion on the amendment.
Thank any opposition to the
amendment.
I see none will consider the
bills have been amended.
And anything else we go to the
audience to refer you can go to
the audience only thing I you
know I have today on the news I
see more thirty eight officers
have been killed just in January
alone that in New Mexico no
across the US and not in New
Mexico the just and the one
month all alone which is at
record setting pace
we know that when an officer
falls in and what it costs to
raise a child in New Mexico
doesn't even cover what the
insurance will be with one child
costs about two hundred fifty
thousand per child from birth at
age eighteen and so I think we
need to show their specs the
most important thing we can do
everybody sees and hears us
every single day is given
officers training
so that they're trained
correctly so we don't get in
those situations that make
national news so with that will
stand for questions.
Go to the audience anybody in
the audience want to speak on
this bill this is what.
Is there anybody signed up on
zoom for this bill.
Okay.
Of these the ones no it's kind
of yeah we're good.
They they signed up for yes No.
Members of the committee hello
is anyone on that date Senator
guy and if you have a question.
Learn.
most of the thank you seven inch
sooner process.
Did you have did you have a
question Senator guidance.
The scene is office.
Here in the building the
technology wonderful.
Fall over waiting for senator
Senator is.
Okay but we do have somebody
were to make a comment on this
Mr there were again did you want
to come in on this bill.
The.
Their of their well.
I am.
Senator then your friends all.
They don't have any broadband.
That is the on is he trying to
get on I'm trying to.
It's not happening Mr chair to
don't know how we experience the
same K. problem and Senate
finance today our link was sent
to to committee so we can even
start.
The vote on the walkie talkie.
Here.
So can you unmuted yourself the
Mr they are aware of.
Thank you can you on mute
yourself Daryl there would've.
You can't.
No okay.
Okay well we'll go we'll go
ahead for a while to the
committee Representative Mr
Condit did you want to.
It affects the people the on the
June meeting or getting a lot
of.
About three dozen people were
falling on the committee then
the audio.
The cashier is.
The time.
Okay we're working on it we've
got our correct creating.
That we're not supposed to
continue up to the public can't
hear them the through.
good.
There's some reason that you're
showing up
Mary Jane is your moderator for.
I thank you the two small that.
Can you hear us now Mr there
will.
Can you on mute yourself.
This.
Okay.
Both going to can you hear us
can you get yourself and speak.
Can you hear yes.
Thank goodness well sorry for
the late show with.
I did not get back in well thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
registered lobbyists for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce I just want to make a
couple of brief remarks in
policing has always been a
dangerous job but sadly it's
becoming more dangerous and
those who answer the call to
protect and serve noted that
there's always a chance they may
not make it home from their ship
and so to the officers families
and this is a very heavy burden
to bear for everyone involved.
This is the least we can do as a
state to honor officers daily
sacrifices with increased the
death benefit provided to the
family of fallen officers it's
the right thing to do and we
commend the sponsor for bringing
this forward thank you very
much.
Thank you JJ how about Mr there
what or do we have him yet.
Us.
Thank you so can you unmuted
yourself the general.
Thank you at the text of until
dawn.
It's probably quicker
technology.
Who is the.
Senator Gallegos he said I can't
get in to speak you can see is
here
All right Senator DiSanto
Senator Gallegos did you have a
comment on.
With up to the member did you
have a question or comment on
the bill.
No Sir I've been knocked off for
awhile and just trying to get
back on.
I appreciate the opportunity to
hear the debate.
Thank you senator you're loud
and clear that's great okay we
did have a question over here we
were about to hear from Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes
Thank you Mr chairman this is
this is a really great bill
because to lose to for the
family members
when they've lost their their
police officer member of the
family it's just the least the
least of the state could do
especially in light of what that
loss losses has meant I just
have a couple of technical
questions and and one of them
does it have to do with doesn't
even have to do with the
amendments but I've just curious
of.
It says the budget should be
paid first to the surviving
spouse if there is no surviving
spouse been pro rata shares to
the surviving children and then
surviving children it goes to
the parents what happens if this
is a single individual who
doesn't have living parents.
I think that would be up to the
insurance company to determine
who the that that benefit or the
survivor we would go to and they
have to have some type of
survivorship on the schedule in
order for them to receive.
So it would be taken care of in
the insurance papers consist it
doesn't say that.
Mr chair Senator this actually
runs through GPS so that's the
formal process this will go
through GPS to the survivorship
Fund in that case I'm not
actually sure but that would be
a DPS to going to track down the
next eligible person.
Or family member so I mean if
this were if the person doesn't
have a will then normally what
happens is if the parents are
not surviving dented siblings it
goes to siblings and you know
under under
Have the rules it when you don't
have a will intestacy is is that
what is intended for Mr chair
Senator what's happened in the
past just curious yes that's
when we have to reach out to DPS
to get that next level that's
not laid out in statute but we
can we can reach out to DPS to
see if we get an answer okay and
then the other against a
technical question maybe again a
curious thing a curiosity thing
the the minimum balance balance
of the fund you're changing to
one million dollars in of course
that makes sense but before it
was three hundred fifty thousand
dollars which was three times
the expected or not quite three
times the expectation.
Of of what might be needed and
so it I just my question is is
one million dollars enough I
know I also read that the fund
has a lot more than that of
potential because it's it's it's
it's the.
It says a lot but I guess I'm
thinking of the of the times in
which the fund has been rated
What is the is one million
enough in in the event that it
ever ends up getting rated.
Mister chairman Senator.
The reason it's a one million to
make sure there's always at
least a million there to make a
payout what we've seen
historically New Mexico is that
we lose on average one officer
per year so that's why there be
a minimum of one million dollars
in cash balance if we ever had
an issue of of two deaths in one
year in the agency would
ultimately have to submit a
budget adjustment request to get
more authority to pay the funds
out okay and that depends
Has a historical Representative
the historic revenue has been so
much greater do you just expect
it's not going to be a problem
because it will always be
greater Mr chair Senator will be
increased distribution from the
current distribution up to
ninety five to Department and
fifteen hundred profit will take
care of a lot of that but as
receipts continue to grow and is
insurance cost increase that ten
percent fee will make the fund
grow so in later years in the
out years you may have a
scenario where the but the
center needs to come back in in
the body needs to figure out
what to do with that cash
balance the excess mmhm that
would be in a another bill where
the legislature would have to
decide we do scholarships for
the fallen officers children you
guys have every option on the
table and what you could decide
to do with those funds.
Thank you Mr checked.
Thank you yes Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and senator
Munoz.
Couple of questions and it very
well may be I've oversight it.
How about officers families who
have died before.
July one two thousand twenty
two.
I'm just really kind of your
thoughts on help those that have
lost officers in the past
I don't see in here that they
are affected it's only.
Only
Yes in the future effective July
one and then my other question
is I see on the FIR.
There is a conflict on page
five.
It conflicts with house bill one
hundred which proposes to
increase the best death metal
fits from two hundred fifty
thousand to five hundred
thousand and I was wondering if
you the movie just a poll we.
I have thought about how to
address that thank you chairman
thank you senator so we can it
make any law retroactive so
anything that happens to happen
within.
Current so that's why we can't
go back to the to the officer
that we lost in in stemming or
Los crucis I was from demi but
happening Office of the other
question is house bill one
hundred was a duplicate of bills
dropped last year that that
didn't make it off the house
floor in so we notify that
member that we're running this
bill and and I think shows up on
their own to do something
different.
Okay very good yeah I'm thinking
of.
Those families of the two
officers one Rio Rancho one in
Albuquerque that were murdered I
just I just think about them as
I'm looking at this and I
realize that.
They can't be compensated for it
thank you for addressing at.
I had a question is it are the
pay outs for fallen officers.
Lump sum payout it's a million
dollars yes there would be a
lump sum payment of a million
dollars.
and then it's up to the family
to invest that are stretch it
out and just like any other
insurance policy right when
there's a death than the than
the benefit is beneficiaries
paid out immediately the full
amount.
And and the but they would also
probably be getting at the P. E.
R. A..
Survivor benefit of some amount
to depending on how long they've
served and so if there
person that they designated as
their retiree which you would
assume I would doesn't my wife
is that as the beneficiary of
Bill then they would give of.
and one last question who
decides if a given policeman's
death.
Is is duty related
I mean it's still in the
building that you know for
example we've had police
officers who
wrecked their car and died in
automobile accidents.
Because of.
They fell asleep at the wheel or
some some other factor I mean it
wasn't that.
So maybe that do that qualify
for state chairman in that
correct me if I'm wrong we don't
have the PS here should be here
with us.
So officers are always on duty
right they always have the duty
to protect and so if an officer
walked into a seven eleven and
something happens and often gets
killed even though he's not on
duty he still has that duty
within the statute and so if an
officer is.
Eating and drinking and causes a
rack that would probably not be
covered under the duty of an
officer because he wasn't in
pursuit of something or more in
the line of duty.
But so will the committee we
have the bill amended.
Yes on Senate bill three as
amended.
Through any says seconded by
Senator McKenna.
Any other debate or discussion
the secretary will call the
roll.
Survivor ghost.
Yes ma'am.
angle.
Yes.
Yes.
Thirty minutes yes.
Okay yes
thanks yes.
Tallman yes Sir to subpoena yes.
Congradulations sanity of a
depressing Mr chairman thank you
Mr here center city a little bit
of we need to contact anybody
have Brian have here right now
Senator will do him and then.
And you have got to bills for
the Senator which would you want
to start with which is passed in
the the unanimous consent Mr
when we start the match.
Okay Senate bill fifteen K.
ninety five K. and ninety five
math and education right thank
you Mr chairman committee so
Mister chairman committees the
bill actually introduce the year
ago for the first time and at
that time it kind of seem like
we were turning the corner on
COVID and that was certainly our
hope and.
There was a lot of talk with the
secretary of health and Human
Services about you know what
type of mask to work properly
but we work out the language we
agreed that can ninety five it
was known at that time they can
any five mass.
Was the standard we should shoot
for
since that time of course the
pandemic didn't go away in fact
we erased with the new delta
variant now we're in the midst
of an Omicron variant.
And we the fact is nobody knows
what's going to happen this year
nobody knows what's going to
happen next year for one thing
we do know Mr chairman as it's
an airborne virus and then also
the number one tool we have to
fight this biological war that
we're in.
And I think the government.
State and federal were caught
off guard frankly with what's
occurred this year and we're
prepared with the right
resources we don't have to make
that mistake the second on so Mr
chairman committee what this
bill does is sets appropriates
ten million dollars to the state
the Human Services Department of
Health Department to basically
distribute can ninety five mass
for their equivalent quality
level to the citizens of the
state.
It intentionally doesn't have a
reversion date for not the
current coming fiscal year the
end of it but the following one
so the intention is as we have
sent over seven hundred million
dollars left the appropriated
federal comment funds I think
it's appropriate we give some of
them to the department of health
to be prepared for whatever
comes next.
I'll just close Mr chairman by
saying you know when I drafted
this bill the federal government
had not announced that they were
going to be procuring you know
K. ninety five mass for the
public they since have done so
having said that.
You know we don't know what the
future will bring and we can
always change course we can
always not spend that money but
but I think it's a very prudent
thing to give are are a
department of health resources
to be able to meet the threat of
the future including and
especially have the best mass
available for the citizens state
and I will say X. they will then
go to Amazon and buy it there's
a lot of counterfeit mass out
there so we want to be effective
I think making sure we're buying
the right mass we're getting
amount that we're doing a public
education campaign that's also
required in this bill is really
very prudent course of action
with that I stand for questions
Mr.
Let's go to the audience and see
if there is anyone in the
audience who wants to speak on
this bill is for against.
Anybody on zoom Mary Jane.
Nobody members of the committee.
That is Senators committee.
Mr chair Senator masks again
here so and and you know I think
in I do remember this bill last
year and this appropriation bill
so you know we didn't wouldn't
go too far in the debate in
we've already had a debate
during this legislative session
about masks and I've already
expressed my concern that
when I've looked at a lot of
peer reviewed studies a lot of
them are concluding that mass do
not stopper decrease spread of
of COVID nineteen.
and I do want to point out
though that I do like an aspect
of this bill and that we're
we're kind of upping the ante
for some type of mask that would
be more effective.
I did want to ask Mr chair
Senator how did you arrive at
Katie and I can any I am not in
ninety fives or something else
just curious this treatment
centers committee so in ninety
five when a bill is drafted I
think even today and ninety five
our little less prolific than
can ninety five ten ninety fives
use by the medical field and can
ninety five more kind of
commercially available so that
was the feeling that can ninety
fives we're more readily
commercially available on a
large scale so but the bill says
K. ninety five requests only
effective mass so it could
certainly be an and ninety five
both economic ninety five and
ninety fives are rated at ninety
five percent effective at a
preventing transmission of these
droplets so.
So they're kind of similar but I
guess can ninety five Sir more
commercially available okay and
that Mr Chairman center I I I do
want to emphasize the fact
someone that you it said
in that there are counterfeit
mass well the reason that
they're counterfeit mass is can
ninety fives are not regulated
by any sort of American health
agency they're not recommended
or they're not regulated or
approved or monitored by the
National Institute of
occupational safety of safety
and health okay we're is in
ninety fives are so if you go to
three AM website you can see in
ninety five ninety K. ninety
five the CDC website will say
things like internationally
regulated well it's basically
you know China that those
regulations and so the CDC has
done some studies on K. ninety
five and they found that at
least sixty percent.
Of those masks that were
commercially available did not
meet those standards so if this
bill were to be passed the
department health would have to.
Work with some sort of
accrediting agency to at least
even against mask categorically
in this setting it to a at least
verify that what we're
purchasing is something that is
average you know advertised you
know to be who what it's
supposed to be
and then lastly I would just say
because when I vote against the
bill special health bill I want
to be very clear this committee
that I proposed a positive
alternatives not just say no as
a minority person the
Republican but just just to say
something positive and so what I
would say about this bill and I
very much appreciate the
Senators sincerity on this bill
is I feel like a lot of our
focus in COVID has been on
healthy people the very
beginning of the pandemic come
out essential workers healthy
thirty five year olds let's get
them vaccinated and I had eighty
year old constituents that
couldn't get you know vaccine
when they wanted one PP you know
PPE let's let's health the
doctors and nurses well these
are all healthy people not
saying those things are not
necessary or good but the focus
was really turned off the
treatment so I'd rather be
voting on a bill that's
appropriating money for sick
people in the care of COVID
nineteen then kind of you know
what what we're doing here but
we I I appreciate the the
discussion very much and and
that concludes my comment so
thank you Mr things thank you
so.
I had a question is a kind of a
technical question up I thought
we we move the arpa money.
We didn't we put it into a
separate fund not general fund.
This is chairman I believe we
did put it in the general fund.
As a member of the Senate
provided it from there is that I
can't think fine remember the
language.
Mr Chairman is an operating
provide just that we if we had
to move it into a different Fund
specifically not like the
general fund that were used to
seed but that's what we
apparently LFC put some and
prior to moving it to the
general fund it's like an
operator is still there I mean
this bill says the money will be
taken from the general fund.
Yes because they probably is
going to be our money's read
through that operating funding
to the general exactly okay.
Senator Tallman.
Interesting.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this bill
forward in order time is
precious.
Single parent.
Is the ten million on.
Yes so Mr chairman committee
last year was five million
dollars and I just thought.
You know mass don't last that
long and if we're really
committed as a public health
strategy to having a supply that
that are more than a one time
deal mass you know these types
of Masser about about fifty
about fifty per one we have two
million New Mexico residents so
if you wanted residents to have
more than just a master to and
instead have a little bit of
staying power as a public health
strategy than we need to do we
need to have more money so ten
million is a number that gets
you closer to.
You know of of five six million
mass so something that can last
awhile hopefully get us down the
road that answer also did you
consult with the experts
Okay Mister chairman Senator all
the five year I think they
certainly did not I've been
working with the department of
health and Human Services I work
with them from the very
beginning on getting the right
language also trying to get
costs I look at what other
states are doing more more other
states and cities are doing this
that providing test kits for
their folks so I kind of.
Try to put it all together and
do the math and figure out.
You know but even then honestly
you could you could look at it
and say what is that enough and
if you're really committed to
this and if you had a crystal
ball and you were going to be
facing years more you might say
this isn't enough for its too
much but I think with the amount
of resources we have.
We should not it's the Senate is
not having enough not having a
little bit too much that then
you can call back so.
Thank you Mr chair also
You mentioned that the donor
built right before the federal
government also program
providing mask that didn't
change your mind at all.
Well Mister chairman Senator.
It's a moving target to be sure
I still think because we have
seven or million left in federal
comment funding specifically not
to mention all the other men
that it's appropriate for us to
appropriate some public health
dollars might be worth it to
look at even giving more
flexibility.
To the Department because it
maybe they want to invest a
monoclonal antibody treatments
or some other therapeutics to
treat sick people I've been
asking the department since
before the session give us a
package and and there's
agreement that masses of a great
thing testing here a great thing
so I I just think we need to
give them resources to be
flexible and to help us with
this thing down the stretch but
but this bill certainly isn't
import really important
component of that because you
can keep people from getting
sick you don't have to treatment
hospital they don't have to
drive.
And and right now we could save
a lot of lives just by making
sure all New Mexicans were
wearing a K. ninety five.
If they were so thank you Mr
chairman primary.
Thank you for having a.
Last year the
Thank lost what six hundred
thousand dollars and because
the.
Use the single vendor or urgency
purchasing and there's.
The
the causes for all day loss of
money so would you propose a
this go through the regular
channels of purchasing it would
be a single vendor vendor or
merchant to purchase Mister
Chairman Senator common they're
actually national institutes
repeatable National Institute to
help with math procurement that
are well known channels and they
do scientific vetting of the
specific brands and whatever I
think the state of New Mexico
the and by the way they've now
gone into this venture buying
these things but that they
should be working with.
Verified vendor sources and I'll
leave that to them and we have
procurement laws that they need
to follow and.
But it's crucial that they get
the rights that is not our
decision right one more question
a kind of like Dr Schmidt is our
idea maybe spending some of my
something else would you be
amenable to change committee
your bills that maybe take
advantage of it thank you
smitteez idea.
Okay you want Mr chair Senator
what I'd rather do is amend the
next bill because it's for a
greater amount of money it's for
testing governments invested a
lot more testing at this moment
so I would suggest that there
would be a great though the at
testing and therapeutics
something along those lines not
be more appropriate this this is
master kind of a frontline thing
and it's a much smaller amount
of money.
Been suggested thank you thank
you senator thank you that's all
I have thank you senator how
long do these how many times can
you wear one of these Mr
chairman you know initially they
said one day one time have to
throw it away now I think we're
getting looser guidance in that.
So I think the reality is people
who wear the more than one day
I'm sure maybe they lose some
affected this probably depends
how much you where they loosen
up and then the fittest I think
you can wear probably and again
this will be an unscientific
answer but I think you can wear
at least several days.
But if you're wearing it for
just limited periods of time you
could probably where a lot
longer and the sun's out Senator
Tallman has yes.
We just summon dition
information additional
information so at the center of
rate has on all into the door
close the store for ten minutes
and for the rest of the home.
Hi if you use it all day.
They also say you should rotate
on.
Put it up we're in for.
Whatever one to two or three
days in and put in a well the
ventilated.
Rural.
And and maybe use a second one
and then rotate two or three of
them after they've been vented
so that no one way to make a
long the last longer thank
that's all I have thank you but
will commit Senator Ingle.
Mr Chairman.
Your own salaries usually range
from three hundred ninety one
thousand two million nine
depending on the model.
Good ranger salaries
Where we where we hiring Julie
paying this definition the man
that quite a bit of different
services Mr Chairman said
Senator yeah that's an
interesting FIR on how they
would implement it the bill
doesn't specify any of that it
just says we should purchase
these mask into a public
information campaign they then
extrapolated okay well here's
how we would do that and what it
would cost I thought some of
that was a little high to I
would frankly want to.
Trim a lot of what was in that
FIR to purchase more mass and
figure out more economical ways
to get about people.
Well in the bill of those
numbers.
No no outage that's the problem
when when the state does
something and from which we pass
on our hands and.
I.
I don't know I just I just see
so many masks that are.
Mowing down the street.
I these are good measure my
daughter's.
Kidney physician and California
in this she sent me some of
these personally I don't care
much for making a restricted by
reading compared to this and I'm
outside with animals all the
time and they didn't like the
way I look.
I took mine off and the cap from
created.
And but I I I just really worry
about when we do things like
this.
Of a.
You know how much we're spending
and how much I agree that folks
should wear masks but I also
read a lot of reports that.
I just really don't make that
much difference on the
transmission and I don't know
who's right and who's wrong the
thing about it is there's so
many companies to get involved
in this sort of thing and the
spending by states is
astronomical because none of us
want our citizens dying if we
think there's some way this to
keep it from happening but this
is pretty
Pretty big bite here and I'm
just I just worry about.
the distributions are going to
go and you know I wish I took a
test in my office this morning
from a kit that was provided by
I think one of the counties or
something and.
I was told that that yes one
Martha dam managers to you know
really Senator Moores kit the
one I got that I got that from
from a person yes on I can't
reveal who that is.
The but the thing about it is is
that that's just a normal thing
that happens when the this sort
of thing in this and I know the
K. ninety four K. in ninety five
is certainly supposedly the best
mass but
Everyone of us
has has massed on I have.
I have the only one of these and
these are the these are the Ford
falcon of the of the mass.
And it's you have a good one
and.
More years is more like a
fairly.
Senator Collins is a
Thunderbird.
And
Your K. ninety five I should no.
But the thing about it is if you
look around in here and I don't
know what's right and what's
wrong but I do know that ten
million dollars is a heck of a
bunch of money and I can see
these things just.
Really being.
Not years like it is good as
they should be and some of these
figures in here like a.
Ten dollars a box times a
hundred thousand shipments to
your house all five two years
two million dollars.
I mean I.
Just beyond belief Committee
that we're spending that we're
sending those to households and
I can assure you that they'll be
a bunch of that will be
delivered because I can't
remember how many people moving
each month and how the addresses
will be wrong and things like
well you we've all male things
and we know how much mail comes
back and then we thought we had
a hell of a good address system
right thank you Mr chairman of
have my questions answered and I
as I say I have the the Ford
falcon of the last year.
It's an attractive one on you
Senator you know there's no one
sitting by me so I guess that
is.
In addition to Germany.
Senator Stefanics.
And my personal comments.
Thank you bye Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
I think this will be fine if it
really goes to provide
it may get refined is one word.
The most polite or this.
Any other debate.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Ingle you're funny I
love it.
sure Karen and
Senator Steinborn I'm just
curious this is a lot of money
I'm wondering does our state
have any capability to
manufacture masks such as these.
Mr Chairman Senator not that I'm
aware of okay without
contracting it up even and I
would want to repurpose a
different.
The manufacturers.
Okay so we're not sure where
they would be procured from it
just be the.
Somebody who's price budget
quality right okay all right
thank you.
That point Senators thank you Mr
chair Senator but that's just a
great point and I just wanted to
highlight it that this is a
secure our nation and our state
has a major security problems
because a lot of these masks a
lot of our drugs a lot of other
things that we really need to
help people come from countries
that don't like us so much.
And so I I'll I'll I like center
to kind of bring that up because
I I really think we need to do
that and I don't know how much
our state can do I think we can
do a lot because we could become
a hub for such and such and and
communicate with our you know
federal folks it's a lot of if
you know we don't do national
security agency I mean but
anyway I just want to highlight
that and I I really hope the we
can we can take a look at that
as a state and a nation thank
you.
Good point secretary will call
the roll.
Both.
No.
Thank you no.
McKenna yes.
No.
Lopez to deal okay yes.
First FedEx.
She stepped up to.
Sir Tom week yes.
There are two six.
Yes.
You have to pass on the Senator
thank you what about the next
one the next one is a on Senate
bill sixteen distribution of at
home COVID nineteen testing kit
Mr Chairman so this is a lot
more money Mr chairman this is a
but it's just because it's a lot
more expensive product this is
the appropriation bill for fifty
million dollars to ultimately
what was designed part time with
the best information I had at
the time with the slide
essentially two
boxes of two yes kids per family
the same exact thing after the
federal government is now doing
through their through the thing
for for yes per per household
anyway so that's basically where
this was designed with the
pricing at the time I had which
was about twenty five dollars a
box so.
That you know two million New
Mexicans that gets you to fifty
million dollars I want to be
clear I want the Mr chairman
which the language in these
bills don't say mailed to every
household they say distributed
and that's the important
distinction that I think somehow
the media's graft on that we're
going to mail these to every
person which would have its
problems and talking to the
Human Services department
secretaries prices made a good
point that you know about a
million New Mexicans are on
Medicaid there two and a half
times more likely to get COVID
greatly disproportionately
higher affected so you can be
very strategic and choose to
focus resources maybe where
they're more vulnerable where
they're more scarce.
We believe it or public health
people to come up with the
strategies so I just want to
point that out but these are for
these are for testing but I
would absolutely welcome an
amendment from senators
committee or myself or anybody
to add the word hand
therapeutics.
if you'd like on that bill and I
think that be a really good
improvement.
Because the test as it turns out
cost less since then about
getting less for that at the
scale that by and from so.
Okay let's go to the anything
else in her you don't want to
let me move you want.
So.
You know you want to wait until
after public comments.
Well that Mister chairman
Senator I mean you have me
thinking so I I may have a
little discussion on that but I
don't know which one do that now
or but we see if there's any
public comment and then move the
given the chance to formulate to
anybody here want to speak on
behalf of our against this bill.
How about on the zoom.
Well we didn't give you much
time.
Control over yes.
Zurcher sent is there anyone
from D. O. H. available to ask
some questions on that or no.
The are no okay well the reason
I'm asking Mister chairman
Senator is I I have a couple
questions so for example I saw
you know some communication that
for example the state
distribution of Citro map which
is a monoclonal antibody used
against people with COVID
nineteen we were a lot of a
hundred and seventy treatment so
that only and now I don't know
if that's the full final deal
whatever they'll be a question I
want to ask the O. H. is how
much of these are funding issues
and how much of them or supply
chain issues because you know
how much you're gonna
appropriate for therapeutics if
we can't get them there's no
reason to appropriate so I would
want to ask that question
To see what their thoughts are
now the and the other thing I
would love to see in this kind
of know what mentioned the
doctor not only prevention
diagnosis but treating sick
people it is really the
education of a lot of our health
care providers
whether they're physicians nurse
practitioners PTA's I have seen
a lot of abandonment of high
risk patients who test positive
for COVID nineteen and they're
sent home with with sensually
nothing no guidance literally
some of my friends and my
patients have been told this and
they're seventy years old and
obese have hypertension and they
sit literally the advice is what
we don't have anything for you
you Miss tested positive.
And
just go home and call nine one
one if you can't if you have
trouble breathing and that
that's not acceptable to me and
it has happened many many many
times just in my little circle
and so I would love to see some
of this funding go to education
of our health care providers for
number one how to identify who
is at risk for developing severe
disease and how to keep them out
of the hospital this law is a
debate on that but what
medications can be given with a
lot of good data now two years
into the pandemic how to reduce
people's escalation of this
disease and how to keep them out
of the hospital unfortunately
there's been some partisanship
in those issues I think we have
a lot of
you know of good good chance for
bipartisanship in looking at
that issue too so I I I want to
probably not just say
therapeutics but I probably want
to say something about educating
our our our health care
workforce in and how to you know
help prevent de escalate disease
that sort of thing.
but I I would want to also ask
the O. H. if they're here.
What have they done I mean have
the appropriate funding to that
how much they've been doing I'm
sure they've been doing some of
that maybe I just haven't seen
it in my circle so I don't know
how to put a dollar amount
behind that but they'll be
another example so anyway that's
just my thoughts Mr chair send
it in light of that in light of
the fact that you H. is in here.
If it comes out of this
committee will go to finance
maybe between then you you deal
with some of those issues and
provide some wording that gives
you greater flexibility in the
use of the money but that.
You know give you a better
chance of finance at that point
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Fifty.
With that
The data.
because of thank thank you
Because one of the things that
I've been reading is these at
home tests have been affecting
whether we're accurately
tracking the tracking it and
we're getting for each from from
the federal government in the
next couple weeks so I guess I'm
wondering eight is this
necessary given what the federal
government is doing and be
What is the deal waiter what
what do we think about affecting
the data with regard to where it
is and
And it's spread those are two
really good questions Mr
chairman and senator a number
one I think it's acknowledge
that with at home yes you know
the trade off with that with
with more surveillance testing
as a as a as a society which is
something which you know you're
testing people even are a
symptomatic see can isolate this
virus and in that means that
people are Pete philosophically
fine haven't it yes it's more
stressful so maybe they take it
they can isolate but the benefit
of being able to have more
pervasive testing is that
they're not going to be
reporting in their results in
many cases it's just the trade
off and I think medical
professionals have even openly
talked about as it becomes more
pervasive the virus how
important those numbers are
compared to other metrics which
is hospitalization and things
like that so if you if your if
your chasing that ball rather
than stopping the virus and
having people know you may not
be focus on writing so that's
the trade off admittedly but
it's an important one thank.
Number two the necessary that's
a good question I think in the
short run.
Obviously the federal government
made these available of the
state of New Mexico by the way
is purchasing a million at home
rapid test right now and so but
these tests six fire they don't
last forever my guess is if
things mutate you need a
different task even so I think
what's really important with
this funding is that we're not
just looking at the next three
months this is actually about
the next six months the next
nine months this is about giving
them the tools to be able to
adapt and without knowing what
the federal government's going
to do because with the federal
government is doing is a one
time deal the present by the
state to what will first half a
billion yes many increased to
billion yes what we got three
hundred million Americans for
yes so what is that that's get
the third rounder to but it's
it's just an initial wave it's
what comes after that that that
this funding is really important
for and so that our state is
armed with some tools to be able
to fight.
That so those are my two answers
I do think it's important in
this committee Mr chairman to
add the word and therapeutic
treatment.
After yes.
because I think that's a really
important piece I hoped would
come from department of health
adding to this thinking through
really what's the suite of
things that they need.
And the I think it's conceivable
there will be treatments will be
more widely available that will
have cost constraints perhaps
maybe they won't but we given
that pool so I think that the
really great amendment to make
now to make this committee or
where to find it I would Mr
chairman I'd like to make it now
so I would propose that on
Online nineteen after the work
kicks.
We add in therapeutic
treatments.
Now the of my question that
those that wording it that way
does that mean at phone
therapeutic treatment.
Yes Representative emergency
room that in and the committee.
Good question I don't know the
answer to that.
Probably could mean that it
could not be that probably.
You have a comment after testing
kits.
How about and the purchase of
therapeutic treatment the
purchase of at that in there
too.
Works for me.
Whatever therapeutic treatment
is given which I assume is in a
hospital but I is that thank you
maybe but it also may be it at
home I think that well Mister
chairman Senator yeah I mean I
mean they can be through an
outpatient doctor's office yeah
you know or a pharmacy
dispensing
You know medication supplies
things like that it can also be
and compounding pharmacies are
infusion centers that are out
patients so those are not
necessarily hospitals and the
purchase of therapeutic
treatments rural in in forms of
the treatment.
Well it will be if the
discretion of the health
department to.
Yes Mr chairman we suggested
come and the purchase of
therapeutic treatments yep
treatments with an S. at the end
mmhm.
The the the that is indicated
to.
It have to be indicating that
the their second for that.
Also seconded by Senator phone
four percent committees were.
Senator Schmedes seconded
any any debate on that a
discussion.
There are I think would also
probably need to amend the title
as well.
Yes good point.
The testing kids to drop the
period there and that in and
therapeutic treatments
purchasing.
And the purchase of therapeutic
treatments.
Sir Senator Sedillo Lopez
I I appreciate the the addition
but I would feel more
comfortable with the department
of health health we're here
telling us the big picture and
how this fits in
hello and lets you have a if you
already had that discussion.
Mister Mister Sir I haven't had
that conversation about
therapeutic treatments what
we're speaking but it doesn't
good thing about that is it
doesn't require them to do that
it gives them the flexibility it
just gives an additional pool
because we're anticipating that
that this was an important piece
of trading people to the extent
that something that the state
can help pay for we know that
therapeutic treatments exist so
whether or not they have the
ability to pay for it it's a
good thing authorize them to do.
It doesn't.
Doesn't required any percentage
distribution you know.
I can't imagine they'd be
opposed to that.
But again it's just that it is
that it's an improvement Mr
chairman it's expansion of the
concept I think that helps this
bill in its continue discussion
with the department as it moves
along so I would encourage the
committee to.
The.
Senator is the function of a
COVID of my comment was on the
earlier discussion Mr chair I I
believe this is especially since
there's no availability that our
state agency should be
participating in this we've had
that this we've had a request
about servers SO resuming to I
know and so what we have some
questions why about the late
there should be having some
complex is there anybody online
from Do�a area and showers for
example.
The legislative liaison.
Well.
If there's if there's anybody on
the zoom call from D. O. H. if
you could.
Raise your hand that would be
really good so we can get some
input on this from the
department it's.
About to receive fifty million
dollars to Senator Ingle.
I think.
Passed out.
Not the truth.
Okay I okay nobody there Mr
chairman I would just say this
the department has absolutely
embraced at home yes as a
strategy the secretary made a
very pressured COVID to me says
I'm as worried as I am forty six
months from now as I am now
that's what this bill is about
it's not just looking at now
which by the way they embrace
monoclonal antibodies they
embrace at home yes it's about
giving these resources for a
world which we can't even
anticipate today it's going to
exist six nine months from now
so.
Senator other we did do we adopt
the amendment we have into it is
there any opposition to the
amendment are you your comment
on the amendment.
Any opposition to the motion.
Yeah I made a motion.
And senator city Senators maybe
seconded yes.
Senator Tallman okay we we then
will consider the bills have
been amended and go to Senator
Tallman for question.
So thank you Mr chair thank you
senator that fentanyl assists
the.
Good question and home we're
very.
With this money.
The.
Because nobody can answer that
question.
The track Mr Chairman yes that's
a great point and and I think
this particular bill is really
more post three months from now
because the state is purchasing
them the federal government has
done this so I would hope we
would count on our department
health building sophisticated
enough to understand that things
are changing and you obviously
have to buy tasks that are
effective at that time.
The service rep I but also to
have enough money to make it
last so it's kind of like a
contingency fund for two years
yes and I want to and they
shouldn't spend all it's really
like.
Tools to fight down the stretch.
For.
All right quick comment Senator
impresses you going paperless.
Thank you for.
I I could never do that but
you're saving paper.
Fortunately they're short bills.
This is a process thank you I
have I have looking for paper
billing the he spent half his
time trying to find a.
One other quick question so how
we we coordinate with the
federal government if you
receive a.
Yes from us and the federal
government.
Mr Mr that's a good point and
that's something that we would
count on our department to think
through a smart process to do it
but again I think this is really
what happens after the current
current program that we see
right now.
Okay.
It's important to hello.
The the one more
responsibilities and to your
list thank you for all I have
Mister.
Senator Ingle.
The
is it to get COVID yes now.
Senator released.
Chairman Senator probably
depends where you live and what
time it is it's actually pretty
easy to get scheduled for a test
in the state of New Mexico
but it's a the least when Los
crucis where I live but I know
that there's lots lots of people
who during the last I guess over
the holidays had a really hard
time getting a test.
And they certainly could provide
an at home test.
So I think convenience is an
important aspect here too
there's there's attractiveness
to that at home yes that.
Provides really more.
More usage by the public that
having to schedule I go drive
out somewhere and wait days and
for whatever reasons.
The at home option is a lot more
adopted by the public.
And they were and they were
downright impossible to get over
the last month.
A couple months.
I haven't found that to be the
case I'm not arguing with you
but I just it seems to me like
they have been very very readily
available for anybody that won't
work that's just my.
Maybe in Albuquerque it isn't
Los crucis in smaller towns that
seem to be very very available
Representative K. and that's the
thing about you know doing so
much of this we just end up with
so much overflow on so many
things in my years up here when
I tried to do something good.
We found out that to sometimes
the money is not used for its
greatest purpose.
Other than a few people got
extremely wealthy.
Thank you thank you senator.
Okay members we have a it
amended amended bill is there a
motion regarding that bill.
I'm moving to pass on the
amended bill the second.
Senator Tallman with the firm
second.
The secretary will call the roll
Sergei ghosts.
For a.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
I'll text.
But that he's not mute their.
Yeah he's.
You you and I've asked to I'm
you can
can you on mute yourself
Senator.
The step to a humanist at.
Senator Gallegos are you there.
When both that.
Convection.
Third goal.
Yes right now.
Yes.
no elected.
Yes first fax yes.
Telamon.
The most.
Those.
Thank you thirteen point four.
Yes.
And senator committees to
explain his vote thing Mr Abbey
refund I'm just I'm I'm very
impressed with the bill sponsor
it is I'm in ability to admit
amending the bill which I think
is is making a better
I I still have some concerns
about the at home testing and
and would love to have the O. H.
here to discuss those things and
I I do believe that we are
testing too many a symptomatic
people are yes and to be able to
have been
that are at low risk here that
have already had COVID and so
for some of those reasons I I
oppose the bill although I am in
favor of at home testing lot of
the cases because I think that
we need and should have done a
better job and will hopefully
continue to a better job to keep
sick people at home which is
really I think the underlying
goal of this and I think we we
can do that I think we can do
that with some other other ways
to but just want to kind of re
was a lot to be said there but
anyway I I do think it's a
better bill and and I just want
to make those comments so thank
you thank you senator thank you
Senator Steinborn thank you for
your time thank you for today
very good Senator Rodriguez.
Senator doing is is trying to
juggle back and forth between
judiciary and here and.
He'll come right after Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for hearing my bills I
have is the Hernandez here that
the executive director to the
mortgage finance authority in
the back of a large day here if
we had another chair we have
about how here at she's the
senior director of policy and
planning for the mortgage
finance authority and this is a
familiar bill to I'm sure many
of you
I sponsor a bill every year to
try to get funding for the
affordable housing trust fund
here in New Mexico this fund
generates but the second yes
it's done to me the people in
the zoom in a be quite sure
we're on Senate bill nineteen
that forgot to mention that this
is the housing trust fund bill
and and and in in futures the
committee meetings will have our
little.
Whatever it is the the number
that the details of viewing
public which which measure we're
looking at I'm sorry Senator go
with that's fine thank you Mr
chairman it's better to have a
clear for the public anyway that
this bill comes before I think
it's before your committee
almost every year before it goes
to finance and what we're doing
is we're requesting funding to
generate more funds in leverage
more funds for the affordable
housing trust fund in New Mexico
this fund is generated twenty
nine to one in return for every
dollar that we put in for
affordable housing and so it's a
no brainer that we continue to
put funding into it the problem
is been that that we have not
put nearly enough funding into
this and as a result there is
approximately seventy million
dollars worth of shovel ready
projects for homes affordable
housing that is sitting there
waiting for funding to come in
and I thought I would try again
this year to sponsor a bill to
see if we can get some
appropriations I. N. dot last
year we came up with
approximately I think it was I
if it was I met him five million
dollars in appropriations here
before was like to made in or
something but they're here so we
get nothing and most of this
funding has been nonrecurring
which helps quite a bit but it
would help a lot more if it was
recurring and so I have another
bill to try and fix that but
that's a later on will come to
your committee I and so
basically the bill would
appropriate if we can find some
funding the sebi the struggle
from here to finance to see if
we can find a.
Seventy million or even close to
it to put into this fund to
rehabilitate build whether eyes
and provide energy efficiency
upgrades for approximately four
thousand five hundred seventy
quality affordable homes for
lowincome New Mexicans so I'm
not going to going to a lot of
great detail because I know we
have a is the also that we want
to say a few words and Rebecca
so if with your permission Mr
chairman I may have and say a
few words thank you very good
and this is at the the bill from
with endorsed by the interim
committee thank you very much
it's endorsed by both the
mortgage finance authority and
the health committee in the
summer and so yeah that well you
know that may I say something Mr
chairman and that we've always
needed more homes more
affordable homes in New Mexico
and but now with this pandemic
it's exacerbated not only the
need for more homes but rental
assistance weatherization and
and rehabilitation we need to
comply with the American
disabilities act you know to be
able to have to widen your for a
disabled person to be able to go
in with a wheelchair if they
need to into the restroom
there's just so much need and
the fact that it generates
twenty nine to one in return
should really motivate
legislators to put more money
into this fund so we're hoping
for that this year let's see
what happens thank Senator busy
good to see thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee just a couple of a.
Madam all make the Senator did a
great job of covering the the
main point I believe one of the
things that I will mention is
that we had MFA believe that
affordable housing is not just
shelter it is the foundation for
strong communities and thriving
families without a good
affordable housing it's hard to
to get that the there is a great
need yeah can you Mexico and
across the nation for affordable
housing and that just has been
increased now with the pandemic
in the I'm sure you've all heard
of the increased costs for for
building in the increased cost
to buy a house a house now it's
increased here in Albuquerque
itself by about twenty three
percent in just one year.
MFA we operate over thirty
different programs ranging the
full spectrum from
appropriations funding
appropriations for homeless
shelters all the way up to home
ownership and everything in
between in across the full
spectrum of housing there is a
great need there's not enough
funding for all of the need that
there is out there in the
various programs that we have so
with that tell a we have a
couple of examples it'll share
with you real quick this is
based on some recent data data
that we received on the study
that we're doing for a statewide
housing strategy in in New
Mexico there's a hundred
seventeen household hundred
seventeen thousand households
that are cost burdened which
means that they are paying over
thirty percent of their income
towards housing and there's a
little over a hundred thousand
are severely cost burdened which
means that they're paying over
fifty percent of their.
Income or their budget towards
affordable housing.
There's a also under another
example would be under with the
weatherization program that we
operate we currently have a
thirty one hundred families on
the waiting list for that
program and we do roughly about
US seventy eight hundred homes a
year that's without that too
much marketing because we
haven't had the resources to do
that there are a hundred and
sixty three thousand households
that based on the qualification
guidelines for that program
would qualify for weatherization
assistance for those are just
some quick examples of some of
the need out there and we truly
appreciate the center sponsoring
this bill in trying to bring
some additional money to help me
some of those resources and I'll
maybe have Rebecca if you don't
mind senator if there's any
comments you want to make
Rebecca.
I think that they covered it
very well so appreciate your
time and I would love your
support very good thank you
Rebecca thank you Mr none this
and thank you senator let's go
to the audience is there anyone
in the audience who wants to
speak in support of this
mission.
Or oppose it.
Let's go to zoom anybody on
zoom.
Senator yes you can.
Eight people eight people.
Hey
Brian I think it be time to the
text to Senator do exist we're
we're moving along here so.
Okay.
This one was the first one.
Thank you Mary Jane.
Jeff curry are you out there and
to speak on this measure.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jeff curry
and the director of development
for the jail great company we
develop and manage multi family
housing in New Mexico we
specialize for the housing
with about five thousand three
hundred units I wanted to speak
in favor of passing this bill
today these funds are incredibly
necessary to the state of New
Mexico to keep up with the
demand for safe and decent
housing in our communities we
trailed behind our neighboring
states where formal housing
funds are much more plentiful to
lose this resource from infants
to prevent many housing projects
from moving forward greatly
increase the gap between need
and supply also the mortgage
finance authority has been
incredibly effective in fairly
efficiently distributing New
Mexico housing trust funds and
strong leadership and effective
staff and they proven themselves
year after year to be good
stewards of our public funds I
wholeheartedly recommend passing
this bill thank you for your
time and consideration great
thank you Mr curry the bill
Jordan you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Bill Jordan with
New Mexico voices for children
and I want to thank Senator
Rodriguez who brings this issue
forward to the legislature year
after year she's really been a
champion for affordable housing
and it's probably never been
more important with the cost of
housing going up and affordable
housing getting harder and
harder for our low income
families to provide so we stand
in strong support of this bill
and ask you for a it is yes
stick to pass thank you.
Thank you bill Rachel Biggs.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Rachel budget with
Albuquerque health care for the
homeless a federally qualified
health centers serving
approximately seven thousand
people without homes and
Bernalillo county New Mexico is
experiencing a housing crisis
before the pandemic New Mexico
but is only exacerbated these
issues prior to the pandemic New
Mexico had a deficit of over
thirty thousand units of
affordable housing for people
living at extremely low income.
Endemic brought devastating harm
to thousands of families in New
Mexico and those with low
incomes have been
disproportionately impacted many
have struggled to remain safely
and stably housed due in large
part to our severe shortage of
affordable homes for people with
the lowest income a seventy
million dollar investment in the
New Mexico housing trust fund is
urgently needed and really the
smartest investment we can make
in our economy right now I urge
your support Senate bill
nineteen think of sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you
for your time.
Thank you Rachel Linda bridge.
Linda in your okay good.
Sorry can you hear me now yes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Linda
branch and the executive
director of the Albuquerque
Housing Authority I'm here to
speak in support of Senate bill
nineteen which would appropriate
seventy million from New Mexico
housing trust fund I and so all
the comments made so far by the
presenters in commenters in
wanted just provides some
information through the lens of
the Housing Authority for
Albuquerque
The City of Albuquerque is
short and estimated
conservatively estimated fifteen
thousand units for extremely low
income households.
As many of the presenters have
commented on that's only been
exasperated through the pandemic
we have numerous voucher holders
right now that have a housing
voucher did not provide unit
rents right now there's over a
hundred sixty voucher holders on
the street looking for units
this includes thirty four
households trying to exit
homelessness regency housing
voucher program.
And fifty seven veterans seeking
housing to the Veterans Affairs
supportive housing program.
We are facing daily requests
from the south from holders
takes in the timeline in which
to use these vouchers many of
them going beyond a hundred
twenty days seeking housing.
In addition to.
To that is the public housing
for housing authorities that
serves extremely low income
households is in need of
preservation and rehabilitation
this housing service the most
extremely low income populations
the average income of the people
we serve our public housing is
eleven thousand dollars.
You cannot afford to lose this
housing.
Concern when I talk to partners
with other housing authorities
across the state including
ourselves.
In responses I received Los
crucis and Santa Fe which covers
Espanola there is currently an
estimated funding gap of over
forty three forty four million
dollars that's needed to move
forward projects that would
preserve eight hundred forty
four of these public housing
units and add more units.
For us alone we have at least a
half a dozen projects that are
shovel ready projects ready to
go the need to tell with that
we've table due to lack of
funding.
We fortunately have been able to
move forward we have I projects
currently under construction
rehabilitation thanks to all of
you and we're very supportive of
the New Mexico legislature and
their support in past sessions
and it is only because the
capital outlay that we did
receive that allow these
projects to move forward.
last August we're trying to
close on to these projects and
once our construction costs
increased by over two million
dollars.
So as you can imagine the
combination of rising
construction costs supply chain
issues staffing shortages
continue to make already
challenging task of building
affordable housing and
rehabilitating preserving
affordable housing even more
challenging.
I did share this information
with you to urge your support of
this bill this housing trust
fund would enable ourselves
other housing authorities and
other formal housing developers
to move forward much needed
affordable housing to meet the
needs across the state in very
challenging time.
Thank you for your time this
afternoon thank you very much
Linda Maria Griego.
Thank you good afternoon and
members of the committee my name
is Maria Griego I'm the director
of economic equity equity with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and we also like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this at very important bill
As Mrs Biggs at from Albuquerque
health care for the homeless and
mentioned earlier our state has
long been across and and housing
crisis even before the pandemic
the most recent data from the
New Mexico mortgage finance
authority shows that forty three
point eight percent of New
Mexicos renters are cost
burdened and of those twenty two
percent are extremely faster
meeting may spend more than
upwards of fifty percent of
their monthly income on housing
costs
despite this rents continue to
grow in our state recently in
Albuquerque rent skyrocketed by
six percent
and our New Mexico New Mexico
families simply can't keep up
with this this appropriation to
help acquire bills and
rehabilitate
But housing for approximately
forty five hundred New Mexico
low income families and so for
those reasons we stand in strong
support of this bill and we
encourage them I do pass thank
you.
Thank you Maria a Joanne
pandemic.
Can you hear me yes yeah we can
join.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and senators my name is Joanne
Pena and I work for the housing
trust.
I am in support of Senate bill
nineteen the need for affordable
housing is imperative not only
for families who rely on housing
but neighborhoods having
affordable housing developments
neighborhoods bring a positive
impact on the surrounding
communities affordable housing
development encouraging
diversity by creating
communities where people of
different cultural social.
Economic and educational
backgrounds can unite diverse
community communities increase
the knowledge of cultural
sensitivity Ernest and
understanding the different
backgrounds ultimately creating
a better community overall by
supporting affordable housing in
our community you will be
helping a family buy their first
home addressing housing
affordability is the most cost
effective way to lifting people
out of poverty reducing
childhood poverty and increasing
economic mobility thank you.
Thank you Joanne Daniel well
worth.
Hi there thank you
my name is data were lost
appreciate the opportunity to
speak Mr chair members of the
committee and here to speak in
favor of SB nineteen
I am the executive director of
New Mexico interfaith housing
the interim director of the
housing trust tier content to
corporations in Santa Fe three
affordable housing nonprofits
also in the leadership group of
the Santa Fe housing action
coalition as a group working to
unite over twenty business and
nonprofit leadership groups
towards positive change in
affordable housing I wanted to
just start my testimony with
thinking out of level and that's
the thinking about what this
means as an investment for the
state of New Mexico about a
fifth of the population
nationally cannot afford a
decent market rate housing and
that number is certainly higher
in New Mexico but unfortunately
the federal government only
provides about a fifth of the
resources needed to help those
people and what that means is
that the remainder of those four
fifths of resources must come
from state and local governments
and the housing trust fund is
one of the key ways that the
state government contributes to
solving this problem I think
it's also worth noting that
federal resources are usually
allocated on a per population
basis not based on the need in
the state where ours is
typically higher than other
states it is also worth noting
that in that
Population based formula for
federal funding it doesn't
contemplate the higher cost of
delivering services in New
Mexico because of its rural
nature
Rio Arriba county is slightly
larger than Connecticut.
so that's why it's so important
for us to think about meeting
these gaps and you've heard a
lot about the gaps from the
other speakers tonight Regis
really want to highlight how
critically important it is for
us to meet the needs of these
folks who really have no other
options and and this is a
critical tool in the and the
faces important partner for
doing so thank you for your time
today I encourage you to pass of
this of this legislation thank
you Daniel.
Kurt rigor with Lutheran
advocacy.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my needs record of the
directors see ministry Mexico we
also advocate on behalf of the
New Mexico churches for all the
very persuasive reasons already
articulated by previous speakers
we to strongly support yes the
nineteen and urge your support
thank you very much thank you
Kirk uh Chris Herbert.
Customer I am the executive
director of the eastern regional
Housing Authority and we stand
strong support of just be
nineteen
and has been utilized by the
house is working on a number of
projects and we have a as the
bridge stated earlier a number
of unmet needs at this time
certainly utilize the housing
trust fund to assistance in New
York.
Thank you.
Thank you Chris and finally brie
celery.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is free salary and I represent
the New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness we stand in support
of Senate bill nineteen this
funding will have significant
impact on the community by
allowing for the acquisition
rehabilitation and new building
of homes to address the housing
crisis in New Mexico.
According to two thousand
nineteen in the state of New
Mexico there's a shortage of
thirty two thousand rental units
for households under thirty
percent and money many of these
households are living on fixed
incomes and are struggling to
make ends meet and do not know
what to do in the face of
soaring rental costs our
organization communicates with
thousands of individuals each
month and it is all too common
to receive calls from people
seeking assistance after
receiving the notice that their
rents will increase as much as
five hundred dollars per month
their next lease renewals most
of these people cannot afford to
lease the for the increased must
face the dismal reality of
doubling up with family sleeping
in their car emergency shelter
or outside.
The affordable housing crisis
doesn't stop there rural New
Mexico struggles to bring in
teachers lawyers these managers
and other necessary workers to
be because of the lack of access
to affordable housing he called
for the maximum possible
investment to the trust fund so
that the economy of New Mexico
grows the lowest income earners
are not left out thank you thank
you very and we do have somebody
in the audience who wanted to
speak please.
Introduce yourself and and we.
Thank you at.
Thank you.
Thank you very much chairman and
members of the committee to keep
the family okay my name is
Alyssa Kenny Geiger and I am a
former legislator from Oregon
from twenty eleven to twenty
twenty one I thank you it's
great to be here I left my post
after my term ended in twenty
twenty one and I became a senior
adviser to the chair to the
director of the department of
Human Services and then I did
that through June I moved here
in July and at that time I was
fortunate to be nominated sorry
I'm out of breath because I keep
running here for this nominated
by speaker Egolf to housing
trust fund advisory board and
that pointed so I'm incredibly
excited that this is the first
bill and I'm testifying on in
the legislature in my new home
state and.
Senator Representative I just
wanted to say how strongly I
support this very very modest
investment in housing for all
the reasons that the other
speakers have said I won't go
into details because you had a
lot of other quick people I just
want to say in a few meetings
that I've had so far for
investments from the fund the
staff of been incredibly well
prepared and it's been a huge
honor for me to see at least by
zoom all of the other volunteer
advisory members from around the
state and to hear their passion
around the challenges facing the
state and I am so excited to
roll up my state sweeps and help
in my new home state how we can
to improve the housing for for
people across the state.
I'm happy to answer any
questions but I'm really honored
to be here and thank you for
squeezing me in a great thank
you for coming and welcome to
New Mexico thank you members of
the committee.
For the two thousand that we
have a motion for do passes
second any questions or
discussion.
Senator gave us back on.
Yes Mr chairman you have a
question Senator.
No Sir I can let you know by the
my wife worked for the low
income housing in session
recused myself from this point.
Although I don't think it would
have anything to do is a public
housing there.
It is it shouldn't affect that
at all so I mean you're free to
recuse yourself of course but
there's no clear conflict at all
that I can see.
Okay rather stay safe thank you
Mr thank you Mr okay Senator yes
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator yes for bringing this
forward.
I I really like this I really
pleased that it's before this
committee and I really supported
I'm curious and and maybe an
oversight on my part.
If this passes.
One would be like the first
housing projects that we could
see would be completed and
welcoming new homeowners.
Thank you for that question
Senator I'm gonna let is the
response because this way we
don't have to duplicate her
answer so is it can you please
respond to that.
Yes.
Mister chairman Senator McKenna
generally when did a bill like
this passes to the legislature
and do want to thank the
legislature for a the funding we
received previously the last
five million dollars and we
received a at the previous
session.
When into effect we just a
actually just signed agreements
here within the last month month
and a half or so it takes awhile
for that purpose a two money to
get out to the projects I can
tell you that there is a
pipeline totaling about seventy
million dollars you heard about
the needs from a lot of the
speakers today but some of these
projects that once we get the
money would be able to start
using the money but I would say
shortly after we signed
agreements that would depend on
on the money going into effect I
would assume in the July time
frame and normally does and then
agreements are signed shortly
thereafter
so I would say within a year so
we could have definitely
projects that are starting the
use of funds and some of these
bigger developments sometimes
take a year and a half or so to
be completed the the larger
complexes that maybe seventy to
eighty units when it comes to
some of the smaller a
investments if you will of re
having a house for a an elderly
person or providing
accessibility modifications or
whether it's ation those could
be done within within weeks or
months if you will of the
purpose or the funds being made
available.
I hope that addresses your
question.
Thank you chairman of and thank
you senator and it does and.
The reason I took special
interest in this is for my day
job we do work with a lot of
constituents who are
housing and secure homeless and
making echo your nose.
Maybe.
and and I know we have wonderful
organizations such as joy
junction but they there's just
so much capacity that they have
and I was so
Honor to help joy junction with
their annual thanksgiving event
at the Albuquerque convention
center but to see all of these
people that don't have
A home to call their own is it
just breaks my heart and then to
learn that some landlords are
increasing rents by forty five
percent because they can get
more money.
I think it's really
unconscionable so I I thank you
for doing this.
Thank you senator thank thank
you Senator McKenna senator Tom.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you for your so yeah I
want to commend the senator Byrd
reviews for being such a strong
advocate for a housing.
How did they hear you correctly
Center this.
Last year you got five million
yes Mister chairman Senator
Thoman yes I believe it or not
we were so happy with that
because in the past we gotten
less sometimes you get zero
sometimes we get two million and
zoom so we were happy to get not
I mean to get five last year we
have a nine million now in the
in severance tax in the
framework for the severance tax
bonds capital outlay
that we've recommended but again
that is one time money and
hopefully we can get to seventy
million somehow because another
bill that I have and it'll come
before this committee will
hopefully past so that we can
finally once and for all depend
on sustainable recurring income
to revenues so that we can build
affordable housing on going so
we're hoping to get seventy
million to to get the shovel
ready projects going because
they're just sitting there and
yeah we could be providing jobs
and at the same time getting
people homes in I want to make
this the final comment maybe not
necessary because I know this
committee has been so supportive
of these issues specially
because we all see them all
through the summer as we Madam
we see the needs but I I truly
believe that have having housing
would ameliorate some quite a
bit of the problem that we have
with behavioral health
you know with substance abuse
with
even you know there are some
problems that we have exactly
because you know I I can't
imagine not having a home I mean
how can a person be so home and
and not get depressed if you
don't have a home you know I I
can't imagine how people can
live like that and this so I
think it's incumbent upon us not
to leave twenty nine to one in
return that's millions of
dollars on the table just
because we don't want to
appropriate some funding so I
think it's going to.
Both a long way much more than
just affordable housing and just
to tell you last year thank you
to all of you he passed
unanimously a bill that I
sponsored Senate bill twenty
seven that allows now finally it
allows the housing trust fund to
help with rental assistance also
it allows the housing trust fund
to help with weather is ation
pro projects with the compliance
with American disabilities act
for example the example I made
that you can why the door you
can put energy efficient windows
in the house that's this for
somebody can't afford their
utilities there the windows are
just leaking and you can get all
this cold air and you can afford
the utilities so it's all these
things that are now going to be
able to to get better hopefully
if we can pass a bill thank you.
Local quick question thank you
to six up quick answer your.
So you're right we're able to
boost this up for the.
Currently because of.
The
We have a lot more money to the
coming from a.
The general fund in the coming
from the federal money.
Mr Chairman when we got the five
million last year or it was
merrily of the severance tax
bonding capacity dollars like
capital outlay so that was not
on any art the funds until we
have the special session in the
special session when we
allocated some are put dollars
part of the one point one
billion that we had the
legislature appropriated four
hundred seventy eight million
dollars of those are federal
dollars this was in December the
special session fifteen million
dollars were appropriated to the
affordable housing trust fund at
that time and so we will be able
to leverage that you know twenty
nine hopefully twenty nine to
one again
and now we have in the framework
for capital outlay nine million
I'm trying to get whatever I can
whether it's STBs capital outlay
or risk a recurring from general
fund any amount generates twenty
nine to one on average and so
currently in a nut shell so I
don't confuse things here
currently we have two approved
hopefully this legislative
session nine million dollars in
the capital outlay bill
severance tax bill if we pass it
We are hoping to be able to in
finance I'm gonna see what we
can do to be able to fill in the
gap the huge gap that we have
because right now if we had
seventy million the projects are
rated go their shovel ready they
don't even have to vet these
projects anymore they're ready
to go we just don't have the
money in there so if we could
find the seventy then and you
can just imagine that seventy
made in twenty nine to one
return how much it would
generate we could get going
quickly with affordable housing
weatherization programs and and
that programs to help the
homeless because you have for
example a rental assistance here
we can help with that too so
this goes a long way of more
than just building a home if if
it affects people in a positive
way.
One quick thank you very much
for your very knowledgeable
about this issue one last
question maybe you can answer
this but what would it.
How much money would you need to
meet all the needs housing needs
a billion dollars or more.
It's Mr Mr chairman and senator
Tom and Rebecca is looking for
the numbers here we have the we
don't have the true figure if
you will we have for a couple of
activities what it may take to
get there I think we have some
figures for to meet the entire
need for weatherization
potentially for a portion of the
those folks are cost burdened
but all it Rebecca kind of speak
to those numbers that we do have
but we don't have the full scope
of well to me.
Mr chair Senator Tallman MFA is
working with the committee
called the housing New Mexico
advisory committee to treat
create a statewide housing
strategy so we're trying to
figure out and put dollar
amounts on the true need to
figure out where to and how much
funding is necessary we started
to get those figures in so you
know if you went through the
housing cost burden if we didn't
help all those individuals that
are housing cost burdened are
extremely cost burden let's
just.
We help people that make thirty
five thousand the household make
thirty five thousand dollars or
less it would cost nine hundred
million dollars annually to real
relief their burden if we were
to whether rice every hold that
is eligible The New Mexico it
would cost well over a billion
dollars if we want the so good
chunk of New Mexicos homes are
substandard they lack complete
kitchens they lack complete
plumbing or they are very old in
need of repair if we were to
rehabilitate about just two and
a half percent of the it's just
a very very small amount it
would cost probably about a
hundred and twenty six million
dollars so the need is there
you know seventy million dollars
a you know it seems like a big
gas it's bigger than what we had
in the past but the need is
there and shown that we can
expand it efficiently.
Thank you very much for the
answer and
Sorry there's a great need for
command all you for the work
you're doing in this very
important issue thank you Mr
thank you senator Thomas Senator
committees.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator
I'm gonna just.
Certainly support the bill today
I think that I want to tell you
why I'm supporting it couple
specific reasons because
honestly I'm a little torn on it
the thing well gosh have how can
you be Torrance among as well is
the reason is I think that it's
very difficult to run what you
guys are running with
nonrecurring funding and we have
a good time and good year.
The sun is shining it's not
raining and I think is a good
opportunity I think it's I just
can't imagine how difficult it
is to just saying well I don't
know what's going to happen next
year.
so I I like that I very very
much like
what R. R. Sanchez said about
weather's ation homes and and
making homes ADA compliant
that's been very very touching
to me and I've seen homes where
people literally are are living
I I grew up in Texas so we go
prepare homeless people would
have like Hornets flying around
inside their home because they
didn't have screens on their
homes and just yeah wheelchair
ramps I mean you name it you
listed a lot of those things and
so I really really like that
about this this project what I
don't like about this project is
we are injecting third party
payment and more of it into
certain systems I know it's a
diverse group of programs where
we're dealing but I think that
we've seen that in health care
we've seen in higher ed and
we've seen it how that the lose
prices over time and becomes
this kind of positive feedback
loop where the intent is to help
but then we we end up doing
things that cause prices to
rise.
Same thing with homelessness
evictions I mean very complex
issues but to our chairman's
credit I did want to follow up
on this real quick we don't have
time for book review but last
session in may have been in this
one of your bills with our
chairman recommended this book
so I went and bought it and I
does yeah I evicted called the
victims about homelessness and
poverty I certainly highly
recommended
and I I've given great thought
to you know to this another book
that I had read before yours
Mr chair is it probably in
contrary to some of the things
are is a book called life at the
bottom is written by British
psychiatrist who spent his life
it working on the indigent and
has a very very different
outlook on it and and so I I you
know he's anyway I I've looked
at this and given great thought
and I I do think we there's
sometimes cases when helping
hurts and when we actually can
trap people into poverty
in a multi generational way if
we're not careful and so I I'm
I'm gonna vote in favor the bill
but I I I think we should be
very careful and I what I'd like
to see instead of what I see is
sometimes government subsidizing
poverty itself is I think the
government should be.
Subsidizing behaviors that are
proven to get people out of
poverty things like you know
getting high school education
working a full time job getting
off of drugs or if you're on
drugs going to seek treatment or
or whatever those things may be
that we can all agree is going
to help you get out of poverty
and somehow subsidize those
things instead of you know Hey
if you're poor next year we're
gonna continue to to help you
and so I know that that sounds
you know there's a lot we could
be set and that I agree to give
this a do pass and then lastly
you know efficient bands another
very touchy subject but are you
know.
Who wants to see people get
evicted nobody I've called a lot
of our shares around when this
came up last year to try to get
my head around this very very
difficult situation but once
again that's something that is
going I've seen studies on this
that is going to make rents and
housing prices go up it so it's
kind of like how do how do you
how do you balance all this in
such a complex system so it
certainly happy to support the
bill but I I I would love it if
we can start to really subsidize
these behaviors and getting out
of getting people out of fabric
poverty I think we'll see more
behaviors if we subsidize it get
more of it right if you tax you
get less of it so we tax tobacco
Logan less people smoking we
subsidize poverty more poverty
and so I I think this could be
married with
Eight eight some more programs
or more you know tweaking to
really
get people out of poverty so
thank you Mr thank you thank you
senator we have a motion and a
second pending any further
debate.
The secretary will call the
roll.
There are.
Both are you voting on this.
The settlement of mass.
angle yes.
Senator yes.
Yes.
There Lopez yes for Spanish yes
Sir Thomas yes.
The pandemic yes and I just
wanted to make one little point
that I'm not sure got raised
this is a revolving fund right.
As as these of low interest
loans are paid back there is
money coming back and so this
money will.
Hopefully for generations be be
moving through the system and
helping under a direct the costs
of future housing so thank you
senator thank you for bringing
that thank you is a good to see
you revert to Rebecca good to
see you and we'll move noted
Senator doing the very patient
Senator doing thank you once
again Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you.
If.
This is Senate bill for
prevailing wage and fringe
benefit right.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm.
I'll give you kind of a.
Brief overview and then Mr use
will give you a much better one
but basically what this bill
does is it closes a loophole our
new we have public works
projects that are over sixty
thousand dollars the.
What to call the public works
minimum wage aft flies to set
the the.
Wage and benefit rates for those
workers and usually that is
actually the the practice has
always been that that those are
set according to the collective
bargaining agreements that
covers the various jobs on
what's been happening is that
someone can do an appeal of that
wage rates and that is
automatically steam the rate the
rate from going into effect and
so this last year of the appeal
lasted all year so is it creates
a loophole where you can just
avoid having the collective
bargaining agreements going to
affect to and how to avoid the
workers getting paid what they
should under this act so this
would fix that by making to
small changes one by us stating
that the rates take effect every
January first and are sent out
by October first so that folks
have ninety days to appeal if if
need be it also it state it
takes out this automatic state
that has been happening that's
allowed folks to to just hold up
the rates from going into effect
and so for a state Kim's could
still happen if someone can go
to District Court and for good
cause shown they could get a
state if need be but other wise
the rates going into effect
would not be automatically
stayed during the pendency of an
appeal and Mr useful probably
give a much much better
explanation of this whole
situation.
Senator I don't know that I can
do much better at Mr chair
members of the committee as
senator do he explained this is
really quite simple bill the
public works minimum wage act is
New Mexico's little Davis bacon
act it was passed in nineteen
thirty seven so it's an eighty
five year old law in from time
to time we have to fix it a
little bit this particular
instance is a situation where we
have to small changes creation
of a date certain and the
closing of a loophole what
happened last year and what has
happened in a couple of years is
that any appeal at the
administrative level stays
implementation of the wage rates
in twenty twenty one for example
the wage rates were set on
January first in an appeal was
filed in which the appellant
said we only received twenty
nine days notice instead of
thirty days notice and your
website was down for five days
over the holidays so we're of
filing an appeal to the process
as a consequence of this
procedural appeal literally tens
of thousands of New Mexico
workers did not receive the
minimum wage in twenty twenty
one they appealed the decision
to District Court and during the
pendency of the appeal still no
one that paid the minimum wage
now the irony here with regard
to this loophole is that as a
consequence of the loophole and
as a consequence of the wages
not going into effect you have
one group of contractors who
have to bid these projects at a
certain wage rate you have
another group of contractors who
bid it at a lower wage rate and
so what the loophole does is
creates a competitive
disadvantage in this case for
those contractors who are you
contractor whose employees are
union employees they have to be
a public works minimum wage
projects at a higher rate in
twenty twenty one then those
contractors who don't have you
pull.
Please so the low poll actually
goes it does exactly the
opposite of what the legislature
intended eighty five years ago
in terms of creating a little
Davis bacon act in New Mexico to
create a fair wage system to
create a system where all
contractors had to bid projects
at the same wage rate so this
simple legislation close those
loopholes and make sure we don't
have that unfortunate result in
the future.
That very clear thank you
anybody here in the audience
want to speak on this bill
either for or against we'll
start over who would just
correct us.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the job with you with the New
Mexico federation of labour also
speaking on behalf of.
Of the the president of the
international fifty.
Our workers seven ninety four we
stand in strong support of this
bill thank you thanks yes thank
you Mr chairman members the
committee eyes is empty you
Representative the sheet metal
workers I'm asking for your
support on just before this
legislation will close loopholes
that heard workers so we ask you
to support thank you.
Thank you yes Sir.
The Silverado president of the
New Mexico federation of
neighboring strong we spent in
strong support of this bill
thank you thank you that.
The yes ma'am.
But care director for the UA
local for twelve years and I.
we stand in front of four and a.
Members
this legislation.
Thank you.
Yes yes.
The thank you Mr chairman Brian
Condit Mexico building trades
council status from support of
this legislation we've been
working on this issue since all
last summer and hopefully we
don't have to replicate the
disaster we experienced in two
thousand thank you.
Thank you yes.
Mr Chairman quarter one members
of the committee for the budget
with action we stand strong
support one of five to sponsor
for this thanks current yes Mr
chair members of the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists the associated general
fund.
Tractors across the state it is
an issue about the current
structure does creating equities
we contracted contract we
believe that.
This bill would create parity
bidding on public contracts we
stand for thank you thank you
just.
Okay we have several other zoom
and we'll start with the Ricky
Serna.
The cabinet secretaries.
The second.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for a the overview Mr
you to did a great job and thank
you SantaFe for bringing this to
People consideration I stand
here to express the support on
behalf are going to work
persecution is poor this change
which will send should be you
know codified.
The the intent behind a process
that's been long standing is is
you can explain there was a
state that the pre pandemic the
implementation of of preventing
wage rates for twenty twenty one
is published by the department
works solutions and if passed
will work to expeditiously to
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr stern Rhonda
Gilliland locus.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee thank
you my name is Rhonda Gilliland
Lopez I am the executive
director for the mechanical and
sheet metal contractors
association of New Mexico and as
stated previously we would ask
you support on Senate bill
number for it simply because
this provides consistency on the
prevailing wage and it ensures a
leading a level playing field
for all contractors who are
getting on these projects thank
you so much Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you run to the two must
Trujillo.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members many Mr must
reveal and system business
manager with I. B. W. six eleven
and stand strong support of this
before and thank you.
Thank you Thomas chili.
Is there someone named Joe is
the.
Yes Sir this that I think
chairman and committee members
my name is Joey Atencio on the
business manager for Microsoft
sixteen in Albuquerque New
Mexico and vice president of the
New Mexico building and
construction trades we stand
strong support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you joy Robert over.
Representative chairman members
my name is off of their and I'm
presenting the rate of four
point three on behalf of our
hardworking members and stated
before the funds sent from the
for the you for someone else to
come in
the.
Thank you Robert the general
they a little.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee
Mr chair construction workers
working on the public works
projects
Only on larger projects that
have an extended timeline for
completion so any attempts for
him with what we do from the
workers.
Industry needs thank you Mr.
Thank you general and finally
Whitney Haaland.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee put in Holland
president of eighteen New Mexico
we stand in solidarity and urged
the committee to support the
spell thank you.
Thank you very much to mark two
more ways second we're not
finished yet.
Okay now we have to must already
so have a Jacob Gonzalez.
Without as president local three
prepared you.
We strongly support this bill
thank you.
And we had to muster here
before.
Okay so no members of the
committee.
But I don't think we have
committee with.
We should we lost our.
The.
That.
Just hold on we'll we'll get
through this.
The film okay this is on line.
That is the only yeah we got a
committee good.
Senator Candelaria.
We have nine members now that
correct yeah three eighty five
and we got but okay so I I
believe you have.
Because he's not
Hey this is not on the we should
the scared we scared him off
the.
Re alerted them enough you and.
That's the question
the question from.
Thank you parents thank you
Senator Duhigg and pardon me I
might just be low on glucose.
It's of how is it that what
happened in twenty twenty one.
Quarter was allowed to happen
and that it wasn't caught it was
just was it just simply an
oversight.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator McKenna mysteries
correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe that the automatic stay
was put in the regulation and so
this the statute where then I
make that regulation meant.
Okay right thank you Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank.
Thank you for.
Great hello
I just have a question over
first and not not.
A very hi what I'm doing to
minimum wage bill they wanted to
be here so I think the number
here for.
Mr chair Senator just the
eleventh all defer to misuse on
that Mr chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez at the.
Wage rates are set on January
first of each year by statute
and so what we did is allow for
a reasonable lead time for the
submission of those rates
initiatives of collective
bargaining agreement so that the
new rates could be set in a
timely fashion on January first.
Is that correct we different
from budgetary okay yes thank
you I would just sure.
Well we could just function is
the subcommittee.
And then take a vote when the
Senator Tallman or Senators
committee returns for Senator
Ingle.
Anyone of them.
Schmedes left his book so I'm
sure he'll be back file here
you have to go file to thank you
thank you Mr chair playing the
federal level the fact.
In finance you for money and for
that for you I.
But I believe that's what
happened now.
Yeah maybe that's what it was
for the old scurried off to.
But when we when we.
Will we finish with you I think
we have a motion and a second.
Well we can't really take
effect.
Seconded thank you so as soon as
we get a committee back we'll
take the vote and move on to
Senator Lopez you wanted to
years now.
Mr chair do you need me to
return.
Stefanics made the motion and
lotus the city of the state.
Yeah we'll take the vote as soon
as we get back cornerback thank
you for the future thank you
members of the committee thank
you.
Yes Senator Lopez said it had
asked if she could well it was
because I was getting nervous
about getting okay Senator
Hickey list two years.
This is the behavioral health
parity legislation impact.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators
I would like to note that this
is my maiden voyage sitting at
the table presenting a bill did
that through resume last year.
But the.
I think we're gonna vote.
Senator thank you very turning
and we have a of a motion.
And a second on Senator.
to do X. bill on the prevailing
wage I thank you for your that
we did here yep and so we'll go
ahead and take the vote to the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
There Ingle no.
Yes.
No.
There's a deal okay yes.
Thanks yes Sierra yes Sir to see
pandemic yes.
Very good now we go to you
Senator Hickey thank you Mr
chairman and senators.
I am presenting a bill to.
Study in a stakeholder
basically.
Mental health parity.
Mental health parity was
originally introduced by senator
Domenici and senator Wellstone
back in two thousand and eight.
And since then it has taken on a
life it probably eight other
federal bills which makes it
very confusing to pull out all
the components that are now
essentially law and also makes
it confusing as to where the
enforcement will be it's on the
federal level but it does apply
the concept and all the laws
subsequently to every state.
So I am proposing a bill.
That would fund the OSI a
hundred and fifty thousand and
HSD a hundred and fifty thousand
because the law in mental health
parity applies to Medicaid
managed care plans as well as
all commercial plans and
exchange plans.
And originally when I had
presented this in the interim.
It was I was looking at a
memorial and one of my
colleagues sitting on the dais
there recommended that this be
put into a separate bill and
originally it was to go into
house bill through but and all
the excitement of the the fall
it somehow slipped house bill
two and when the it was reminded
to put it in it was recommended
and put in as a separate bill so
that's why we are here today.
So mental health parity is to
have a hand out there and you
also have a handout from
California who as usual as ahead
of most of the rest of the
states and essentially what
we're proposing to do is what
they've done California I am
only going to highlight a few
points and can't stand for
questions
basically in this country health
care is really focused on.
The body.
And to be somehow because we
haven't known a lot and we're
learning more we have always
kind of put the mind as kind of
a second classes and and health
care.
But we know that the body
doesn't work without the money
and vice versa and that to have
health and when you've got to
have health and the other and
have easy access to health but
in the culture and in health
plans which I know a lot about
The mind has really been
relegated to a second class
status even third it just has
not it is it has been made
extremely difficult for people
who need access to mental health
and substance abuse care it has
been made very difficult through
barriers that help plants can
put into place prior
authorizations co pays only
treating acute not chronic
etcetera etcetera etcetera.
So this federal legislation
which again I'm not going to go
through that is multiple has
basically come out and says you
can't do that.
And in fact you now is the
health plans have to document.
That you are placing know of
more stringent barrier on access
to mental health and substance
use services then you aren't any
medical surgical.
It is also into mating through
it through the federal
government department a let of
labor this applies to self
insured risks up as well as to
fully insured so which HHS and
department of labor.
That they have to for virtual
host every diagnosis in
behavioral mental substance use
issues they have to show how
they are putting no further
barriers to that care than they
do to medical surgical.
This even goes so far.
Just to applying to compensation
so in other words Mr chairman
senators I see doctor committees
and myself we are medical
surgical doctors
But I can tell you having at
different times run health plans
we pay behavioral health
providers quite a bit less it's
just part of the tradition.
This bill as it there are the
bills nationally are now going
to require that health plans
have to justify not just I but
they're going to have to pay and
equipment pay scale which is
usually a percentage of Medicare
above a hundred percent.
And this will apply to all
levels well all this is very
complex and I was originally
going to bring a bill forward
this year.
But because it's so complex the
health plans have to be involved
in their being required I
thought it more judicious to
bring all the stakeholders and
they're listed on one of the
pages here together through the
OSI and for Medicaid managed
care plans through HSD to
participate in the
deliberations.
HSD I believe wants to bring in
a consultant to help them OS I
have some staff it feels I going
to have to add additional staff
and of a J. D. level to help
sort through and pull this all
together and they have both
agree to do this over the next
year but they need the funding
to get it so we will write a
bill based on this stakeholder
input over this next year and we
have it is an emergency because
of last out right away and we
will come with a built in the
twenty three session that will
be sure that mental health
substance use.
Individuals are able to get full
access to services and no
skirting by the health plans
this even goes so far as to say
if I health plan does not have
with in the state.
A residential treatment center
they can refer to our for
residential treatment center is
booked up they have to send them
out of state to get those
services and at no additional
cost for going out of state and
and and escort the three
seventeen from last year says no
copay coinsurance or what have
you so if you look at the Senate
bills eight fifty five in
California it has a lot of thank
you in days and that but
basically we could say Hey why
not just go with federal the
problem with going with federal
is that we want to be explicitly
clear on all the benefits that
anyone with mental health or
substance use services need to
that there's no ambiguity or no
potential for a health plan to
skirt what they did in the past
so I present this bill to you
today it's an appropriation is a
separate bill and if you pass it
will go to finance will go to
the house I have people there
who are getting on board with it
and I stand for questions and
I'm sorry expert witness and I
have expert witness yes and I am
expert witness who has helped me
in all this because I am not
even close to being a JD is
the professor emeritus of health
law from UNM professor Robert
Schwartz at that would like him
to comment and then we have a
few of the people I think the
staff and I think he's on right
now or a professor short.
Yes Senator Ortiz Pena members
of the committee thank you very
much of the drive Hickey I think
is very close is much closer to
J. D. than he would up at
your your credit first time in
the legislature I think to.
I am rob Ford's I've been
teaching health law and related
subjects at the UNM all school
everyone and school of medicine
over the past three or four
decades and I am here to support
Senate bill thirty three which
would allow for an evaluation of
whether behavioral health parity
legislation that is now in
effect is actually working I
mean recent years Congress as we
heard through the Paul Wellstone
and Pete Domenici mental health
parity and addiction equity act
two thousand eight and this
legislature have required
government insurers and private
health care insurers to make
behavioral health care and other
health care equally accessible
the people for whom they provide
policies and those who seek
behavioral health care those who
seek mental health care or
substance abuse here know how
extraordinarily difficult it is
to access this kind of care in
New Mexico you alright I I would
suggest because both federal and
state parity legislation is not
actually being enforced the
department of labor is charged
with enforcement on the federal
level it really just hasn't had
the resources or the experience
to be able to do the enforcement
that probably is necessary
Senate bill thirty three will
allow us to collect the data to
determine whether parity has
been established between
behavioral health care and other
forms of health care and whether
current legislation is
benefactor anything has been
effective then what could be
effective to assure that all New
Mexicans really have access to
behavioral health care of all
sorts when they need so thank
you very much.
Thank you very much professor
Schwartz we'll go now to the
audience and see if there's
anyone here in the audience who
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
Or AFP or oppose it.
About on do we have any video
zoom.
We have a few people in the.
I thank you
so we've got two people up first
up is Patsy Romero.
I think good afternoon Mister
chair this is Patsy Romero
I'm currently representing the
National Alliance on mental
illness I am the co chair of the
legislative committee for nami
so Mister chairman members of
the committee I stand in support
of Senator Hickey's Bill I thank
him for bringing this bill to
you I think it is important that
we look at and ensure that the
providers and the system of care
is ensuring that parity is being
used in order to provide
services to those who need
behavioral health services I
think for too many years we take
it for granted that these laws
are passed in that people are
being careful to ensure that
people are being treated fairly
but all too often we hear as
members of nami that that is not
the case so I appreciate the
committee's support at this
legislation I thank the sponsor
and again nami New Mexico stands
in support of this legislation
and thank you for bringing this
up to the forefront Senator
Hickey appreciate it.
Thank you Patsy next is Sarah
Baca.
Good afternoon.
Members of the committee my name
is Serra Baca and I and the plan
advocate for proud moments ADA
what we provide children with
autism and their families
behavioral health services in
New Mexico we are also a member
organization of the New Mexico
behavioral health providers
association and we stand in
strong support of this
legislation I would like to
thank senator you for bringing
this bill forward and ask for
the committee support thank you
thank you Sir the Westin
cluster.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Wes foster
I made you an amber resident
psychiatrist I wanted to stand
in full support of this bill
ultimately increase access to
mental health care services for
all Mexico thank you great thank
you doctor Karen would look.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee Karen was locked
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
and we do appreciate that we
would we want to be part of this
group in order to provide
behavioral health parity many of
the behavior health services
questions are provided by social
workers and it it is imperative
that we get this we see the
extent to which this is not
being enforced the federal laws
not being enforced and giving
the state the ability to be able
to enact.
again we think Senator T. for
bringing the.
Thank you so much current.
David late.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm executive
director New Mexico solutions in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and
psychologist and ex vice
president of the behavior health
providers association we stand
in support of the bill we think
Senator Hickey for bringing it
as many of you know we have a
long history in Mexico of
struggling with access to
behavioural health services and
unfortunately the the system is
littered with what I call Easter
eggs that are rules and laws for
instance in regards to
credentialing claims payment
processes as Senator Hickey
mentioned even reimbursement
rates
again and again and again what
we see is in the paper health.
System makes it very difficult
for people to access services
and for people like myself to
provide services we stand in
support of the bill because we
think that this kind of study
would help the system to
identify those districts and
develop a plan to do.
Thank you David and finally a
three hundred and so that.
No no not.
Good afternoon as the chair of
the committee members thank you
so much for this opportunity I'm
a resident in psychiatry at the
university of New Mexico
I just want to think Senator
Hickey for bringing this bill to
the floor French we commonly see
less
if you were services for folks
with mental illness and more
difficult to securing them so
being able to secure access to
those resources would be a huge
boon to everyone here doing that
work as well as to the citizens
of New Mexico we are services
thank you all.
Thank you doctor now finally
Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children I also want to thank
Senator Hickey per
The issue sadly I think we all
know that navigating the
insurance system and the health
care system is confusing enough
difficult up but navigating the
behavioral health system I think
is even worse this is an attempt
to identify some of those
barriers and complexities and
build real solutions so thank
you we encourage or support.
Thank you very much bills
members of the committee
senators the product Mr chair
for the programs I'd like to
move it to pass the Senate with
thirty two.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any committee discussion
or question Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Hickey I'm really
enthusiastic about this study
it's very telling because all of
You and me and our colleagues
will express to finance
committee how important
behavioral health was and I
think it came out number one and
two with the discussions and so
very timely and I thank you
wholeheartedly for doing this.
Is.
Please thank you Mr chairman
center I'm a no on this one but
I want to tell you kind of what
I would would vote in favor for
to try to stay with the theme of
the not just saying no to things
I think we have a shared goal we
want better mental health care
in New Mexico and it's terrible
I we we both know people that
have been sent out of state for
inpatient services to tiny tiny
tiny impatient for kids you know
next UNM and it's it's such a
it's such a it's such a so I I
think we're I see this study
going is further in franchising
insurance companies and
disenfranchise and patients
because we are ultimately going
to be doing is flowing more
dollars through insurance
companies whether they're from
premiums or whether they're from
the government.
And whoever has the money has
the power.
And we disenfranchise the sick
people and get all the money the
insurance companies and that
kind of Polish off with all
their lobbyist in DC with the
Medicare rates and it flows down
to the rest of our country.
And so what I would like to do
to improve access to behavior
health is I would like to stop
our gross receipts taxation
system.
and I like to go to sales tax
what what does that matter what
we tax health care we tax health
care services we have some
exemptions in New Mexico but we
actually taxes so we get less of
it
is in and it goes beyond just
the health care even the billing
services if you send a bill to
like you know you an amber some
of the hostages had your your
payment your check goes to
Aurora Colorado or other places
because they out compete those
those contractors and billing
services so you did just
compounds but I I basically want
to see bills that are going to
take money away from insurance
companies and give it to
patients so they can be more
more powerful so to speak in all
of this complicated health care
system
hi
you know we we increased
liability for physicians during
the COVID nineteen pandemic I
mean that's that's not good
that's not gonna help with our
health care supply
and we have the number one
Medicaid per capita in the
country because of our poverty
rates if we if we could you know
obviously fixing that is going
to help recruit more physicians
including mental health care
providers to New Mexico I know I
and I lastly Mr chair Senator
I'm very interested in the
credentialing comment from Dr
les I believe I mean I'd be
curious to it that's one part of
the some of the studies gonna go
toward that but I think that
those very interesting comment I
think the credentialing issue is
is another another problem and I
think that's something that
could probably he doesn't need a
study to be done I think we we
know what we what we could do to
you know kind of do better there
when insurance companies can
play games and delay thanks so
we just get just some general
comments but that's kind of
where I'm coming from with my I
think were ideologically opposed
on this but we're obviously want
to the COVID framework of of
more health care service
providers and in New Mexico.
Thank you doctor committees
excuse me Mr chairman you are
responsible and I respond to
that yes thank you Senator
Schmedes for your observations
are at I have another bill
coming on credentialing to to to
get the junk out of the and and
have it happen with these have
been number two I would ask but
act point out that last year I
brought forth Senate bill three
seventeen which eliminated cost
sharing in behavior health
services and I only did a five
year moratorium on it a lot of
people ask me low rate should we
do it for ever and I said no
because the insurance companies
are going to learn what I
learned in insurance company
that if you open the access and
really care for people who have
behavioral situations the the
data show certainly in our real
life experiences insurance
County but.
Tons of studies that.
If people who have chronic
disease and no unstable or
underlying behavioral situation
are compared in cost to those
who have the same cohorts of of
chronic disease and they can be
divided up so you get apples to
apples but there is an unstable
mental health position.
The situation those patients
with unstable mental health
situation costs three four five
times more for the chronic
disease and so when I was in
charge of an insurance company
here in New Mexico we did away
with the costsharing and our
emergency room physicians were
third less than any other health
plan and he described areas so
apples to apples and admissions
were down about twenty five
percent it is irony this will
bring money back to premium
easement in the insurance
company which is what happened
in the insurance company that I
have it up because we did make
the access much easier for
people to behavioral health
services so I think you I
understand that you can think
that it would go the other way
but in fact this the insurance
companies are going to figure it
out and in fact one major
Medicare advantage plans this
year for local.
No longer has costsharing for
their seniors and behavior
health services they forget
about.
It's going to be in their
economic interests thank you Mr
chairman that Senator Tallman
thank you Mr chair I thank you
for reading this the issue
forward.
this is this is different from
our
Meetings we had with the the new
dean of.
Home health services.
Talking about.
Representative I don't think
what company of the state or
that this is different.
With with the what you're trying
to be integrated with that.
This is a thank you R. senator
Tom and and Mr chair this is a
completely different endeavor
that is for school of public
health.
This actually is a comprehensive
plan that County B. hill is
talking about
The behavior health
comprehensive plan yes this is
completely separate from that
this was this was of Senator
this and Mr chairman this was
put forth in L. HHS back in
October.
Question Mr chair Senator so we
concern support parity but
assuming that this is a huge
increase in a lot of money we
have to take money away from.
From medical health care in
order to route nine parity.
Thank you senator Tom and and Mr
chair I would provide the same
answer I just legislative staff
for your colleague that in fact
it lowers the cost of overall
care by caring for the
behavioral health situation
stabilizing it the overall
premiums will go down.
I think that's all I have sent
their CENIC you.
There's wherever it is that
thing from California the
festive.
It has some good questions
answered on the very issue that
you're talking.
Thank you Mr chairman yes
actually didn't cost California
any additional or somewhere
somewhere there.
Any any other discussion the
seeing none the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator.
Thank all.
Yes.
Kenneth yes
No.
First available first yes thirst
FedEx yes Tallman yes Sir to
subpoena yes and congratulations
Senator thank you thanks for
bringing this for ten eight or
ten years ago we had a hearing
of the LHS is with the law
school in the summer on this
very issue.
And the the answer we got over
over it both men medical
necessity that's why we can't do
it medical to and and we could
never get an explanation for who
decides what's medically
necessary or not why wouldn't
these be medically necessary
they just did more paper that
was for the.
Mr chairman then maybe just one
quick comment on that before I
leave because I think it will
help identify the committee the
Medical necessity has basically
been defined in health plans
from medical surgical point of
view in California and in the
governmental federal regulations
medical necessity will be
defined by the behavioral health
associations professional
organizations will not be
defined by the finance the
finance chair.
All right very good Senator
Sedillo Lopez for a much
awaited.
State employee minimum wage
Senate bill seven.
That.
Not a member of okay.
For.
Good senator Senator through to
welcome thank you Mr chairman
here with one of my co sponsors
Senator Wirth and I'm sorry I
didn't start because I had not
seen the FY are within our
packet so I was just doesn't
pass it up to the yes it is just
reading it because I was very
eager to see how close how close
we came to to them out
so with this bill does is you
know our employees have been
without
significant raises for quite a
few years just because of the
nature of our budget so they get
a raise and then we that they'd
come into a special session to
get their rates cut and so they
really have suffered and not
only is it the right thing to do
for people who are have been
very crucial to keeping our
state running many of whom are
essential workers the state is
having trouble higher rate
hiring people because the wages
at the lower ends are so so.
if there's a unique feature of
of Google unique features of
this bill we have discovered
that some agencies then just put
people on a contract and pay
them less and so
on page two we included
contractors to discourage that
that the practice of putting
people on contract so that they
would have to pay the minimum
wage and then the other is a
distinguishing feature of this
bill is on the bottom of page
three
we heard a concern that if
people were to get together five
fifteen dollar minimum wage and
then somebody came in and were
hired at the same level with the
fifteen dollar minimum wage that
there might be some resentment I
don't know honestly whether
people resent a raise for
themselves if another person
gets it however
to be fair to people who are
been worked working I've talked
to people who worked at the
university of New Mexico for
fifteen years and are getting
thirteen fifty
What this does is if a laws
enacted during the second
session of the fifty fifth
legislature to provide a salary
increase this act was will take
will go into effect prior to the
salary increase provided for
that law taking effect and the
taking of facts language is is
very important because it's not
when the governor signs the bill
it's when it that this will go
into effect before any other
races go into effect so those
are the unique features of this
bill.
has you can see we have quite a
few people sign it because there
is a lot of appetite in the
Senate for increasing the
minimum wage of our state
employees who have been working
so hard for so long.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr chair
good to see you all so I in
happy to sign on with Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senator Lopez
because I think this is long
overdue.
As I was driving to the capital
this morning the little day just
outside McDonald's that they're
hiring at fourteen dollars an
hour.
And so we've got.
Workers will work for the state
were making significantly less
than that
and given.
For we all experience with COVID
many of these are the essential
jobs that keep our state
government running just stepping
into their classroom for
educational assistance see huge
issue where many times they're
actually stepping up I am
teaching a class and yet many of
them are making.
You know the low wages so this
is long overdue and I really
appreciate the center city Lopez
highlighting the the language on
upon page three because I think
that is super important
basically let's bring everybody
up to the fifteen and then you
help with the increase on top of
that page will provide for
differentiation for those that
may be close now but again I I
really don't think there's going
to be a resentment among spokes
to have the bottom coming up
like this so.
Long overdue and happy to
support it right thank you let's
go to the audience and see if
there's anyone here who wants
the job the.
Did IT
John located within the next.
Well if we support this bill
would be a gross understatement
we very much thank the sponsors
the bring that up I think you
know a number of folks here will
probably talk about how the
minimum wage was just read the
number of years ago and
increasing steadily through the
last few years I think we can
all acknowledge that.
If you in our life different now
than what they in two or three
years.
we are seeing record high
inflation and that that we've
just doesn't mean quite as much
for that
you know I Representative and to
that represents over thirty
thousand workers a lot of.
Workers that you'll burn more
than fifteen dollars an hour I
not all that and we also believe
that we represent all workers in
New Mexico.
And this is a matter of.
All of the survival for a number
of years and our public sector
workers feel free to fixing the
Sanchez being able.
With bills for including
contracting with as well as
members of higher education and
qualification all public sector
workers from all of these
reasons we wholeheartedly
support this bill.
Thank you John yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee guys is
empty with the sheet metal
workers Representative over nine
hundred.
Workers in the state of New
Mexico and you know fifteen
dollars hour minimum wage public
sector employees you know it
it's going to lift those of.
Workers lives up exponentially
still doesn't keep up with the
cost of living in the state of
New Mexico but is a good start
and we stand strong supporters
measures thank you thank you are
yes.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
original this of the federation
of independent business out
we're neutral on the part of the
state employees we do have
concerns and questions as it
relates to the brat helpful the
contractors for the state and I
understand Sanchez explanation
and I think that makes sense but
there's no definition of
contractor and we do have
questions around is this full
and failure Medicaid copper
contractor home hospice or some
other provider argues the
contractor now required fifteen
dollars minimum in our are you
do you have a state contract
with the Land Office for grazing
or agriculture are you also
pulled into this no those
employees are part fifty dollars
to redefine clear on that and
just kind of.
Thank you to yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Carter one thousand
we want to thank both sponsors
remembers for we think I have to
wait for prejudice or university
employees your property the for
the fifty one fifty and also the
contractor piece very important
because if you don't for the
contractor piece you all have a
right to race to the bottom
we're and she's the same money
will try to privatise for
services and so we think this is
a terrible fantastically floral
Fund Act captain Sanchez enough
with this for.
Anybody else in the yes our
third.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my names are all and I
represent a number
all consulted we represent a
number of providers all of them
are project.
They're all private contractors
and.
If I understand this is July one
twenty two we're gonna end.
Fifteen dollars for everyone
that has a contract with the
state of New Mexico or
contractor.
I can appreciate the gentleman's
concern about record high
inflation and what that has done
to all of us I just think it's
important for everyone is voting
on this to understand that
inflation are the same cost of
our businesses are having to pay
to stay in business and keep
people employed and keep the
services for.
Years of COVID.
We represent good Sam did home
health care the cost to provide
those services and folks home
keeping them out of the
hospital.
a to me medical specialists the
largest durable medical
equipment provider for.
They've been hammered.
Not received any relief for the
last two years over these COVID
cost increases and as I read
this it says the we're gonna
appropriates five million
dollars.
And I'm not we're not opposed to
increasing the minimum wage
we're not opposed to wages going
up commence really entertain
people.
But by July first of twenty
twenty two.
All the businesses are going to
have to raise I mean we're
paying eleven fifty right now on
our for all the child care we
represent all licensed childcare
providers have state.
So does that mean every employee
there on July one is fifty
because it is
not.
Revenue part of money coming in.
To match that requirement.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
We are not against anyone
especially state employees
minimum wage but to be able to
fund the increased cost of all
these private businesses that we
represent the money is going to
have to.
Help from someone other propose
that we'll be able to go to DFA.
Pandemic ply.
For some time of some portion of
this eighty five million dollars
that the DFA through a contract.
In fact I think a rate increases
with a lot if you do rate
increases but however that would
happen Mr chairman members of
the committee it's hard to
believe given what we've been
dealing with for the last six
months budget what the last two
years to live we're going to be
able to.
All these private contractors
and then figure out a way to
get.
Well we covered so that we can
help.
Before.
I mean if
you look at both of the F. R. is
that right.
No.
One.
Your appropriation not
encouraging a little require
annual.
The correct and services to all.
Quantifiable at this time but
may be extensive that's from yes
bank.
And our service chairman is we
talked about parity with weights
for years no problem.
Thousand nineteen we we want to
try to do this for the private
contractors.
It was over sixty million
dollars a year just for the
private side should take into
account this week so we
for five million dollars is
enough money to try to do this.
How would business recovery and
be able to operate with this.
And so we're just very confused
concerned and I think at this
point we would be in opposition
to this legislation thank you
thank thank you for talking
thank you for Charles.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Charlie ward is and
I'm here also on behalf of a
number of clients thank you Mr
hole total number wind out of my
sails most of it but a lot of
these of.
Of course representing our.
Providers of Medicaid services
something we've struggled
through the last increase and
again the parity issue that was
addressed several times never
was at.
Currently we are looking at
holding our breath that we're
going to get an increase of the
department of health for the DVD
waiver community.
the we look at New Mexico health
care association personal I mean
we so far have been self funded
through health care quality
furniture familiar very familiar
with and so and then also the
New Mexico business coalition
has concerns about the the
private issues that Mr all
talked about and the eighty five
million dollars appropriation of
them what the impact is to the
private sector.
Also for the for the for these
issues the phone number review
what's been said so thank you
very much thank you try okay we
have a number of people on zoom
want to speak and we'll start
with the the workforce solutions
secretary and just feel director
Ricky Serna.
Thank you Mr chairman yes
absolutely wearing my state
personal office have that for
this piece of legislation that I
I do want to thank the sponsors
they are amplifying the
certainty of a concern with the
minimum pay rate for state
workers that at the governor
has has certainly made up of
critical I already heard
executive recommendation for
compensation increases so I will
share that several months back
six months ago the governor
asked the person office please
leadership role in working on a
plan that not only is
collaborative with with our are
you seeing the Caspian Sea WA
but it also aims to achieve a
fifteen dollar minimum rate of
pay for state of New Mexico
employees and at the same time
whites the strategy and the
funding necessary to address
with compaction which is
essentially what would what
would be the most concerning
element of this field from from
the state personnel office
perspective as you're aware
minimum pay rates as low as
eleven fifty the difference
between there and fifty dollars
an hour certainly the through
that in some instances you may
have a worker making eleven
dollars and fifty cents and
their supervisor maybe making us
dollars and fifty cents when you
move all of these workers up to
fifty dollars our not only now
are the work from the
supervisors thank you the state
amount of money but now the
might all be just you know a
caller right from the chair
overseeing several supervisor
tune into setting that in there
by the the the financial
implications of moving everyone
the product up to fifteen
without understanding what it's
been a cost to move everybody at
or around fifty dollars in some
equal proportionate amount rate
and those costs are significant
so we worked on as a stress.
The need that lack of a better
term photo quotes in in in our
in our attempt to minimum rate
of pay for all state workers
also writing a pay increase
every state worker and also
addressing.
So we we do want to suggest that
we take a look at that model
which addresses one of the most
critical cost implications of
this bill that isn't built in on
top of it not being a recurring
appropriation and then of course
there is that at any the state
agencies if if a state agency
does have a contract prison the
with the you know with someone
who's providing services this
contract and that that
contractor must raise the
minimum rate of pay for their
employees then the costs to the
state agencies is also financial
considerations that we have to
be aware of so if you know my
contractor million dollars
excuse me X. amount of hours
well that X. amount of hours
times when you rate a rate
increase my overall cost of that
contract and the difficult.
So that in the we work on a plan
like in the executive plan we
actually increase the minimum
rate of pay we find it recurring
four agencies you tell them
here's the minimum you given the
money to do it there's no
inclination on that agencies are
to have going up percent and
lower amount because they have
we're with you that on the
Caribbean nations of thank you
Mr chairman I apologize for my
comments but if I did want to
chime in.
Good thank you Mr stern Karen
would look.
He needs to and you can you and
your care.
Okay now I can't thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we want to thank the
sponsor chairman lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in strong support of
this bill we believe that it it
is over it is a necessity to
increase these these lowest paid
workers some of which are social
workers to a basic minimum
living wage and we we understand
that there are costs associated
with that but we also know that
ultimately that the that that we
are better and more money is it
put into the economy from these
low wage workers.
reseeding wait receiving can pre
pay increase and again we want
to thank the sponsors who
brings.
Thank you Karen Allen Tway.
No way under vice president with
the communication workers of
America will.
Are you and our members strong
winds would still.
This is more than simply
floating off of some of the work
of brought on the water it's
going to put in the.
I want to thank
thank so there are Senator
Sedillo Lopez for introducing
this element for introducing
similar bill last year in our
request.
Are we didn't hide this the
previous session I want to go on
record the way seven seven six
also support rating will wage
bills Senator no.
Thank you for your time thank
you Alan Dan Secrest.
I'm getting.
Can you hear me yes.
Good evening Mr chairman.
Committee
I echo everything that hello
just said on behalf of our local
and I want to thank the Sanchez
is this bill Harley for for
expanding it to include are are
are really essential and at
really low rate workers at UNM
and CNM the user base because it
to students security and
maintenance people that have
been you know working throughout
this pandemic at higher risk is
anyone except for health care
providers
to keep this these operations
going it it basically to
mediate everyone else's risk by
keeping things clean up.
We've been struggling to get
this for several years now we
are very grateful and we
strongly support this.
Thank you thank you Dan a fairly
big give our.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members of my name is Philip
about and I'm workers rights to
get New Mexico Center on Law and
poverty and extended strong
support this bill in support of
SB seven we we want to note that
all workers deserve adequate we
just stated self supporting to
the economic policy institute
family budget calculator in New
Mexico single children need on
average thirty thousand eight
hundred fifty five dollars per
year what a full time worker
making fifteen dollars per hour
approximately earns annually to
achieve a modest at the center
additionally no we just heard
all works by driving all ages
down a particular concept to
marginalized communities that
rely heavily on minimum wage
jobs increasing the minimum wage
to fifteen dollars per hour for
state employees includes
contractors working state New
Mexico would increase a lot
me because at least twelve
hundred public works and it
found only workers from some of
the most Senators up in our
State like staff and public
schools leasing makes computers
PED's workers which is fifteen
dollars per hour we strongly
support additional increases
Committee tax thank you.
Thank you for the pay so I I
just the Sanchez is the the
issue around the contract is is
probably the the most to do
that.
Difficult to to deal with the
you're really talking in this
bill at least from your
description of those contracts
that are with the company is
hired to do work that otherwise
would have been done by an
employee of we janitorial
service or something like that
we're not really you work really
addressing when the state
contracts to provide services to
somebody else that's but do you
have wording Defense correct and
we were just talking about what
that language might look like
but that is not the that is not
the intent to make every every
contract with the state it's
really to discourage because we
see that happen to discourage
the state from
Highrise arcing yes outsourcing
their minimum wage employees but
but I don't think that I could
Representative draft that right
now I would commit to the draft
that before it gets to finance
you are bring it back here when
C..
To to to drop that language and
and then the other thing that we
ordered by it on years you can
fast track finance of yeah I
think that that would be fine
because everything is the FIR
says that it does not cover
That it does not cover public
school employees and public
school employees are listed the
public education department and
school districts for all public
education department staff and
all public school faculty and
staff are are listed on three so
I need to understand where
they're coming from with that
with that point a couple of
points to race in your.
That you so so I don't mind
committee I will be here anyway.
What was so much to take a crack
at at the dealing and maybe that
language consult with some of
the objections that were raised
by the provider associations and
then bring it back Wednesday is
that okay with the committee for
the location yeah still Sierra
thank.
Thank you for rural field for
over a hundred both ways are
part of the compression we're
making.
Fifteen hours now that I have to
raise how many employees
with the cost of that that
included eight million eighty
five million did attempt to
capture that notice that the FY
are
says it is five point five
million is with the estimate for
school employees and higher
education estimating
approximately eight point three
so that was I was very eager to
look at the FIR because the the
drafter and I we're really
struggling to find this number
and we finally came up with
eighty five million I'm not
positive that that's the number
to be honest but
Please but finance committee
should have I know of Senator
then when you just told me that
financer told me that they are
looking at this and working on
it.
Mister Parker the amendment is
important Center manuals also
has a bill of fifteen dollars I
think the point that secretary
Sir brought up he's the one that
really makes me pause when you
have a supervisor making fifteen
fifty and the employees making
eleven twenty five.
Then you really run into that in
a way that that is problematic
that I think you know we need to
think through and look at but
some of those fiscal issues in
the trying to pan a dollar
amount that's all going to
happen in finance I for sure
but.
We'll we'll look at the language
because I think the I think it's
I appreciate the committee
wanting to get that right and I
think for some issues we need to
look at absolutely I thank you
again for bringing this forward
thanks for the answers so I have
senator Richard.
Thank you very much thank you so
we will we'll just put you on
the agenda for Wednesday.
Very good.
And the last bill today is one
that I'm carrying Senator
Coleman will chair.
The okay.
Thanks for asking.
So.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and committee
members of the Senate bill
forty.
Is probably the simplest bill
I've I've ever introduced it
simply takes away the sunset
provision.
On the health care quality
surcharge Act and if that that
health care quality surcharge
Act just to refresh your memory.
Deals with the situation
that we we approved a couple of
years ago a program in which the
nursing homes and assisted
living facilities pay an extra
tax.
That tax comes to the state.
Where should it is matched with
Medicaid it is used to increase
the reimbursement rates for
those nursing facilities and
assisted living homes that that
meet quality standards and
that's that's in in a nut shell
we originally put that into to
make sure that everything was
was
Was working out well so we put
in the sunset provision there's
no need for it HSD and T.
interactive protect the F. I. R.
both of those departments say
things seem to be going very
well so we're asking for us to
remove that if we don't then we
lose the federal money and the
whole purpose collapses by next
year.
And Charlie Marcus the lobbyist
for the New Mexico health care
association is with me with the
nursing home association and he
would if you want help please be
available to answer questions
it's a very simple bill.
Ninety.
Thank I can assume that no one
has a question.
Ninety percent of their money
comments of of.
Yes I was going to get to that.
We have any of.
The where the audience so it
went through a comment on Senate
bill forty.
Do we have anyone on the we have
four people.
We have ten people on that one
Custer ten yeah
Mmhm.
Do you have a list.
The where we can the.
The nursing home administrator
in the state of Texas thank you.
The
first one to get started.
The.
So those who are listening and
the zoom we have twelve people
want to speak to his.
Later in the day food thank you
everyone one minute so the
first.
Do.
That.
So we.
Senator.
Ingle yes who is the dentist
Center longer anybody here well
pointed out that we have a two
passed motion.
So will the.
Expedite this is the first one
that wants to speak is here.
Jerry
That's an old.
So can we proceed this is really
do Pasquali we asked them to
raise their hands that they
insist on speaking because okay.
So.
Yes the those who want to speak
the.
After they've heard to do pass
motion to raise their hand if
they want to speak.
What is that what.
Shares Kerry dot since hand does
not.
Okay our chair that's in the how
are you
Can you proceed are you on mute.
Can you hear me now.
Yeah I'll I'll be brief about Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am a volunteer
advocates with a a RP and we
support this bill thank you.
David.
Okay thank thank you of.
Terry for your statement
actually have a.
director and secretary of health
and Human Services the.
David twelve.
Use.
Can you hear me are you on mute
I just I can't even unmuted I'll
speak very briefly thank you for
the past motion this is a
program that I actually help
start before coming to state
government it was funded by the
legislature in twenty nineteen I
believe it is working well we've
seen improvement in quality
metrics seventy Schardin Clarke
it was also prepared to speak
but we tell you this tax as a
higher collection right the most
enables us to match federal
funds and.
Increase reimbursement to
nursing homes and would we all
all secretaries involved here
including just as secretary
Katrina hope from Lopez would
urge I do pass thank you thank
you director Mr secretary and
finally have Kerry in the hall.
They left the meeting came to
terms with the meaning of
celebrating.
Well I guess that that there
were just ready to.
So we have a motion and a second
to.
Please call the roll.
I don't.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Yes there is a yes.
The.
Yes.
Thanks committee of their
location yes.
Yes yes
yes to speaking of yes thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members that concludes our
meeting for today you have a
last minute thought so Mr chair.
Just the drive safely and.
Thank you so much.
The bill.
Thank you.
Well my gavel unity.
