Chair members of the committee
to today we have Senate bill two
eighty five it's gonna be point
awkward nation a maintenance
expenses cremation in New Mexico
to involve
hydrolysis process using and
alkali substance as opposed to
an acidic so it's just extremely
alkali essentially breaks down
the proteins it's kind of gross
thought to think about what it
how it works but anyway socially
just based on the proteins as
opposed to using fire to
eliminate them this is currently
available in Alabama California
Colorado Connecticut Florida
Georgia Idaho Illinois Kansas
Maine Maryland Minnesota
Missouri Nevada North Carolina
Oregon Utah Vermont and
Washington which is kind of
issues all over the board right
that's that's kind of the point
of the red blue red blue is you
have states like California
states like Wyoming that also
are kind of in this new process
and the Republicans are wearing
blue and the Democrats are
wearing red
of course.
That's really nice.
Okay go ahead I'm sorry thank
you Mr chair so essentially that
was just kind of the idea this
is something that's gaining
popularity for multiple reasons
in you're more blue states or or
people that tend to lean left
they like it because it uses
less energy were as red states I
just think it adds more liberty
and freedom and options to
people to take care of after
death situation so with that
I'll leave open to my the rest
of my ninja turtles or
go to questions from committee.
Who's next.
Mr chairman and members employee
thank you Mr chairman so that
what
alkaline hydrolysis does is it
in terms of when you compare to
a burial or cremation their
other advantages to this
particular method in terms of
ecological impact so it has
lower emissions resulting in
less carbon dioxide being
a contributing factor in
increased greenhouse gases and
also one of the challenges with
typical cremation is that when
somebody has mercury fillings
they are about right vaporized
and so this would reduce
releasing harmful emissions into
the atmosphere.
Also so there are many
ecological impacts that are
beneficial to this particular
map that I don't know if my
others conspirator diamond did
you want to say anything about.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of staff or what
Senator Hemphill said in many
states this is known as green
cremation and that's because of
the you know eighty percent
reduction in carbon dioxide
emissions emissions in in real
essentially what it does is that
mirrors the chemical decompose
decomposition of a body should
be buried underground but
instead of taking years to do
the same thing this speeds up
the process to between three to
twelve hours so it's doing the
same thing and much quicker time
frame so with that I think we
stand questions one is anything
Sir.
Okay.
We'll try to bring some of.
One in the audience here in
support of this bill.
Is there anyone in the audience.
Opposed to this bill.
Is there anyone on soon.
Exactly drawing the public
reaction.
Members of the committee Senator
Hickey Senator I've as city
Lopez and.
Senator Gallegos go ahead.
Thank you thank you Senators
while for at the meeting
for bring this forward and Mr
chair
up what's left over after this
is just a puddle.
Mr chair Senator pretty much and
then the the bones but those are
then is there percent heated up
smashed into small bits and
pieces just the same as those
regular cremation but but yes
actually it's it's just like
turns into just a sludge.
thank you senator Mr chair so do
people put this sludge in the
bones and earned and of and the
fireplace mantle State there's
that Mr chair Senator they they
may with the bones I'm not
really sure what each I mean
that's up to each person to
essentially do with as they
please
and I know this isn't like a
real fun exciting.
subjects after life and and what
happens after we.
Turn the body into sludge but I
mean that's up to each
individual surviving heir I
think at this point this is also
very popular is in your more
populated areas where the run
out of room we don't have that
problem New Mexico
but I just thought I would add
that with Senator is taking up
so much space this is just
another option for that and it's
legal in every state for pets.
Interesting well so we can
already do it in New Mexico for
Pat yes do they do it.
Mr chair and senator rob.
The idea
There we go.
One past little piece Mr chair
if I might
I think about these things now
because I'm over the top of the
hill and
the the I think this is great to
have another alternative
The originally I thought I was
going to be cremated and have my
ashes spread over so corn canyon
and San Juan rivers something
but maybe that's not too cool
but if they could just throw
little chunks of bone out the
plane along the way that that
would be justified so thank you
very much.
Thank thank you Senator Hickey
Senator Sedillo Lopez tickets.
Thank you I think this is such a
great idea then this may be out
that that's probably outside the
scope of your bills but I was
wondering if it if you do if it
was legal to have your body just
replicate linen and then put
correctly to the ground you know
Phelps.
Mr chair Senator I I don't know
if that's currently
legal if you have to be in some
type of a box
This is more like a Hebrew for
burial I don't know if that's
legal or or not okay because I
just look through the statute
and I couldn't there wasn't an
answer this particular statute
that you're mending I think this
is a great idea and I'm gonna be
very happy to support this bill.
Group of.
Chair of the calling you to make
that comment Senator Senator
Gallegos.
Mr Chairman etcetera etcetera
etcetera and Senator an expert
witness I just want to say that
I was going to try to figure out
how the decompile to come
position ended up and I got way
more education than I wanted
from the doctor but I just does
my only question with that'll
yield thank you for this idea
thanks for doing other options
as just a comment in Colorado we
have ranch that has families
family cemetery it was within I
think it's forty eight or
seventy two hours in Colorado we
don't have to have box but it's
just one of those things easier
for the family at their proper
steps place so with that are you
thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators I'm looking at the
synopsis analysis page two and
there's a cost of.
Once hundred sixteen dollars and
forty cents to dispose of ten
thousand pounds of remains so
I'm just wondering what has
Have any of the funeral homes
shared how much they charge a
client.
For for use of this.
This is the alkaline yeah
alkaline.
Mr chair Senator can you
rephrase the question please.
What is the cost for some use
alkaline when they pass on it
that's their choice.
And Mr chair Senator you'd have
to ask of the funeral on my I'm
not really sure what that charge
would be.
At current and centers.
Yeah it's not offered here so I
don't I don't know who would
even know what that would be
okay I just wondering if there's
a than any research on the costs
from other states.
Because I do see there's a
hundred sixteen.
Hundred sixteen dollars and
forty cents on your synopsis.
And I wonder if you had any
other figures.
It's a it's a committee analysis
analysis.
That came from Frank Farry movie
chairman members and we can get
you copies pretty good analysis
that Frank did on this with some
background answers a couple
questions and being here but I
do not see a response about the
opposite of the cost of it to
the family I don't that we
haven't come across that okay
thank you chairman thank you
senator.
A couple of questions for.
To make a couple notes
for the Senators I had a couple
questions
right right before I read your
bill I saw an article in I think
either Harpers are at Lente on.
Composting.
Is that is that permit is
permitted in the state and and
Mr chair members of the
committee that's that's not
permitted that's actually the
way I wouldn't mind being done
spread over my farm afterward
just ash dashes this to this
kind of thing but no it's not
permit in the state of New
Mexico.
okay good but it's not to be
confused with our okay and and
in your bill then what happens
to the sludge I mean how is that
disposed of.
Is it I mean it just seems like
a lot of alkaline very alkaline
sludge to be putting me anywhere
so dates Mr chair members the
committee that handle it
different ways some of them are
actually
Left to the US sewer and waste
water systems and then in many
states the remains are just
handled with the same in in
accordance to the same required
procedures for disposing of
medical waste assessed whatever
their medical waste laws are
they abide by the same medical
waste loss and so Mr chairman
the remains are reduced to a
powder consistency placed in a
temporary container and can be
returned to the family or
disposed of those to be the
about the phones I guess the the
the one to thanks to have okay.
All right.
But we do have we have a motion
for do press sick is seconded by
Senator Hickey enthusiastic
second by Senator Hickey any
other discussion.
The secretary will call the roll
Senator guy across.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center mass this yes Senator
McKenna yes Senators metes
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Tallman.
Yes center to the penal.
Thank.
Okay well yes.
Thank you explain as both
senator told.
Budget is.
I've been here seven years and
never seen for senators.
Facing me before I was wondering
what what prompted such a
interested in the people are are
you facing a young death or
something.
If somebody like me should be
censoring this bill.
Actually.
We had our.
Additional you had to ask them
into this.
This guy suggested so you all
have dinner you decided this
would be a wonderful bill for
the for the.
There are due diligence as
public servants and this is what
we came up with that
satisfactory.
More than satisfactory.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
You have a due process body
eight to zero vote.
Okay moving right along.
Senator Pirtle.
You're back here.
Don't go too far.
Physical therapist MRI orders.
Don't go any further okay.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and what what.
Okay Karen Browning's on zoom
she'll help with any technical
questions
Senate bill for twelve
essentially would allow for
physical therapist to order an
MRI this came from
coaching baseball with my son.
Injury to the shoulder go see a
doctor Hey need an MRI to see if
there's any major damage before
we do anything insurance company
says no go see a physical
therapist go see the physical
therapist he says well looking
at where it's at it kind of
seems like it's not something
that can fix we need MRI but
then the insurance coming says
you must do four sessions of
physical therapy which is in my
opinion absolutely nonsense if
you've already seen a doctor
that said you needed to do it
and then a physical therapist
who is trained in muscles
tendons and everything and going
through the motions says Hey I
wouldn't mind making sure that
we're not gonna do further
damage so this would just ensure
that if once it gets to that
point they've been referred
there has been and I'm M. R. I.
done if they and their
professional opinion think that
there should be that they could
order that in our I'm with that
I stand for questions.
Okay that's it it's it's just
that one little paragraph adding
MRI imaging to the scope of
practice of.
Of the physical therapist Mr
protesting for the person
who is the person answering that
he needs to Browning seventeen
Browning during.
Karen Browning Farron Browning.
You got
here in the so I I can which we
have a different number or name
or something or is it.
Senator you gotta okay let's let
her talk he's she's his expert
witness.
Okay.
This Browning go ahead.
Can you hear me yes.
I'm good afternoon as senators
and members of the committee my
name is Karen Browning I am a
practicing physical therapist I
am also currently the president
of the American physical therapy
association New Mexico chapter
same here too you definitely
support Senator colonel and his
efforts I don't know that I did
stated any clear I have a
statement read I would have to
be happy to read it I am happy
to answer questions that will
have you just answer questions
so that be.
That's great thank you Richard.
Let's look in the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this bill.
Okay well Senator.
Does anybody want to speak on
this bill.
Good coming up and and use the
Mike.
Keep it short the.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Amy Dixon at desert states
physical therapy network we
stand in full support of just
before twelve physical therapist
to support and service in New
muscles Mexico capacity as
primary care providers
especially in our rural
communities this bill offers
another tool in the box to
continue to alleviate the demand
of our stress primary care
system for patients to receive
timely care and treatment thank
you.
Thank you anybody else want to
speak on this bill.
And we have to online in support
Karen Lou Cerro and Beth Jones.
My name can you hear me yes yes
and this is our go ahead.
Thank you my name is Karen lose
Cerro I am also a physical
therapist Mr chairman and
members of the committee I want
to thank Senator Pirtle for
bringing this bill forward
I am also with the American
physical therapy association New
Mexico chapter and we are
supporting this bill because we
feel that it definitely will
facilitate patient care
especially in rural areas and
allow patients to access the
care they need more quickly
rather than having to go back
and getting more medical visits
in order to move forward and
also
Allows for us to order and our
eyes not to interpret them the
radiologist will still interpret
them and our other speaker has
much more information on the
topic to support it so thank you
very much.
Good thank you Mr Serra and then
we have Beth Jones.
Can you hear me now yes.
Hi thank you for allowing me to
speaking good afternoon money my
name is Dr Beth Jones and I have
the privilege of directing the
University of New Mexicos drive
in physical therapy program I
have served the state in New
Mexico for over twenty of my
forty years as a physical
therapist and educator my
expertise happens to be an
anatomy where we teach Musco
skeletal
imaging and treatment is fine I
rise to support this legislation
to allow physical therapist
order diagnostic imaging I speak
on behalf of my Doro rule as an
academician and clinician from
the academic side we've been
teaching imaging in our program
for almost fifteen years
students learn the reasons to
utilize all the different
imaging resources they are
tested on plain film an MRI
understand normal anatomy
related to imaging and then on
the American college of
radiology appropriateness rules
related to diagnosis we also
utilize case studies to help
with differential diagnosis
understanding and knowing when
to order imaging and what
imaging is most appropriate to
order.
The military's been usual that
utilizing PT's in the ordering
of diagnostic imaging for over
fifty years as such PED's in the
military have been recognized as
muscular skeletal providers of
choice and data indicates that
they refer for imaging much less
often and use it more
appropriately than other first
contact providers I have three
studies that support this one
that has shown that we have the
equivalent abilities of
orthopedic surgeons and
diagnostic accuracy of muscular
skeletal conditions and how to
categorize patients for courses
of care or referral including
indications for imaging another
study has shown that we
demonstrate appropriate use of
diagnostic imaging in the vast
majority of cases over ninety
one percent and we're judicious
in our use of imaging and that
there were no problems with
reimbursement another study has
shown that the chair of the
management of musculoskeletal
patients resulted in a
significantly lower rate of
imaging studies use of and says
and cost to care when compared
to and these D. O. S. PA's and
Anders practitioners.
Just one more aside as of late
in twenty twenty one seven
states including our next door
neighbors of Utah and Colorado
as well as the district of
Columbia permit physical
therapist to refer patients for
imaging.
I would love it if we could get
this done and I very much
appreciate senator pirtle for
introducing the bill I'll take
any questions great thank you Mr
okay anybody in the audience
opposed to this bill.
And nobody online opposed to.
Members of the committee Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator pro for bringing this
bill.
And that's not that I'm trying
to personalize every bill that
comes here but having had
the two herniated disks and
ultimately ending up with two
fusions
the the there were there were
point of time when I was getting
physical therapy that than that
and we had to go through all
sorts of cart wheels and
craziness to get the M. our eyes
done to look at the differences
and then speaking as a health
plan executive
you're actually spending more
money by not having this bill
because of all the back and
forth that goes on and then
finally I having had the
experience of physical therapy I
agree there's that means the M.
Amaraizu not exposure to
radiation versus CT scans so
they're much safer they're being
done very well that really
relatively cheap to do the only
objection that I could ever
think of is if the physical
therapy practice put an MRI in
their office then that does
sometimes would question the
health plans may question them
ordering their own as sometimes
happens with our doctor I think
this is a very common sense
bills and I appreciate the Santo
praying and thank you very much
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Seconded you have a question it
is their second for the motion.
Seven we have second for the
motion Senator committees you Mr
etcetera so.
It doesn't seem like there's
much of a doctor patient or
physical therapist patient
relationship if in their
professional opinion they can't
even get the services that your
kid needs we would you agree
with that Mr chair Senator that
that was I think the the thing
that
maybe set me off the most was
the fact that I have with the
doctor doctor said Hey you need
this and then the insurance
company essentially stepped in
and said all regardless of what
you and your doctor came up with
as what was best for you to
figure out what your health was
needed they essentially trump
that so what we just not going
to pay for it.
I've got a couple questions for
you one.
One is.
Your issue was that the
insurance company wouldn't pay
for it.
This will require them to pay
for it well Mr chair members of
the committee what it will do is
you go through the same process
that I went through where they
say okay gonna go to physical
therapy but what it allows is
once you go to physical therapy
for your physical therapist to
say okay you've been referred to
me from bone drive and.
I think that after doing because
they just go through the the
syntax of you can pick your arm
of this hiking not what can you
do and so now it'll be a second
person you've been referred to
the physical therapist and then
you'll be ordered Nelson the
order and your insurance company
and the hope is by that time
that okay doctor said it we
required to go to the physical
therapist now physical therapist
says Hey for me to do my job as
a as a specialist in bone and
muscle skeletal tissue and all
of that is that then they'll go
ahead and allow the MRI to be
done I know as another step it's
not ideal it be nice if interest
companies will stay out of the
the doctor's visit room in
general but that's that's not
we're talking about here and and
this just I know it seems like
it as a step but a lot of times
the interest comes require you
to go and it just makes it where
it's safe for that if a physical
therapist thinks that the that
you need to have it that the
insurance company would would go
an issue it otherwise this is
what's happening Mr chair is a
C. four four sessions will with
the physical therapist will do
is it safe it's a shoulder
injury well to meet the
requirements and I just have you
ride the bike for times meet the
minimum requirement say there's
no approve in the shoulder then
the insurance company pays for
it which I know sounds insane
because I just cost the entrance
coming more money but that's
where we live in now.
And then the other issue that
got raised in our analysis is.
Do you need to change the
language to be more inclusive to
include the X. rays in the
cities as well.
And Mister chair members of of
the committee of that that
that's the will of the committee
I would oppose it but in my
specific situation was just M.
R. I. if it'd been a an X. ray I
was I was told they probably
would cover that.
But that was done in house due
on that point do you on that
point we would potentially have
shown would be needed to find
out now.
And they were exposed to
radiation from the X. rays are
basically on the good for the
bonds involve components period
where is the MRI does soft
tissue and really tells you
where and if there's information
at the in the verses and so
forth it brings that out extreme
would never be able to pick that
up what about the C. T..
The CTE would not either I mean
a bit again it's a completely
different technology MRI is
about realigning that Pollard PO
the polar fields within this
thousand that's how they can
pick up and and and see much
more than that the C. T. is just
a very sophisticated X. ray
okay.
Very good.
Any other discussion we have a
motion and a second secretary
will call the.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente.
Receptor center to the penal
yes.
Six zero here doesn't do pass
you're you're on a roll and I
think you Mr does anything else
you want to bring want to do
some bills tomorrow after.
You have a right to sign.
I did buy provisions but I
wasn't quite aware of that.
Senator Brandt good to see you.
Is the first time the.
We had to the one of the time of
the year if you to.
Teacher vocational ed licensure
track.
We have a different bill for you
all the seeing I know what to
say.
We see whatever comes before us.
I will tell Dr Hickey in doctors
committee that this will not
allow anyone to practice
medicine without a degree.
So so what does it do.
It does Mr Chairman is is it
changes the way well.
Thing changes sounds like there
is a way
that puts in law away for our
CTE teachers to actually be
licensed in the state of New
Mexico right now there's a rule
in place that's called the eight
hundred license but pad
attorneys have told them that
that rule really doesn't work in
the gonna have to quit issuing
those licenses.
and so this actually puts a law
a way for C. T. E. which is
career technical education
huge.
Importance in our state we're
seeing a large movement across
the country to Kerr technical
you know only about thirty five
percent of our students that
graduate from high school go to
college sixty five percent of
them are not and they're not
really learning a trade and this
helps them to learn a trade so
what this does is that allows
how how do we licensed teachers
to come in.
And I always use the example of
automotive.
because that's what I know the
most
you know how do we get
automotive teacher to come in
and get licensed to teach our
students because they don't go
to college and so this sets up a
pathway for them to be able to
do that
it starts with the preliminary
license which is for three years
which allows them to get some
mentoring a lot of mentoring
required to make sure we're
trying to get that pedagogy
training so they know how to
teach students how to do this
and then they would be able to
apply for their permanent
license and that permit license
just like any other teachers
license last for nine years so
this is just dealing with
licensure
and that the creates a process
by which to do that but they
wouldn't be eligible for the
three tier.
Mr Chairman this was kind of
this is one of things that had
and I've been talking back and
forth about as I've talked to
the the Hobbs superintendent as
I've talked to my own
superintendent Rio Rancho they
really the the filling is pretty
common and stand rounds with the
superintendents association we
all feel like CTE doesn't really
fit within the three tier
licensure system of the three
tier licensure system is set up
for our you know.
Four year degreed certified
teachers and through the regular
mode most of your CTE teachers
are not coming at that bottom
level.
as far as level one we're not
being paid that because you
wouldn't leave your job making
eighty thousand a year to come
in and get paid what is it now
fifty.
Fifty thousand a year
By removing it from the three
tier system the school districts
would have the ability to
negotiate that contract with
that CTE teacher to pay them
what was the what was needed to
get them into the classroom.
Okay is there anyone in the
audience is here to support
Senate Bill for seventeen yes
come on up and say something if
you want to.
Thank you it is not a supported.
Are your is that a relative of
yours no.
Is there anybody on the line.
For this the fittest anybody
here in opposition to it.
I see none members of the
committee.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
And the question go ahead.
Thank you I think this is a
really good idea
I guess.
This kind of life what else.
Want to see this the.
That you think you've just about
the future system I understand
that.
Help me out with what you mean
like with the insurance and all
that kind of thing.
They would have all the other
benefits of being a teacher
Absolutely yes they would fit
into the entire rest of the
system retirement or without any
changes they fit into the
retirement system which may be
one of the reasons why they
would want to leave no don
Chalmers income teach the other
big reason is a lot of them have
you know ten fifteen years of
experience and I will tell you
after just a few years of of
working you know bolts with my
hands you know it starts getting
it starts wearing on you and so
you want to it you know if
you're teaching a relief to
working once a day instead of a
hundred times a day and so this
allows those people who have
that experience to come in and
teach our young people but they
have all the other benefits of
being a teacher.
Right.
The other three tier system for
our regular teachers it really
for the first three years so
very similar to the first three
years is that preliminary
license they call something
different just tier one licence.
and then if they move into tier
two if they haven't moved in the
tier two they actually lose of
teaching license and so and once
our tier two that puts in a
different paid here
which the districts can set that
up impact all the districts have
their own pay scales they would
just figure out how this fits
and I just put that back to the
local control the three tier it
is it was a little bit trick
here and that's one of the
reasons we felt like it should
not go in there because the
three tier system you've either
got to be certified through your
national board certification or
you have to have a master's
degree and that just doesn't fit
this kind of a teacher and you
have to be a mentor teacher to
actually be able to do that it
just doesn't fit the system so
this just gives the districts
the freedom with this very
different type of team work to
be able to do what they need to
do thank you that really
explains they didn't.
They go.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for brings for that.
I've said it a hundred times
appeared something like this is
so critical for the state and I
want to get the opportunity
scholarships to help these
people and not quite sure how to
do that yet but want to get
there I did have an experience
at the pipefitters union and
they have people who who are
doing quite well out in the
field that they come in to teach
and then they take a big hit and
compensation because I can do
better in the field
which is is there some way where
maybe not through this bill that
and next year you could expand
to help them some way get a
certificate and set and then
that I'd be happy to work with
you to figure out how we get
them every knows it the if
they're missing out on the
compensation in the field
they shouldn't do that to teach
and they said they could do they
could triple the number of
people that they were teaching
if they had more people coming
in and so I'm seeing maybe this
is a vehicle on my and I off
balance on this maybe there's
there's there's been a few
issues with within I and I
introduction one of the groups
I've talked to a little bit but
there's some issues with they
really want the the high school
experience to be more kind of
learning how to do the measuring
learning the the carpentry math
those type of foundational
things and it's mainly because
of insurance so someone that's
below eighteen can't really go
out and do the kind of work
because the dangers involved and
so they really
Pre requisite certificate that
then they can go to the pipe
fitters union and be taught by
their instructors there and I
know your kind of talk about the
instructors I don't think
because the pipefitters union
isn't a college or even it's
it's kind of a labor school I
don't think the state is allowed
to fund that because of our
wonderful what we call that the
anti donation clause so which we
all have to look like so.
For change are changes thank you
it's great that thank you for
clarifying and I hope maybe next
to you and I can talk about how
we can help with this with the
state needs and it would again
raise up compensation to the
point where we would build a
middle class tax base which we
don't have in the state
absolutely maybe we can bring
some of those and and figure out
of classes an intermediate class
that we can use through the CNM.
Rio Rancho type demo you anyway
thank you for bringing this
bill.
I've got a question for you you
use Gretchen nine year license.
Yes Mr it doesn't say this but
is it renewable yes.
Thank you all all of the
standard licenses are renewed
every every nine years is that
there are teachers license for
nine years yes up want to get
their permanent license so that
first licenses not once they get
their permanent licenses and
nine your license okay.
Any other discussion this is a
the.
We are have a motion and a
second noted you have any
question Senator Ingle.
Point out okay secretary will
call the roll.
We'll have a second I thought we
had a second yeah the city of
the city Lopez she has to
question which is seconded
refers.
Senator their goals Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente center to
the penal yes.
Six to zero vote you have to do
passengers thank you members
that thank you Representative
China's.
This is house bill three seventy
surprise building protection act
the sense that they.
Thank you
Mr chair representative is H. B.
seventy is really a very simple
bill all it does is move the
existing date.
The since that date of for the
provision of this from twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
eight.
The provision is related to the
provider reimbursement benchmark
for qualifying out of network
medical bills.
The state's methodology works
better for all par for all
parties in the federal probation
gives a state some time to
incorporate data from a new
database that is currently being
built.
Mr chair I have with me Kate
expert witness from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance and I'm gonna let her
introduce yourself because hi
will massacred.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is DR and I
Acura and I am the current
acting director of the life and
health division with the office
of the superintendent of
insurance
thank you Mr chair we also have
a page to handle on zoom zoom
yes if we if we need to have
page did you want to say
anything about this bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Paige to Hamel I am here.
I'd any answers to any questions
that you guys might have okay
anybody in the audience in
support of this bill yes come on
up and speak.
yeah you're here all day
yesterday we should have put you
on first.
I think that might yes the
otherwise assume one pick you up
you have to hold the button
there.
Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee Glendale and Gallagher
aging and long term Services
Department surprise medical
bills are large source of
financial hardship for many
persons but especially for older
adults and this is because older
adults have higher rates of
hospitalizations and emergency
department visits and.
The consequences of the surprise
billing may include the end of
the inability of altered New
Mexicans to afford to pay for
their basic needs and rationing
future healthcare so by
extending the sunset date this
would mitigate any potential
financial harm of receipt
receiving unexpected bills so
aging and long term Services
Department supports H. B. three
seventy thank you right thank
you.
Anybody online and propose.
Questions for in support one and
support yep who is that of.
So no but let me.
Let's see I'm.
What the but let me.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Tian the loonie
advocacy director for A. A. R.
P. New Mexico when we stand in
strong support of this bill we
supported in the past we believe
surprise medical bills are a
large source of financial
hardship for older New Mexicans
who are subject to a hi
disproportionately number
surprise bills because of higher
numbers of visits to the
emergency room and and these
because of that we I said to
pass this bill thank you very
good thank you that's it members
of the committee questions for
the Sanchez I move it to pass
motioned and seconded by Senator
Hickey and a question from
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill
perhaps this is more than a
question of clarification well
no surprise billing has been
awful I before I joined this
August body worked on the
original bill back in the day
and there was a sense that
because we thought we'd have
five to claims database and have
our own database from which to
be able to see what the
appropriate billing is that's
taking a while to get put
together so the sunsets is
simply allows us to use the
external standard that we agreed
to at that time and and it it's
just again it's very common
sense and we do we even though
there is federal surprise
billing this really.
Focuses on you don't do that in
this state at the federal bill I
think could be stronger I think
our state bill is is stronger
than the federal order I am
asking my colleagues to approve
this great any other discussion.
The secretary will call the roll
Senator I have also Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senators metes yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente center to the penal
yes.
By seven to zero vote you have
to do yes Representative thank
you.
Thanks okay we'll go now to
House Bill two oh seven.
And this is the.
Representative Ortez welcome
thank you percentage changes
here that for sure I think I was
only here one time two years ago
hello resume.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on my co sponsor
is on her way senator Kerry
Hamblen but I I thought I'd
begin and before I want to go
into the the details of the bill
I want to just very briefly tell
you why I'm carrying the
amendments to the Human Rights
Act
I will spare you the group
therapy session I had on the
house floor and all the
committees on the house side but
I will say this I had a
difficult childhood I was raised
by a single mom I had a really
amazing and influential pia this
is the who took me under her
wing and us but a lot of time
with me she would be seven Cisco
when I was really young she
worked in fashion should a lot
of fabulous and amazing gay
friends and I learned a lot from
this community who treated me
with love and respect and
acceptance and it really shaped
the way I think about the world
really shaped the way I think
about of the LGBTQ community I'm
a mother now I have two
daughters and they're figuring
it out on their own right now
who they are who they love and
they are pretty surprised of
what's happening in the world
right now all around the country
with so much legislation that
seeks to stigmatize and shame
the LGBTQ community so I had to
act.
That's why I'm doing this this
is what the build us.
It updates the definitions for
sexual orientation and gender
identity it updates
discriminatory language around
disability disabilities it adds
definition definitions for sex
and gender it importantly close
is a discrimination loophole for
public entities that we believe
was never intended to exist it
sure is that public dollars
cannot be used to discriminate
and ensures that public entities
like state state government and
all of our political
subdivisions are held to the
same standards as private
entities.
I have eight an expert here Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Marshall Martinez very
good.
Artist welcome thank thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee it's good to see you
all again
the Human Rights Act in New
Mexico's adopted in nineteen
seventy one with the relatively
small set of protected classes
in two thousand three we were
the fourteen state in the nation
to add sexual orientation and
the third state and nation to
add gender identity to that list
to protected classes in nineteen
eighty the New Mexico Supreme
Court read the term public
accommodation extremely narrowly
and determined that state
government public entities local
school districts universities
municipal governments we're all
exempt from discrimination
prohibitions and Human Rights
Act for the last fifty years
taxpayer dollars have been
legally allowed to be spent in
discriminatory ways.
While many protected classes and
Human Rights Act are covered at
the federal level as well I'll
need to keep people are
explicitly left out which is
most evident in current times
been discussing public education
institutions and the need for
essential services in our state
a somewhat argue post comment
our current COVID said the
situation.
This bill will help protect
LGBTQ students and seniors from
discrimination this bill will
help provide access to justice
for queer and trans homeless
people and those impacted by the
CYFD system.
This bill will give a new more
accessible path to justice for
New Mexicans who experienced
discrimination at the hands of
their government in as a member
of any other protected class.
And lastly let me just say that
without this we're forcing any
member of a protected class in
New Mexico to interact with an
incredibly complicated federal
system of discrimination law
and on behalf of the quality New
Mexico our sponsors and so many
people in this building that I
never working hard every day
I just wanna see really clearly
to every LGBTQ young person
who's out there.
Feeling the brunt of incredibly
politicized attacks every single
day we see you there are people
in this building with you and
fighting for you every day and
we will continue to do so until
New Mexico says very clearly
that your life is full of value
and your deserving only of love
acceptance and affirmation not
in spite of who you are but
because of it.
Thank you Marshall the Senator
Hamblen did you want to say
anything about it we just
started when you came I I do
appreciate that Mr chairman
committee I am here as a support
services at this moment to
Representative Ortez but we'll
certainly chime in if necessary
very good it's hard to hear the
some I want to ask you about
one.
The thing on the in the
Judiciary Committee and the
House.
The the passing amendment
striking local.
From page seven line to.
Yes Mr chair they did but it
reads kind of awkwardly now
because it's still says or.
Didn't strike or should remove
yet maybe I'm missing something
the reach no public body means a
state or government.
At the which should be.
Make in the course Mr chair they
struck the word local online to
yeah section B. B. reads the
governmental entity I see none
online three public body correct
and okay.
The state or any public body
okay thank you thanks Marshall
thank you.
Okay let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who supports
this bill.
is there anyone here who opposes
this bill.
Okay is there anybody on the
line who opposes.
Okay so all we have our
supporters will give will give
you you pick for board of speak
for brief period of time each
who who feels a strong desire to
speak on this.
So what is it.
Because there's a lot of like
protecting this person.
Okay okay well we'll just have
to respond to but is anybody
want to speak in support of the
bill yep.
Come on up and use the money
for.
That.
This white.
Okay can you hear me yes are at
member
I'm sorry about that.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith I am on speaking on behalf
of bold futures reproductive
rights organization we strongly
support this piece of
legislation and we urge a do
pass thank you thank you
heather.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Daniel Williams on a
policy advocate with the
American civil liberties union
of New Mexico and we likewise
are very proud to be part of
this bill thank you.
Thank you to.
Member center you have to push
the button at the bottom of the
page and I can hear in the
webcast okay can you hear me.
Thank you okay thank you
chairman and members the
committee my name is I think
just the landing here with
transaction New Mexico and I
support this bill and support
thank you and their efforts
thank you so much very good
thank you.
And then finally.
Hi chairman members of the
committee my name is Amanda and
I'm with the New Mexico Dream
Team and we support any sort of
legislation that protects
immigrant youth also immigrant
queer youth so this is for all
the undocumented queer youth up
there thank you very good we
have two people online who want
to speak in support Philippe
they get up get give us give us
give us a.
Yes thank you Mr chair
delivering about an attorney at
the New Mexico Center on poverty
we think the Sanchez for
introducing this important bill
we stand in support of HB tool
seventy percent more nice to
create Human Rights Act to
ensure that all government
entities in those receiving
taxpayer dollars including state
agencies state contractors and
grantees are prohibited from
discriminating against
individuals based on certain
personal characteristics and we
appreciate the expansion of
gender gender identity and
sexual orientation as terms in
in the bill and we support for
these reasons thank you.
Thank you for the the then
finally Kurt Reger.
good afternoon Mister chairman
and members the committee I just
wanted to state our support of
this group regular with your
navigation Mr New Mexico I want
to straight our strong support
for H. B. two oh seven as well
thank you.
Thank you Kurt no would you care
to answer the question that was
posed by the young woman in the
audience thank you Mr Mr chair
members of the committee there
are protected classes that exist
under the Human Rights Act right
now I'm they're they're listed
in various parts of the bill but
if you turn to the very end we
talk about all the different
protected classes which include
race age religion colour you
cannot discriminate on the basis
of these issues and so what this
bill will do well it's we're
updating the definitions for
sexual orientation and for
gender identity and we're adding
a protected class of gender and
sex sex sex is in there but we
were we're up we're defining sex
differently.
So what was so what it means is
that there be more people who
are part of the protected class
of people who have just
experiences combination and we
think that this is the the right
move to modernize Rights Act.
Thank members of the committee
then that your question.
Okay.
Is the committee.
Senator Hickey followed by
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
The fellow committee members
note this and
I said I wasn't gonna based on
my comments on every bill the
day hunt personal experience but
here we go again and I apologize
for that
I have been through a journey
with my daughter for nine ten
years now talk to her coming up
here
This morning and
she lives in Portland where you
know this isn't an issue at all
of there might be an opportunity
back here in New Mexico.
But I got to be able to tell her
she's going to be safe here and
she's gonna.
Not get discriminated against
and so it is as we all it again
nothing against us old smart
people but we grew up in a
different time when there was
like.
That that hetero sexual
homosexual and we just started
in the by sector.
Way back when in the seventies
and I mean I know it's been
there but but this is not there
is no label this is Justin's
experience and these these folks
by daughter needs to have their
experience to be a complete
human being and so I I really
appreciate you bringing this
should she decide to come back
home but this is a very
important bill thank you so
much.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
I'd really support this bill I
love this bill but I also want
to compliment you on page four
in clearly defining fact factual
orientation gender identity and
gender a not I think that that
performs just a really great
educational service I I feel
like last time there was
conflation last time we talked
about one of these kinds of
bills there was conflation
between gender identity and
sexual orientation and that's
very problematic so I I just
really wanna you know I support
this bill and I just wanted to
point out that that language
that is just so clear thank you.
Senator trees.
Representative.
Mr mentioned a loophole that
exists could you.
Tell me what what that is or
what that was then Mr chair
representative FC Senator I
sorry I forgot where I was for a
second.
Mr chairman and senator
when the HRA was updated in two
thousand three I believe in this
and my expert can can jump in
here we we didn't we didn't talk
about the state government state
government local government plus
political subdivisions or I
think very importantly public
contractors so that meant that
for those protected classes
there was no pathway for for
taking on a discrimination case
if you were discriminated
against at school for instance
or
all right local government this
is not applaud Mr chairman and
senator to employment but if you
are experiencing discrimination
other there was no passed to
serve state District Court to to
hear a case on on on
discrimination so.
This is why we're amending the
bill to ensure that government
at all levels is held to the
same standard as private
businesses which are referred to
as.
Click accommodation so in on
page two H. we add any
governmental entity to the
public accommodation definition
so public accommodations which
include businesses are held to a
really high standard
and if you face discrimination
there's a pathway to address the
discrimination but there isn't a
pathway for state government or
local government for for other
political subdivisions.
And
so Mister chair representative
etcetera so I guess when we
maybe it's more of a
academically Paul I don't know
but usually when I I'm used to
hearing the word loophole it's
like Hey dad this is the problem
right here this is what keeps
happening and we need to close
it so is is there an example of
a loophole that's been exploited
worth more of kind of a a legal
loophole that's been recognized
on more of an academic
framework.
Mr chair and senator committees
so the loophole has been
continuously driven through so
in nineteen eighty a student at
the U. at the UNM college of
nursing filed a racial
discrimination case that's the
case that went to the Supreme
Court in state Supreme Court
said in their ruling we believe
this is racial discrimination
and that's not against the law
in the state of New Mexico since
then district courts have thrown
out multiple cases one of them
just over two years ago
Albuquerque public schools was
accused of racial discrimination
that complaint was filed at the
state level.
Court judge said I'm sorry but
it's not against the law for
Albuquerque public schools to
discriminate against students on
the basis of race so we have
continuous examples that this
loophole is actually being used
okay and Mr chair representative
on experts this is with you know
looking I'm I'm trying to come
up with some more.
Especially with regards to
gender and gender is being put
in here
we're talking kind of and we
look at like accommodation so
I'm thinking.
Are when we're talking like
accommodations that have
generally been
separated with you know by sex
like caused.
bathrooms housing prisons I mean
the is that kind of what's gonna
applied to this bill over thank
you Mr chair and senator no so
it's it's interesting because
public accommodation is what is
used to describe private
businesses and so for example
fixing a car at a mechanic shop
is considered a public
accommodation which is
counterintuitive right what
we're talking about is for
example the the discrimination
case that happened Albuquerque
public schools was a teacher on
a on a regular and systematic
basis used incredibly derogatory
racist slurs against the student
in front of the entire class and
and force that students sit in
the back of the classroom or
dismissed the student from class
which was a clear systematic
case of racial discrimination so
the up the accommodation in this
case is education right this a
student has a right to be in a
classroom
if they're picking of the right
grade etcetera like they have a
right to be in that classroom
and so what we're talking about
here is saying that local
governments public public bodies
public entities
when when they are using
taxpayer dollars to find a
service such as education they
have to do that for everybody
they cannot refuse to do that on
the basis of sex gender sexual
education or gender identity.
And Mr chair representative
center of what what what struck
me as interesting as the
definition gender is a self
perception and so I I really
would like to see how how how
would this play out you know
there was I I'm I'm sure you're
familiar
You know surrounding the reasons
why the first minister Stalin
had resigned earlier this month
there is a case where there was
a person that was in all male
prison a convicted rapist and
then they passed a bill that
seems similar to this I don't
know I haven't read the
legislation whatever was that
you know would allow your self
perception to then you could say
I identify as a female this
individual was then transferred
to a female prison.
And so with this supply I mean
with with with a male and may be
able to then self perceived as a
female you know after this bill
and be moved to a different
facility I mean that that's
that's kind of what I'm you know
looking at Mister chairman
Senator
I do want to correct you and I'm
sorry to do this in the in this
on the Senate side but what
you're talking about is gender
identity not gender so we're you
know we're updating the
definition for for gender
identity and what this bill does
is that it allows a pathway for
someone who has been
discriminated against and if
there now is part of the new
protected class in this bill
they have a pathway to to talk
about the discrimination and to
seek remedy for that
discrimination in up in in the
state so through the Human
Rights Commission and and beyond
so that's what this bill does is
that it it's it adds gender
identity
It at it updates the definition
for entry for gender to identity
and it adds gender as a
protected class.
Well but Mr chair representative
about I'm not about gender I I
did have a question about gender
because you had the word gender
into some of the
the housing and things like that
but I the general denim I'm just
going off of you all's
definition says.
Jeremy the person self
perception so if that self
perception changes after their
incarcerated they were assigned
to a certain facility what if
their self perception changes
after they've been incarcerated
what would happen in regards to
this bill.
You Mr chairman and senator
that's actually
already governed by federal law
and so the the pre a yes pre is
the name of the federal law that
actually governs how these
issues are addressed in and
incarceration situations than
this right yes the prison rape
elimination act thank you Mr
chairman and so but but in in
this case what we're talking
about is a clear case of someone
who's who
a teacher for example could not
say because a student is a trans
student they're not welcome in
my classroom if they chose to do
that in a discriminatory and
systematic way then that student
under if this bill passes that
student when then be allowed
with their parents should be
allowed to go to the Human
Rights Commission Human Rights
Commission the state of New
Mexico would do a preliminary
investigation determined if
there's reason to believe that
there may have been
discrimination they would try to
to correct that discrimination
at an administrative level and
if they could not do so that
that person would then have
access to District Court right
and so Mr center of resentment
that that's very clear ticket
then no one's I'm I'm not aware
of anybody that would disagree
with what you just said I think
that's just I'm just so wrong to
humanizing and it seems like so
many of the the concerns of
still go back and I am still a
question on this topic a it
hasn't quite.
In answer to me I mean how.
You know someone's in in a
county prison or state prison
the same same simple maybe how
how would the federal law like
what is it doing now.
With with that situation I don't
I don't understand how it how
it.
interact with this bill.
Thank you.
Different way different way
maybe are you asking if this
federal law that deals with
prison.
Assaults has anything to do with
the Human Rights Act the
modifications in the unites Act
just to clarify what you're
asking Mr no Mr chair and and
senator I I'm asking if someone
who was previously in cars to be
because gender identity self
perceptions they get to decide
right right they get to decide
so after their car straight in
and assigned to a the segregated
facility you know based on on
how they self how they were self
receiving at the time of
incarceration if that self
perception changes okay and they
were assigned to whatever
combination it was whether it's
in a I would so I said present
it could be
it maybe the college dorm if
they have that or or homeless
shelter they the assignment was
made and after the sign was made
by the public body the public
you know that for certain
government worker their self
perception changes and so now
they're going to request a
different commendation I'm
wondering if this bill is going
to allow that that after they're
assigned to a you know something
that they're gonna self
perceived differently there
generate any changes after this
time is made and what that allow
it seems like it would it would
allow them.
And if they're denied that then
they have a case of
discrimination I'm just asking
Mr chair for if if I may um
you're gonna just if I may Mr
chairman and committee just
address the idea that like a
light switch we change our our
gender identity because we don't
know okay because it and I do
want to to some and I and I
appreciate that you you you get
that because that's not
something that just happens like
one day I feel like I'm a
masculine presenting lesbian in
the next day I'm super feminine
that doesn't happen of the
reality is that people don't
change that on a regular basis
because they're such a journey
that it takes to get to that
point of living your truth and
being comfortable with who you
are and how you're presenting
how you perceive yourself how
you're comfortable with other
people perceiving yourself that
that that's very rare that
somebody changes from one time
to the next so I I I do hope
that Mr chair and senator that
that's but that's understood
absolutely and Mr chair center
absolute and I've read a lot on
this because we have a lot of
bills so and I think journey is
the word that comes up during
the we're just it just comes up
but I'm but Johnny's not in the
bill I mean I'm asking what's
what's legal so I'm not
suggesting and asking what kind
of happens I'm asking what are
we legal doing and if the court
does not have some kind of no
other way to do it if it is
truly it's just is not defined
as a journey or a you have to
have this much time and I have a
doctor's note or whatever else
it just says self perception of
the bill so that that's what I'm
asking I mean how can we deny
someone if if the bill says self
perception and the whatever the
person that's been assigned to
the.
Yeah the the female homeless
shelter or the mic mail you know
inmate board.
And they come and they say I it
says in your bill self
perception that is how I
perceive my gender identity is
this I'm not suggesting on any
statistical level how often it
happens I'm just saying legally
is that permitted is the light
switch permitted and it seems
like it is I don't see anywhere
where it's precluded.
Mr chair Senator I want to be
clear the bill doesn't determine
what discrimination is if
someone is experiencing
discrimination they are
experience it experiencing that
but the bill does it is it it
insures a pathway to determine
if the judge will that will can
determine what discrimination is
so that's that's what this bill
is about we we're not saying
that what they've experienced
with that person's experiences
Screamin ation if they feel it's
discrimination they have a
pathway to have a conversation
with a hearing officer at the
Human Rights Commission and then
that hearing officer will say.
This is this is discover there's
evidence of discrimination and
now we will into the court
system and and make a remedy
figure out what's happened there
that's what that's what the bill
does Mr Chairman representative
then then that's my question is
the pathway right so the let's
go back to the I mean we can go
through different for different
scenarios we're we're still kind
of stuck on the male inmate
right that self perceived
differently
The the pathways called to judge
right this is the judiciary
branch and so they're gonna be
they're gonna say I self
perceive what let's say they
sell perceived as one I'm just
asking what the law does you
know they still perceived as a
woman.
Where is the judge gonna find
anything that that trump's that
me to me it's kind of a trump
card itself perception.
How can it not be
discrimination.
How your bill is written if it
says self perception how can the
judge say.
No you know you were denied
access to the female ward.
But the but the person says it's
my self perception it's in the
law do you deceive just my
concern.
Mr chair and centers committee
I.
I think I understand your
question and what I would say is
that the Human Rights Commission
was founded in nineteen seventy
one and most of the protected
classes did not have definitions
to begin with and we have
entrusted the Human Rights
Commission for the last few I
think it's fifty years I didn't
do math I was like policy major
so I believe that's fifty years
over fifty years we trusted the
Human Rights Commission to
determine whether or not scope
of evidence of discrimination
exists and we've trusted both
District Court judges at the
state level and federal court
judges to determine what is and
isn't discrimination and I think
what's clear for us in this
situation is that the Supreme
Court said
in nineteen eighty.
Taxpayer dollars can be used to
discriminate there is no law
preventing that and this brings
forward a lot that prevents that
and from and from that point
forward I think we just have to
continue to trust those folks
who've who've been doing this
professionally for the last
fifty years with with
Understanding the changing
environment understand that
everything's going on around is
that they can make a
determination as to what is and
isn't discriminatory Mr chair
and and etcetera I I
respectfully say that this is
not answer my question I mean
it's the law says what
discrimination is that judges
don't just get to kind of decide
I mean they have to look they're
looking at the law and they're
they're making a judgment based
on the law and it's right here
discriminatory practice it is
right here in the definition it
is a self perception so maybe
we're not.
You know I'm I've and I know
we're not on the same wavelength
I think to get it but I I might
my question is not answered my
but I think what I what I'm
saying is it seems that the that
there's not a.
There's not even as a sincerity
yes I think the judge the the
courts are going to have to come
up with something there but when
it says self perception that's
what we're gonna go within the
law and the person that's in
front of the judge is going to
say this is how I self perceived
and the judge is going to have I
I'm not gonna say their hands
are but they're interpreting the
law and it clearly says self
perception and that's I don't
know I guess what is in with
this because I think we're an
impasse but that's that's the
trump card in the courtroom self
perception that persons in
charge what and that's what the
losses what this bill.
Prohibits is discriminatory
actions that doesn't mean that
an inmate gets to pick whichever
prison they want to be in.
Just because they say that they
are that the self perceived as
as feminine doesn't mean they
then get to pick which which
prison they go to the the
corrections department still is
responsible for deciding where
they go and they might might
very well decide in this
instance that will provide your
you you you you of self
perceived as as feminine we will
put you in this in a in a
facility somewhere else will put
you in another unit in this
facility we will do whatever it
takes to make sure you're safe
but you don't get to pick which
prison you go to.
Yeah and and Mr chair those in
the it's only if they say well
you know you you.
We're gonna keep you right in
with the other male members of
the the.
The other male inmates that were
housing here then that might be
the basis for discrimination
that's what you take to the
court not whether or not your
self perception is.
I mean it your self perception
is what it is exactly as you
say.
But then what does the
corrections department do about
it is the issue and if they
treat that person in a fair way.
Then that's then there's no
basis for saying there's
discrimination Mr chair how can
they treat them any different
from a one of a woman that's in
the women's facility but that
discrimination if they say
they're women by moving them to
us at the separate on that point
to the pre has detailed
detail to.
The criteria for how to how to
address this and that's you know
and Andrea is actually governs
this issue so this bill doesn't
really deal with it and and I
could go we could use Mr chair
we could use.
Other bathrooms are homeless
shelter we could use other other
similar you know examples where
the the same principle applies
but.
You know I mean I if someone
says a room at the way this
reads I don't see how we could
treat them differently from
other women that have had public
accommodations assigned.
Thank you Mr any other
discussion we have a motion to
I'm I'm over the past the motion
produced just one seconded from
second Senator Hickey I'd like
to
I'm I'm happy to do referring to
Senator Hickey.
This on the basis of age or.
All right very good parental
love motion by Senator Hickey
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Any other discussion.
We still were hanging onto a
quorum by the skin of our teeth
here.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle cinema is
Senator McKenna Senators
committees the Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator AUMENT yes
center to the piano yes.
But by four one vote to have the
do yes Representative thank you.
Now we'll go well Senator.
I just this is still in
Judiciary
McKenna let's do your dog
tethering bill for twenty nine
she's not here where did she go.
Thank you.
I know the very McKenna goes
going to do our dog.
Research was McKenna can we find
her.
Yeah.
I do.
So the other one she wants to
rule the.
Put later the rent increases in
air conditioning.
And how many of yeah look this
it had and if they come there
because.
Look this is probably an
Judiciary have autonomy of.
No rent increases well she's
she's she's getting it of the is
there an amendment or sub I'm
not sure which and once it later
in the it's not ready yet.
Yes.
Broadband changes thank you.
Whoever gets there first will do
rules we're we need we need food
for our mill.
I know it.
We've got a quorum all we need
is some action.
That.
Okay.
Have.
What your doctor during the
long.
So.
Voluntary manslaughter
exclusions.
Senate bill three sixty three.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
honorable members this is Senate
bill three hundred sixty three
deals with our our voluntary
manslaughter statute that we
propose a legal fix to a
quagmire that was brought to our
attention by the court of
appeals sadly in a case that
involved.
the death of a death of a young
man.
In state versus a state versus
Matthew Chavis.
The the court of appeals said
that the defendant was entitled
to a voluntary manslaughter
jury instruction and remanded
the case back to District Court.
The defendant in that matter
come you know tend to commit
armed robbery the the victim of
the armed robbery brandished a
weapon to defend himself and was
subsequently of kids.
so this fix will will not affect
that case but it will affect
hopefully no basis in the future
but if that would ever happen
again.
this would fix fix the law that
From a policy standpoint that
that person is not entitled to a
step down instruction should
should be secondary murder or
not guilty so with that I'll
turn it over to a representative
from the twenty general's office
and are very special expert
witness thank you.
The internet.
Good afternoon Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kristy Lee I am the deputy
for criminal affairs of the
attorney general's office I'm
also a career prosecutor with
about sixteen plus years of
experience prosecuting similar
cases I was not the prosecutor
in this case but I do handle and
have handled many many violent
crimes including homicide the
attorney general's office does
strongly support this bill we
think that this is sort of an
oversight that are court appeals
has urged a fix for because it
doesn't make sense that we would
allow someone two who has
provoked there Vict a
provocation Defense I would like
to also introduce is Frank and
in the pandemic to her.
Senators hold the Mike up it's
not picking you up so hear me
now.
That the whole the button and
could yield about about the
folks listen you hear me.
Yes we can.
Can yes okay.
So
This is a letter that I've sent
to anybody who will listen.
My son Tyler lackey the twenty
four year old army combat
veteran was shot and killed in
an attempted ATM robbery
February fifth twenty sixteen
Matthew Chavis was tried and
convicted of his murder in
October of twenty eighteen he
was sentenced to twenty three
and a half years for the murder
and associated felonies his
conviction was overturned by the
New Mexico court of appeals and
a new trial has been ordered.
The court of appeals ruled that
the law required the presiding
judge to instruct the jury to
consider voluntary manslaughter
charge in addition to the murder
charges this charges based on
the imperfect self defense in
that Chavis possessed an actual
fear of imminent danger of death
or great bodily injury from
Tyler.
Chavis initiated the conflict
when he approached Tyler Tyler
pulled the weapon he legally
owned with a concealed carry
permit Chavis retreated to his
vehicle Tyler followed and
demanded Chavis wait for law
enforcement Chavis then shot
Tyler twice and drove off.
Chavis was arms throughout the
confrontation there was no point
at which Tyler was not in danger
there were other options
available to Chavis had he
actually been in fear for his
life it took Tyler four steps to
follow Chavis to his car this
can hardly be considered
vigilante ism.
To apply an imperfect self
defense to lessen the charge of
murder to manslaughter is to
blame the victim for getting
attacked and reasonably taking
defensive action.
After shooting Tyler Chavis and
his accomplice Veronica Trimble
said their stolen car on fire
and still another they traveled
through northern New Mexico then
went south and into Texas and
into Oklahoma committing
additional armed robberies
through all three states local
and state police departments
were involved along the way and
they were finally apprehended in
Ardmore Oklahoma by the U. S.
federal marshals allowing these
criminals to walk free in our
society is a disrespect to all
the hard working law enforcement
professionals who put their
lives on the line to bring them
in.
I'd like to also point out that
the presiding judge Christina
Hermio heard all of the
testimony saw all of the
evidence and did not find there
was any.
Reason for self defense she
knows law she knows laws
regarding some self defense and
imperfect self defense and
didn't find that it applied.
So.
We're asking you to address this
law and close this loophole.
Very good thank you madam.
This video Senator.
Just thank you Mr just the of
the adjustment is to R. thirty
dash to dash three the
manslaughter statute and this
language job.
The drafted by the lawyers
Attorney General's office and
Legislative Council and this
would this would prevent
This injustice from happening
again.
Thank.
Go to the audience is there
anyone in the audience who wants
to speak in support of this bill
yes JD come on up go ahead and
get in line behind him.
Check check check one two that
on its own.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce it seems a new example
presents itself each week of how
our justice system is unbalanced
and tilted against victims and
in favor of criminal offenders
to greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce offers that sympathy
and support to the family of
Tyler lackey whose tragic murder
and the justice system's
response since his murder
conviction has made this
legislation necessary everyone
should agree that a perpetrator
initiates a violent crime and
the victim diss Defense Emma
herself resulting in the
perpetrator killing the victims
and that perpetrators should not
get the benefit of a lesser
charge and letters lesser
sentence like voluntary
manslaughter to the average
person this concept is
incomprehensible and the chamber
asked the Legislature to clarify
this issue with this legislation
thank you thank you Judy.
Yes ma'am.
Can everybody hear me yeah.
Hello my name is Jennifer track
and I knew Tyler basically my
entire life so something that's
very close to me and when
everything took place I had
never had to sit in a courtroom
I never had to go through
anything like this in my life at
the end of all of it we got our
conviction I thought that
justice would be served and you
know J. for us when it got
overturned we had to go back
through the system we have to do
this all over again I was amazed
to find out that are lost
supports such a thing we trusted
in the line we believe that it
would bring us justice and when
it didn't.
Now that's why we're here we
want to make sure that no other
family has to go through this
that no one has to see such
injustice and has to sit back
your courtroom and hope again
that the person who murdered
their family will again get
second degree murder because
that's what they were originally
convicted with so I hope
everyone can be in support of
this bill.
Thank.
Mr chair members of the
committee retainer on behalf of
the New Mexico district
attorneys association
I think Mr Bolton Mr Clinton I
said it best when the after so I
don't have much more to follow
however we do ask you to listen
to the victims
our.
Every DA throughout the state is
dealing with and talking with
the victims throughout all these
trials and we think it's
important that their voices be
heard and so we we thank you for
hearing this bill and we ask for
your support on it thank you Mr
thank you.
Yes ma'am.
What about the other real names
getting anyways
I would like you all to take
into consideration passing this
did you introduce yourself yes
my name is amber Mitchell and I
hope that you pass this bill I
believe that it's quite common
sense that if you initiate
something that.
You shouldn't get away with it
after the fact of trying to
start something when it's wrong
as a previous individuals said
it's quite common sense to say
that if I push you over and then
I ran away and said you're
picking on me that's not quite
how it works out
so yes I'm in support thank you.
Thank you for.
And then we have on on zoom
Joseph Mantegna.
Go ahead Joseph.
Hello my name is Joseph want on
your own time also family member
with a Jennifer archer back in
amber Mitchell there affected by
the murder of Tyler lackey and
again it's just a oversight and
a common sense thing to fix this
law and make sure that people
initiating violent felonies or
any crime in that matter can I
get away with something and
claim self defense it's just sad
that we had to go through this
and as a family.
And
It's you know it's for anyone
else to have to go through it
they shouldn't have to so I just
urge you all to please pass this
bill.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Okay.
Anybody here opposed to this
bill.
Nobody online opposed members of
the committee.
I've got a couple questions for
first no matter what we do is
not going to apply to the case
right Mister chairman Senator
Ortiz Pena corrected this will
not apply to the Chavis case of
will apply to all new cases
moving further.
And.
Miss yes.
I still have to go through
another trial and watch the
video of my son getting shot
twice hitting the ground yes no
I mean I I I fully understand
what you're gonna have to face a
but
In my reading this right that
that the old manslaughter laws
were written back in.
Nineteen sixty three.
Mr Chairman said are to be no
that was when they were last
codified in New Mexico law but
manslaughter laws are centuries
and centuries old
Yeah and and it was this the
first time this.
Mess it makes several confusing
language let somebody get off.
Mister chairman Senator Ortiz
Pino the the the doctrine or the
notion rather than perfect self
defense was articulated in the
nineteen ninety five court case.
And that was that was
successfully.
If this case that that because
that would this notion of
imperfect self defense.
Mr Chavis was entitled to a step
down the jury went into the back
with guilty sectarian murder or
not guilty.
And what the court of appeals
decided was that they should
have gone in the back room with
the extraction of secular murder
guilty voluntary manslaughter
guilty or not guilty.
On that because the jury was not
instructed on a voluntary
manslaughter stepped down
instruction.
then up Mr Travis came to a new
trial so when he does go to
trial this this bill will not
effective yeah he will simply
get that step down instructed
the extracts with the extra
option the jury will have so the
good this this is been this was
noted back in nineteen ninety
five there was a case that that
this came up and and the
legislature never acted during
all that to.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
to pay no I don't know the facts
of the case or whether it
prompted an injustice
necessarily it was state versus
a beta nineteen ninety five
Supreme Court case.
for the folks keep its court
home at one twenty New Mexico
two thirty three but it was
that we just read what the
current case says.
That that case the lawyers of
the appellate lawyers use that
case to hang their hat on on the
current case to win a new trial.
Okay.
All right actually it I may Mr
chairman that the up the
nineteen ninety five K. talked
about it that explaining that
the claim of imperfect self
defense proved presents an issue
of mitigating circumstances that
may reduce our murder to a
manslaughter.
But there was a decision made
not to appeal this is a pre
recorded seem to cut and dried
it was yield that this Mr
chairman Center to pay no the
Supreme Court did not grants or
sorry but instead in debt to the
the court appeals rights in its
opinion this needs a legislative
fix for this hopefully next year
it'll should fix it but I think
a phone call I appreciate
writing an opinion I think
another supporting this that we
should fixes it seems to me long
ago but and to late for the
Chavez family but let let's
let's do something about this
now
what's the will of the committee
Senator Ingle.
Thank you.
Quick question of the of the of
the district attorney's.
Of those issues is written for
they feel like this is going to
help the situation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes I think that in
the future if we have a
situation like Tyler's where
someone is trying to hold
someone after they've committed
a felony or defend themselves
this would prevents them from
being able to say I only shot
them because they scared me
essentially which is how it
happened in this case so it
would fix it in the future if
this type of situation comes up
again Mr lackey was
Had legally owned and possessed
his gun he was robbed and he was
trying to hold his perpetrator
so that police could arrive and
that's when he was shot and
killed so in situations like
that it just makes sense and it
would prevent this from
happening again thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chair what other situations
with the supply to.
Mr chairman
Senator Ingle hopefully this
bona fide any situations but but
it will apply to any up acted
which the perpetrator initiates
a felony we're in the course of
a felony
If the perpetrator up.
During the course of conduct of
a felony offense I would lose
their their ability to argue
self defense so that would be
maybe an armed robbery maybe
maybe
A situation that that escalated
that would compel a victim to to
use.
deadly force or the threat of
deadly force I if you were a
hallmark or kill that person you
would lose your self defense.
Argument.
Your certainly more that.
For more the circumstances than
I am but I've just been here
while we passed bills thinking
we solve something and then
something just very close
happens and we didn't quick.
What are we thought we passed it
didn't apply to that new
situations such that's what I
want to hope for is that this
will apply to other situations
of somewhat similarly without it
having to be something totally
exact all the time that's why I
ask if the district attorney
if they and they think they can
handle this the this is going to
help their situation.
In a levy eight this situation
we have an doesn't have to be
exact exactly alike but it is
going to make a difference in
some of these things that could
be decided this way.
Okay thank you.
Anybody else with will of the
committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator Hickey.
Any other discussion or debate.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center my SS
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
street is.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Tallman.
Yes center to the penal yes.
Two five seven zero vote you
have a do pass senator thank you
thank you I want to thank Mrs
Frank for being here today.
Thank you Mr the.
we do have another bill Attorney
General person exemption be
seventy one.
Three seventy one in here is the
Attorney General on Q..
Good.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members were joined by the
Attorney General state Mexico Mr
Raul Torrez of the attorney
general's office was was not
under spole for over a century.
And then what it was recently
decided that that it should go
under spoke not too legislature
or legislative initiative rather
but just by kind of
administrative.
Our decision making so we're not
asking the legislature to change
something necessarily that a
drastic way but we are asking of
from this moment forward at the
attorney general's office not be
under the state personnel office
have more latitude with regards
to building a team and having
folks at that office that
that that that are committed to
the to the cause of the of the
of the electorate in terms of
the GNU Attorney General or any
Attorney General for that matter
with that I'll turn it over to
eighty dollars.
this is Mr chairman welcome and
thank you thank you Mr chairman
in in members of the committee I
I think I should probably start
on a question that that was
raised gosh I think just
yesterday by Senator Sedillo
Lopez when she asked me
specifically about what would be
the response of our office it
was if it was discovered that an
attorney in that office had
disclosed confidential
information and you'll recall
that my answer to that question
was they would be subject to
disciplinary action subject to
the limitations of the state
person act
what that really means is that I
don't have the same latitude
over the professional staff
within the attorney general's
office that I did recently
inside the district attorney's
office every major law office in
the state public defender's
office the district attorney's
offices across the state all
have discretion over the hiring
and firing in recruiting of
professional staff and so what
this bill simply does is return
us to the status quo that has
existed in this state or had
existed in the state for the
better part of a century it
would give us the opportunity to
go out and recruit on a more
expedited basis but it would
also allow us to shift the focus
of the agency in considerable
ways in fundamentally you need
to think about the attorney
general's office's attorney
general's office and the
attorneys within that office as
advocates of the policy of the
administration and this
administration our emphasis has
been on rebuilding the civil
affirmative civil litigation
division the civil rights
division unfair trade practices
act work anti
anti trust litigation that we
haven't done a great deal of
time and right now we simply
don't have the flexibility to
hire fire
And recruit most importantly the
types of people that we need to
achieve the goals that we've set
out for the agency and so that
was the that is the purpose of
this bill and with that would
stand for questions.
Very good is there anyone in the
audience is here to support this
bill.
Is there any what up yes come on
up and say something.
Mr Mrs Mr chair I apologize we
to do with the New Mexico
district attorneys association
were not in support of this for
also then opposition I am just
hearing cases questions
regarding the actual plants that
that is the dust plan at this
time and I'm waiting for the
Attorney General be a little
nicer to me before.
Senator support of our state
will opposition thank you if
thank you.
David else anybody here in
opposition to this bill through
yes someone up.
Run the okay.
Here for the dog tethering bill
is a.
Okay
that one online for opposition.
We have one person online who is
opposed to this and nobody in
support of it who it is merry
Smith.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
I am merry H. Smith and attorney
and among that dozens of AG
employees found by the court of
appeals in twenty nineteen to
have been fired in violation of
the personal act by a then
eighteen elect all there just.
I oppose SB three seven one the
stated purpose of the person Act
is to establish a system of
personnel administration based
solely on qualifications and
ability in nineteen sixty four
after the person Act was enacted
the AG opined that the person
act is intended to insulate in
some manner the rate state
employee from the whims and
caprice of the political
election so as to provide
continuity of government in a
changing environment.
Accepting the governor most
employees have all other elected
state officials state treasurer
state auditor secretary of state
lands commission to for
classified employees under the
person act and are not subject
to political whims and caprice
employees of the attorney
general's office must not be
treated differently.
I.
Does just be three seventy one
because it interjects politics.
Into a law firm and.
Diminishes the integrity and the
abilities of employees there
including the Attorney.
I personally was fired after
sixteen and a half years of
service to the state at the
attorney general's office with
the annual of a annual
evaluation that never was below
exceeds expectations I got a
three sentence email from the
transition team at eight o'clock
in the evening on December
sixteenth two thousand fourteen.
Firing me without any
opportunity for me to ask why or
to defend myself that's that's
on conscionable well it
indefensible please vote do not
pass on SP three seventy one and
maintain the integrity of the
attorney general's office and
its employees and protect us
protect them from politics and
political whims and caprice
thank you thank you Mr.
What is.
What are we hearing that's the.
They're having a committee.
It's there's yeah.
Further let's assume echo.
Or.
Senator okay.
We have to live we're we're
working under limitations that
there okay
I just had a question before we
go to the the the the committee
your bills it doesn't really do
away with person like to move
you under the district
attorney's.
Person Act is to how does that
differ from the state personal
act.
Mr chair and I and I would
actually also defer to Mister
tender up to get into the
particulars but as a as a former
district attorney what I can
tell you is that there are
comprehensive protections
primarily for staff members and
career paralegals secretaries
frontline investigators in
people who can provide that
continuity who are not
exercising professional judgment
they are not in a policy making
posture however and I exercise
this right is district attorney
just like the public defender's
office and other offices we have
the discretion to
remove people who are not
conforming to office policy but
also to create new positions and
fill those positions with real
speed and to also reclassify of
certain attorney positions from
one component piece of the
organization to another and I
and I understand and respect the
concern about politics what what
I can tell you is is troubling
and difficult for someone who
runs a large legal office is
take for example a position that
I find myself in where we have
lots and lots of prosecutors but
not nearly enough water
attorneys for antitrust
attorneys for civil rights
attorneys anyone who's run a
complex law office knows that
you can't and instantly convert
one of those line prosecutors
into an anti trust attorney and
agency heads have to have the
ability in the discretion to
build out component areas within
the agency to meet those new
objectives the district
attorneys program or
compensation plan gives us the
latitude while also offering
protections due process
protections to.
in certain classified employees
and eight we have classified
employees and exempt employees
within that framework it's just
a different framework than the
state person act so let me see
if I understand them Mr tree
General the the the as you said
the secretaries in the
investigators.
Anybody this below attorney I
guess would be covered by some
kind of a person system that
protects them.
Yes ma'am yes and it and and are
they then transferred over to
this district attorney's
personal system where the state
in the state personal system no
they all members of the attorney
general's office would move into
the district attorney's plan
they would be conduct convert
under the classifications that
are set forth in that plan and
there are some modifications to
that plan in this proposed bill
because not all of the job
descriptions that we have inside
the AG's office perfectly
aligned with what was existing
in the DA's office but at at at
its base the staff support is
covered and protected and the
other thing that I would add to
put people's minds at ease and
this is this came through in the
FIR everything that we're
talking about doing applies
prospectively we concede in the
FIR that the people currently in
the building have a vested
property right under the old
system and so they would not
they would they would be
grandfathered into that system
but moving forward when we bring
people in we bring them into the
dust system and then that that
would be able to to manage those
needs as they arose.
and.
Will this require you to have
your own person office and and
to accept applications and then
process all the paperwork and
everything Mr chair asked as the
district attorney's office
currently does we would be
responsible for recruiting and
that's another big bonus for us
because right now and I can give
you a clear example we tried to
hire one of literally the most
gifted child abuse prosecutors
in the state I know this because
you work for me at the DA's
office she failed to check a box
on an application form and CPO
that listed that that basically
subtracted a year of her
experience she was disqualified
from the search and she was not
eligible to be hired into this
child abuse position and we
could not get Spode on wind it's
process is she could go back
into the system and check the
right box and that's the kind of
thing that that really causes us
issues in terms of managing of
an organization of this size for
each district attorney's office
handles their own person they do
there's just an overall.
Description of how that program
works that everybody would be
tier two including your office
yes and there's in in Mr
chairman there is a process that
people go through for example if
you're gonna give a raise you
have to go to the board that's
kannst debt that is composed of
dust and now a member of the
AG's office that would be part
of that board whether or not to
justify the raise or the re
classification of an employee.
If I may Mister Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino when we up created the
independent public defender
commission.
This was one of the arguments
that they're losing good lawyers
because they would apply they
could hire might away into this
years that we're applying to the
PED's would would take jobs with
the dust or whoever because they
can hire literally on the spot.
And and then I have another
question for you because the
bill specifically lays out just
five positions really.
The
Yeah I'm page six the public
information officer chief
financial officer chief
administrative officer chief
information officer human
resources manager and special
program director.
That when I guess was in there
already but it doesn't say
anything about attorneys.
Mister chair if you look on on
line for its already included
sorting concluded on page six
line for district attorney
attorney that's all right yeah
these are you're taking you're
you're you're adding in these to
the district attorney's thing.
Okay in consultation with the
district attorney's office
returning attorney district
office manager and then those
that are listed.
Okay got you members of the
committee.
Senator Hickey we have a motion
for a do pass.
Seconded by Senator Ingle any
other discussion or questions.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senate committees.
This Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Tallman yes enter to the
penal yes.
Six of six to one Bojo the
defense.
Thank you.
Okay Senator McKenna list to
your bill your tethering bill.
Same question yes it does.
Yes.
This is insane here it is this
if you're on to a six lane for.
There are already included in
the office distributors so that
turned.
We have these.
From the city.
On this page yes I think
Thank.
Would.
Two hundred.
Senate bill for twenty nine.
We have a set.
Yes good afternoon chairman
members yeah I do have a
committee saw.
We're just before twenty nine
thank you we have a motion on
this up.
Senator Ingle would you like to
make the motion of the so.
How would that read.
And that we.
And if we do it do the tests and
for twenty.
Okay.
And the for discussion purposes
do pass and Senate.
Health and public affairs
committee substitutes for for
twenty so tell us about the
substitutes Senator overweight
yep go ahead I thank you
chairman thank you committee
members so with the substitute
we've added another exception to
tethering and we've changed the
word restraint to change and to
route respond to the attorney
general's observation in the
FIR.
So those those other exceptions
chairman and committee members
we're adding kind
And activity related to legal
Fox Sports.
And then attendance of legal
public events such as picnics
adoption fairs and group
training classes.
So you just dropped restraint
yes the more you use the word
change and change instead.
And then added two more
exceptions for tethering what
were the two extractions I miss
those emotions they are.
Conduct number of page two this
is number five.
Conduct that is directly rated
related to the activities of
legal Fox Sports and then number
six legal public events such as
picnics adoption fares group
training classes.
Hello yes and thank you chairman
one more on page one.
Some of us see our under section
one part B. we've added for
longer than three hours within a
twenty four hour period.
Okay so that the visitors
specific time frame yes whereas
before it was just the longer
that is necessary to complete a
task okay okay.
Let's go to the audience and did
you want to say anything please
your expert witness yeah and I
Chairman can I say couple things
about the bill why I'm
sponsoring it yeah okay thank
you I'm so the bills to prohibit
the fixed point chaining of dogs
in New Mexico chairman that is
with the chain or rope or leash
all day all night day after day
after day in my subject matter
expert agency still here will
share some examples of what
she's come across
the past ten years the reason
why I'm here today sponsoring
this bill and proud to do so in
twenty twenty one I noticed two
dogs a mom and the son who were
and they still are tethered and
outside and I knew I knew some
coaching to talk to the human
caretakers to try to get them
off their their the ropes
so that's when I found NM dog
and missed out and she coached
me unfortunately I wasn't
successful to get those dots
freed but I was determined then
to help the state.
with legislation to stop this
practice.
Last March I attended the
Valencia county commissioners
meeting and witness the county
voting for no tethering
ordinance and I shared with the
commission then that I would
initiate a statewide bill to do
the same.
chairman and committee members.
There are.
Six counties in New Mexico that
already have prohibition on
fixed point tethering seven
cities in New Mexico plus
through the communities and
there are twenty three states
and the district of Columbia
that also have no tethering
language in their statutes and
so with that chairman and
committee members I want to turn
the Mike over to my expert
witness miss Angela still.
Still welcome thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee
thank you for having me here
today to speak to you about the
dangers chained dogs face across
the state of New Mexico.
While I am here today is your
subject matter expert I would
like to see the true experts are
the dogs who live their so
called lives at the end of their
chains day in and day out night
after terrifying night under the
scorching New Mexico sun and the
frigid New Mexico winners they
fight to survive the fight to
remain emotionally intact with
respect they are here to experts
but they have no voice is an
honor to speak on behalf of them
here today.
My name is Angela still I am the
founder and director of in and
out we are an all volunteer
nonprofit serving chain dogs and
victims of animal cruelty since
two thousand and ten over the
past thirteen years NM dot has
encountered thousands of dogs at
the end of their chains.
For primary means of containment
it is not for the faint of heart
and our volunteers are trained
specifically on how to safely
approach and interact with the
chain dog.
It's also very hard work
physically emotionally and
mentally but our goal is always
the same to serve in to protect
to better the lives of these
stocks to educate their
guardians to the dangers their
dog face faces and to provide
the support needed in these
efforts.
NM dot has horrific first hand
experience with extreme chaining
cases from all parts of the
state from Eunice to Clayton as
tech to Deming and in all points
in between chaining is cruel
House memorial nineteen a study
done by the New Mexico
department of public safety
concludes just that.
We have seen significant drops
in animal in extreme cases of
animal cruelty in New Mexico
jurisdictions that have adopted
and utilized their anti
tethering ordinances in a
proactive manner.
Is important to note that this
bill will provide a tool to law
enforcement and animal control
officers to help increase public
safety and help the dogs of our
state.
Well the FIR discusses sending
people to jail for tethering
dogs I've spoken to many experts
and none of us are aware of any
cases where someone has been
jailed for this type of offence.
The punitive aspects of the
proposed bill will be an
officer's discretion and applied
only in the most severe cases
many households coming to self
compliance once an anti
tethering ordinance is passed in
their community and we do expect
the same to be true but the
statewide prohibition.
What is the purpose of this bill
might one might ask Mr chair
committee members the answer is
very simple the purpose of SB
four to nine judges law is to
protect chain dogs across the
state and to lessen the public
safety risk chain dogs pose to
our citizens especially our
children.
A log ins tethering would be a
bright rule a bright light rule
that empowers law enforcement to
cite violations remove animals
that are in severe distress and
protect public safety there is
no public benefit to tethering
humane practices and public
safety should always one out
thank you for your time and your
consideration I'm available for
any questions thank you
if we can get a show of hands
from those in the audience in
support of this bill.
Good and we have a number
online.
Have a anybody here in
opposition to this bill.
Okay anybody online enough
position.
Of okay we're gonna do we're
gonna take of four people in
support of it you could come up
the you want to pick your for we
have to on on the zoom who
you've indicated our our experts
and will listen to them when we
go to zoom that's Ellen Schmidt
just Weston.
And Andrea Taylor.
Please go ahead ma'am introduce
yourself and then good evening
chairman and committee my name
is Martina auditing I was the
director of the A. W. C. Pat
centers the animal shelter in
Las Vegas New Mexico and San
Miguel county for ten years and
I've worked in animal welfare
for approximately fifteen years
I'm here to speak to a very
specific needs of taking care of
tethered and move to other dogs
which is then had many disasters
and natural disasters as well as
you all know what San Miguel
County and Maury county suffered
from horrible fires last year
that will now will result in
terrible flooding I've also
worked the dogs had fire in P.
had us several years ago so I've
been on the ground in emergency
situations where animals are
being evacuated from changed all
of our what we call the
forgotten docks for gotten dogs
often means that they've never
been on a leash they've never
been off the property they may
have never been in the vehicle
the very likely have never been
to a veterinarian receive the
appropriate vaccinations so when
you were evacuating animals of
this type it's going to be
extremely stressful for the
animal and when they get to
wherever they're going to be
health care additional problems.
First.
The death.
Worst case scenario.
Can you imagine that death
sitting at the end of your chain
you can't get off of it and the
fires rolling towards you or the
water's really torture we know
for a fact that many dogs died
in north county in San Miguel
County because they were left
behind on their chains best case
scenario they're taking their
removed either with their family
or by law enforcement or first
responders
on their animals that are used
to be handled they're not
socialized they're unsafe to be
handled by other people they
don't have the proper
vaccinations to be around other
animals and these are just the
beginnings of the problems in
terms of a long term state
somewhere that they that is not
their home I just really want
you to think about all of the
the results of having a tether
to die.
That really needs to be
addressed we appreciate you we
hope you do the project no pass
thank you thank you so can yes.
Senators I'm Alex Alex and I'm a
former animal control officer
San Miguel County
the biggest push back you can
get about a bill like this is
that it puts undue burden on the
pet owners and I as an enforcer
of the law we have that
tightening San Miguel here to
tell you nothing could be
further from the truth just a
week just so you know what
enforcement of a law like this
actually looks like and not your
fears of conservative fines and
going to jail or whatever you
know is firstly we do is we
inform the in the form the
offenders of the law very
surprised many people don't know
that you're not allowed to do
this horrible thing to an animal
was to get the law I'm sorry of
course to make other
arrangements that usually right
there will put people compliance
also given thirty days to make
with make other kinds of
arrangements come back in thirty
days if they're still not
compliance you find out why
often times a be like well I
can't afford a fence I don't
know how to build a fence I
don't know where to get a kennel
whatever their issue may be then
I go to met any other humane
societies with that will donate
the materials I need although
make builders are would do
everything I can to get that
percent into compliance if
activities after that after
they've turned down or help
wasn't sufficient
then we go into vacation mode
and only then we got a citation
even at citation time I given up
I said if you come to compliance
before the citation goes to
court all drop the charges so I
don't know what burden.
Thinks is happening these pet
owners it's not true
so there is no downside to this
bill there is however a lot of
up so it's it's bill as you you
may or may not know oftentimes
people who are harming animals
or neglecting them in this
matter are also involved in
other crimes much bigger crimes
I can't tell you how many times
I've been to a house as an
animal control officer on a
minimal complete found a meth
lab in the kitchen but I'm not a
police officer I can't do
anything about that if it is a
state crime to do this a police
officer can go to that house on
a on a yes I think and PC's a
metal in the kitchen he can
actually do something about it
this gives all law enforcement
another tool to get closer to
much bigger crimes so I implore
you please pass this bill.
Thank you.
Next.
Good afternoon chairman so.
County I've been doing this for
eight years I can tell you.
Dog attack.
The.
Two other animals as well as.
Is beyond what you would
believe.
I have removed dogs that have
lived on chains for they break
their chain they're tired of
running around in their feces
they're tired of nobody talking
then they dump their water over
I've had dogs hang themselves
trying to get away trying to
find a way to get water the ones
that do break free they go after
other animals and they go after
children I have a little boy
down south and then providing
you have as your ripped off.
And was modeled a bus stop
because dogs got loose from
their chains and that's.
Their mental state completely
changes.
So they're not socialized these
are sociable creatures they want
to be with our people they want
to.
Be inside or in a yard where
they can run and play.
But when they don't get that it
changes our mental state and
that also makes it difficult for
us as officers because we're the
ones that have to deal with
these animals were the ones that
have to go and remove them.
The public safety.
And as heartbreaking as it is
there are some that yes you can
say.
But there are others that there
is no point to state because
they are too far beyond saving
and it's heartbreaking when it
could have been avoided.
From the get go.
Thank you for your support thank
you Mr and finally.
I
need to.
Hi my name is Linda Kastner and
just a few random thoughts I
hope you continue this role of
do pass for this as well
and then I just read that the
animal legal defense fund
publish their
state animal protection law
ranking and guess where New
Mexico fell number fifty so it
sure would be great if we were
in at the bottom of that animal
protection list from the animal
defense league.
Then my random thought is I
volunteer with my dog through
humane education through the
Humane Society here in Santa Fe
we go to schools and libraries
and we usually we'll talk about
two things one will be dogs
safety and the number one thing
that we tell these children is
don't ever approach a dog on a
chain and I hope that they will
learn that lesson the other
thing that we teach them where
they actually come to it
themselves is that dogs are
sentient beings and may need
love in total lies in education
and shelter and warmth and
everything that a person would
so they don't need to be twenty
four seven on the individual
team as has been described to
you by Angela and again I hope
that a year to pass thank you
very much thank you we do have
two people here who indicated
they wanted to speak in
opposition going to come up.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senators my name's Elena don't
linger I am now The New
legislative liaison for the real
great.
Albuquerque.
we are an AKC cal club and all
members that supports purebred
and mixed breed infants and are
the oldest nonprofit canine
advocacy group in the state.
I can appreciate what was just
being said here I'm not for
abusive tethering.
But I would think that we have
or would like to think we have
enough laws in place to enforce
it.
And tethering by itself does not
necessarily have to be a bad
thing as long as it's done
conscientiously with the.
well being of the dog in mind
and that is the a Casey's
position as well.
So I don't think you really
thought about possibly a maybe
it's just how the the law of
the.
This is being written.
But
I I show dogs I have show dogs I
go to shows my dog is tethered
on a table getting I didn't vote
for the show ring that may take
some time.
There are field trials that are
out there were dogs sometimes
are being tethered and as a lot
as well as law enforcement dogs
the disabled sometimes tie their
dogs to their wheelchairs.
And this is for the safety of
the animal.
As well as you and everyone else
who owns a path I mean I sure
wouldn't want my thought running
around getting hit by a car or
something in the sometimes the
word come does not reflect
always so.
I'm here to oppose this bill in
its current form and.
The other did you see these the
substitute the substitute
version.
Can you get her a copy of the
subsidy version did visit it
does make a couple of exceptions
that you brought up I don't know
if it.
The other thing here is that
the.
Sorry about that.
The other thing that affects
this as I said the dog trials
and one.
Is the AKC has.
To digest.
In twenty twenty one hundred and
forty events here with
eighteenth.
And get togethers for state at a
cost of up on a weekend that
brought revenue into the state
of twenty two.
Weekend.
So I get close it I'm hoping
that there is enough I'm not a
fan of
Tethering but only under one of
state for the animal and I
highly support the laws that are
in fact and if they're not
adequate enough maybe those are
the ones that need to be visited
with regard to abuse of
tethering thank thank you.
Check check that sub to see if
the items five and six don't
cover a lot of what you're
talking about thank you mmhm.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman Philip Committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here representing the New
Mexico cattle growers in this
bill I see that there are some
provisions that that go along
with livestock working dogs and
I I understand that and I
appreciate that.
But it it doesn't quite it's not
as clear as I would like it to
be and I would love to be able
to work with the hopefully to be
able to work with the U. S.
sponsored a to make it a little
more clear on the livestock side
livestock dogs are working dogs
and not only are they working
dogs if they are not get
tethered up.
Whenever you're not around they
will continue to work and that
can cause bodily damage to the
livestock that they are trying
to work and if we're not there
to control them.
That things can happen.
Another thing is a lot of the
the hazing dogs that we have for
predators you know you have mail
online and and bear dogs and we
use on to Hades these these
predators away from our
livestock and they have to stay
tuned up for the home hot stay
home period their first instinct
is to get it catch a trail and
they're going to hunt and
they're going to follow it.
And so they have to stay
tethered up to be able to keep
them at home and to keep them
safe but like I said I we are
fully understand exactly what
the Sanchez trying to do and
don't disagree.
But we would like to be able to
work whether hopefully and not
come up with some language on
the livestock in the the
agricultural side of of the
working dogs to make it to where
it's it's clear and that we get
our point across I I appreciate
your time thank thank you Sir
thank you very much okay we have
I want to take a lot of people
we have a number of people
signed up but I do want to
listen to Ellen Schmidt just
west and.
And Andrea Taylor.
You got I don't see a.
Ellen it's Ellen.
Guess dog it's guess drive
something like that guess
doctoring.
Nope okay but Jess Weston.
This put him on.
Good afternoon everyone.
Good afternoon.
Thank you chairman and senators
for taking the time to hear this
bill today and and hopefully it
is a.
A past for everyone my name's
just west of on the director
Valencia County animal control
I've been in this bill going on
twenty two years now bowls out
in the field and on the
veterinary side of it I think
this bill is a huge
but huge advocate for animal
welfare and think it'll be a
great thing for our state well
for the ability County Board of
commissioners passed this bill
last year almost a year ago
today to couple days ago.
So this.
I have a huge I have a huge
fight in this battle yes you
could say I I was the one that
kind of spearheaded that and got
it passed and I think it's a
good thing for our state to to
follow suit as Angelus said
there's there's multiple local
governments state governments
and it's the national trend of
of animal welfare animals don't
deserve to be tied up on trains
they don't deserve to be unable
to remove themselves from a
thunderstorm they don't do
deserve to be unable to protect
themselves or flee from the tax
of the of of a wild animal or
another animal or something like
that they don't deserve to be
unable to come not be able to
get access to food and water to
become tangled on city and they
don't deserve to be.
The chain around their neck when
they're puppies in the they grow
older these trains to become
embedded in their in their skin
and they they just don't deserve
to live like this
I would greatly appreciate the
the Senator the communities
Voting for this I thank you for
your time.
Thank you Mr Weston okay I'll
just list the names of other
people who who had signed up in
support Jacquelyn Gomes.
Makani.
Cheryl Gibson.
And Jessica Johnson they all
signed up to support then we
have one person in opposition
the zoom Robert de young.
Going to put him on.
Go ahead to Robert.
Mr chair Senator.
Thanks for the time to speak I'm
Robert young in the present Rio
Grande chemical want to think
when you double your point
because I'm not on behalf of our
club as well what I can tell of
the the amendments wall
appreciate your
Do not address all of our
concerns so we will continue to
stand opposed to this bill as
amended or or the committee so
all we would certainly welcome
the opportunity.
Senator McKenna Steve all of our
concerns can be addressed.
Thank you Mr Deo.
Okay members of the committee.
I have a question for you before
we get into any kind of motions
raising you several times
referred to six point tethering
what is that.
Chairman and committee members
yet what I I believe I said is
five point five point.
Yes okay
I'm sorry it's fixed point.
I'm sorry six point I
mispronounce the word and this
still can talk about that okay
if you like these additional
thank you chairman a fixed point
tethering fixed point chaining
stated six six six point yes
fixed I'm suppose to be this yes
Sir that is the difference
being chained and tethered to a
fixed point stationary object.
Verses eight trolley or runner
line or something like that the
gives the dog more ability to
freely move.
But they're also does need to be
guidelines and restrictions
when.
Runners or trolleys are allowed
some of our jurisdictions that
have anti tethering language in
the ordinance have guidelines
and requirements for tethering
that would include a trolley or
runner so would under this bill
into substitute form would
probably or or a line the
permitted under this bill as it
is written now yes this is a
dressing fixed point stationary
chaining of dogs that are capped
as a.
On a chain as a primary source
of containment.
One of those trolleys were they
can have free range roaming up
and down but they're still they
can't get out of the yard but
they can move around that would
be all right under this and the
way this bill is written yes Sir
it would okay Senator Hickey we
have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator Tolman and
we're clinging I know we have so
we have Senator McKenna here too
so we have a quorum you have a
question Senator Ingle.
no Mr chairman I really have a
question but I just really feel
like these things taken care of
at a local level the county or
the city rather than.
Doing so from the state
basis thank you.
Thank you Santo Domingo any
anything else.
Secretary will call the roll.
at no no but do not pass to
Senate bill for twenty nine this
is what you meant right and a
due process to Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute presented bill for
twenty.
That's.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Yes this.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Tallman yes center to
the piano yes.
I I do want vote you have to do
yes thank you chairman thank you
so much for your time.
Okay Senator Stewart of let's.
Whilst we have used your it I
guess right now.
Both yeah it well you're getting
coming up here let me if you are
here for for two for the
Representative K. what do you
heard for.
Senator McCain is other bill the
other bill we're waiting on an
amendment on that I don't know
are you ready.
Get out the floor anyway.
What's the deal on that one.
So do you want to set a hearing
on.
Okay well can you hang on
If you can will do you right
after Senator for this bill if
anybody is here for four two
four the CYFD bill the kinship
anybody here for that bill.
Nobody here for you okay no
problem we're not going to hear
that when today's sponsor us to
rolled over to Wednesday.
Four two four we can scratch
that up so here's the deal we
have center for the is broadband
changes mineral of senator
McCain and Representative Kate's
bill on
rent increases in air
conditioning and then we'll have
my bill on the roof I don't know
why it says real estate agent
contract business agents are
involved in it but real estate
contract.
Thank you video thank you Mr
chairman I
Certainly got interest in the
term broadband I don't know if
you if something I've never knew
a new interest of yours to do
with some money yes I do did
come forward with a substitute
Mr chairman it's two two five
five six five dot three and I do
believe it's been handed up the
committee is that right yes we
just got it okay so want to make
sure the right one so again this
well your committee needs to do
some.
I guess work for me to be able
to talk about it even want to
make a motion on this the this
Senator.
I do not have.
For discussion at close okay
good thank you Mr chairman so
make sure the right document and
that once again so everyone's on
the right page two two five five
six five dot three down the
bottom left hand corner so Mr
chairman members of the
committee we do bring the
substitute to you we created all
of us you know get together in
the clubhouse and created the
office of broadband access
expansion a couple of years ago
we are seeing some tremendous
results already which is very
exciting for the state and for
the people of New Mexico.
What that we knew that we would
have to come back Mr chairman
and do as we do with all
provided we have we would have
to do some massive clean up and
and fixing and reads designing
and you know when I put the
original oil together right
right right right sorry I didn't
know we don't have the even
numbered pages.
We only have the odd numbered
pages.
Chairman I have in both there's
a twenty nine page document.
Yeah I don't.
I agree and we're happy to give
you money.
Everybody else have the.
Okay I just have I do have
Mister chairman of the copy with
the I just feels a little
discouraging and it's okay.
I've got an extra with several
of them only have the to.
I'm gonna.
Yes everything you need.
Can you get him when I get in
the General.
Okay I think we're raring to go
now thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee so
essentially we knew we'd have to
come back and do some some quick
leg work to get the office what
they needed to continue on down
their their mission on their
mission and to continue hitting
the home run that they're
hitting for the state of New
Mexico so you have a twenty nine
rate substitute here double
space so really about thirteen
and a half sixteen sixteen pages
whatever
So in figurative thing exactly
so so bottom line is I I do have
a summary of what the
legislation does but I'm gonna
let you know the vast majority
eighty or so percent of the
legislation is is due at
definitions in a lot of ways
this is a new area of of of
what's going to be law for New
Mexico as we created this office
and further established it so we
need to define a whole number of
things broadband infrastructure
what does that mean you know the
term internet facilities based
provider what does that mean
you know just a whole number of
open access state owned
broadband networks but there are
some specific things that the
legislation does in addition to
all that and I'm gonna highlight
those for you essentially the
the new legislation requires
facilities based providers of
internet service to provide to
report to obey twice per year
the same data they are required
to report to the FCC so this
begins which was my quest Mr
chairman we created the office
to link are planning in New
Mexico to link that to the
planning and and and at the
federal level which makes of
applications for grants you know
loans whatever it is that we're
going to try to do with the
federal government link all of
those up top to bottom and then
that will cascade its way down
to other political subdivisions
as they put their broadband
plans and financial plans and
all that together so now we have
some link it's up and down
similar definitions but it
requires the reporting to come
back twice a year to obey so
that we keep our records up to
date as we say this as well the
you should have seen it what
what the broadband office had to
do in a short period of about
forty three days to collect
trucks I it was a herculean
effort Mr chairman to pull this
data together for the state all
of buildings structures in the
state had to be mapped and I
think we're.
Probably about fair to middling
in terms of you know getting all
that together but once we do all
that it's going to be truly
design and show the picture of
broadband in New Mexico the
broadband Matt is going to be
able to be updated heat sheet
that tells where broadband is
where it is and what speeds
they're receiving all of this
very vital data to help us tell
the story of broadband in New
Mexico so that we can start
turning the red areas to green
areas and move forward that way.
Second big thing outside of
definitions of the legislation
does is it revert reserve
reserves to obey a right to
advise and make recommendations
to the department of information
technology where they sit
administratively for the work
that they're doing on state
owned broadband projects and
other internet service projects
that are that are happening
within the state so it it
basically gives them the
authority to drive the bus at
that point when it comes to
projects of this nature other
major things that the
legislation does is includes
express provisions that require
bay to maintain an open process
throughout so basically shine
the light let this like sign in
so that everyone knows would
obey the office broadband access
is expansion is doing and how
they're doing it why they're
doing it and what's what we
getting for it
The disk expressed expressly
prohibits that it's only Monday
Mr chairman and I'm already
expressly prohibits the
department of information
technology from selling or
otherwise delivering internet
service directly to non
governmental and users so big
basically helps us with the anti
donation you know and all that
business going on there the
proposes to amend one section of
the do it act to allow the
secretary to make available by
lease or sale at the department
establish rates which is
something that agencies would
typically do like the department
transportation and others that
have assets on a competitively
neutral basis such a state on
broadband projects etcetera.
We offer broadband access
expansion with.
With the a substitute that we've
put together here further
defines the term agency as it
relates to this this function
and it also strikes a couple of
pieces that that were not
necessary that section I see of
the original bill and then the
last thing it does is it amends
the the a final sentence
to further clarify all
information reported by a
facilities based provider
pursuant to this subsection
shall be maintained as
confidential information by the
broadband office in accordance
with any applicable state or
federal laws so basically if you
hand over all sorts of
information from a competitive
standpoint and you're out there
trying to deliver broadband we
don't want to cause any issues
for your competitive the ability
in in the market place so that's
essentially what the legislation
does I have Todd Barron who is
the legal counsel to the obey
this is the yes to all of the
broadband access and expansion
and and the department of
information technology I have
the secretary designate Peter
meant to us and the super to
rific
international sensation in
reconfirm and I checked my aunt
yes so it's designated to talk
to us but we never did do it to
we never went
In that we have the super
international sensation
broadband director the best in
the world Kelly Slagle with us
and I will say that I did a lot
of work on this but the
department determined almost all
of the work in crafting all of
this because it's really what
they need Mr chairman and set
and members of the committee to
be able to continue doing the
great work that they're doing so
I know you're probably a little
tired so that's my song and
dance and I'm just going to rely
on the experts here when you
have questions did you want to
say anything yeah I mean it's up
to you guys in
the state a little bit I guess
you go ahead yes thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
and thank you Senator Padilla
for how we miss here of this
when the anti donation law
passed in November it wasn't as
it wasn't prescriptive for
broadband okay so this helps us
with doing our daily business of
taking in no public money and
commissioning private entities
actually go build broadband so
this helps us as senator created
Padilla said with the mapping
data with owning a quick then if
we need to do that and then also
offering that to areas where
nobody else wants to go.
Can okay no you had a bill in in
rules on cyber security is that
incorporated into this resented
distinctive issue so Mister
chairman and and and and
committee those are just we're
now the way that we further
defined broadband now we're
going down the road a further
defining and and clearing up all
of the structure around
cybersecurity in into the
secretary doesn't want to say a
few words on that but we just
passed that through the Senate
floor just I believe it was
priority pass the Senate floor
yeah we're we're moving on there
yet yeah okay so it is this just
compliments it doesn't in any
way it does I would say that
broadband access and expansion
is probably admit school or at
this point and cybersecurity is
just getting into elementary
school so all right great
analogy.
Did you want to add anything Mr
Secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman senators
are.
Just a couple of points one is
funny you should mention
cybersecurity
one of the goals for office
broadband access to expansion is
not only to make broadband
available to people who haven't
had it.
But there's more objectives in
their one is to make it usable.
Affordable.
And most importantly secure we
do not want to expand out all
over the state and just expose
ourselves to to more trouble so.
These laws to which the senator
referred
There is some overlap but more
importantly they mesh with each
other they support each other on
Making these of very important
tools are health care was
mentioned we've already done a
lot of work with in the area of
rural health care helping bring
Making devices capable that
warrant were person at the drive
sixty miles to go see a
specialist and in many cases
unfortunately they wouldn't
drive those sixty miles now they
can drive seven go to a clinic
that is broadband equipped and
has the.
Technology that they need to
conduct that health is it right
then and there.
And the I certainly hope you'll
support these necessary changes
for all by to do their work
thank you Mr chair thank you
senators Mr chairman I don't
know that he's been here before
me has I don't know Mister
Berendt did the vast majority of
the crafting of legislation to
I'd like him to just have a few
words as well the to hold that
button okay Sir.
Thank you Mr chair Senators
this that is the secretary
designate indicated it meshes
with the desire to have secure
broadband third provisions in
here that are going to offer
authorized the department to
specify cybersecurity standards
for the broadband projects that
are going to be implemented by
the office of broadband access
and expansion and there's also
dovetailing with the
department's role in building
the states internet service
provider for all of our state
agencies and what this bill is
going to let the let's let the
department do is support the
office of broadband by providing
access to that network only in
the private sectors yeah areas
where there's no
competition where the where the
private sector won't go because
it's not economically feasible
the office of broadband access
and expansion is going to be
able to help fill that gap to
serve the most rural and needy
parts of the state.
Thank you Mr chairman that's our
opening state.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience who
is here in support of this bill.
Yes please come up in the Mike
immunity my name is Roger cement
and I'm the chief information
security officer for the state
and now I raise to support of
this bill okay because it is
secure broadband so thank you
you're the one in charge of
cybersecurity that's right Sir.
We have someone online who's in
support Joan Dickerson.
His son Joe here on can you
share your ideas with us.
Hello Joan Dickerson.
Well.
Okay.
That they're all right anybody
here in opposition to this bill
yes Sir please come up.
Mr chair committee members thank
you for allowing me to speak my
name is Albert catacomb the
president and CEO of New Mexico
Sir.
School service the largest fixed
wireless broadband provider in
New Mexico additionally we also
are members of the wireless
internet association providers
of the of the United States
additionally there are twenty
six other witnesses what we call
ourselves in New Mexico that
serve approximately between five
and twelve hundred subscribers
mostly in rural areas.
The reason that I'm in
opposition to this bill is on
one particular section and that
is the section of reporting.
I give you a little story of
what happened and the FCC
changed the reporting procedure
last year the Congress mandated
that the broadband reporting act
be implemented.
In the FCC was cold you need to
help smaller providers that have
fifty thousand or less
subscribers who need help.
To report these different
procedures and what the FCC did
was not that what they did was
they said if you need help
submit an email to this help
desk and we will help you.
I landed up spending over a
hundred and eighty hours trying
to figure out the reporting
process for what the FCC
mandated.
And thousands of dollars later
we finally got it submitted.
The problem that I have with
this reporting is is that
they're saying that all you have
to do is submit what the FCC
what you're submitting to the
FCC but that's not how the bill
is right in the bill is right
and where the opioid he can can
prescribe what they want us to
report now for example we we
just we report of broadband
subscription and availability
data in a CSV file okay yes CC
also says you can you can
reported J. song or a shape file
we don't do that so at the very
eight comes back and says well
we want you to report in a chase
on it'll be a or or shape file
that's going to take us a lot of
time to do that and we're gonna
have to hire experts to do the
we are small broadband companies
like I said there's twenty six
of us we don't have the
resources to be doing this kind
of stuff.
So that's the reason that we're
posing this bill so if if the
bill were amended to specify in
exactly the format submitted to
the FCC the bill was to state
that hate what you submitted to
the FCC email that same file to
the opioid we're happy with it.
Thank you Mr cat next would that
work so can I just say Mr
chairman and and others will
chime in but so the office of
broadband access an expansion is
not going to be asking a wisp
like who you just heard from
Mexico survey to report anything
other than what they're being
asked to report to the federal
government and so the previous
to this and what you just heard
isn't isn't it's a true story I
mean it's an accurate example of
how why this office was needed
to begin with now there will be
resources and support to put
together systems that make that
type of reporting a lot easier
for a with to provide well and
so on page twenty five
Representative so on page twenty
five of the line eleven there
you.
You say or into a tent in such
form as a broadband office may
prescribe so and then later it
says Mr chairman all information
reported by facilities based
providers
the starting line seventeen all
information provided the SLO's
which provides percent of the
section shall be maintained as
confidential information by the
broadband office accordance with
the proposal that so they're not
going to be asking them for
anything that they're not being
asked for so that they can keep
it private it's a performance
issue so we're we're we're we're
interested in in a moment if
that would make our friend here
to just talk spoke of
comfortable what what do you
think Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think we did thank
you want to make that amendment
I think the broad read director
would be and amenable and.
We want to express exactly what
there's just been a Munich Kate
it it is the intent of the
office to only require the data
to be produced in the same form
that is produced to the federal
government so if we wanted to
strike out in such form as the
broadband office may prescribe.
All this is on page twenty five.
Line starting at line ten ending
at eight line eleven online
tunes begin striking at.
In such programs such a large
all the way through line eleven
up to the word all and in
certain and insert.
Right before data the same so it
would reap the same data and
then right after data.
In the same format.
Right.
The well I do Mr connect that
everybody supports it yes Mr
chairman.
Requirements and I I have to say
I appreciate all the work that
the center of the of those for
the broadband initiatives for
New Mexico all of our goal is to
get all New Mexico.
All right so we'll see that is
friendly.
We have a motion for amendment
seconded by Senator.
Maestas is there any discussion
of it is pretty clear with the.
For.
yeah will this will not move it
to a point four step.
Any other debate on that any
opposition to the amendment.
We will incorporate that
amendment great Mr chairman we
learned of this need to change a
couple of minutes for we sat
down so that I we're very
comfortable with okay up we have
Rikki Lee Chavez son who's not
in support but not in a position
only wants to comment and so
we'll listen to a neutral party.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak
remotely it was my turn for kid
pick up today Mr chairman
members of the committee I speak
to you today on behalf of
eighteen T. we are not yet to a
place where we can support this
however I do want to come and
the work of the office of
broadband they did meet with us
after four fifty two was filed
they listen to our concerns they
take in some of our our
recommendations and for that we
are grateful we appreciate the
work that the office is doing to
spot expand broadband in the
state of New Mexico and create
digital equity across our state
and we look forward to the
continued dialogue and
appreciate all the work that the
sponsor has also done on this
bill thank you Mr chairman for
letting us speak thank you Ricky
the okay let's go to the
committee members of the
committee questions discussion
motions.
We have a motion of no you move
you know that you want something
else.
Not.
The deal
was.
And is there a second thank you
Senator Hickey he's best to the
new little younger Annie's
Stricker.
Any discussion I I just had.
On page I just have to assist
I'm sorry to nitpick pages
twenty one and twenty two.
On the bottom of twenty one you
define underserved.
On the top of twenty two you
just find unserved.
But there's a gap between the
two.
Those the services that we have
what's the deal there.
The reddit.
Mr chair Senators thank you for
asking yes there there is a gap
these are as presently defined.
I've been speed specifying both
upload and download and
Without getting into
technicalities if you meet the
top limit your considered Sir
that's what the FCC is looking
for by the way these come from
the feds in New T. I. A. and
An FCC that's where these
numbers come from.
unserved is when you're below a
certain minimum which I believe
is some like twenty five three
year twenty slash three
something like that maybe if you
don't have that you basically
don't have broadband you don't
have the internet it's I can to
a dial up modem and in between
it is our under served and we do
want to address the needs of
those people as well primarily
are underserved population.
There in the rural areas eighty
percent of them live on tribal
lands thank you senator that's
about twenty seven or so percent
Mr chairman and what we're
really trying to solve with this
office and is the unserved and
the underserved that those
numbers need to get dramatically
better in our state that is it
ever going to be profitable for
private companies to provide
internet service to those parts
of the state your is it always
have to be subsidized Mr
Chairman we have an all of the
above state we need to do it
just like you heard from New
Mexico serving awhile ago you
have a sacred when using five
different mechanisms and
modalities to live abroad if
you're into the entire state as
a frontier state still but in
Albuquerque you have wired
service which is is the best
service that you can get the
moment you have what's it called
the satellite service call
because of starlink you have
that as an option I don't think
we can be picky at the moment to
achieve what you're basically
saying we need an all of the
above solution in the office is
helping to coordinate that kind
of stuff thank good thank you.
Anything else secretary will
call the roll Senator Gallegos
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes centers committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes center to
the penal yes.
By a vote of seven zero to
excuse you have to do best thank
you Mr.
Okay Senator McKenna.
We will do your rent increases
in air conditioning bill to.
Senate bill three seventy five.
Which.
I.
Right there.
The same that.
Department.
That.
Mr Sheldon you're becoming a
regular here.
Good to see you.
All right Senator.
Given extruding.
Good afternoon the chairman and
committee members so my co
sponsor is Representative
Kathleen Cates but I believe she
is presenting elsewhere I do
have on zoom.
A couple of matter experts yes.
And we welcome them chairman and
committee members after I give
you my opening remarks great
thank you
so good afternoon chairman
committee members SB three
seventy five proposes a fix to
an urgent matter for many New
Mexicans today and that's the
increasing cost to rent a place
to live.
I knew I wanted to help many of
my fellow New Mexicans who are
experiencing stress to find
another place to live because.
The rents have increased so much
that they can't afford it since
twenty twenty one constituents
have contacted me.
To tell me how the rent has
increased one constituent shared
how her rent increased by forty
three percent.
In this committee chairman and
committee members we heard of a
woman who resides in the shelter
because she cannot afford the
increase in her monthly rent
even though she received a cost
of living increase in her social
security check.
SB ninety nine which was
sponsored by Representative
Lopez proposed to lift the rent
control prohibition and there
was concern it would cause
inconsistency across the state
this bill addresses that.
It proposes chairman and
committee members eight ten
percent limit increase per year
this improved includes consumer
price index
I've also included and
evaporative cooling to utilities
that need to be maintained in
good working order.
We do have air conditioning but
not evaporative cooling or also
known as a swamp cooler.
I decided I want to collude the
supplies chairman because I
learned of the renters who
experienced that there landlords
are not servicing of swamp
coolers.
And that in August of last year
it was cooler to be outside than
inside the home.
with that chairman I will come
since Michael Sanchez not here I
I stand for questions or if you
want to get a
hold on the bill thank you.
Thank you we'll go to your to
experts online okay the list so
it can you guys hear
to stop thank you Mr chair can
can you hear me we can hear you
fine okay thank you chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to service expert
witness it's my first time in
that capacity so excuse me if I
don't do it exactly right im
service thing is the expert
witness because as the chair of
Oregon's house committee on
Human Services and housing I
worked on many bills to
stabilize housing in Oregon
using a multi prime pronged
approach to both increase supply
as well as enhanced tenant
protections this bill has some
of that but tenant protections
that we passed in Oregon which
is why
the good Senator invited me to
be an expert witness New Mexico
is starting now the legislature
starting now to invest more in
supply and I really want to
thank you for that I serve on
the advisory board of the New
Mexico housing trust fund which
finances the development of
affordable housing so that of
course is important but that's a
very long term to try to develop
to to zone and and design and
fund it's actually years and
given our lopsided supply and
demand New Mexico must also
strengthen its tenant protection
laws to keep families and
communities stable it is really
devastating for families with
children seniors people with
disabilities to lose not only
the safe roof over their head
but often their community as
well the impacts on society also
serious education for affected
children as well as their
classmates is severely
compromised when kids have to
change schools many years Midir
businesses suffer when some of
the evicted and up on the
streets right in front of their
businesses health care costs
increase when people suffer from
physical and mental health
conditions as a result of a
fiction or having to leave the
house because of high rents so
the rent cap in Senate bill
three seventy five if combined
with the band I know because
addictions will.
Stabilized families in their
homes I'm happy to answer
questions about Oregon's law we
in twenty sixteen passed a law
that said rent could not be
increased in the first year in a
month to month in month to month
tendencies and after that needed
a ninety day notice and then and
so in a twenty nineteen we
passed Senate bill six so eight
I've sent all of you information
with a link to that bill as well
as a summary of that bill so you
can consider that it's not a
radical idea California followed
us
it's it basically allows for
that the ending of leases when
there's a because when there is
either attendant because for a
landlord because and I'm happy
to go into that if you'd like to
know more about that and then we
had a cap of seven percent plus
CPI and actually no one expected
the CPI to go up so high in so I
I believe that the cap that we
passed in Representative is too
high California was five percent
as is in Senate bill three
seventy five I also in the the
email that I sent all of you
have a number of different links
to the myths around rent control
and also the links between
increasing rents and evictions
and how that leads to
homelessness so I'm happy to
answer any questions and I
really think the Sanchez for for
introducing this and the
committee for hearing at.
Thank you Mr K. Kenney governor
of then we have Rick Richard or
Rick Weiner.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee.
I don't consider myself a
subject matter expert actually
make control but I I have been a
housing attorney for a civil
legal services organizations for
more than twenty years.
Just thirteen of which is
providing telephone advice
to the elderly and all sorts of
areas but housing is one of my
specialties and I can attest to
the fact that many people have
lost their housing because of
the huge rate increases that
we've had in the past couple of
years.
The simply cannot afford those
increases landlord and investor
groups continue to claim that
there will not be the incentive
to build new housing if there is
any kind of record for all at
all and that claim is highly
questionable in any case what
good is an increase in housing
stock if thousands of tenants
become homeless as a result of
exorbitant rent increases.
Housing is not just another
commodity should not be entirely
subject to the whims of the
market place we're not talking
about the latest iPhone
retention of clients housing is
necessary for survival yes new
housing should be built with
governmental support if
necessary however given the
current housing crisis for
instability is crucial to the
well being of our communities
I I urge the committee to go to
to pass on SB three seventy five
thank you very much thank you
okay let's go to the audience
and is there anyone here in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Is there anyone here.
You are yes please.
New Mexico legally and did you
want to introduce yourself you
identify yourself.
Okay thank you and anybody else.
Anybody in opposition to this
man yes okay we'll take we'll
take of three or four of you
come on line up try to do it
quickly.
This person got off.
Okay okay.
Please Mr chair.
Members of the Senate.
Committee my name is Chuck
Sheldon I'm an independent
rental owner.
I Representative a hundred and
fifty five plus owners look at
these bills.
To speak directly at five key
points.
This bill would affect
development and affect housing
supply we can see this because
yeah my brother's a broker in
Oregon and we see of.
Mass.
Leveling and leaving the
ownership out of Oregon right
now and it has been migrating to
New Mexico.
To.
This bill has conflicting
languages with.
Senate bill four eleven and
house bill six and we're
currently in discussions with
the.
The folks to support that bill
and hopefully that'll be
concluded here shortly.
We indicate five percent.
Five percent does not account
for any capital improvements so
if you ask for somebody to be
done that requires more than
just a repair this not money for
that I give some examples the
CPI when we look at using a CPI
is a leveling tool you know that
doesn't account taxes.
We're trying to pass bills that
help people will increase
employee taxes that are not
accounted for will increase
twelve twelve weeks of leave
that's not accounted for.
To give you some ideas of what
we've seen here part numbers.
This is out of our system.
In twenty twenty.
Utility bills ran us one million
two hundred thousand.
In twenty one the rand one
million three twenty four.
In twenty two the around one
million eight hundred and fifty.
If you look at that as a nine
percent bump a twenty nine
percent bond overall a thirty
five percent increase and
utilities from twenty to the end
of twenty two.
Water went up thirty seven
percent.
Gas went up thirty eight
percent.
You know this of this account
for our system for utility
increases at eighty eight
dollars per unit per month
increase in cost.
French pay for people repairs
mortgages improvements mortgages
usually are pretty fixed or have
been.
People expect to get pay raises
and be able to support their
family we support those things a
look at that we cap income it's
like me going to a restaurant
and telling the waitress you
will not get any more increases
in pay.
Your fixed your cut right now at
this level.
So we look at that we affect the
ability to one make repairs.
The affected ability to make
capital improvements I grew up
in Los Angeles you have all
staff you grow up in New York
you see old building sitting
there decaying because there's
no money to fix up.
Let's not do that to New Mexico.
We have stuff that was built in
the sixties and seventies.
It is archaic we need to be able
to improve.
You know I was fortunate no line
to get to million dollar
contract through the state to
redo.
Housing.
Which are all sixty staff and
spent a lot of money to get it
so is even habitable.
And there's a lot more to do.
But if you cut it you level it
there's no money to fix it.
And that's a fact.
For those reasons we need not to
approve this bill.
Thank you thank you Mr Sheldon.
Thank.
Mr can you hear me yep yes Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
number registered lobbyist for
New Mexico association of
realtors and we stand and
respectful opposition to the
bill give you three reasons why
we think there are problems with
the bill first passing a
statewide law is a deterrent to
investment housing when you look
to folks who are going to invest
in housing either residential or
multi family housing they look
to see where rent control is and
it can drive investment to other
states we do not believe that
this is a pro this is the
appropriate approach we've had
this discussion in this
committee previously about rent
control and what the appropriate
path forward is everyone wants
affordable housing the realtors
want affordable housing we don't
believe a statewide law is the
appropriate approach secondly
section four of the bill which
addresses the rent control it it
institutes what we would call
arbitrary limitations on rent
increases you're talking about
five percent a plus CPI and then
ten percent total that does not
take into account the individual
circumstances of each particular
investment property or in an
individual rental you don't know
exactly what's going on at each
one of those pieces of property
and so an arbitrary limitation
on rent increases it really is
on workable and my final point
and that is this it appears to
me in reviewing the bill that it
just seems like they're
implementation challenges when
you look to these rent increases
plus CPI it tries to limit the
rent increases over twelve
months to a total of ten percent
or five percent plus CPI and
then if you go forward to the
next year and the next year and
the next year it's difficult to
tell exactly what that standard
is or what you would be looking
at it it appears to me in
reading this language that you
really would be guessing as the.
The landlord as to what that
appropriate amount is and you
would have questions about
compliance those are three main
reasons for being opposed to the
bill thank you very much thank
you open.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the chamber clearly
understands the issue that the
Sanchez trying to address here
we've all experienced inflation
over the last year have seen
increased prices on everything
from construction materials to
acts but we have a housing sort
shortage especially in the metro
areas areas and we can see that
rent is higher than it's ever
been so these are real
challenges but they require the
right fix it's a chambers
understanding that in Oregon
when they implemented statewide
rent control two thousand
seventeen that the state
subsequently lost fourteen
percent of its rental housing
because landlords simply pulled
a properties off the market so
again high rent is definitely a
problem we agree with the
sponsor on that but it's also
the symptom of a bigger problem
that we need to solve first and
that's we have a housing supply
issue in implementing rent
control will take us a step
backwards and moves away from
solving the real problem so
that's why the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
as opposed to Senate bill three
seventy five.
Thank you to the.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist for now
a pandemic we stand in
opposition to this piece of
legislation we do appreciate
Sanchez sensitivity to our
housing shortage but
Representative control
negatively affects the housing
market by discouraging the
construction of new housing that
expediting the deterioration and
loss of existing housing and
diminishing the value and
investments in properties not
only the housing market is hurt
by this of legislation but
policies this have a large
economic development downside
trade labor and all supporting
industries are crushed by rent
control thus resulting in less
job thank you thank you Mara I'm
not going to go to the people on
the line that I will live list
the names of people who signed
up in support was will wolf
Bumgardner.
Then in opposition were Craig
bunny.
And Kristin Johnson.
So members of the committee.
For up to you.
Senator Tallman.
That uses a.
Thank you for reading this bill
forward disappears into
Discuss this issue with.
Senator
Okay.
Chairman and senator Tom and no.
Thank you for that answer one
other quick question just real
briefly what's the difference
between this bill and.
Correct control bill we were we
are never the detail.
This briefly sure the chairman
and senator Tom and thank you
for the question yep SB ninety
nine which was carried by
Senator Lopez.
A lifted the prohibition for
rent control in New Mexico and
if I recall from the testimony
it was sent in the late
seventies.
that's how long it's it's been
on the books.
Thank you for the answer Mr
chair Senator lifted and so.
As chairman and senator correct
and that's why I I suggested we
said Capt to have consistency
across the state.
Thank you for that it says will.
Senator Maestas followed by
Senator Hickey thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir McKenna
no this is a.
Moving in the right direction
from the other proposal because
this would be a statewide
proposal correct.
chairman and chairman Senator
yes.
I think of.
So besides the.
Besides the cap on
He says the cap on raising the
rent what what what else is the
building.
I'm.
Chairman and and senator we did
add
The evaporative cooling which is
also known as the swamp coolers
to what we find would be
make the living space habitable
and that was because I heard
about some landlords not
maintaining swamp coolers last
summer.
Am to come to find out
evaporative cooling is not in
our statute but air conditioning
is.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Canada that's
not a good catch I of noticing
that law was.
Written and last touched in
nineteen seventy five the I
think the five percent.
Is reasonable I think the ten
percent is reasonable the
Find a my apprehension as we we
just kind of an all encompassing
landlord tenant bill that
everyone can support you know
the
It's it's kind of like the up
it's different but it's similar
in terms of the three percent
cap on property taxes.
At eight two.
You know property values that
are just off totally different
than what the realities on the
ground the reality of their next
door neighbors.
So like if there's low.
There's I mean last year was an
anomaly with regards to.
With regards to
Read increases or I'm trying
with legislation and hopefully
objectives back to two percent a
year one point five I think
folks would be compelled to
raise it five percent five
percent five percent each year.
Of the inflation's to they can
go seven percent seven percent
ten percent even though the
market may not call for that you
know
it anticipation of a year with a
cap raise it as much as they
would prefer but I think like
the ninety days to sixty days
like to bolster the relationship
between the landlord and the
tenant I think we need to do
that there seems like there's a.
A power imbalance for some some
communities
But I think
But I think the forty percent
and as a thirty percent increase
we've seen over the last year we
it be nice if we could prevent
that in a way that doesn't.
diminish up.
Investment that's what kills the
state perception is reality when
you're an investor.
And people investors kind of
freak out on us right or wrong
and investment goes elsewhere.
Many a time so.
I think I'm committed to
learning more about this issue
in the offseason working with
with all the parties thank you
Mr thank you senator Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this up
very difficult they're also
incredibly complex issue I mean
the it the inner dined.
The interactive dynamics of
multiple different companies are
coming to play here and and
leading to the homelessness but
I think that some of the people
who step forward did make some
very good points
The statewide is a little too
broad I think it is that we need
different communities are going
to have different situations and
I've been here even though I'm
arguing for preemption bill on
another issue
but here I think just the
statewide is too much and needs
to be able to be adjusted
secondly the we have an
inflating economy we have no
idea where this economy is going
right now
and I just I would feel
uncomfortable putting a
particular percentage of point
out there into we have a better
grasp on where the economy is
going in the air so which I
hopefully we we will have the as
I said it's it's standard
connectivity jobs and training
is something we've got to do so
people can afford these
increases I mean they're they're
coming again across the board
not just in housing but in all
the gas and so forth and and
food and finally as when we
heard
for eleven the local rent
control I'm really concerned
about so many people who do make
an income are have an income and
a livelihood based on their
local housing and this to me is
just a little too early to be
that arbitrary I I would
encourage you to talk with the
folks who wrote for eleven I
don't know that we're ready for
a rent control like Oregon I it
is troubling to hear the
abandonment of investment from
an organ my children live there
and I've I've heard about that
and the homelessness and and and
just the lack of housing that's
being developed except for very
very high and
so I think that there there's a
concept here but I think it
needs a lot more research and
work and working with the other
people and so I won't be able to
support this bill I the motion
that want to but just and.
Terms of workable economics in
the economy in New Mexico we're
just I don't think we're ready
quite for but this puts puts
down indefinitely as for eleven
gets worked out you go talk to
them about this one coolers and
being sure that maybe there's a
there's an Avenue in there to be
sure that those are being kept
up or maybe it's bill for
another year but thank you for
bringing a very important
subject for.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I do
support it this bill and the
reason I support it is because
it addressed a lot of problems
that were identified in
In the senator Linda Lopez built
it when concern was that there
might be housing built in Rio
Rancho and not in Albuquerque if
we had different jurisdictions
and so this solves that problem
and I just if a rent if the if
the.
It if it the owner can't make it
work on five percent or ten
percent I have I think that's a
problem with these kind of you
know with the this there is a
problem with the owner and I
believe I spoke the last time we
were talking about Senator Lopez
is build I've just heard so many
stories and I'm actually
involved in legislation they
then litigation or potential
litigation I'm hoping we can
work it out but with
With an out of state company who
made their investment in New
Mexico obviously has no concern
about New Mexicans the house the
the it was on the ground floor
because she needs it because of
of.
Her inability climb upstairs and
it was flooded.
they never fixed the they never
fixed it she finally moved out
in their billing her for the
damage caused by the flooding
that was not her fault and that
they never fixed and she's
dealing she's communicating with
an out of state attorney who
simply doesn't even understand
or because and and so I really
like this because it is it up.
It's also a lot of the problems
of the other bill and it it to
me it strikes a balance
You know yes you can talk to to
the owners and maybe strike some
you know the the Representative
that organizations.
And maybe strike some other bait
based the other of number based
on their history and and
whatever but I think it's a good
approximation especially could
you tie it to consumer price
index increases
so I think it's it's really good
I just and the technical little
thing about air conditioning air
conditioning with our air
conditioning is a broad term
that would include evaporative
cooling are you telling me that
some landlords said no this is
their conditioning and we have a
swamp cooler and therefore I'm
not going to fix it is that
really what.
Chairman and
And Senator Sedillo Lopez I did
have a conversation with the
bill drafter and he suggested to
add evaporative cooling when I
told him the story about the
swamp cooler
just to for the technical
language because we have air
conditioning and yes I I thought
of it because I've heard in
Albuquerque last year the
landlord was not.
replacing a swamp cooler here
she took out and so the tenant
was sitting outside in August
because it was cooler outside
than inside.
Well that that is a Regis and
probably another example of why
you need to build that strikes a
balance between the owners of
the property in the people who
actually.
End up paying the mortgage which
is the tenants
so I I support the bill and.
When you're ready for motion
Senator of a movie to pass we
have some we have Senator Ingle.
Out of state.
a motion to table it's another
debatable motion.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gehrels Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna.
No Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez though.
Senator Tallman yes center.
Center to the piano.
Yes Senator Tallman to explain
is the.
I.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator I.
Pretty without.
He is that is Dr because it's a
very complex complicated issue
and.
A ten page.
Bills that was in the go shared
with anybody that is not going
to solve it.
which is some sort of point out
it's not just it's not a
statewide market so it's very
difficult to.
Make put a cap on that's going
to work statewide and yes there
are a lot of bad plan.
Bills they had landlords is a
lot of bad actors enrollment in
every industry.
But I think we're trying to pass
you can't legislate morality
we have too many bills over
trying to.
Legislation and
Force people to act in a
And civilized manner but there's
other laws are already existing
that they can take care of that
so again in some rate is just.
As of two complicated of an
issue just try and solve in a
ten page bill that has been the
Goshen that's all I have thank
you again applaud you for what
you're trying to do but.
This is not the answer sorry
thank you
So by a five to two folks to
share count the motion to table
Festus thank you chairman I
appreciate the consideration
last bill the night is Senate
bill for forty nine.
Real estate contract.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate bill four forty
nine.
Representative to dealing with
the issue that you're this is
been brought to our attention.
By people who've signed real
estate contract.
Only to find out down the line
that although state law requires
those contracts to be recorded.
They haven't been and so after
making payment in some cases for
many years.
Those providers are suddenly I
asked to leave by the seller.
Who contends that oh no it was
not a sale it was a it was a
simply a lease or rental and now
you have to leave because I want
to sell that property to
somebody else and then they keep
all the all the money that have
been paid over the years
and it was brought to me by Eric
Sutton who works with United
south Broadway in Albuquerque.
And to we have also is the extra
the expert witness forget you
again Corinna lots Carino laws
Lou Henry who was with New
Mexico legally and they can and
they can share some of the
issues behind this bill with you
and we did meet today with the
realtors who who pointed out
that the law already required
those contracts to be recorded
but that.
What we found is that when
they're not recorded there's
little or no recourse and so
we're trying to tie up that
loose and with this bill Mr
chairman and I'll ask Eric to to
speak to this matter and then
Karina.
Thank you senator Mr chair
Senators thank you for having me
today
I just want to notes that we
have Karina Rocha on the zoom
also from New Mexico legal aid
whose would be available to ask
answer questions later on as
well.
first a brief little history if
I may about the realistic
contracts legislation here in
New Mexico it last efforts
related to real estate contracts
date back to twenty eleven when
senator Wirth trying to
introduce a comprehensive bill
to regulates this area that did
not pass that was not successful
and subsequent to that the
Senate's
Past memorial up appointing a
committee to review the
realistic contract issue here in
New Mexico
the committee came to a number
of conclusions and that's one of
the handouts that's you have
received centers it is entitled
to Senate memorial forty task
force on real estate contracts
and if you see in the back that
the task force included a number
of
players and interested parties
in the real estate world
That.
In staff together they came to a
number of conclusions about
what's needed to be addressed in
real estate contracts in order
to.
Fully protect all the parties
and other signatories to those
contracts to date we're not
prove we're not presenting all
of that we are trying to address
just basic issues the basic
issues are the fact that there
is no record notice a realistic
kind of released recent
contracts if they're not
recorded.
So what you have is you have the
ability to of
Of a lien holders to show up on
the untitled and affect the
buyer's ability to actually take
ownership of the property after
they make all their payments the
biggest problem and in fact you
also thank you you can have
sometimes a seller who tried to
sell the property again as as
sender to the PO I talked about
but you have instances where a
seller will take out a mortgage
on the property that's the buyer
has no knowledge of you or or
there's you know the the there's
a judgment against the the
seller in this vote is lean
again that's gets recorded out
there
whether it be a civil judgment
or criminal judgments though
that's a lien on the property
that would that supersedes for
the purpose of the purposes of
the of the record and on the
title the interest of the
The fire these are all issues
that's
In easily be addressed it we we
feel ands as Senator noted.
There is a law already on the
books and has existed for for
decades that's a transfer of
ownership
needs to be recorded but it's
you have actors and critically
unscrupulous actors who are
choosing not to record and so
What the bill puts the onus on
them to gets that realistic
contract on the record so
everybody knows what's going on.
you know this is going to I
didn't know if you the problem
is that we do we want to protect
buyers interest in the property
these are the buyers invest
frequently invest thousands of
dollars into these homes if the
if the property is in bad shape
to begin with which often is
The they they renovate the
property the improve the
property the they they pay for
all the maintenance that the
homeowner's insurance the taxes.
Everything it goes towards these
payments and we wanna make sure
that the buyers are interest are
protected and we believe this
bill does that's in particularly
in particular by providing for a
thirty day
requirements right to cure and
it's similar to the home on
protection act.
And I'll turn it over to our
experts on.
I work in the housing stability
practice group.
We're in agreement that the
productions here that thirty
days notice and an opportunity
to cure is really.
Baseline of any contract dispute
first you have to be told you
are in breach of the contract
and have some opportunity to
cure that it's a minimum it's
it's it's what the mobile home
owner is entitled to based on
the grave injustice that
forfeiture of their home.
Might create for that.
The fact that is a whole
different.
But many of the people we see I
I had somebody who'd been paying
on a contract for twenty three
years another person sixteen
years so.
The concern that unscrupulous
people may create a bait and
switch make something look like
a leasehold tendency when eight
eight the intent the meeting of
the minds of the parties
involved was to have a land
transaction to and and
installment and they can be
structured in lots of different
ways but I call them and see
installment land contracts and
then they might say option at
the top of them but then they
might have an amortization table
so to the person who is signing
that document it looks as though
they can build out equity so
it's not an option where they
still have to pay the same
amount fifteen years from now
know that amount comes down and
comes down I think the sunshine
that this long provides is is
going to be when with.
Work across the board it's good
for New Mexicans can improve the
quality of housing.
It's going to protect would be
sellers potentially because
those unscrupulous industry
folks they're getting their
inventory from somewhere and I
can tell you a quick story.
Often these are these are
distressed homeowners who.
Their home may be have been in
their home turf in their family
for generations.
And.
I thought that I'm a fast talker
giving you do I say although new
ten percent of your home's
value.
For security interest of some
sort what the documents you
actually signed to say though is
that you sold your home to me
for ten percent of its value
with the option.
To purchase it back over time.
And often times these contracts
are designed to fit the manner
and method of payment is
designed to ensure.
That might be difficult for you
to make those payments on time.
Four have a good record of your
own payments for.
Even understand how your
payments are being credit.
It's also true that sunshine on
where the of settled title
county to county we see real
state contracts within real
estate contracts we see yes
mortgage Jeez.
There's no record so they're
gonna loan money on land and
then when they for close like
this story you'll hear from my
from my colleague
the bait and switch turns you
into a tenant with with the
mobile.
Less rights more than a month to
month tenancy
and lastly I will say that this
bill will help providers of
civil legal services like us and
help our courts because this is
a
We have the uniform owner
resident relations act which is
protective and very.
hyper technical there's some
strict compliance with some
notice requirements in order to
get that fast path to a change
of possession.
And magistrate judges are
metropolitan court judges are
extraordinarily versed in it
used to it and.
Yes if there is a claim of
ownership or if.
My client's counter claim for
specific performance of the
contract for the sale of land
that they have been paying on
for twenty three sixteen thirty
years.
Can't be heard by a magistrate
judge it moves into a form
that's not designed for a seven
day trial
the to the yes.
I urge you to
to to pass.
Thank thank you.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you
They were in the audience in
support of this bill.
There anyone in the audience
proposes spill.
The.
Hello.
Would you please come up to the
Mike.
Okay thank you thank you all
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Ashley
Strauss Martin and I am general
counsel for the New Mexico
association of realtors but
before I get into some of the
points in the bill I'll try to
make this brief I just want you
to know what my experiences with
real estate contracts so we have
about seventy five hundred
members our realtor members by
Representative buyers and
sellers and real estate contract
every day in the state of New
Mexico and I've been dealing
with them for sixteen years as
counsel for the association I
took over a practice about eight
years ago that's been around
since the seventies the does
nothing but real estate
contracts might organise it my
company drops more realistic
contracts in any one entity in
the state of New Mexico I also
an escrow company or we just go
real estate contracts I handle
front in work I handle back in
work I am neck deep real estate
contracts all of the time and I
love real estate contracts
because they do amazing things
for the people in New Mexico
both buyers and sellers I
understand the concerns that the
sponsor of this bill has as long
as along with their their
experts I understand but the
reality is that is not the norm
in real estate contracts and I
know that because I work with
them all the time hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of contracts a year I
deal with and most of the time
people are using real estate
brokers or they are and or
they're using title companies
where something's always be
recorded using escrow companies
and nothing comes into nasco
coming that's not been reported
so where these things happening
where people are taking
advantage yes they are and it
was reference to land a lot of
this is land in the colonias and
you know what's happening in the
colonias is that Miss legal
subdivision going on that's how
come nothing is being recorded
and ages are going after those
people for illegally subdividing
the land and that needs to
happen and it's not happening
which is why some of these
people are getting burned
unfortunately.
So I review this bill and I had
a long conversation with both
the sponsor and with with the
expert witness and we did talk
about ways that we might be able
to work with this bill but as it
stands it is so technically
flawed there's so many problems
with it it ignores statutory
laws already in place that does
recall required reporting it
ignores common law regarding
real estate contract that goes
back decades and decades that
deals with many many of these
issues and it just needs so much
work and one of the main
problems with it that they did
speak to to some extent was this
filing a report requiring the
seller to be responsible for the
filing right now anybody can
file it a buyer can take it down
file it everybody's supposed to
be filing it right and now we
put the onus on the seller and
we say that the seller is has to
file and if they don't then the
buyer gets to go to cute to
charge the seller fifty dollars
a day for every day they don't
file it know what incentivizes a
buyer to follow the call the law
it's already on the books and
filed a real estate contract
when they can charge additional
fifty dollars a day for every
day they don't do that there's
no incentive so it actually
encourages the buyers to not
follow the existing law and file
the contract so they can take
advantage of the fifty dollars
dollars a day I mean this is one
of the many problems it has even
the thirty days courts will not
if you look at common law rules
because that's where twenty four
so less than a thirty day
default period and I never
encourage a thirty day default
period if you're a buyer you're
always asking for something more
than that if you can get it
right it's a negotiation you
don't always get it but you're
always trying to get something
more than that can courts are
not going to force anything less
than thirty if you look at the
common law real estate contracts
so there's just lots of problems
here lots of men wearing of
existing law that's already on
the books I'm not saying that
there isn't maybe perhaps room
for improvement and I'm open in
those conversations but as this
bill stands we can we we do not
support it in any way shape or
form so thank you all.
Thank you the gentleman in the
back to do once.
You defer to her okay.
I have a one on the zoom.
Support is that one.
should she wish to speak.
This is the current Rocha Rocha.
Thank you.
Thank you good evening
mainstream average an attorney
with New Mexico legal aid as my
colleague Korean previously
stated we are the legal service
provider to lowincome New
Mexicans
I want to address something that
was set in opposition to the
bill now although there are many
people that go through realtors
and brokers for realistic
contracts not all people do a
good percentage of people
actually use and notaries or
sometimes they don't even use a
notary they do all the work
themselves.
Now what this causes is that
often buyers are realistic
contracts are unsophisticated
and therefore they rely on
others to properly reporter real
estate contract us having some
of those contracts are never
reported buyers do not find out
until it is too late for example
I currently represent miss I
will set the rate the sellers of
her home
five thousand dollars and the
cell went behind her back months
later after the contract was
done and obtain a mortgage loan
on that same house.
The seller deposited and since
twenty sixteen was that I was
has been fighting against
foreclosure on her home is that
I also apart from P. eighty five
thousand dollars for the home
spent thousands of dollars in
making improvements to the home
itself that case is still
litigation because there is a
gap in New Mexico law tools all
these problems that come up with
real estate contracts because
not everyone goes to realtors
and brokers we know how
realistic contract is done a lot
of people just do this on their
own Spanish speakers rely on
notaries because they have this
view that notaries know the law
when sometimes in fact they
don't and that in turn causes a
lot of complex issues and this
is something that we see often
New Mexico legal aid agency I
was does not the only person who
has become a victim of
unrecorded real estate contracts
so now the company that holds
that mortgage note that she knew
nothing of is trying for clothes
on her home that she lived that
for nearly twenty years of this
bill would immensely paid the
way for more realistic contracts
to be done fairly so that we
sellers will not take advantage
of friars were unsophisticated
real estate contracts also New
Mexico illegally asked that you
will yes on Senate bill four
nine thank you.
Okay thank you I guess that so
we have this Mr Chairman just
did you all get this of the
report is the
Senate memorial forty task force
that was passed out to the.
Just I think it I think it was
yes okay and I would just
emphasize them Mr chairman
members that was twelve years
ago.
That's a twelve year old report
and we're trying to enact some
of the recommendations of that
report in this bill.
It looks like we may have only
gotten one page of it.
It is it's actually a one two
three I have a.
Four but it's a six page report
with lots of recommendations
we tried to includes all you got
is one yeah that's all I got to
but he had the full six pages
and I would point out that the
task force did have members of
the realtors association Mr
Steven I was part of it the
public Regulatory Commission was
on it the real estate commission
was on it.
The mistrust a stress Martin who
spoke was on it and she she
remember this very well of so I
mean it's it it points out I
think the accurate picture is
anybody who's using a realtor is
not going to need this new law.
They already file they already
have these escrow they have a
lot of protections built in it's
the ones that aren't that we
need to figure out a way to to
protect and that's that's what
this is about of those.
This is done ten years ago
nothing twelve years ago.
Well that reports tenure this
this report ten years old the
the first the legislation the
last piece of legislation that
was attended was just twelve
years ago I think because of
this no.
Ten years went by and nothing.
Was done at the.
Why is that.
That before my time I'm not sure
are you suggesting the
legislator of inertia might
exist.
Well okay we'll open up to the
committee first off is Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank thank you Mr
chair.
It's really important that there
be consequences for not for not
filing can you know fifty
dollars a day
I think one of the things that
you could do on your way to be
if it's going to do this year
what sherry.
One of the in order to address
some of the issues of that were
right which I do believe you
have to have a consequence on
for not falling to the point of
file I
I know so many people what part
of the real estate contracts and
certainly have them in my family
and what issue on page three
with an address by anybody.
The
report of the judgement of all
that happens in the event of
termination the social worker to
provide the full amount of the
down payment sometimes after
years of pain it's not just the
down payment because a lot of
these perfect perfect one of the
reasons they're doing it because
the seller is not required to be
generated so might be like it's
nice that I of thousand dollar
down payment but they reduce the
mortgage I like there were paid
into it and and private equity I
mean I understand that interest
is just on the money but so it
just feels like that would be
something to look at is they
should be compensated for that
equities of the page one thing
that hasn't called me one
seventy pays so well into it and
they end up getting of the
twelve and you have nothing to
show for professional under the
circumstances I sections.
So I'm going to support the bill
I'm encouraged you to work with
of the women who.
it was issues.
Because you're going to do this
year.
A lot of a lot of talk but
I have a problem about.
Who have the burden of recording
the putting the burden on the
seller's.
This record and you have for
them the reason I'm concerned
about that is because some of
these are inner family.
You know what transaction there
are going to fix or whatever and
so they're not very
sophisticated and and that would
be a consequence.
I think there should be a
consequence but I am not saying
there should be but that could
be a real heavy consequence so
maybe I don't know that is it I
would just think about it coming
up supporting your bill of which
is suggesting that you may have
some modifications and I think
we like it because these
contracts
or without Pat Woods
administrative council without a
title for the and and this is
really good I want.
But.
This is totally up to you.
The little legalistic.
and so if you're writing for
people who are represented by
counsel if you want to get the
message out about what these be
yeah and do education it would
be nicer if it wasn't quite it
looks like it's written for
firefighters and yeah.
and oops.
I think you know.
To me the goal is to get to
these transactions like the ones
that you described and and I
feel like if the statute is that
you have to get a lawyer to
understand it staff.
The statute like this
but what and then you know to be
twelve our first house we bought
a real estate project you worked
out but you know is it the way
that people can't.
Okay have a good down payment or
people who of it will not be
financed by mortgage company
because they have no known for
them to get it.
Into the market
but you're right there's so many
bad actors baffle.
So.
What's your response.
The.
They who have.
Voice opposition to it.
And uses a big so there's a
disconnect she says is not a
problem uses a problem.
The.
Through in response so.
So we see these when they go
south
that's that that's why they come
to us
I have seen contracts
legislative it is a breach of
this contract if you were to
finally.
I have seen is so
what with.
I am somewhat.
Thank you know I think that that
that the penalty part that's
things maybe maybe be
incentivizing and in the wrong
direction.
Potentially there does have to
be a consequence maybe that
could be changed but in terms of
already required to be well.
Transfers of land but these are
documents that are drafted to be
and thank you just and if you
yeah and to allow you to believe
that you are getting an interest
in land when maybe you are the
business thank you for the
answer so you mentioned earlier
the two examples one after
sixteen years ago after twenty
three years they lose those two
cases they lose other equity
lose everything that.
There is we're in litigation on
the sixteen year one
the home in question in the
twenty three year pool and just
burned out a couple that last
weekend nobody was in it because
the title issues.
Created by that particular
sellers obtaining of title and
then and then contracting with
may be different buyers for
consecutive buyers.
once the courts treat possession
as like a quick easy thing
because it's an addiction K.
it's gonna go quick.
That that person goes out the
seller dies and they requests
live in the wild well there's a
probate battle or something like
that and it burned down so if I
made and just a little bit of
that
It's.
I also want to point out the
note which is about the courts
Addressing these cases it's not
sometimes it goes goes really
fast sometimes it takes years
the case that's miss Rocha
It was just talking about the
one that she is
which is actually representing
the buyer that was filed in
twenty sixteen.
It's it's a seven year old case
already sometimes it sometimes
it takes a long time that there
is no there's not enough clarity
in the law right now but at any
points to equity Mr chair
Senators
There are a number of states
that require for closure.
The as the as the only method of
of enforcing rules to contract
after you get to a certain point
of of payments towards the
purchase topercent once we're
not addressing that in this
bill.
The mid session it is certainly
something that you know we we
would be happy to talk about and
and strive to provide remedy for
in the future
but it but it's it is a severe
consequence potentially for
homeowners just.
Lose all of their investment
potential thank you it is one
quick comment off of that often
so amazed that we get built
similar this where bad actors
are acting fraudulently has been
going on for years and I wonder
myself you know why is it taking
so long to.
Correct the situation that's all
I have.
I'm looking for it's the
pleasure of your.
We have the most.
Just please call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center masters yes
Senator McKenna the US Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
and Mr chairman we will work
with the realtors of that but
this trying to figure out a way
to fix it if there's some
problems already set up a
meeting for Wednesday right
thank you very much.
The state for the it is very.
