Here
our boon, then our Charlie.
Gallegosnava.
Then Pinto.
In her scalp Center city of
Lopez here
the Hickey. Senator Lopez.
Here.
So we have a quorum established.
Madam, yes, uh, just a quick,
uh, point here. I, I heard a
rumor. Is your daughter here
today?
Yeah, she's here today.
But not in the room.
Oh, I thought she was in the
room. She'll join us a little
bit later. I hope you introduce
it to the room.
embarrassed. That's why you got
to introduce her.
We'll see. Let's see. I did
encourage her to join us, but
she goes, Oh, Mom, please.
Yeah,
we'll see yeah yeah I know.
So we'll see as the evening
wears on, you may get bored over
there to come listen to us and
get a little more, you know.
So with that, um,
We start over with our carryover
legislation from our meeting on
today's Monday, which was
yesterday.
Set up Bill 146, Senator Pope,
welcome. You're here for
educational opportunity for
military children.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. It's great to
show to committee and actually
follow the agenda and the
schedule when you're first up,
so thank you for.
Not your committee, other
committees, just trying to be
funny.
Uh, Madam Chair.
members
Senate Bill 146, um, I just want
to give a little background.
This deals with
Updates to the interstate
compact on educational
opportunity for military
children. Uh, this is an
agreement among US states, um,
designed to make school
transitions easier for children
with active duty family members.
Uh, what this contact deals with
is enrollment records transfer,
placement and attendance,
graduation requirements,
extracurricular activities and
special education services.
While the, the bill is really
thick. It's really the entire
compact. All that we are really
doing on this bill is making a
change to where
There are 2 sections, 2 places
in here that uses the word
sections.
And it needs to be changed to
chapters.
And so that is all that we are
doing on this legislation, uh,
with that, Madam Chair,
committee members, I'm ready for
any public comment or questions
from the committee.
Thank you, Senator. We'll go to
the audience. Is there anyone
here in support of Senate Bill
146.
Anyone in opposition?
See no. Is there anyone on Zoom?
We do have one person on Zoom
who's in in support.
Beth, man.
Hello
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Beth Mann. I am the
school liaison program manager
at Kirtland Air Force Base and
the subject matter expert for
New Mexicoil Interstate
Children's Compact Commission
State Council. I'd like to thank
Senator Pope and Representative
Sareanao for sponsoring this
bill. I wanted to let the
committee members know that this
interstate compact is used by
all 4 New Mexico military
installation school liaisons to
help our military connected
children level.
The educational playing field
during their many school
transitions. I urge the
committee to vote yes to support
these minor changes to this
extremely important interstate
compact. So New Mexico schools
can continue to support our
military-connected students.
Thank you.
Thank you.
With that, we will go to
questions or comments from
committee members. Senator Pinto
motioned for DuPass. Second.
There's a motion from Senator
Pinto for it to pass with a 2nd
from Senatorero Lopez.
still open for discussion? Are
there any questions or comments?
Senator Black
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator for bringing
forward. I'm glad the slow was
on there cause that was one of
my questions when I looked
through a lot of the um a lot of
the areas on the bill. I, um, I
didn't see like coordination
with slow. Is, is that even
necessary for um the schools uh
to be working with the slow on
the various spaces because I
know the parents do.
When they PCS in from wherever.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
they would work with uh Miss Man
at Kirtland, um, the way these
compacts work, a lot of times
they're already signed by other
states, so we're not really able
to do too much modifications or
edits, and so, um, the way the
language is, it's kind of set
when we sign it.
Um, so that modifications are in
there now and it would be hard
to make any updates on.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So can I assume,
um, and maybe, maybe you don't
know and that's fine, but, uh,
on other education bills or
policies where is the slow.
Involved in in some of those uh
issues working with the schools
to make sure kids are, are, are
where they at in certain grades
and they're not getting screwed
over going from like Dodea to
um.
Or even an IBS.
Mm
You know, or nondo school like
overseas and you save your PacA
or something like that coming
back here, Madam Chair Senator,
I, I'm really, I gotta be honest
with you, I'm not familiar with.
or what, what that acronym is or
what.
So,
yep, yes, sir, Madam Slow Slow,
Madam Chair, uh, senator,
disclose the every installation
has a school liaison officer.
OK.
And I don't remember her name,
what what she just said.
Um, but the school liaison
officer is working with um the
off-base schools, so if you
like, like what I did at PCS
from Germany to
Rio Rancho, so the slower
curtlin was working with
Lincoln Middle School in Rio
Rancho High School.
Um, based on some issues with my
kids that went to Nando Dia
schools.
Make sure they are placed in the
right, in the right grade.
That's that function, yeah,
madam Chair, Senator, I just
didn't know about that ac in the
physician, but I know uh that
Miss man that just came in on
the public comment, that's the
work she does like Kurtland
whether the APS or some of the
real Rancho schools, so I think
and then she
Here liaison and really knows
these compacts that does that
work there, so.
Right, not the acronym that
they're using but she works with
the students. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam I'm sure that, that,
that was the reason why I was
asking because when I, when I
read the bill.
I didn't see a slow in here
because the schools aren't
coordinating with that, which I
think they should, and they
maybe they already are, so.
I'm, I'm good. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions or comments?
See if you could call the role,
please.
And our block.
Hi. Senator Boone.
Yes. Charlie.
And our egos.
Nova, yes, Senator Pinto.
And stop.
Serio Lopez, yes, and Hickey.
Yes. And I love this.
Yes.
I voted 10 to 0. Senator, you
have a due past recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, next is Senator Sanchez
here?
There you are. Come join us up
front.
Senator Sanchez is here with
Senate Bill 315 called the
State.
But Senator Sanchez, I hope that
you have.
brought something with you.
Today.
That I think would encourage a
positive vote.
Uh, Madam Chair, if this makes
it to the floor, there will be
plenty of uh treats the taste
and maybe some homemade tortilla
tortilla senator, you still need
to make sure that this committee
is supportive of
my co-sponsor, uh, Senator
Hamlin and see why she didn't
prepare me with those.
Um,
well, we could consider holding
this over for another day.
I don't know if I'd have time to
make enough tortillas.
Ah, OK, anyway, Senator, please
present your bill. Senate Bill
315. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
and committee members. Uh, this
bill would, it, it's pretty
straightforward. It's making the
tortilla, the, the steak bread,
so the tortilla would be the
state bread. It's adding it to
all the other lists of things we
have as um
Roadrunner for the state bird
and different things like that.
It's
Pretty simple, not too much to
explain.
And that's uh Senator Block
needs an explanation.
With that Cheryl stand for
questions.
Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm
multitasking up here. Um, so, do
we have anyone in support in the
audience.
Do we have any anyone opposed in
the audience.
We do have someone who opposed.
Uh, hello, uh, chair and members
of committee Kath Sanchez. I'm
here in my personal uh hat, not
my work hat, but I just, I
appreciate the legislator for
bringing this forward. I just
want to vote for fried bread
instead of tortillas. Thank you.
And I understand we have someone
on Zoom who wants to speak.
In support of the bill.
And
Adelaine Macintosh.
Hello,
Mr. Chair and senators on the
committee. My name is Adeline
McIntosh. I'm 10 years old and
I'm in the 5th grade. I'm from
Las Cruces.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak about this bill
today. A little background.
Early in February, I
participated in teen packed New
Mexico.
Mr. Chan senators, Teen Pack New
Mexico is a class to learn more
about our state's government. As
a part of the class,
participants are asked to write
a bill, real or fun, in which
they will present at the mock
legislator.
2 years ago, I watched my
brother Brayden participate in
the same class and through his
experience with this class, he
was able to work with Senator
Sanchez to pass Senate Bill 392.
Some of you may remember, it's
the one that established a fund
for youth gaming fish programs
through the New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish. As
I watched this process two years
ago, I've been thinking ever
since about how I could help New
Mexico.
The story of how I came up with
this bill is I was sitting home
having breakfast with my family,
when uh we were studying New
Mexico history. And as we were
going over all our states
wonderful.
Symbols.
I asked my mom, is there a state
bread? She said there probably
is, so she looked it up.
And there wasn't, and I had an
idea. And I said, I think the
state bread.
would be a tortilla.
And so when I went up for um
packed in February, I asked
Senator Sanchez if he would help
me support this bill.
And I'm so thankful for his
support in sponsoring it, and
I was also able to present the
pill to Senator Hamblin, so I'm
also grateful to her because of
these two senators, Senate Bill
315 has bipartisan support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
senators of the committee for
your time in listening to my
story. Do you have any
questions?
Adeline, you're so persuasive. I
think when you owed just off
into supporting this bill. Thank
you very much for your
commentary. We do have senators
toil Lopez and Senator Pinto.
Jeez, Adeline just really got
me, but I was gonna ask.
But.
Because
So what beass are unique to New
Mexico and fried bread and it
really, it, you know, they're
related to fried bread and they
really tell a lot about our
history, and of course I love
Supatias.
Tortillas are not unique to New
Mexico.
So I just would like an
explanation of why you chose
tortillas over topatillas.
So Mr. Chair and uh senator.
Having
Long discussions with my
wonderful chairwoman Senator
Pinto, and it inffairs when we
have this and the good
discussion on the floor with
Senator Shindo, uh, which maybe
if this makes it to before we
have, we picked some uh we we
picked tortillas over the
sopapillas.
With the discussion with
Senator, uh,
She.
And um he just gave me a little
bit of history and why and how
and
We just came up with the
tortilla.
But um
We all love the tortilla
sopapillas, the fried bread, we
can't get enough of them and I
don't know if we can make all
three of them, but we picked the
tortilla, so that's the history
of why we picked it.
Senator.
Well, Mr. President, honestly,
it's because of Adeline.
Uh, that I'm gonna, I was
thinking about trying to amend
your bill to put a sopa in, um.
Because I love sopapias, like
tortillas for me are every day
and so partillas are a treat.
So I don't know. It's, it's a
tough, it's a really tough
decision. I was torn before, but
that testimony was just so
compelling.
I don't know.
You're lucky you have that
witness.
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and Senator.
Senator Pinto. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
and thank you, Senator.
I think the broadness of of
yeah, gonna be supported.
In that sense.
But uh I think there does
probably need to be an
appropriation attached to it as
far as if there's a state
competition.
Oh, I, I look forward to seeing
you on the floor and seeing some
amendments.
Thank you.
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. Uh, just a few
things, uh, gone through the
discussion of tortilla or.
Um, so Papia.
I look at his tortillas and
staple.
How we use
Our scooper to eat stuff
for the uh.
The others so we use that as
dessert, but I, I like the idea
and I love your
Um
Comrade up from Las Cruces, but
I did have another question on
this chair and Senator, uh Miss
Sanchez in the back room.
family.
Just
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Who
there's stats or baa, they might
be related, I don't know.
we are in New Mexico. I, I don't
think so.
Mr. Senator, I, I would say if
my wife was here, it'd be in
opposition to my thoughts too,
but my last question Mr. Chair
and Senator, does this make you
the tortilla king from New
Mexico?
that I y. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't
know, maybe I'll get a, uh, one
of those big uh
Staffs like uh Senator Munoz
has, isn't he the chili king?
OK, thank you. And Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this great bill forward. Um, I
do have a question though
because my Mexican mother, um,
until today makes tortillas.
make sure that I understand. Is
this a flour tortilla that we're
talking about or a corn
tortilla.
Uh, Mr. um, Madam Chair,
Senator, this would be a flour
tortilla.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, how
was that, uh, decided upon?
So.
Madam chair, Senator, I guess
because the flour tortilla.
Rises a little bit like red and
corn tortilla stays flat like a
total.
So that was my, and there's some
history back on that, but.
If it made it to the floor and,
uh, senator, uh, Shindo wanted
to.
take that on. So I'll leave it
for that, but that's kind of the
the, this would be the flour
tortilla.
Madam Chair, uh, thank you,
Senator, um, and upon the
passage of this bill, will we
all receive a 12-pack of
tortillas and the recipe for the
tortilla cause that's very
important.
Madam Chair, senator, would
those be homemade or already
made tortillas. I would if I had
to make 12 dozen for 42 members.
I don't know.
Yes, there'll be some tortillas
on the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Do we have any
other
Folks from the committee, um,
Senator, I just have one
comment. I, I would just stick
to tortilla.
Because we don't want to spend 4
hours on the floor going back
and forth between.
Yellow, white, blue corn, etc.
It, uh, uh, we have one last
comment from Senator Block.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair.
Senator Sanchez, um,
I'm actually impressed with your
what expert witness you have
there, uh, out of line and
Las Cruces, I think she's at.
Will she be on the floor as your
expert witness when this comes
to the floor.
Uh, Madam Chair, yes, you will
be if this makes it to the
floor.
I think she'll tell the story
better than you, my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Sanchez.
thing though for their comments.
And questions? May we have a
motion.
A second.
In the same.
And
OK, if the secretary will call
the roll, please. Then there a
block.
Hi.
Yes, Senator Charlie, no one to
explain.
I.
In another. Yes.
Pinto.
And
Center Cia Lopez.
Yes, and to explain my vote.
Hickey.
Yes. And I love this.
He has to explain my book.
Uh
Explaining votes are
And
Oh, it's a, uh, you have a due
pass 9 to 1 and vote
explanations, I believe.
Charity.
And Senator Sadilia Lopez and
Senator Lopez. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Senator for
bringing this forward.
I voted no because I firmly
believe that Pueblo bread made
in an Orno.
Is the best bread in New Mexico.
And I'm very biased because
A blow, but or and.
I'd like to invite Adeline to
reach out personally and have a
conversation with me because my
mind could be changed by the
time we get to the floor. Thank
you, Mr. President.
Thank you and
Um
city of Lopez, and, and I just
wanted to say when, when it was
limited to flour, you almost
lost my vote. I believe you
should embrace all tortillas.
Just saying, I'll think about it
very hard for the floor. Thank
you.
and senator.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair. I hope
they'll be better.
It's a hot tortilla, hot bread,
whichever it may be with some
freshly made with some.
It's like really, yes.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you very much, and I was
remiss and not arguing about the
Navajo taco, but we'll pass up.
I spent 7 years in Cana.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Madam Chair and thank you to the
committee. Thank you.
Have a few days, Senator
Sanchez.
OK, Senate Bill 247 Senator
Ramos.
If you could join us upfront.
This is publication of certain
educational info.
And are hearing yesterday, uh.
At our hearing yesterday, there
was some confusion about a
committee substitute and
And usually by the
What we do in the Senate is
without you here, Senator
Gallego's graciously sat in for
you.
But the presentation was done by
Representative Doo.
So
You're in the Senate chambers
and we prefer to hear from the
senator,
presenting your bill, Madam
Chair, I, I appreciate it.
Committee members, I appreciate
you and uh.
Present this uh Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 247
and before we start, we still
have to do an official motion.
So, uh, would you like to
commotions that
Senate Bill 247 do not pass.
And
That uh
The Senate substitute.
247B.
Uh
There's motion and I'll second
it.
Her purposes of discussion, so
Senator Ramos, if you would
present your bill, Madam Chair,
thank you so much and just, just
to explain, I'm sorry I wasn't
here yesterday. I had an
employee that called in sick so
I had to go back and
And inspect the house, and I'm,
I'm back today. So thank you so
much. Um, send it, uh, the
Senate.
House and Public Affairs
Committee substitute was put
together because when we first
put together our our bill.
We, uh
We didn't the
ap fo rd did not include the
statutes that were already in,
in place. So we did is we went
ahead and, and uh added the stat
statute on there.
And
Senate Bill 247 mandates that
the New Mexico Public Education
Department annually publishes
the statewide summative
assessment.
Results in English, language
arts, mathematics and science by
September 1st.
This includes overall
performance trends and detailed
subgroup data by demographics
and grade level.
A positive aspect of this
legislation will enhance
transparency and accountability
within the education system.
Madam chair
Since we created this bill.
I've had so many administrators
reach out and thank us. I had
superintendents thanking us
because they feel that
All this information that
they've been getting late has
not helped them in the past.
And they're hoping that if we,
if they can receive the reports
by September 1st or these
assessments.
They'll be able to put together
better uh better class
information and, and uh and and
uh work towards their
weaknesses.
So, like I said, Madam Chair,
committee, we really need to get
this passed. Unfortunately, we
haven't had.
Good, uh
Good assessments or in a timely
fashion.
In the past 5 years.
And we really need to get these
assessments out to our schools.
I do have uh
I, I do have an expert witness
here with me if she'd like to go
ahead and introduce herself and
got me out here. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Amanda Audubon.
I'm the executive director of
New Mexico Kidsan and here to
help answer any questions.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. OK, we'll
go to the audience. Is there
anyone here in support of Senate
Bill 247?
If you'd like to come forward.
There was a microphone.
to identify yourself and then
your statement, please.
2 minutes.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee carry Robin Bruder
with public charter schools of
New Mexico, uh, quite simply,
uh, assessment data is an
actionable unless we get it in
time to take action, and so we
think this bill makes a lot of
sense. It will help our teachers
be able to make the curriculum
in such a way where students
will be able to use it more
effectively and we think that
this is just a really common
sense bill. Thanks so much.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
no, I do have a list of those
on.
Zoom, we'll start with hope,
Morales.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales and I'm the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico, and we are in
strong support of SB 247. I have
the honor of working with
hundreds of excellent teachers
across our 3 programs. The role
of high quality assessments and
timely data and education have
the potential to be
transformative tools for
enhancing both teaching and
learning. However, this
potential can only be realized
when quality assessments are
paired with timely and accurate
data, reflecting on my
experience.
as an exemplary 3rd grade
teacher. I remember how I led my
colleagues in data analysis
aimed at interpreting student
performance to better understand
the learning and needs of our
students. We utilize this data
to set meaningful grade level
goals, adjust our instructional
priorities and ensured that we
were effectively differentiating
support for each student
according to their unique needs.
This collaborative effort not
only strengthen our teaching
practices, but also directly
impacted student outcomes by
fostering an environment of
informed decision making.
Assessment data from both
district and state assessments
enabled us to develop clear
attainable goals, monitor
student progress regularly and
make informed decisions that
drove instruction. When
educators have access to current
and relevant assessment data,
they can tailor their approaches
to meet the diverse needs of
their students, identify areas
requiring
additional support and celebrate
success promptly. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next is Jessica Cas
Castro is in Buena.
Yes, you got it right. Um, good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jessica Castrobuelna, an
elementary teacher in Las
Cruces, New Mexico. As a
teacher, I know firsthand how
critical, timely assessment data
is to supporting student
success, assessment results
provide a vital starting point
to address learning gaps to set
realistic goals and tailor
instruction to meet the needs of
every learner. Unfortunately,
when these results are
delayed, it hampers our ability
to act effectively. Zach, a
student of mine, began the year
significantly, significantly
behind in math, about 2 years
below grade level. If I had
known this at the beginning of
the year, I could have
immediately implemented tier
one, I'm sorry, tier 2 and tier
3 interventions to support him.
Well, we worked hard throughout
the year and made great
progress, his scores by the end
of the year still didn't reach
where we wanted him to be at. If
Um, I would have had this
information sooner, we could
have achieved a plan and um
gotten him further.
SB 247 ensures that districts,
schools, and teachers like me
have the tools we need to make
informed decisions and provide
targeted intervention from day
one. It is prac practical and
necessary step to close
achievement gaps and give every
student the chance they need to
succeed. I respectfully urge you
to support SB 247 by ensuring
thatummative assessment results
are published by September 1st
each year. This bill prioritizes
transparency, equity, and
evidence-based planning for
educators and families alike.
Thank you for your time and your
commitment to improving
education in our state.
Thank you. And then we have
Enrique now.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Enrique and
Nell here on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and strong support of
Senate Bill 247. Um, having
timely assessment data is very
important for two reasons.
First, it empower students and
families by allowing parents to
determine how best to support
their child's academic progress.
If a student is struggling,
early results help parents make
data-driven decisions about
tutoring, interventions, and
more. Some states release uh
these
Results as early as late June or
July, most by August or the
first of September. There's no
reason that we can't do this in
New Mexico, um, early release of
data also supports teacher
preparation. Teachers need
timely results to adjust
instruction, set academic goals
and allocate resources, and
we've already heard that today
from some of our witnesses. We,
we don't need teachers to lose
the opportunity to tailor their
lessons to address student
needs. Therefore, we would
appreciate a yes vote on Senate
Bill 2.
47. Thank you.
Thank you, and there was no one
in opposition, correct? No.
So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee. Senator Pinto.
Madam Chair members of the
committee and thank you for the
bill, Senator.
So
September 1, when does school
start in New Mexico?
Well, Madam Chair, I believe
it's starts somewhere around.
I like August 12th.
So Madam Chair and Senator.
Doing these assessments.
And I'm like they're saying
teacher preparation.
It, it, it, it's gonna be too
late still.
You
Have some of these
How come we're not doing
anything about the report card.
answer.
I'm sure Senator Pinto, uh,
I think it would be a dream to
have report cards go home that
also share the students
statewide assessment data. I
think that melding of
information can be a little
challenging, um, that we've
heard. I will clarify some
districts do make the individual
student reports available prior
to those usually are released to
districts, um, usually around
June. This more so, um, is
requiring the school level and
district.
data to come out. Um, so it's a
little bit higher level and one
thing that uh we forgot to
mention previously indicated in
the LESE analysis is we really
hope that you all have it prior
to December, which is when it
came out last year, so that you
have it for budgeting and
program evaluation prior to
developing any legislative
priorities or the budget.
So man.
By the time they get this
assessment and um
It's
The, the school year has already
started.
Um, that the student is not, uh,
Over on the radar of the school
itself.
And as a teacher too.
You're supposed to do your own
assessments in the class.
Um, even at the end of the year.
And part of that was
You don't teach to the test.
So this is just a test that
they're taking and we want to
scores.
Um, speeding it up.
Doesn't seem to really be, um,
It means something that really
can be utilized so quickly.
Um, and in turnaround time.
Uh, especially if they're not
really keeping up with the
student.
It's over the summer and then
they come back in.
Um, that assessment is very
important, not the assessment
they took at the end of the year
in May.
Uh
And
It is
I
Here's some of the, you know,
well, it's, it's important and
necessary, but if they don't
meet the
Deadline, what happens?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
one thing that I think explains
the amendment is.
The original draft was in a
different, a new section of
statute that it got moved to
this existing section of statute
that in Section D says before
August of, before August 5th.
We have to provide that student
by student data. So the school
has to receive.
The data from the state about
individual students so that they
can do to your point though.
The interventions or the class
placements for that individual
student. We wanted to back this
date up a month to give them
more time to assemble the school
level and district level data.
I think to your point about what
happens if they don't meet this
deadline.
It would be long, so we would
hope that, you know, they would
follow that the public education
department would do their best
to comply with the law and our
conversations with them, they've
alluded to, um, believing that
September 1st is a reasonable
deadline.
So Madam Chair, if this is not,
then we create a liability for
someone to sue the school or the
school district or they, you
don't comply.
Can you rephrase that question,
Ma? So if this becomes law or we
creating a liability in which
state nor the school district or
the school can be sued, not
meeting this.
particular day.
and uh senator, good question.
You know,
I
I really don't know what to say
about that, but we always,
always have, we have many, many
dates throughout our statutes.
And uh I guess anybody could sue
if they really want to, um.
But uh I, I, I don't think
there's ever a guarantee that
someone will not.
That true.
Madam Chair and senator.
Fitness
The tests or this assessment
that you're talking about is
part of it written.
Um, Madame Chair, Senator Pinto,
these are the federally required
state mandated assessment, so,
um, currently, the Nemaa exam
which is given um on the
computer, um, for 3rd through
8th grade students and the SAT,
which is what we use as our 11th
grade requirement.
So is any part of the senator is
any part of the tip?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
my understanding is that all of
those assessments are delivered
via computers. Um, I believe in
some instances, if there is a
student, um, need identified in
their IEP that they may do
portions of the section, um,
hand, right.
Oh, Madam Chair, and so.
There's no input in the computer
where the student in this
English section has to type in
some kind of response.
Into the computer.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, my
apologies. I thought you were
asking whether or not they were
handwritten exams. Yes, there
are components of the current
assessments that require free
response. Sections where the
students would input via typing
the responses to the questions.
It's not entirely um
Multiple choice.
About chairing members of the
committee.
When I was teaching, we had to
do the assessments too of the
written assessment, and it's
very time consuming.
And
I'm not sure how we tackle that
as far as these assessments, but
I think some of that is probably
local choice.
In that whatever assessment they
decide to adopt.
But if you're adopting a data
system that is not giving you
the results.
That quickly.
Um, he's been individually or
student report?
I think that's um
The decision of the school board
or the school district.
Because
If they dumped it for the whole
district, they buy that system.
For them to use and utilize.
And
If you're not able, if the
teacher is not able to have
access to it.
That's interesting to me if they
don't, because yeah, you're the
teacher that's um.
As a student in the classroom is
very valuable to you.
But even that formulation of all
the data after the test is
taken, um, if you are really
evaluating.
This system, it should give you
everything you need.
In a timely manner.
And if it's based on some other
system that we're requiring as a
state for them to take that
test.
You know, that's also beyond our
control a little bit because
To the to
have the integrity of the tests.
So it's not compromised,
probably has to go to a certain
place.
Um, to be, to be overlooked,
especially when we talk about
the written part.
And
I, I, I find it hard to support
this because
can speed up the time.
But the, the consequences of it
don't seem to be um
That detrimental mean because
school is already started by
that. You have your resources,
you already have.
If you're going to talk about
the particular student.
That is up to the teacher to
address.
Um
In that initial when they come
into the classroom and when you
do those initial assessments.
On your own.
So I'm hoping that we do have
highly qualified teachers that
are able to do that for
themselves, and even at the end
of the school year.
I think the part of the
When you're saying, well, the
student, uh going into the next
school year.
You don't know where they stand,
uh.
You don't.
Because you don't know what, how
much they're gonna lose during
their break during the summer.
And also part of that, you don't
have some of the consistency,
you know, we have different
teachers and different teaching
styles.
In that sense, and in some
subject areas, teachers are
better than others.
So they could be very strong in
one area, jump, but still.
My inclination of our young and
they're mostly.
So.
That
if things are done right.
No more questions.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
biggest son of Ramos and.
What, what was your name? I'm
sorry.
Uh, but I'm sure Senator Amanda
Audubon.
Amanda? Yes, sir. We, we'll go
with that. OK.
Thank you.
So, um, a couple things I want
to talk about for, right, uh,
real quick.
So the academic assessment
This is Madam Chair and Senator
and Amanda.
These tests, um,
Basically, the teachers aren't
teaching to the test. They
should be teaching the concepts
for the students to apply those
concepts to the test.
Is that fair to say?
Madam Chair, Senator Black, yes,
the state assessments are
required to align with the state
standards and state standards,
put simply, are the targets of
which we would like each child,
um, the skills we'd like them to
master at the end of each grade,
so that is what these federally
mandated state adopted
assessments measure.
OK.
Um
Madam Chair Senator Amanda.
Let's go through grades 3
through 6, for instance, because
I assume that's
Elementary school, I know
there's some middle schools that
might have 6 through 8.
But
The teachers that are
So for grades 3 through 8.
And 11
Let me go with that.
Elementary school teachers.
are certified.
Incompetent
And
Uh, they understand.
Teaching math, correct?
If you're in elementary school
teacher because
As an elementary school teacher,
you're teaching multiple
subjects, correct? That you have
to be evaluated in and certified
in, is that fair to say, Madam
Chair, Senator Bloch, you are
correct in that the licensure um
is different for elementary
school and secondary. Secondary
requires more specific licensure
based on what you're teaching
versus elementary being more
generalized, that's correct. OK.
So, Madam Chair, and I guess
I'll just talk to you amanda.
You seem to know more than
Senator Ramos.
So,
um,
At the
Middle school, junior high, um,
I, I would argue, and I think
you would agree that a math or
science teacher.
Um
Knows the subject matter to
teach those subjects, to teach
those concepts.
Um
Over a an elementary school
teacher, correct?
random chair senator. Correct.
And Madam Chair, the reason why
I say that is I, I agree some
teachers might be strong in
other areas than others.
But when we're getting to the
junior high and the high school
level.
These are very specific skill
sets of teachers that are
teaching the content.
Is that fair to say?
Uh, manager and, and that is
fair to say, but then all we're
doing with this bill is
everything's already written
statute, everything is good, uh,
and all the assessment
requirements in statute. All
we're doing is changing the
Changing the actual date.
I understand, but, um, Madam
Sheriff Senator, I'm just trying
to lay the foundation for
everybody that these are
very skilled and good teachers
that are teaching these concepts
so the students can apply them
to take the assessments on the
required date.
You agree with that?
Yes, ma'am.
OK.
So
Um
I want to talk about the the
writing assessment here because,
uh, Madam Chair,
The writing assessment.
is for
Grades 3 through 8, but it
doesn't include grade 11.
The writing assessment, can you,
can you tell us what that is? Is
it basically uh like they read
something, then they're asked a
question you have to write about
it or something.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, my
understanding is that all of the
content that you see in the
statue that currently exists in
subsection B is the federal
requirements around English
languages are that an assessment
that measures English language
arts writing and mathematics. So
I believe that assessment that
New Mexico has adopted the AMASA
does exactly what you ask. Read
a prompt and then respond in
writing or typing.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
All right, getting down to page
2.
Um, line 15 section C.
Um, the standard shell, I'm
sorry, the department shall
involve appropriate licensed
school employees.
Uh, in the development of
standard-based assessments, so
is that each school district
doing their own.
Standard-based assessment, or is
this a standardized
Assessment across the state.
Madam Chair, Senator Black, um,
as this is existing statute that
um
Dictates the state required.
Assessment. So it's federal law
that dictates that every state
has to require a statewide
assessment. That is what all the
existing statutory language
does, and then to Senator
Ramos's, um, conversation. What
we're saying is the results of
that statewide assessment by
district.
And school has to be released no
later than September 1st. OK.
So, uh, Madam Chair, when
And I'm, I'm trying to get to
Senator Pinto's point here. So
before September 1st,
We're going to publish the
results. When, when do the kids
take the test?
Madam Chair, Senator Block
usually the public education
department sets the assessment
window, um, which is usually a
six-week window in which
districts could choose when to
offer the assessment. It usually
takes the district about a week,
but it's usually between mid
August and the end of May.
A certain mid, you repeat that
mid what? My apologies,
Senator
mid-April to the end of May.
OK, thank you, Ma. I think that
kind of answers it because that
allows them for all year long
from August to.
April or May to understand the
content and then take the
assessment that's how it kind of
looks, OK, all right.
Come to speed. Um, on page 3.
Uh, starting on line 13.
Some of the demographics here,
um.
Proficiency rates reached tested
subject in grade.
Reported by statewide district
and school-level performance,
disaggregated by student
demographics, including race,
ethnicity, socio-economic
status, and special education.
Um, male, female, do we not care
about that or why is that not in
there?
Um, Madam Chair Center, it's,
it, it just wasn't required in
statute.
Before, before.
And Madam chairs, uh, Senator
block, it has been, that data
has been included sporadically
by the department over the last
few years, so, um, in, in
writing this bill we took what
they always report and added
those in, um.
But certainly, an analysis by
gender would be helpful.
Madam chair and I, I, I agree. I
think that needs to be in there
whether we amend it here or
Um, is this the first committee
or a 2nd committee?
Man, this is our 2nd committee,
but we want to have a problem
amending it before it gets to
the floor. OK. OK. All right,
let's just make a note of that
real quick. And then, Madam
Chair, um,
Amanda
It says here on line F on, I'm
sorry, line 17 F.
All students shall participate
in the academic assessment
program. So how do we do that
for the special education kids.
Uh, Madam Chair Senator B block,
the federal requirement is that
every state to be eligible for
our federal funds has to assess
95% of students. That is a law
that was created to make sure
that districts or schools are
not opting out certain parts of
their student body to make their
assessment scores look better,
which was a very common practice
um in the 80s. And so there is
um a section of statute that
allows certain students um with
Special education needs, um,
they take a different
assessment, but it has to be
less than 5% of the total
student population of the state
of New Mexico. OK.
I just last, last two quick
things here, um, Madam Shaer
and um Amanda.
Um, students
who have been determined to be
uh limited in English proficient
English as their second language
or something.
Um
What's the percentage of
students in Mexico that English
is their second language,
whether it be
Spanisher or Native Americans,
their primary Madam Chair,
Senator Block, on any given year
we usually range between 13 and
16% of New Mexico students, um,
having English learner status.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Amanda, and
Madam Chair, I don't know if you
want to, if we could do the
amendment.
here, but
I would propose an amendment to
insert.
Um, after on page 3, right after
line 16 with uh
Actually probably rather produce
it on insert after line 13 of
race and then put B.
Um
Male female, so we can get some
uh better data in New Mexico.
Gender? Sure.
Yeah, it was a suggestion.
Yeah, gender is fine.
So, uh, Madam Chair, I, I would
like to uh make an amendment.
And
Input after line 13 with race
after the semicolon and keep it
and put a bravo for gender and
then add a semicolon and then
Bravo, Charlie and Delta would
be
Uh, Charlie Delta echo, if that
would be a friendly amendment.
So Senator, you are.
Emotion and for a second, I will
2.
That's what I'm
Ma, I'm sure we consider that
friendly amendment, please.
OK.
And for the amendment, is there
any discussion on the amendment?
Any opposition to the amendment?
no
I was voting
Any affirmative
So you now have an amended.
Substitute, which is still
allowable.
been adopted.
full of
Substitute just yeah.
So Senator Blocke still has.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
lastly, um,
And, and I don't know if it's
related to the new section in
here the bill, but if, if uh
these students are not
proficient.
You know, grades.
3 through 8 or grade 11 when it
comes to math, reading, language
arts, or or writing assessment.
Um
What, what happens to that kid?
Let him chair Senator Black, um.
It, it is not in this bill, but
there, um, our other bills
circulating in the legislature
that would identify those
students for extra support,
known as high impact tutoring,
um, but right now, uh, to answer
your question specifically,
there is no statewide approach.
It is up to the district and
individual school too.
Identify those students for some
support and decide what might be
best for them.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So Amanda, I can assume
that when we get the assessment
back of the different, uh, all
these kids.
And they're not meeting.
Uh, the standards.
They're not getting a retest,
it's just that's the data that
we have and then we just go on
to the next year, correct?
That's correct, manager. OK,
thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Amanda. Thank you, Madam Chair.
A
Thank you, Senatorero Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, um, I
think that the gender addition
was a really good one, but I
wanted to ask you why tribal
affiliation or, well, OK, I'll
ask you first. Does A and B
Um
Allowed on page 3, does that
Help you identify native
children.
Madam Chair, um, Senator Sadia
Lopez, yes, so, um, as you look
at the state assessment data as
it's released now. Um, our
Native American students are
broken out into an individual
subgroup, which is extremely
helpful when we're looking at
targeted interventions or um
best case scenario monitoring
progress on the Yazi Martinez,
um.
Crew is named in the Yasi
Martinez lawsuit. And, and
that's why, that's why I ask,
um, so how do these families
identify their, because this is
I put
Um
Because native American and I
probably should defer to my
Native American colleagues here,
and my understanding is, it's a
tribal affiliation. You're, you
know, it's whether you're a
member.
Of of a group so that
Do children answer Native
American to race, or do they
answer?
Uh, you know, how do you figure
that out, Matt, Madam Chair.
And I would yield to um
Either Senator Pinto or Senator
Charlie for better.
Understanding of this?
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. It's actually neither
Native American or American
Indian people are unique
political class because of our
trust in treaty.
Relationship with the federal
government. So we have dual
citizenship.
Um, so we are neither a race or
an ethnicity.
Political protected political
class.
Be sure that that's my
understanding that it's not a
racer, it's not not an
ethnicity, it's a, it's an
affiliation.
And so, um,
And I, the reason I'm aware of
this is because in the
applications to the law school.
We asked for tribal affiliation,
and we also asked for
Number, the member number or the
some kind of identification
because a lot of people would
check that box.
And then they had no
affiliation, no connection to
the culture, nothing. And so in
order to stop that practice,
probably about 20 or 25 years
ago, we started asking for a
tribal affiliation, and that's
why this jumps out at me as
missing.
Um, but if you, I, I'm curious
how you identify that now.
Um, and that's why I asked about
race and ethnicity because I
think that's
Not the best way to get it
because I think if I were
It's to me just like uh it's
confusing when people say
Hispanic, non-white.
I'm like, what? Uh, or Hispanic
white?
I don't know what to do because
it's like,
I don't consider myself white.
So I, I, you know, so I do the
Hispanic non-white, but then
I've been told that's not
correct, and I'm confused, uh,
you know, so, um,
And that was actually a sense I
had, we had all kinds of
problems. Um, so,
Um, ethnicity, I think, takes
care of that.
For Hispanics, but I don't think
children.
Madam Chair, that's very good
discussion. I, I actually just
learned a lot.
But um
It just depends on how the
district reports it.
Uh, to, to PED.
And that that's, that's how it's
done right now.
But Madam Chair, isn't that
gonna screw up the, the, this
thing if you don't have it and
the district reports it to you
in a different way. How are you
gonna match it?
And shouldn't there be
uniformity among the districts
and how they report this. I know
that in my um in my area, there
are quite a few native kids in
Highland, well, when my kids
went to school, there are quite
a few native uh children.
Um, in fact, the biggest
basketball stars at Highland
tend to be native kids.
Um, and so I just
I don't know whether to amend it
to put tribal affiliation or to
ask to amend it, um.
Because I don't know how this
data.
is collected now and whether
that would be problematic.
But I'm worried that it's not
collected correctly now.
A lot of just another example, a
lot of Latinos have Native
American blood and they'd be
like, well,
You know, which one again
causing confusion.
Madam chair Senator, he's
suggesting in a minute.
Well, um,
I'm asking if such an amendment
would be friendly.
OK, Madam Cha center, that is a
good question. And see, we
really couldn't say if it's
friendly or not because we want
to see how PD would want to uh.
Uh, or, or that, that would have
a say so on what we're going to
change here, see if it'll cause
any disruption or, or confusion
in the reporting.
Madam Chair, that's my question.
I I would want something that
wouldn't cause confusion, and
that would be accurate
information, and I feel like how
it is now is not accurate.
You could lead to confusion
since, since there's no option
for native child.
To check the correct box.
Madam Cha,
uh as ania Lopez, I.
Our concern would be to make um
reporting for families is more
burdensome, so much so that
maybe we wouldn't get the
accurate information if.
To use your example from the law
school we asked for um a tribal
affiliation of our or something
such as that, wanting to make
sure that
However, the districts are
currently filling out. It's a,
it's the child's enrollment
paperwork in which they're
pulling this data into the uh
student.
Information system that then
rolls up into the state student
information system, um, and to
send almost at this point, I
just don't know that we have
enough clarity on how those two
systems are matching.
Uh, that, that I'm sure I'd like
to yield to um Senator Charlie.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, the
PED has this information.
As a parent
Who has enrolled my child.
system. There is a form, and I
don't know the the title of the
form that we have to fill out
that identifies that our child
has been enrolled in a federally
recognized.
So that would be tribal
affiliation, whether you're
enrolled in a federally
recognized tribe would be tribal
affiliation.
If that's easier than we could
just go ahead and
Yeah.
Right.
OK, Madam Chair, if you have one
of those green forms or
whatever, I'd be happy to, or
I'll make the, the amendment is
gender E now?
It's actually big and everything
else moved down.
We
A through Eve mature.
Have you had an F.
Actually, I think it should go
before um
Socioeconomic status and special
education status, so it should
probably be
Uh
OK.
They
If genders be
And ethnicity is C, then it
should probably be D.
Because putting it after so
because you wanna have like
things.
Near each other, so I, I guess,
Madam Chair, I would move that,
um, after
Oh
Online
Well, this is gonna be where
it's gonna be remembered, but
Uh, online.
15
Insert before socioeconomic
status.
See
Tribal affiliation.
And my understanding that's a
friendly amendment.
Yes, ma'am, chair, Senator.
OK, so Senator, you are moving?
And is there a second?
Second from Senator Charlie.
In the end this is on page 3.
On page 3 would be a new.
See, I mean a new D, I'm sorry,
new D, uh, that would say tribal
affiliation.
In a semicolon.
They can do all the and then
remember accordingly.
OK, yes.
OK, so we have a motion in a
second. Is there any discussion
that sponsor is, is friendly.
Yes. OK.
No other discussion, any, is
there any opposition?
From the committee, there is
none, so if you could show us
all voting in the affirmative.
Senator Si Lopez, you still have
the floor?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
other, um,
question was already, has
already been raised, um, and
that is, there is no consequence
to the to PED.
For, um, not doing this, and
over and over again I hear in
judiciary, um,
them saying, well, it's just a
memorial if you don't have any
kind of consequence or you don't
have this, and I hate the, the
consequence being a lawsuit.
Against the district, um, and so
when you don't put a consequence
like um
This is extreme. I'm not
suggesting this, but an extreme
consequence would be they lose
funding. That would be extreme.
Um, but then it just only leaves
an outlet of a lawsuit.
And I think we should try to
reduce lawsuits against EED.
You know, cause then lawsuits
distract them from their main
business, so
Um
I'm not gonna suggest you do it
now. Are you going to judiciary,
madam?
Maternal.
This is our 2nd committee.
Oh, it's going to the floor.
From here it goes to the floor.
Um
Well, if Senator Cervantes is
paying attention.
I, um,
I'm concerned
That he's gonna say this is just
a memorial because there's no
consequence.
And alternatively, I know.
Because when you don't have a
consequence in the law, the only
consequence is to file a lawsuit
and say that you're violating
the law, and I worry about that.
So, um,
I think there should be a
consequence.
Some kind of consequence.
Um
I don't know what, like I said,
the extreme consequence would be
Lack of funds or, you know,
reduction in funds or
Um
I'm not suggesting that because
I don't wanna, I don't want to
reduce funds to.
Um
But it, it, it concerns me that
the fact that there's no
consequence means.
And, and, and to be real clear
in the law, you could say the
exclusive remedy.
Which then
No lawsuit could be brought
because the exclusive remedy
would be whatever the
consequences here.
And that would exclude lawsuits.
So I share that with you because
I think it's important.
Um, that you think about that,
and I would suggest you think
about it with the, it's a
problem to me about this bill.
Um
Gives rise to potential lawsuits
and
No consequence if if something
is violated, which means
Why bother.
And you know, might as well just
do a memorial.
Manager and Madam Chair, I, I, I
agree with what you're saying.
There always has to be a
consequences, but I, I really
think the embarrassment of not
getting it done and reaching and
uh receiving.
on this would, would probably be
pretty devastating to our
secretary.
So I think if this is a law, um,
I, I think they're gonna look at
this a little more serious.
And if it doesn't get done, um,
I hope they have good excuses.
But uh hopefully there's not.
Well, maybe a consequence would
be publishing it.
The PED website.
The exclusive remedy. I'm just,
I'm just
settling this out there off the
top of my head. The exclusive
and I think exclusive is
important that that there's no
lawsuits against the department.
So the exclusive remedy for
failing is publication of the
school.
The school's failure on the PED
website and the reason for the
failure, the stated reason for
the failure.
And then you've got a
consequences exclusive. I'm just
throwing it out there. I haven't
given it very much thought.
Um, just off the top of my head,
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, um,
one thing I'd like to clarify is
this is PED reporting the data.
This is not school, schools or
districts. This is
Um, PD is the only one that has
access to all that accumulated
data that does the student
verification.
So that they're the only ones
that can go out and say the
proficiency of X school is why
the proficiency of X district is
Y and so it's hard to think of a
consequence for the public
education department.
That's actually a very good
point. So,
It was just a public
embarrassing. I was just uh
riffing off.
Um
Senator, uh, Rumbles public
embarrassment idea was the only
uh thing that's absolutely
right. This is PED publishing or
not PED providing the data to
the teachers, which is what's
important, what kind of
consequence, I, I don't know,
again, if you have an exclusive
consequence that will mean that
any lawsuits will be dismissed
because the only remedy is the
exclusive remedy here with no
remedy.
It's might as well be a
memorial.
So the, the, and my final
question, and I've been harping
on this already, uh, in other
bills is, I understand this is
just the
That this is just about getting
the data to teachers, but it
would be nice if we all
understood that the reason for
producing the data is to develop
an individualized plan for the
student.
To meet that student where.
He is
And
And develop a plan for her.
Um or him, or, you know, that.
And that
Not here, uh, it would make me
feel better, and it would make
me feel that we're more in
compliance with Ya with.
What the judge said in the Yazi
Martinez case, which I just feel
like we're not.
Phoned in on what the judge said
to eliminate the purpose of that
lawsuit was to eliminate
disparities.
And um that to me, that's the
only reason to collect this data
is to eliminate disparities.
And here we're collecting the
data with no statement about,
you were just assuming the
teacher will do that. Um, and I
don't want a micromanage
teachers. I'm not suggesting
that, but it should be the
policy of PED to support
eliminating disparities based on
this data.
Um, because I just
I just think if you don't
identify the problem.
And develop a solution.
You're, it's, you're wasting
your time and so collecting this
data with no plan.
Concerns me, um.
And I just, I wish there was at
least a line that said the
purpose of this data.
Of collecting this data is to
help.
This identify the students.
Figure out who the student is
and develop a plan to eliminate.
There
to do something like that. Um,
and again, I've just felt that
for the last couple of years.
That we're just not doing that.
Me too.
Um
And was that like I have nothing
else.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions or comments? Are we
gonna is there.
What is, which is the committee?
so much for your pastgos with
the 2nd from Senator Hickey.
to call the place.
In my book.
I
in her food.
Yeah.
Charlie, yes.
Yes, ma'am.
And I'm not, yes.
And I think
The
office.
Yes, but I, I may not vote for
him.
I'm sorry. Yes, may I explain my
vote, Senator Hickey.
Yes, and our Lopez.
Yes.
said the Lopez to explain her
vote. Um, I may not vote for it
on the floor, but I, I
I really want to think hard
about this and I would feel a
lot better about supporting this
if it had.
stated the reason for collecting
this data.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, by a vote of 9 to 1,
you have a due pass
recommendation.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Cynthia
Lopez, Senate Bill 450.
We do have a committee
substitute.
Yesterday we had asked for
During the presentation for the
senator to please outline.
And she was able to work on.
A committee substitute.
that we did receive earlier
today.
And the light of us being
getting towards the end of
session.
Senator, if you could please
present.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
really do want to give credit to
legislative council service for
putting this together. I
understand that the policy if
it's more than just a few small
amendments, it needs to be a
committee substitute and so
we're able to come very quickly
with the community subs uh
committee substitute and um
Just to go to the changes.
Um, oh, OK, first I'll talk
about the changes.
Um, from the original bill.
On page 4 and Senator, before
you go, we need that. Let's do
the process.
So the chair will move a do not
pass on Senate Bill 450, but for
purposes of discussion, they do
pass on Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute.
of Bill 450.
Yeah, I'll move it and you can
second it, yes, yes, I said
that, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Please walked us through the
substitute, OK.
So, Madam Chair, I heard loud
and clear, um, what was said
yesterday or was it yesterday?
Yes, it was yesterday.
Uh, I
I'm sorry, the days are kind of
blending. The, uh
So I heard loud and clear, and I
thought about what was said, and
I don't think we have the bit,
it's really shouldn't be us that
is dictating to the medical
profession what is the practice
of medicine, and a lot of those
um
Criteria that we have listed.
We're really trying to identify,
they came from a research that
was basically trying to identify
the practice of medicine and
elements. I had heartburn about
um
I had heartburn about
eliminating bees.
Um, on page 4, line 17, because
of the number of, because of
number 4 under B that starts on
line 3 determining how many
patients the healthcare provider
shall see in a given time
period. And the reason is
because doctors were telling me
that they are being told they
can only have 10 minutes with
the patient, uh, 15 minutes, you
know, they're, they're giving
criteria and these doctors were
very upset because
Some patients require less time
and some patients require more
time and they didn't like those
kind of dictates, but after
speaking with um
The, the, um,
With you and him, uh, I
Uh, would like to
Take out beef.
Um
and so we took out take out beat
and then on on page 4, the thing
that we added.
Very important thing that we
added in this was because of
Doctor uh
Richard from UNM.
was to add
Um
Accept as required by licensing
and accreditation.
On line 16, and the reason for
that.
is um
Doctor, um, I think it was Mike
Richards, Doctor Mike Richards,
um, I just didn't confirming
the.
Yes.
It was Doctor um.
Doctor Richards, um,
But he said what he said that
was so influential in adding
except as required by licensing
and accreditation is um
accreditation standards and some
licensing standards are
requiring doctors to create
committees.
I mean hospitals to create like
committees that are made up of
healthcare providers that would
develop practices, the best
practices in the hospitals, and
they may not be um
Completely dominated by doctors
or by other healthcare
providers, but they'll have good
representation. It might be a
nurse.
A few doctors, whatever.
Be a team from, from the
hospital. And so the question
was, would that violate
Um
Would that violate this bill and
that certainly was not the
intent. If it is required by
accreditation or licensing of
the hospital that they have
these teams that was not the
intention of this bill. So we
put a health care entity shall
not indirectly or directly
interfere with control or
otherwise direct the
professional judgment or
clinical decisions of a health
care provider accept as required
by licensing and accreditation
in order to allow
Grantter or the accredited the
accreditor, um, to give guidance
to the hospital about what's
required and that seemed like a
really good idea, Madam Chair,
that um,
That these teams.
Uh, work on these issues. The,
the point of this bill, Madam
Chair, is to
Um
is to empower doctors.
What happened when I had doctors
meet with me in my district and
um
Basically, this was one of the
most disturbing things.
Was the fact that they um
Because of the acquisition of
their facility by equity firms
from out of state, they'd come
in and they cost cut.
And they cost cut in a way that
interfered their ability to
practice. And so that um
That is what this bill is trying
to do. 00, Madam Chair, and I
have another amendment if, if I
could ask somebody to make this
amendment, I guess I will since
I'm on page 3.
Um, on line 21.
Independent health care practice
means a health care provider
organization.
Um
Owned
Uh, majority owned.
Instead of entirely owned.
So
were owned by a majority.
controlled, yeah.
OK, so on page 3, line 21.
Yes, he wished to strike the
word entirely and put majority.
It strike entirely and insert
thereof majority, yes.
And the purpose for that is I
received feedback from these uh
from independent health care
practice, and they said that it
was a problem to say entirely
with their businesses.
And so I thought that was,
again, I wasn't trying to um
One of those things when, when
you're not, when you're trying
to do something for healthcare
professionals, um.
There's a lot to it, and so
majority it is, is really
important. So if, if, and I
guess I'll just move.
That amendment
OK, so again, making sure our
secretary gets it.
Page 3, line 21.
Striking the word entirely and
inserting majority, yes.
So you're moving, I will 2nd.
Is there any discussion, any
opposition to the amendment?
See them, if you could show.
Thus present, so.
How
For the amendment
With the exception of Senator
Pinto, he said.
OK, we have that senator. OK.
And then, um,
Did you amend
I guess I haven't, I, I, I will
formally amend uh
On page 4, deleting B, starting
on line 17.
And ending on page 5 line 4.
OK, so Senator, one more time to
clarify page 4.
Line 17.
Striking
Oh.
Subsection B, so that goes all
the way, um,
From like 1725 on page 4.
And then on page 5, line 1.
Page, the other page of.
At the end of the line of
way forward through the period.
Yes, yes, Madam Chair, thank
you.
So you're moving. I'm moving,
I'm moving that amendment. The
chair will second it.
Is there any
Conversation, questions from
committee.
Any opposition or committee on
the amendment?
no?
Just make sure the secretary be
secretary, the only person not
present is Senator Pinto.
So you do have the amended.
Many substitutes 2 times.
Is that all?
Yes, um, madam chair, and as I
said, the purpose of this is to
empower doctors. Um, my
understanding is that Texas has
a very strong corporate practice
rule, and I would hate for our
doctors.
To uh leave New Mexico for Texas
because they have such a strong
corporate uh practice rule,
practice of medicine um rule,
um.
I think that this is outrageous
that
A a a corporate entity could
come in and cut cut costs so
much that they're interfering
with doctors' independence. The
other thing I wanted to share is
I have spoken with um a few
doctors about this who like it.
However, they are not
comfortable testifying because
they're concerned about
repercussions from their
employer. A couple of them said,
I'm just leaving. I'm not.
I'm not hassling with it.
They're just leaving um the
practice this horrible um
situation where they're
Where they are autonomy is being
interfered with by cost cutting.
So with that, Madam Chair,
unless my um my expert has
anything to say, I'm uh I'm
ready to stand for questions.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
As a social scientist is your
microphone turned on, just make
sure. Can you hear me? Yes, uh,
as a social scientist, I've,
I've been looking at so much.
So many articles in drama and in
health affairs and others, and
there was one that struck me
recently called restoring
physician authority in an error
of hospital dominance, and it's
the balance between the ethics
of a profession.
versus the market requirements,
and that's what we're grappling
with.
And there, the lack of balance
now
between those ethics, which is
creating a huge impact in terms
of burnout, doctors leaving, um,
physicians setting up as in
Santa Fe, their own clinic, and
then they don't have privileges
in the hospital. Um, there is,
there's an enormous amount of
Of consequences to this, and so
if the article saying it's, we
need to rebalance, essentially,
and that's what this.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in support?
Um the uh
May substitute for Senate Bill
450.
Anyone in support?
Anyone in opposition?
Is there anyone online?
Thank you.
And for in support is Barbara
Peterson.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for this opportunity to
speak. I'm Barbara Peterson. I'm
the president of the AFT New
Mexico retiree chapter, and I
stand in strong support, medical
decisions should be made by
patients and their doctors and
other medical professionals, not
corporations. Thank you very
much for your time.
You. Thank you. No one else.
That was all.
No one else?
OK. Thank you.
with that, we'll go to questions
or comments from committee
members.
See no questions, senator.
Move it to pass. There's a
motion for a due pass from
Senator Charlie.
With the second, um, senatorero
Lopez.
I
And we're still open for
discussion.
They're black.
OK. Think about a chair.
I, I saw the senator to left
kind of twitching the hand. I
didn't know.
up front.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator.
Um
Real quick here, can you just
tell me a, a couple of things
here on page 5.
Line 15
The, the authority of the
attorney general seems rather
broad.
here. So here's the part, um,
I'd like you just to give me a
couple of examples.
Uh, whenever the Attorney
General has reasonable belief
that a healthcare entity
Or its employees or agents are
engaging in or about to engage
in.
An act or practice in violation
of corporate practice of
Medicine Act.
How, how do you
What's the standard there for
About to engage in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's a
really good question. And um in
law, we normally don't do that.
However, there could be an
example of this, uh, you get an
injunction to stop something
from happening before it's too
late. So let's just
hypothetically and God forbid
this ever happened, that you had
a hospital saying you are not
gonna refer people out of state.
You are only going to refer
people to the or maybe or to any
other hospital. You are going to
only refer people within our
practice group.
Um, and then that probably would
cause doctors to leave.
And the way this is set up, um,
That with the Attorney General's
office and from discussions with
some attorneys there, they would
only get involved if doctors
weren't getting involved. So
let's say hypothetically, that
was a policy.
Um, that came out in an email or
whatever and the doctor
forwarded to the Attorney
general office and said, I'm not
gonna file a lawsuit. I'm just
getting a job somewhere else.
Good luck.
New Mexico and left. That would
be sufficient evidence, and if
it's said in this policy goes
into effect in 2 weeks.
What I would hope that the
Attorney General does is go to
court and get an injunction
against such a horrible policy.
So that's an example. Now, God
forbid that happens, but I've
heard some horror stories about
how doctors have the autonomy
has been limited, so it is a
possibility that something like
that could happen if we're
talking about hypotheticals, and
that would be an example where
the Attorney general would step
in here because we have a
private, a right of action here.
The Attorney general is
unlikely, in fact, I was
surprised, they said they only
usually when you put a burden on
uh an agency, they come and they
tell you they need 56, 10, a
dozen people to do all this
burdensome stuff burdensome
stuff that you're asking them to
do. But we call the attorney
General, I didn't really get a
specific answer about
About that, but in the FIR when
they said they only needed one
person.
I was amazed because this will
go into effect and they can put
this in their budget for next
year as an additional
responsibility to hire somebody
to enforce this act. And one
person would be sufficient if
Um
If a doctor
Um
said, I'm, I'm not gonna bring
an action, but here's the
evidence I have about what their
What they're doing or what
they're planning to do, I'm out
of here, then the Attorney
general would be in a position
to bring an action violent
injunction and stop that, that
egregious uh rule.
Or egregious policy. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So,
An employee could be, and I
gotta look back in the
definitions cause I think.
an employee could be somebody in
the hospital or the healthcare
facility.
Yes, Ma.
Yeah, there's no definition for
employee unless I'm missing it,
but I assume it's somebody in
the facility, correct? Employee
is a common known term, um,
healthcare entity needed
definition for its employees is
coming. That's fair. OK, thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So
Read down and in that um
paragraph of B on line 15.
The Attorney General may bring
action in the name of the state
alleging violations of that act.
OK, so, I mean, that's a lot of
state power that the Attorney
general has over hospital, in my
opinion.
Um, what is district court the
correct?
Pork or did you just uh picked
at or legally, that's the first
entering court that they would
have to go in.
Madam chaired the district
courts in our state are courts
of general jurisdiction under
our uh New Mexico Constitution,
and that's where these kinds of
actions would, would go in to
get an injunction, um, you
couldn't go to Metroport and get
an injunction. You couldn't go
to a court of appeals. So, uh to
take evidence because court of
appeals, the courts of appeals
don't take evidence. So this is
the court that would take
evidence and
And issue an injunction if there
was something that was going to
endanger patients.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
I want to go back to something
you said um in my first
question.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, so
if a patient
Uh, some type of issue and the
patient needs to be referred.
Or specialist, it's a um
Go to the emergency room with
the
healthcare provider and and a
patient needs to be referred to
a cardiologist.
Are, are you, I wanna make sure
I understand what you're saying.
Um,
Are you saying there's an issue
with the hospital referring that
patient to a cardiologist in
that health group.
I'm saying that that I think
would be
Let's just take that
hypothetical and the let's just
say it was hospital policy to
only refer somebody who
presented in the emergency room
with heart issues to heart
specialists in their facility,
and let's just say that the
emergency room physician said,
This person needs
I don't know
An immediate transplant and
should be flown to get a
transplant. We don't do
transplant transplants here, and
you violated hospital policy to
do that.
That's the kind of problem that
we're looking at.
Because that would be
interfering with their
professional medical judgment.
Now, I firmly believe that we,
that the hospitals haven't
gotten that bad.
I, I do not believe that they
would stop somebody from getting
That kind of care in the
appropriate facility. However,
it is disturbing to hear.
Doctors talk about the
interference with their medical
autonomy, and that's what this
bill is, that's the only point
of this bill is to protect their
medical autonomy.
Get a
real life example.
Oh, and my expert has a real
life example, right?
Uh
I've been talking to the
musicians around the state and I
was shocked to hear a physician
from Gallup.
Telling me that he does not have
confidence.
In the X-ray company, the, the
radiology company that he is
required.
To use by the hospital.
Um, and that's, that's, you
know, an example. There's uh in
Las Cruces, I heard that if you
have
Um, if you want to make a
recommendation for your patient
about what you think is the
best.
Specialists to go to all of a
sudden there's this list.
On the computer that that really
is a bias to the, to the
hospital, uh,
selection.
Um, and so, and even though that
they and they would be, they
fear that they would be
penalized.
If they
didn't use the hospital.
So those are, those are issues
that I have heard.
from physicians.
Thank you, uh, Doctor Bell
Bloom. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So to me, um, I think what I'm
hearing is
You're trying to wrestle with
The business
Partnership of the hospital
versus patient care.
That's, I think that's really
what it comes down to.
And in regards to that, I mean,
I, I don't, again, just my
opinion.
I, I think having Madam chair,
an attorney General have
Enormous power.
Over those business decisions of
the hospital.
Really gives me some, some pause
there.
Um, because
What you said earlier, if you
take the transplant piece out of
it in the uh
And uh I always use him as a
guinea pig, Senator boot here to
my left has a heart issue.
Again
It'll be hard.
In this scenario.
Um
So he goes to the hospital, goes
to the ER for chest pain.
And he needs a cardiologist.
So there's no reason why I, I, I
don't see any.
Type of
A moral
Uh, or unethical decision making
by the hospital to refer Senator
Boone to the cardiologist.
In that hospital or another
hospital who, another
cardiologist at another practice
that might be in that group.
That's, that's the part I'm
trying to, I'm, I'm really
wrestling with because
We don't know if it's
Uh, I mean, and then someone
makes a complaint, the attorney
general could do an injunction
to say stop.
You know, so what happens to
Senator Boone then he has to go
somewhere else. I, I just, I, I
don't see the, I, I don't see
how
This bill, this log.
Can be that fast.
Have someone complain to the
Attorney General for the
Attorney general to drop
everything.
And look into the hospital
operations.
To do an injunction.
Which might be the wrong
decision because it could just
be the partnership of a very
well qualified and certified
cardiologist.
Madam chair, there would be no
cause of action in the scenario
you said at all that they're
That's not a cause of action.
This is about protecting
doctors.
So it would only be if a doctor
complained about a hospital
policy that was interfering with
their professional judgment. If
a doctor thought that these are
great referrals.
Right. No, no problem. It would
only be if there was a hospital
policy that prevented the doctor
from exercising his
professional.
Judgment
That that would not be
appropriate, Poor Senator Boone,
group.
And the doctor was only limited,
and the doctor said, no, this
man needs.
Something that we don't offer.
And he was unable to
To practice that way because of
hospital policy. What happens
with physicians when that
happens is they just leave.
They just can't stand the idea
of their autonomy being.
Um
Interfered with in that way and,
and doctors.
The doctor treating Senator
Boone would be absolutely
committed to the best care for
Senator Boone.
And that's how they are, and
that's what we need to protect.
Madam Chair and Senator, but I
look at that in two ways. I look
at that as in maybe that
doctor's wrong, the policy's
right.
Maybe
Maybe that doctor just has
issues with authority and every
doctor's getting, I mean, no
offense to the doctors here.
Doctors and nurses, I mean
they're, people are just gonna
complain if they don't agree
with something.
And, and then that.
It is an entering argument to go
into this process, to bring the
state government attorney
general involved in this, and
that's, that's the piece that
I'm struggling with,
I think Madam Chair, the
Attorney general, um.
The general, the attorney
general's authority is to
protect the citizens, the people
in the state of New Mexico. That
is what the Attorney General's
job is. They now have authority
to bring consumer protection
cases, they now have authority
to bring antitrust cases, they
have a lot of authority anyway.
My cons the uh uh bringing the
Attorney general into it.
Is only because
The private right of action may
not be enough to stop an
inappropriate policy.
The private right of action.
I've known so many people who
have had tort, who've had
employment issues, have had all
kinds of issues, who simply walk
away because they have other
options and doctors, as we know
in this state, have many, many
options. So, so many of the
doctors I talked to said, I'm
out of here.
Because they didn't like the
policies, because they can get a
job in any other state.
And so
Because of that, this is a
problem that might not be
addressed with the private right
of action.
And so the attorney general
would only step in.
And, and if you look at all of
their, the attorney General's
power, um, there's so many cases
that people wish the Attorney
general would bring action on
their behalf.
The Attorney General only steps
in when there's a pattern or
practice that affects the people
of the state of New Mexico. They
never bring lawsuits on behalf
of one individual.
They never do that. They only
bring it if it's gonna be a
class action, if it's gonna be
something that is broader than
the one individual.
Um, and I wish we had somebody
the attorney general's office
here, so they could tell you
about how they work, um.
I've never worked there, but my
husband worked there.
Um, that the Attorney General's
office early in his career. And
so I'm familiar.
I, I'm not familiar with this
current office, but I'm familiar
with how the office works.
Well, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I, I think
that this also opens up a lot of
Legal liability.
the hospitals themselves, but I
appreciate the back and forth
very much. Thank you, uh,
senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
They
Thank you. I didn't have anyone
else on my list.
You could call the roll, please.
center of block.
Senator Boone.
No.
Senator Charlie.
Senor Gallegos.
And I know, yes, and Pinto.
That sco.
Centerio Lopez, yes, the hickey.
No.
Like my vote.
And I lover.
Yes.
OK
And Senator Hickey to explain
his vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I worked uh
Most of my life with physicians,
uh.
Chief Medical Officer at
Lovelace, 90 CEO, um,
medical groups in Omaha and so
forth.
And uh
Doctors, uh, in almost all
circumstances, each one thinks
that he or she is right.
And and disagree with something
and
Um
This bill opens up a lot of uh
potential disagreement and
The, the, the vagaries, there's
so much vagaries in such a
widespread net that I, I think
that if this were to go forward
and get to a court that it be.
probably overturned.
But um I understand that
medicine is very difficult today
and
Very hard on clinicians. It, it
wasn't like the great days in
the 80s and 90s and they're back
like Marcus Welby.
And uh the 50s and
Wish it were, but uh it's not,
but um I think there are other
ways to address this issue, and
I'm committed to addressing the
issue of a good work environment
for every physician in New
Mexico is in a hospital or
whatever, but
not the way to do it. Thank you.
Thank you. And Senator, the vote
was tied.
5 to 5, so the bill sits in
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee,
and I do hope we uh find a
balance between the medicine has
a has a business and the
practice of medicine has a
profession. Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Senate Bill 404 and as is the
Um, I say the tradition for this
session for the committee.
ends usually around 8 o'clock, 8
p.m. just because I'm still
dealing with my health issues.
So whatever is left will be
rolled over, carried over for
our committee on Wednesday.
So Senator Stewart, do you think
you're the last bill for the
evening.
Thank the chair members of the
committee.
I'm joined today by Deanna
Warren from the ACLU and my
co-sponsor.
or nova.
So
send a bill 404.
Changes are electronic health
records, which were all quite
proud of, and they've helped our
quality of health care.
Uh, changes the name to uh
The
Patient records Privacy Act.
So, electronic health records,
as I said, we're, we're proud of
those. They certainly help um
our medical system, but
We have some medical records
that are very sensitive about
healthcare practices and uh
those records are available to
all providers with access to the
system.
So this bill tries to rein in
that uh global access to these
healthcare records. Uh, so we're
talking about states around us
criminalizing some of the active
health activities that we find
legal in New Mexico, and it's
estates around us that were
having the problem with.
So as other states criminalize,
uh, these abortion care and
gender affirming care, which are
legal in New Mexico. It can put
our New Mexico patients at risk,
uh, when traveling or moving.
Uh, it poses risks of
discrimination.
Against New Mexico patients by
other providers.
So the patient records privacy
Act amends the electronic
medical Records Act and requires
those electronic health records
vendors to segment out
electronic health records just
to separate sensitive health
information.
This is up to the patient.
patient will have the final
control over uh his or her
medical records. So this bill
will enable patients to reap the
benefits of our electronic
medical records without risking
disclosure of information about
their abortion or gender
affirming care or other kind of
sensitive information around
women's reproductive health.
So, I think we're proud of
ourselves in New Mexico. We're
really a leader and reproductive
healthcare all forms, and we are
trying to put in place more
protections for reproductive
healthcare and genderfirming
care.
So very briefly, uh, section one
changes that name of section 2
amends the purpose of those
records reflect changes to
securing patient health
information, uh, section 3
defines the terms that were
using in the bill. Section 4
outlines the requirement for
use, disclosure, and the
requirement for segmentation.
Section 5 has a liability for
violations of the.
A section 6 regards state
disclosures, uh 7 regards the
exclusion of insurers. Section 8
establishes cause of action for
violation.
Uh, so, uh, chair, I'm gonna
turn it over very briefly for
comments, uh.
Uh, from Senator Nava and Dean
Warren, I, I, I will say that we
have been working uh meeting
regularly with the UNM uh
Presbyterian and others. Um,
they do have some concerns, uh,
they're, they're formulating
amendments, but we did not have
them ready for today, uh, but
we're certainly hoping that if
you move this sport, well, we'll
have to have them for the next
committee because it's
judiciary, and you know all
about that committee. So we're
still working with these
entities, um, they just need to
make sure that the way we're
writing in a statute works for
them, so there's some changes um
that we need to make to ensure
that all our health insurance
industries and the vendors for
these records are able to uh
work with us, so first to
Senator Nova and then to Deanna
Warren.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Right now our electronic health
records make a patient's entire
medical record, including
records about sensitive
healthcare, available to all
providers with, with direct
access to the system.
By default, the information that
patient's electronical medical
record can be shared across
state lines automatically.
Senate bill 404, the Patient
Records Act, corrects this
unintended consequence of
potential risk of discrimination
against New Mexico patients by
other providers in New Mexico or
other states, as Senator just
Senator Stewart just mentioned.
The bill applies to reproductive
healthcare, gender-affirming
healthcare, mental health care.
Alcohol or substance abuse.
substance use treatment and
other similar healthcare and
healthcare services, as deemed
appropriate for additional
protection by the healthcare
authority.
New Mexico patients expect their
medical records to be private
and are often shocked to learn
that the records are transmitted
passively to all of their
healthcare providers and every
field of medicine. Yes.
PA already provides strong
protections. And while we may
argue that additional protection
measures might be redundant. The
current realities of our times
show us how desperately needed
they are. HEPAA allows broad
data sharing and treatment and
healthcare operations, which
some patients find very
concerning. This additional
protection provides patients
more control over who sees their
sensitive health data aligning
with evolving expectations of
digital privacy.
And specifically the patient
records privacy Act specific,
specifically regulates
electronic health record vendors
and providers. Senate Bill 404
is narrowly focused on
regulating access to sensitive
information within patient
records. The bill will add a
layer of security that protects
all New Mexico patients, privacy
at a time when it is desperately
needed. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Man, we have two experts online
also for answering.
Doctor Pifer and Sarah Mans, um,
I think they're both online, so
when we need them.
Um, Madam Chair, committee, um,
I will send it over to Doctor um
Pfeiffer who will make a
statement introduction.
OK, well, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
committee for the honor of
testifying in favor of this
bill. My name is Dr. Kelly
Pifer. I've been an abortion
provider for 25 years working in
4 states. I operate a clinic in
Kansas and I advise a project
supporting contraceptive and
abortion care and emergency
departments around the country.
I've also led behavioral health
policy in California's Medicaid
program.
We as a a community worked so
hard over the last 20 years to
fully integrate records of all
providers see the full picture.
However, we do not predict just
how massively essential health
care care would be criminalized,
revealing sensitive information
about our patients can have
profoundly negative impacts on
their lives.
So I'm going to share a couple
stories that my colleagues have
told me about what happens when
patients seek care, and the
records are shared in their
health records without their
knowledge to all of their care
providers.
A woman who sought a legal
abortion was reported in child
protective services after her
record was opened at the home
doctor's office since a nurse
believed that an abortion is
child abuse. The investigate the
investigation itself harmed her
school-age children. A woman
whose abortion was revealed
through her medical record at
her dentist's office, where the
dental hygienist loudly
criticized her for this
decision, revealing her private
information to everyone in the
dental office. An anti-abortion
pediatrician told
His patient's parents about the
abortion the teenager had
sought, and that Kit had
believed the par the care would
be confidential and private. And
these examples are just the tip
of the iceberg. In Texas, a
provider used his old user
credentials to access minor's
patient records in order to
share those who had received
gender-ffirming care with a
media contract. Although he was
indicted for this violation of
patient privacy rights.
The Federal Department of
Justice under its new leadership
just dropped all the charges,
and as states increasingly move
to prosecute gender affirming
care's child abuse, we must
urgently protect both families
and providers who may fall under
mandatory reporting
requirements.
We healthcare providers take a
vow not to cause harm. Well, I
wish I practiced in a world
where full integration always
helps patients. We now live in a
world where inadvertent sharing
of sensitive information can
cause profound harm. I call upon
my colleagues to accept the
relatively minor inconvenience
of building in consent processes
to protect our patients, just as
we've done for addiction
treatment for years because of
the stigma of receiving
addiction treatment could lead
to lost jobs, lost
custody and ruined reputations.
These threats are new and real,
and we must respond. We hope
that New Mexico will protect our
patients' rights to safe and
private care, and I thank you.
Oh, we're ready for questions or
supporters or opposition or
whatever you want to do.
Thank you, Senator.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
Senate Bill 404.
And with I appreciate everybody
being here, but I will ask for a
limit of 5 people.
And please, if you come to the
middle.
Identify yourself and then a
very short statement.
2 minutes max.
Madame Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Rachel Ray
and I'm with both Futures an
organization by and for women
and people of color in New
Mexico. Since my abortion,
whenever I see a new provider
for any reason, I worry about
being judged. Will the medical
team see the abortion documented
in my chart, and if so, will
abortion stigma impact the
quality of care I receive. I
also worry that my queer and
non-binary identities might be
shared as part of my medical
record with others that I don't
know and trust.
The disclosure of sensitive
health information without our
explicit consent exposes many of
us to potential stigma and
prejudice. It also puts both
patients and providers in peril
in a time when reproductive
rights and LGBTQ folks very
existence is under attack.
This is truly a life or death
issue. SB 404 safeguards the
trust and consent and patient
dignity that should be at the
core of an effective
patient-provider relationship.
If there is something about my
health that a provider needs to
know, please just ask me.
We urge you do pass.
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Isa Villen Naranjo.
I'm a legislative fellow with
the Quality New Mexico and.
part of SB 404. New Mexico is
always protected its communities
that needed it, and passing this
bill only continues that
tradition by ensuring there is
no opportunity for antagonistic
states around us or their
healthcare workers, the ability
to harm New Mexicans who make
their personal decision to
access gender-affirming care or
reproductive healthcare. It is
unfortunate it is an unfortunate
reality that segmentation of
this data is now a necessity,
but we have undeniable proof
that without the requirement of
this data being separated.
Those who receive this health
care are in danger from people,
organizations or governments who
would choose to criminalize,
harass, or persecute us.
Doctors, nurses, and even
receptionists have all the
encumbered ability to access the
profiles of every single person
who receives gender-affirming
care in that facility.
Single-handedly an individual
could publicly release names,
addresses, and the type of
healthcare received by anyone
served at the office, outing and
endangering every single trans
person who is on hormones or
scheduled in an appointment for
gender-ffirming surgery.
The outline data in the bill is
not is not always necessary for
all doctors and all specialties
to have access to.
One person, one bad day, one
radical idea and the lives of
our transgender friends and
family and neighbor is in real
danger. Our personal healthcare
information to stay private, so
we can freely and confidently
continue getting our
gender-affirming care, accessing
abortion care, and traveling our
country without anxieties of
being detained. It is our
decision to receive it and it's
New Mexico's responsibility to
safeguard our right to access it
safely. New Mexico quality New
Mexico urges a due pass. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
community members. My name is
Luis Villescas and I'm with
Strong Family and I support
South is built 404.
New Mexicans deserve control
over who access their health
records while sharing medical
information is essential for
quality care. Safeguarding
sensitive data protects both
patients and providers from
harm. I live in Southern Park in
New Mexico. Doana County. We
live on the New Mexico side.
Up a line between New Mexico and
Texas and between the United
States and Mexico. We have seen
horrible changes being barred
what why your fences between
United States and Texas for the
first time ever, like raids
happening in local restaurants,
public spaces, and close to rent
real time impact of this
administration's policy in our
lives. Please ensure that our
health records are not turned
over to any anyone without our
Our,
uh, permission. So this should
help New Mexico residents.
Excuse me. Uh, thank you, madam
chair members of this committee.
My name is Lorenzo Villesca. I
live in Simon Park, Toyana
County, and I strongly support
Senate Bill 404 because they
remind me of a movie I saw with
Tom Hanks, a man Ca called Otto,
in this movie, there's uh this
group of uh of senior citizens
that live in a
That a developer wants it and
somehow he gets their personal
information, and he uses that
information against them to get
them out of the property. He
even goes to state authorities
and tells them, these people
ought to be in nursing homes.
And it never occurred to me how
harmful our medical information
can be when it falls in the
wrong hands. So that's why I ask
you to please support Senate 404
and if you do support it outside
you the end of the story.
Thank you very much.
Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you.
Um, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the ACLU of
New Mexico. I am based in Las
Cruces and um as someone from
Las Cruces. I know how often our
families travel back and forth
for care, school and family,
especially um to and from Texas
and along with other community
advocates, we are in strong
support of SB 404. All New
Mexicans deserve access to safe,
private healthcare without fear,
but federal and hospital.
out of state parties are
increasing restrictions on
abortion and gender-affirming
care, putting our privacy and
state protections at risk. This
bill would ensure that New
Mexico remains a safe haven
where our communities can get
the health care they need
without their medical
information being used against
them and would protect New
Mexican patients and providers
when they cross state lines,
while sharing medical
information is essential for
quality care, safeguarding
sensitive data protects both
patients and.
writers from harm. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in opposition?
None will go to Zoom.
Uh, I do have Melissa Armijo.
Hello, can you all hear me? Yes.
Thank you, Chair Lopez, members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Melissa Armijo, and
I'm the public affairs manager
for Planned Parenthood of the
Rocky Mountains. PPRM provides
care to approximately 100,000
patients annually at our health
centers in Colorado and New
Mexico.
We are proud providers of
abortion and gender affirming
care, and we are here today to
support SB 404.
PPRM is an essential provider of
Reid reproductive health care
for New Mexicans, and in huge
volumes since 2022 for patients
traveling from states where
abortion care is illegal. They
arrive here with their suitcases
on overnight flights, and after
20 hour drives to get health
care, they had to leave their
homes behind to obtain.
Some come from as far away as
Florida and Alabama, and many,
many patients from Texas. It is
Texas residents in particular
that makes it so important for
patients to have control over
how and with whom their
electronic patient records are
shared. As providers, we are
committed to continue working
with our fellow clinicians to
ensure that operational
implementation of this
legislation is possible. Today,
we ask for a due pass so we can
keep, so we can continue the
work of keeping patients
safe. Thank you.
Thank you, Jen Robinson.
Hi there. Can you hear me OK?
Yes. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you for the sponsors of
the bill. I'm Jen Robinson from
the Albuquerque area. Yohi they
pronouns. I'm speaking in
support of SB 404. I've had the
pleasure of providing midwifery
and reproductive healthcare in
New Mexico as a nurse
practitioner and a nurse midwife
for 15 years, and I had a
statement prepared, but I'm here
with my 6 year old son, who was
listening to um the other folks
speaking in support of this
bill, and he said, Mama,
Why are we in danger? And so I
want to use this moment to
answer his question, um, and
also share my support in that
way.
So we talk a lot in our house
about um kids whose hearts and
brains don't match the bodies
that they're born into, and how
sometimes they need medicine to
help them feel better in their
bodies, you know that? Yeah. So
what we're talking about is a
bill that would help.
Uh, people that need to travel
to our state of New Mexico to
get that care so they feel safe
and comfortable in their bodies.
And um I also really value
having trust, building trust,
and assuring trust with my
patients. Being able to actually
have their confidential
information segmented, um, would
help me continue to uphold that
trust that I built with my
patients. So thank you for um
considering my support.
Thank you, Elisa Martinez.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes, um, oh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Alisa
Martinez. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for Life. Um, I want to urge you
and members of the committee to
reject SB 404. This bill is
cloaked as a privacy measure,
but actually threatens New
Mexico's transparency and trust,
as well as endangering women's
lives by repealing abortion and
gender affirming reporting and
segregating health data. It
erases public insight into the
nearly 20,000 annual
abortions. 75% are from out of
state, and who is paying for
them? That's a vast majority of
New Mexico taxpayers. In fact,
upwards of 5 to $10 million a
year via Medicaid. What about
data on complications arising
from these procedures. What
about deaths, abortion-related
deaths, as well as uh any gender
affirming complications
including death, potential legal
breaches, and malpractice issues
with 59% of New Mexicans per
statewide Albuquerque.
Journal poll wanting stricter
abortion rules, this secrecy
secrecy betrays us all. SB 404
shields malpractice and misuse
from scrutiny, eroding
democracy. Vote no to protect
transparency, women's safety,
and public trust. Our state
deserves better. Thank you.
Thank you, Doctor Connie Liu.
Doctor
Sorry about
Hi, sorry. Um,
I am an OBGYN in rural New
Mexico, and I work with patients
primarily from Navajo Nation and
Zuni Pueblo. In the course of
care, I speak with patients
about a lot of sensitive issues,
and it's because patients have
the confidence to speak to me
openly that I'm able to maintain
their private their um
To, uh, optimize their care. I'm
in favor of this bill because I
do think that patient
information belongs to the
patient, and that's important
that they aren't afraid to seek
care like birth control or
abortion care or reproductive
health services. There are
definitely times when I learned
that a patient I have been
seeing has been withholding
information about some aspect of
their health history that I
don't have access to. I
definitely have had patients who
don't disclose abortion care,
for example, sometimes because
they're afraid of judgment or
perhaps because they're not sure
whether or not they
can trust me with that aspect of
their care. I truly cannot think
of a specific time that this is
markedly compromised my ability
to care for that patient when I
didn't know.
I have found, however, that the
more patient trusts me, the more
likely I am to be able to make a
plan that a patient feels is one
that we make together, and then
I feel, and I note that
consequently, they are more
likely to engage with the care
that I recommend.
So, but I'm trying to say here
is that trust undergirds the
therapeutic relationship. And I
ask you to pass this bill
because it will help keep
sensitive information with my
patients and between me and my
patient and will give my
patients the confidence they
need to speak to seek the
medical advice that they um
that, that they want. Thank you.
Thank you.
That was all from Zoom, correct?
Alright, so then with that,
we'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you for bringing the bell.
So the electronic
Health records
Go from Wednesday to the other,
that's what we're trying to
regulate.
A man, yes, in part.
Uh, just to not have any
sensitive information that a
patient doesn't want to
disclose, not disclosed through
the electronic records.
And
answers
So, how do we know about the
Inoperability of the.
That nothing will be sent
accidentally or that systems
will be able to talk to each
other and you talk about moving
through interstate.
Especially when we know that AI
is probably gonna be integrated
very soon into the.
Do
Madam Chair committee, um,
Senator Pinto. Um, so the idea
behind segmentation is precisely
that, because our current system
relies on that interoperability,
meaning that data from a
patient's electronic health
record and be sent um anywhere
that the patient is. This
process would
segment portions of that
electronic health record, um,
and require patient consent
before any subsequent provider
could view that record. So that
would um be the case with
movement interstate and
intrastate.
So Madam, so are we just going
one way with this are we
expecting?
For us
be not seeing some.
These records.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Pinto,
uh, so,
You would be able to, a provider
would be able to view um
That segmented portion of the
electronic health record with
patient consent.
So it's all about a consent
framework in which the patient
has the agency to determine who
and at what institution, um,
that information can be viewed.
Madam Chair and sponsors, how
will this relate to the?
Um
Madam Chair, um, committee, I
think we can send it to um Sarah
Mans who's
So I'm sure we have Sarah Mans
as an expert, and if she could
answer that question.
Yes, I'm, I'm sorry.
Can you hear me now? I was
having some difficulty with the
mute.
Yes, we can hear you. OK, great.
So, could you repeat the
question, Senator? I apologize.
So
How will this relate to the
compact.
So,
you mean the compacts that we're
trying to
Like the medical health
compacts, the social work
compact those who manitarians on
to, yes, they deal with
healthcare and doing these
interstate, uh,
I in chairs and stuff.
Because even then too.
We're sending that out, but
Who assumes the liability aspect
if it's legal.
Um, Madam Chair, committee
members, um, the licenser
compacts um shouldn't, should
only be implicated to the extent
um that the, a patient hasn't
given consent to see that
portion of their record, so it,
it shouldn't interact at all.
Um, in other words, um, say a
doctor from Texas who has
reciprocity in this state.
comes to do.
Provide medical services here.
They would be subject to New
Mexico's laws in the same way
that they would be subject to
Texas's laws, um, for operating.
in Texas. And so, in terms of
the private cause of action and
liability, um, the, the doctor
would also be subject to
whatever penalties are allowed
by state law regardless of.
Wherever they're um practicing
medicine.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Serio Lopez.
Manager, I move a do pass.
There's a motion for a due pass
with Senator from Senator Saia
Lopez with the 2nd.
From Senator Charlie.
And then we do have continued
questions from Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, madam forte and
senators and experts for
bringing this bill forward. It
is a
critical issue to address and,
and I want you to know I, I
absolutely support the bill. Um,
but
Uh, I, I am gonna go through
some of the IT issues which are
gigantic.
Uh, it's not a minor
inconvenience. It is.
Gigantic I.
Uh, I implemented an EMR in
Omaha and one of my jobs, uh,
I've uh started the health
information exchange with an NIH
grant back in 2003 as the
digital data that's collected
and this is gonna impact them.
Um, I, I've worked for 8 years
in New Mexico Health Connections
and pulling our hair out,
working with CMS about data and
how and how you have to be able
to work it. I just, I wanna
emphasize how complex this is
going to be both for the EMRs
and also I, and I haven't, I, I
read through the bill quickly,
and I may have lost it, but
There's, this has to apply to
health plans as well.
And the OSI needs to get
involved and there are
potentially gonna be some
regulations that this may run
into and I, I can't specifically
tell you. I just know having
lived with the OSI for 8 years
in New Mexico Health Connection.
There's always a regulation.
And my chair, I, I really
appreciate all this. I will tell
you though that we're in deep
conversations with our
healthcare providers to get this
right, so we we're gonna, we're
gonna understand and hear what
you're saying, but we're in
conversation with them to make
amendments to this bill. Right,
and, and I, I, I, I really
appreciate that I confirmed with
Doctor Richards that Kelly
O'Donog who had a number of his
I read through, I said.
Yeah, what I want to emphasize
is that
Um, if there is some way that
And, and here I refer to my
go folks and you all some way to
set up a protection for this
information doesn't get out.
Um
Before they actually get the IT
done. I mean, I'm, I'm looking
at this and I'm estimating that
it's gonna take a year, and it
may not seem like it, but it
really, it is so complex, and I
know that uh uh Epic, which is
at Presbyterian, they're
building this kind of nationwide
around those concerns. I'm not
sure the Cerner at UNM has got
the platform to be able to do
it, and it's gonna take some
time, um, and, and the other
thing just to, in all fairness,
It's gonna cost
Millions of dollars.
Re
be doing the software for this
is very time consuming and
expensive with people who charge
a lot of money to be able to do
it. So I just want you to be
aware of those issues as you
come up with a final bill and
particularly in enforcement of
medical liability, um,
And also I would highly
encourage you to talk with Terry
Stewart and had synchronous, uh,
that's the HIE that in 2003, I
got that's what it's called
today, um, because they, they're
gonna have a number of things.
They have all digital clinical
information.
And
Getting that, um.
Figured out and um.
That, that kind of the hook. OK.
If it's the Oscars.
Uh, but
The um,
yeah, and I, I, yeah, I know it,
but I didn't get an award, so,
you know, I get to talk just a
little bit longer, but I just, I
wanna emphasize those pieces to
you and if you get confused,
look back at the tape and um and
I think Kelly can with
He can really help a lot and I
understand she's working the me.
I think that's great. Yeah, but
I, I do want to say this is very
timely and it's gonna take time
and, and cost a lot of money,
but, and, and also we've got to
deal with our AP our payer
claims database here in the
Department of Health to be sure
that they're doing it, uh, the
other thing you might be sure
that people are looking at is
what we call de-identifying the
data.
Um, so what you do is, is you
take off name, anything that
could identify, you, you leave a
zip code, that address,
telephone, Social Security card
numbers, anything, and then give
it a code and there's a master
list somewhere that works all
that together, but getting that
de-identified data because we
still want to be able to
aggregate.
A lot of this stuff and so
building that into a
deaggregation.
And with the nods, I'm, I'm very
glad I'm hearing that you're
hearing this, this from a real
world person who's had to go
through torture and a lot of
these things, uh, for most of my
career.
That, um, thank you very much
for bringing it forward.
Thank you, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Proin and Senator, uh
just a few questions, so, uh,
I think it's huge overreach, but
I'm trying to find out, not just
with identifiers that you guys
are.
trying to take out, for
instance, back in 2016, uh, UNM
Health Service Center was found
mishandling fetal tissues.
there, talked to the docs,
talked to everyone.
In your bill, how would
Taxpayers and reporters able to
verify that and find that it was
found, its public knowledge.
But with your bill at 404 was
Already enacted back then.
How would they have found those
critical information details.
through later in life, if we, if
it were to happen again.
How would the public and
taxpayers know what's going on
at UNM Health Centers.
and.
Uh, Madam chair Senator, this
doesn't take away any of that
aggregation of data that we do.
We do it all the time and the
apologize,
Senator Hickey was just trying
to get you to add that. That's
what I heard from a hymn.
If that was true, he wouldn't
have brought that up.
protem
Mad chair, senator, that's not
what I heard him say, what I
heard him say was that we have
to, we have to understand and
make sure that we have that
aggregated data, and I'm telling
you that this bill does not
undermine any efforts that we do
in these healthcare providers to
have aggregate data. What we're
talking about is very
individualized, very sensitive
information that individual
patients.
ought to be able to say I don't
want that date out there, but in
the aggregate, that's what they
do all the time. They do it
right now. Yeah, now we're,
we're kind of in trouble with
IT. It's a big ask, and we know
that and we're still working
with them to get the language in
this bill, good enough so that
they uh.
Can do it. Um, but your issue is
not, it's not undermined by this
bill and that something that
continues to happen daily.
The man turned ever since I've
irritated already. Can you go to
page 14.
Lied to and explained to me.
How the enforcement part of
Senate Bill 404's privacy
protections work.
to them.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, this
creates a private right of
action, so, uh, an individual
can bring a civil suit, um,
against either a health
information exchange or
electronic healthcare record
vendor or um the district
attorney or attorney general is
able to file a lawsuit pursuant
to the provisions of this act.
A man turned senator.
Witness, yes, I'd look at it
differently. There's a lot more
detail there.
Just have private
right of action.
Um
This going on just real quick
question.
Oh
Chain and put him,
what oversight mechanisms will
exist to prevent fraud, abuse.
Or legal violations.
Um, me.
Um
If the abortion that is no
longer reported or accessible.
Um
currently so the vital
statistics, um, provision from
which our abortion reporting
requirement comes, there is no
current oversight mechanism for
that. So, uh, this does not
change that, um, and
It, it leaves that in effect.
Madam Chairman Protemix
witnessed, you don't have any
oversight, is that what?
understand
It is my understanding, um,
Madam Chair, Senator, that the
current statutes, so, um, under
section 24 1418, that, that.
Firstly, um, that that, um,
Reporting on induced abortions
requirement, um, has not been
requested for several years, and
so is my understanding that
there is no current oversight
mechanism for that reporting
requirement.
One more time, Section 9 says
repeal section 24 1418.
You're saying in that section.
It has no oversight.
I'm saying, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, that section
requires reporting of um induced
abortions currently.
It does not create an
independent oversight, uh,
mechanism under that statute.
So, this does not change that.
It's simply repeals the
reporting mandate.
And
Expert witness.
Yes, I have a hard time
understanding that we don't
have.
First off oversights we.
Don't take counts. We don't
have, it's sort of like there's
no reporting mechanism.
Sadly
I, I just have a problem with
that cause I think I statistics
and other people need uh
definite information that, uh,
are you with that uh can't stand
for your bill.
Uh, but I appreciate the
dialogue.
Thank you. Other questions?
Senator Block?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, panel. Um,
I just want to make sure I
understand the purpose of this
bill is to provide privacy into.
data.
Is that correct?
Um, I'm chair senator, yes, to
provide a privacy for individual
patients so they can voluntarily
offer uh this sensitive
information, but if they don't
want that to be out there, it
won't be out. Perfect. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator. Um, can we
go to page 8. I just wanna
Ask you about some of these.
Things here. Line 5.
It says uh segregated
individuals' healthcare
information related to
reproductive healthcare.
And again, I want to make sure
this is to the individual to do
this.
Correct?
The individual has the option to
segregate whatever data he or
she would like to.
Keep driving.
Of the electronic records.
I'm sure that's correct. OK.
Um, Madam Chair, and the panel,
so, so here we go.egre in an
individual's healthcare
information related to
reproductive healthcare.
Gender affirming health care,
mental health care, alcohol or
substance abuse treatment.
than any other similar health
care or healthcare service.
As deemed appropriate for record
segregation.
by the healthcare authority.
What, what would, what does the
healthcare authority.
would be any other similar
health care healthcare service.
Uh, Madam Chair, I think that
wording is to uh identify there
there's lots of different
services that go along with
women's reproductive healthcare
could be true.
Or men, that's right. Let's not
forgive me I mean I, I'm, I'm
more familiar with the female
healthcare, but of course you
are part of the bill too.
Uh, so, so things like perinatal
care.
Um
You know, surgeries that could
happen because of 5 fibroids or
other issues with female
reproductive healthcare.
OK. So, thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Um
Viagra
I, a, a, a gentleman might be a
little embarrassed that he's on
Viagra, so he might say, I want
that segregated.
Um, also, sexually transmitted
diseases, I would imagine would
be.
segregated if the individual
wants that because he or she may
not want someone to know they've
had.
A sexually transmitted disease.
Um, mental health care, they
might not want people to know
what, what meds they're on.
To keep those private.
They also, I agree, would not
want alcohol or substance abuse
treatment or they are users
currently on there and they're
trying to, they're taking some
meds.
Um, so that's, that's important
to note.
Other similar health care, um,
Issues
Or healthcare service is deemed
appropriate.
Could it be
Um, heart condition?
That might be related to men's
sexual activity.
So I share this really is
individualized, so.
Uh, yes. OK, so
Could it be also um
I'm, I'm occasionally in air
when I speak, so let me ask Dean
Warren to answer that.
Um, yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator. So, um, the way that
the statute is constructed, if a
court say, were to review that
specific provision um and any
other healthcare inappropriate
by the healthcare authority. So
when a court uses statutory
construction and there's a word
at any other. It uses something
to sort of compare like things.
So it wouldn't necessarily be
something so um attenuated from
the, the enumerated list.
Um, that's not how a court would
view it, um, and it would sort
of sort of uh adhere to all of
the other sort of kinds of
healthcare.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. But, you know,
heart issues could affect
The man's reproductive.
His, his sexual activity because
he's got heart issues and he
might be embarrassed about that.
Um, there are other issues that
um Madam Chair and um panel of
men might be embarrassed about
that, wants that information
segregated, you would agree with
that, correct? That might relate
to sexual activity.
Made of, um, senator, it could.
OK. Thank you.
So there's a whole gamut.
Of
And I, and I don't mean to
embarrass you or anything like
that. This is a serious issue
and, and I'm being very serious
here because
This is a little bit vague,
Madam Chair and panel, when it
comes to any other similar
healthcare because the
individual should have the right
to
I, I hate to use the word
segregate we're past that to
exclude certain information from
his or her electronic record.
So,
That being said, I, I remember.
Back in the 1990s,
When Bill Clayton, Madam Chair
in town.
As an entire working with
Congress, a Republican Congress.
Working to uh put everybody's
healthcare records.
Electronically.
Because
For patient safety.
They wanted all records
electronically. Why would they
want that?
Well, they would want that.
And, and by the way, the
hospital association is against
us, and I know they're doing
amendments.
But why, why would the
administration, Bill Clinton in
Congress want that in the 1990s,
because they wanted
The safety of the patient where
if we had to go talk to a
doctor, see a doctor, they had
the entire health history of
that particular patient.
That patient could be
incapacitated.
That patient might have
segregated.
Critical information.
From his or her health record
that blinds.
The physician.
So what does that do? That
increases the risk to the
patient's healthcare, Madam
Chair and panel, but it also
increases the risk.
For medical malpractice.
The physician because he or she
may not know the entire picture
of the person who they're trying
to treat, who could be
incapacitated.
Now,
They're gonna treat the medical
uh professionals about chairing
panel.
I would want, and you guys talk,
all talked about safety. It's
all about safety. You got to
make sure we're keeping people
safe.
How can you, how can a doctor
Treat a patient.
If they don't have the entire
medical history of that
particular person with what meds
they're on because what meds
they're on is going to
Influence or inform the
decision-making process of that
physician.
But with this bill,
They're blind.
They're blind
And that's why
This puts a lot of risk because
we could have thousands of
people segregate data.
Madam chair and panel on their
medical records.
And when you have to go to the
hospital and you're
incapacitated, and they don't
know your entire history.
It could be treating you for
something that they don't even
know because there's another
issue that's affecting why
you're there.
This is a very dangerous bill.
For you as patients,
And for the physicians.
Because
You're gonna, we're gonna hurt
people with this bill. And with
that, madam Chair, I yield.
Thank you, Senator.
no other questions, if you could
call the roll, please.
Senator Blu.
No. Senator Boone.
No.
Senator Charlie.
And our Gallegos.
And another
Yes. Senator Pinto.
And
And said Lopez, yes.
Hickey. Yes.
Pinto.
And her Lopes. Yes.
By about a 6 to 4 senator, you
have the two pass recommendation
on to the judiciary. Thank you
so much. Thank you. Thank you.
And that ends committee tonight
and we'll see everybody back on
Wednesday. Thank you.
