Of those then we'll move to the
top of the agenda if anyone is
here for Senate bill seven.
That was carried over from when
city that still not quite ready
I understand is being worked on
there's there's been some
agreements reached about it and
we'll have that on Monday we'll
try to get that in on the Monday
calendar that's the one on the
the governor's proposed rural
health care delivery fund but in
the meantime we'll we'll move
ahead then with the four bills
of on the appropriation
calendar.
And the.
Senator is you have a of a one
page description of those four
bills we can refer to that our
policy on these is to try to
move quickly with them in light
of the fact that no matter what
we do in favor or against them
it will be decided ultimately
by.
Forces beyond our control
otherwise known as the Senate
finance committee so we just we
just move ahead as best we can
and we'll start with you Senator
Stefanics with your just be will
one of three thank you Mr chair
members of the committee today
with me I have Mister Dennis
Carter this is a bill that would
appropriate six hundred thousand
dollars to Veterans Services
Department for mental health
services programming.
We have found that many veterans
and public safety officers are
in need of some mental health
services and there are some
programs operating around the
state and so this money would
become available to the
department to give to local
political subdivisions there are
ready our programs around the
state we have given you an
example of one of them healing
America's heroes and today as
you indicated will be very brief
but I have Mister Dennis Carter
and there are some other members
in the audience who might want
to just raise their hands or
stand up thank you very much Mr
chair yes there are thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee
Healing America's heroes took
over a facility in fort Stanton
New Mexico from it was an
abandoned CYFD incarceration
facility M. once we took with
hardware store look like college
campuses we started doing
beneficial therapy programs at
the place we have courses on
location we've got to of a minor
Stafford now we intend to grow
up certainly with this funding
and we have a business plan that
shows a going from five people
this year to eleven people year
round calendar year and to
eighteen people over a business
plan period of five years and we
sort out
Dealing with a hundred twenty
two hundred and thirty clientele
each year that will expand
dramatically as we develop our
in house capacity.
We received a wonderful
community support in the area
from Lincoln County village of
Capt city Rio does so and browse
will.
We like to expand this in terms
of course the support we get and
throughout the state people have
come from every point in the
state and number of other states
to our program so far we process
to about a hundred and twenty
of.
And the state for if if it's so
we can group we do have a three
day group.
And in full we group will which
we prefer is a five day
exercise we've got to twenty
four then dorms a large
cafeteria right in between them
is extremely relaxing and
beneficial and interesting sub
point is that the the veterans
administration has recently
begun to adopt the notion of
recreational therapy for PTSD
therapy purposes they've even
approved a job in the state of
New Mexico for therapist with
the Things gonna description
about five pages long and it'll
be hard to find a candidate
anywhere in the country to meet
the criteria.
What is the an interesting thing
that validates what we're doing
is going to look at our national
level and I think New Mexico's
in a position to kind of take
the lead.
We've got a an existing program.
Very good thank you Senator
anything else now could you see
who in the audience might be
here to support this please yes
is there anyone here who wants
to support this bill.
Anybody here to speak to.
So we have a Senator did you
want to say anything if you do
please come up to the to the
Mike of and and and hold the
button down no there's a hand
held Mike right there.
You can use that hold the button
down we've we've had complaints
that the zoom audiences not able
to understand anything unless we
use the money thank you Sir
Sir my name my name's Eddie
crane and I'm the founder of
heating America's heroes well we
founded this this establishment
in twenty fourteen and northern
New Mexico in the Rio Arriba
Chama area I was there from
twenty fourteen and tell
present before we moved down to
our facility in Lincoln County
at fort Stanton New Mexico and
we were able to get started in
northern New Mexico with with
with minimal support and now
we're down in the southern part
of the state for we're doing
much we're able to serve more
veterans first responders and
police officers so thank you
very much Sir thank you Sir is
there anyone here who wants to
be in opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone assume wanted to
comment on this one.
Good members of the committee
click here any questions for the
Sanchez.
Senator Gallegos Mr chairman and
senator I just want to and Mr
crying those up here earlier I
just know that Representative
Bob Wooley was really
influential on he's been talking
about this for years it when
when I was in the house with him
this type of assistance very
needed in our state and I just
want to mention that he
apologize not been here had to
be back in in Roswell but I like
the premise I've.
Love our back and I know how it
works should take up some stress
and and pains yield as a respect
to long that provides other
pains but I just want to.
Mr chairman and senator
electability you're doing a
great job thank you for what you
do thank you very much Senator
thank you other question Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you I love this bill
did I understand you to say it
was programs that would be
funded for Mr chair Senator this
money would go to the department
of Veterans Affairs who'd put
out an RFP for program services
they could determine whether
it's one program or multiple
programs around the state would
be left to the department to do
by RFP the only reason I ask is
because it says a veteran police
and first responder
posttraumatic stress disorder
therapy program and I just
wondered if you wanted to put
realize that for the possibility
for purpose Mr chair I do not
this might end up in junior and
it might I think it might just
be all settled okay then all
right and well okay and then the
other thing that was raised by
the FIR was the authority a yes
do to provide the services to
first responders and police and
fire personnel I just didn't
know what you thought about that
comment well the
Mr chair Senator I think that's
a great question because all of
our first responders and our
public safety officials if they
have trauma it could people be
PTSD or could be a form of
survivor's guilt and I think we
should not forget that it goes
on both sides and that all
members of an armed public
service forces are experiencing
this because it's the public who
is reacting to them as well as
the live experience that they've
gone through so I have talked
with secretary designate Donnie
can Tana about this and he is
comfortable with accepting the
funds.
Excellent thank you thank you
madam Mr chair thank you senator
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward
this quick question.
It says five days for.
So Mister chair I will defer to
my experts Mr Carter.
Mister chairman Senator of the
five day program is preferred by
apple our operation but that
entails a week off of work all
right there are many people
wander around with PTSD who
can't afford a week off
therefore we have a three day
option alternative we prefer the
five.
Thank thank you for that answer
thanks again Senator for funding
from that trip with the will of
the committee.
We have a motion from Senator
guy it goes for a do pass.
Seconded by Senator McKenna the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos this man Center
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
From the Santo Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes.
Senator Lopez the deal Lopez
excuse me yes Senator Tallman
yes and senator Ortiz Pino yes
thank you senators to find a job
to do pass on a eight eight zero
vote thank you very much you Mr
chair members of the committee
the other complaint we had was
that we were announcing the vote
totals for the people and zoom
so.
If I don't pronounce the vote
total would somebody please yell
at me to do so.
but noted Senator Rodriguez for
your three bills and
Mr none this did you want to
come up with service.
So we have three bills from
Senator Rodriguez on this grid
three of bills one for twenty
million one for forty eight
million one for three hundred
thousand.
We don't have to choose among
them no I'm hoping to get
anything for any of them it's
for that would be great thank
you thank you Mr did you want me
to yeah go ahead and start with
the the one thirty nine the
homeless services bill thank you
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I've got is the
hear the director of the
mortgage finance authority and
robin who is the policy director
also and that Mr chairman this
is a wishful situation here that
we can come up with funding for
this program at the state level
that currently exists with the
Human Services Department and it
is a program called linkages and
what it does we should do but we
haven't funded it sufficiently
in the past is it provides for
comprehensive rehabilitation
services for the homeless and
for those people who are very
low income having a mental
health issues behavioral health
issues and lack of housing I've
always contended that if we
don't piece all these pieces
together into a comprehensive
system we're not going to
succeed because we provide
rehabilitation for a few days or
a few months but if we don't
provide continuous case
management and support and link
people to housing which is not
going to reduce the situation
the problems that we have and so
this bill was endorsed before by
the health committee also I'm
pretty sure I can have so many
bills but I think so yeah I was
I think you were there and thank
you for presenting that for me
one time Mr Chairman yeah we're
just hoping to get some funding
we figure there's of several
pieces that are missing in the
program that perhaps with more
funding we can finally connect
them to reach out to people that
are considered did you want to
say anything about this is the
or robin.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for having us here
I think that the Senator did a
great job of summarizing the
program I'll just say that it's
been a great program we've it's
been in existence for a while
that think I ate two to nine
years and that we currently have
three hundred and thirty eight
vouchers if you will our
families that are being assisted
across the state so great
program with the great impact in
helping many many folks out
there with that the need F. I
missed it could you fill us how
much is your current budget for
this.
Mr chairman I I believe the
current budget for the housing
piece of it is about four point
three million dollars the
problem is that correct Mr chair
thank you that the total budget
is four point eight million and
three point five million of that
is supporting the housing
voucher piece of it so the rest
is for counseling and and case
work services navigation
services Mr chair yes it's for
the of the wraparound services
and you're asking for twenty in
addition to that is that a
recurring figure yes Mr chairman
if we would be able to get this
to has to be vetted in finance
and so on and work with the
House Appropriations and back
and forth but in the governor's
office the governor does have
twenty million dollars requests
as my bill does the big
difference is that hearses
nonrecurring so we're working
and trying to find a balance
here we are you may I wasn't
clear what is the current four
point eight million recurring
it's in the budget as a
recurring items you just need
your bill would at it is an
additional recurring item hers
would be a one time infusion
that might not be there next
exactly in in as we know the
problems of homelessness do not
and in one year instead we're
exacerbating them the the longer
we take to fix some that more
exacerbated they get and so we
need continuous funding for this
program and go from there so we
can do.
That let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wanted to
speak in support of this bill
we're just standard given yes
did you want to say anything or
just stand and support.
The administering the program
and.
Right those are several other
people who are here supporting
but we will take comments unless
you feel seriously.
Interested in saying so okay
very good anybody on anybody
here in opposition to the
program.
Anybody on zoom just that again
thank you Sir then.
David Nicholson please we did
what did you want to say in
support.
Things off okay.
And so we'll go into the
committee any questions for the
sponsor Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Hickey and thank you Mr
chair
I noticed well I want to first
say how much I admire you for
your continued passion for
homeless people in for housing
and affordable housing and all
of the all the work that you've
done I guess I just wanted to
say that substances were asking
is substance use include
alcoholic addiction right
absolutely yeah total for his
that system so this is in a way
a back handed pitch for the
alcohol excise tax increase of
twenty five cents per drink
working on a so if you're
looking for other sources of
funding it would raise two
hundred million dollars and
eighty six of of eighty six
percent could the current money
would be increased the court
money that goes out that eighty
six percent would go to what's
what we're calling in alcohol
harms alleviation and included
in that is housing so it may be
another place that you look for
funds sure that bill passed
would be great so it's a pitch
for that bill I guess thank but
thank you thank you Mr chair
appreciate it thank you senator
did you want to make a pitch for
your bill to Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman of the you
know thank you coats off.
Hello
I I the.
Medical school we have this
phrase Mr Chairman called the
teachable moment.
And and this is a teachable
moment for everyone in this room
and listening and I just can't
let it go so I'm just a couple
of minutes got a state this is
profoundly critical profoundly
critical and people don't in in
less you have had unless you and
and probably most of you here
have had someone in your family
who's been touched by a
substance use disorder and the
pain of the individual for the
family and you'll also know that
you don't get sobriety without a
year of sobriety and even that's
maybe cutting a little close and
you don't get a year of sobriety
without having connection that
whole year three hundred and
sixty five days to someone
something very it can to a a.
You have to have someone to be
able to reach out to you can't
go from an RTC right back in
your old environment we were
self medicating because of the
stresses you at their you just
need is exactly right we are
just wasting money going over
and over again let alone not
doing what we should should be
doing to help people get through
the the their their addiction
their cravings and so forth so
sober housing is really the next
step and we don't know quite how
to put it together but in the
programs withers sober housing
after residential treatment
partial and then into sober
housing to have that connection
and then usually with that
there's a connection with the A.
and others and you get through a
whole year you vastly increase
the chance of sobriety and so
this is a first step but I I
don't want to go on notice and
that's why I'm and unfortunately
pontificating about this because
it is is critical is the
residential treatment center.
And and so I hope that the the
this bill and and that's just
wrapped up my engine to do more
around that knowing that there's
two hundred million dollars and
how do we do it and do it with
private organizations to get
that housing absolutely thank
you for bringing this I am so
appreciative and what this could
do to make a huge difference in
the state that has the highest
alcohol the time mortality in
the nation is double the
national average that should be
a wake up call thank you Sir for
allowing me to point this out
thank you senator Senator
Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
the thank you of the center for
bringing this forward the doctor
he's already said.
what I was gonna say and eyes
huge supporter of this we say
we're spending far short of what
is needed to
To attack this problem isn't as
a doctor points out we have the
highest alcohol mentality right
United States and much more
needs to be done.
And huge supporter of this to a
quick question.
I just why way of information is
it The New Mexico housing.
Of the mortgage housing and
mortgage finance authorities
involved as I thought they were.
They get involved in soft
services are there.
Only funded.
Of bricks and mortar now Mr
chairman of Sierra the mortgage
finance authority assist with
this program also because they
take care of the housing part of
the program because this program
would help with giving people a
counseling substance abuse
treatment and case management on
going home visiting for people
so we don't just drop in that's
where they fall through the
cracks after we provide services
and then link them to housing
and so that's where the housing
piece comes in through the
mortgage finance authority and
they do wonderful work the
problem has been that we we
provide very little for this
program and you know we can't
seem to get a grip on to we
provide enough and that we have
a clear understanding that it's
for comprehensive services thank
you senator for that explanation
that's all I have.
I think you're thank you and and
so your your bill appropriates
the money to the behavioral
health services division it it's
appropriated to the Human
Services department of for the
and they have a program already
established under that Mr king
and what they have a list Liz
analysis said there's eleven.
I just right now I can't find
enough of the others down there
to eleven there eleven providers
currently.
Mr Chairman go I'm sorry I let
robin answer that because we may
have some new ones that just
came in so we want to make sure
we give you accurate information
yes thank you Mr chairman so
currently there are eight of
sites where linkages is provided
and and all of those have at
least one support service agency
some of them have more than one
and then they all have at least
one housing administrator as
well so there's a total of
eleven support service agencies
and nine housing agencies are
administrative is rather I'm
sorry so the money goes to
behavioral health.
They concept contract with you
all for the housing piece.
Yes he did they provide the
service providers or do you
provide service providers.
The counseling in the.
Mr chairman and the behavior or
health and Human Services they
provide the service providers in
the contractor actually with
those eleven service agencies so
you you do the housing they do
that the counseling and case
management in the navigation
whatever else exactly thank you
got Mr chairman thank you what's
the will of the committee some
have a motion from senator Tom
and seconded by Senator Hickey.
For a teachable moment or two
yes.
More teachable yes.
Mr Chairman Senator thank you hi
I just had a brief question so
in Hobbs were I live in the
region we have the more of Hobbs
is looking at taking hospital
that's been of vacated and
making a facility there for
mental health with this work in
just thinking through if they
have the mental health facility
there then we would need housing
which maybe at that hospital for
off campus with this money be
eligible to help with that also
or is it just those
organizations you already have
like thank you for the question
Senator Mister chairman Senator
guy okay goes the money will be
available to work with these
organizations to it's not just
for housing it is to provide
services throughout the state
and to leverage as much as we
can we're even looking at
looking for ways that perhaps
thinking out of the box here how
can we augment these funds if if
we were to get ten to twenty
million of recurring could we
possibly leverage this with
federal funds I think we can if
we get creative and start
working towards building this
fund even more and it would help
with behavioral health services
and not only housing as we said
but even housing connections by
coordinating the services with
other organizations like yours
think that stern center
there again can you tell us
they're taking their city
council wanting take a an old
church and renovated so that way
they could have someone for the
homeless to go in times of cold
and or give them some
opportunities to provide other
shelters and and jobs and stuff
like that that should relate
right to this would not
absolutely Mr chairman Senator
yes and my next bill that I have
before you today is going to
explain that aspect of it
because that a specific specific
for additional affordable
housing this is for homeless and
also very.
Low income homeless people they
have to be homeless and and have
mental health or behavioral
health issues and then we can to
housing my other bill is fourth
straight affordable housing
throughout the state and I'll
explain that and then thank you
yes that Mr Chairman center I'd
sent those party Chavez looking
at federal funds yes get your
letter on both those Mr are you
thank you thank you senator.
Thank you the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Center my a state yes the new
McKenna yes Senator metes yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes that
are COVID yes center to the
piano yes okay congratulations
by a vote of eight to zero.
With one of excuse it one
excuse.
You have a do pass on that thank
you Mr chairman no one forty
year Vicky yes thank you this
one here kind of as a piggy back
to say the least to a huge bill
we passed last year I sponsored
Senate bill one thirty four and
thanks for your support we
passed the bill very very big in
this in the whole change in both
chambers and signed by the
governor that provides recurring
funding ongoing recurring
funding for affordable housing
in New Mexico finally for a
change we always had a million
here a million there and it was
nonrecurring a very little
recurring ones while well the
issue became a situation where
we know people can't find homes
anymore because the inventory is
not there the prices are too
high and the threshold by which
people can qualify are way too
high to so we passed that bill
in those funds are going to be
starting to come in next year my
bill doesn't kick in until the
next until twenty twenty four
how and is going to bring in
approximately forty million per
year it is going to be
generating twenty nine to one
return now the reason I say that
is because this here would fill
in a gap that for this year we
do not have sufficient funding
and it would stretch out further
than that for affordable housing
in New Mexico and the reason we
we asked for forty eight million
dollars is this is the one I
have three bills here forty
million dollars yes forty eight
million yep is and I have to
break down here is because at
the end of two can't for a this
bill and give me a second we
wanted to break it up and I
don't know if his the has the
break down here of that little
chart I got is the we wanted to
break up the the use of the
funds if we do get them into the
affordable housing trust fund we
wanted to break come up so we
can use a portion of it for
weatherization programs to help
people that are on a fixed
income lowing.
I am and middle income that meet
the threshold to to for example
to be eligible for for
weatherization program
assistance for example we have
windows that are broken somebody
who is disabled elderly or on a
fixed income income can't afford
to fix their windows or their
doors or the roof was leaking
and and the houses get more and
more dilapidated and and on and
on so.
Part of this would be used still
for affordable housing but
expanded a little more for
weatherization and in addition
to that it would be used for
rehabilitation of homes in
general are and then also.
Fort to meet those gaps that
sometimes we get funds for the
federal government but we don't
but with there's gaps we don't
get enough for that for
affordable housing so this would
fill in those gaps also and and
then also to obtain those homes
that are need rehabilitation
some have been for closed or or
just sitting there are
dilapidated and we would be able
to pick those up redo and have
more homes for like for like
this church in unit like this
church in Eunice's exactly and
that's why I said Senator Mr
chairman that we would explain
that this is a perfect
opportunity I know it's a big
ask forty eight million but when
you look at it the need is
greater than this and also we
would generate twenty nine to
one in return approximately.
And and does all the do all of
those things fit under the
existing language in the housing
trust fund act Mr Chairman thank
you for asking that because I
passed a bill last two years ago
that Senate bill twenty seven
that actually expands the use of
the affordable housing trust
fund and it increased the
provisions in there to be able
to use it for these things to
before it used to be just
whoever qualified based on
competition that wasn't fair now
it's based on need who needs at
the most it's to help people
with affordable troops portable
care needs for homes thank you
did you want to say anything
revenue Izzy.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee just a
couple of things to add in that
the senator I think did a great
job of a tell you what the bill
will do it is very flexible we
are currently at about twenty
eight twenty nine dollars to one
in leverage because we leverage
other sources as well so it's a
very successful program that
there's a we recently completed
a New Mexico housing strategy
that that really outlines
comprehensively all of the needs
the resources available in the
gaps and some strategies to fill
those gaps I just very quickly
I'll run through some of the
numbers at the Senator already
mentioned there are forty
thousand units in the state a
lot of them on tribal in
colonias land that are
substandard don't have enough
plumbing or kitchens that are
financed there's a lot of need
for we have there we are
currently shied thirty two
thousand units of low income
rental apartments that are we
need in the state we have a
hundred and seventy thousand
households or families are cost
burdened or severely cost
burdened which means they're
paying more than thirty percent
of their income towards a rant
we have between fifteen to
twenty thousand individuals that
to suffer homelessness on an
annual basis on a chronic basis
there's a between six to eight
thousand individuals and the
need for permanent supportive
housing is great so that's just
a very small slice of the needs
that were identified there so
this funds are greatly needed a
thanks to all of you and support
Senate bill one thirty four last
you will start getting recurring
funding but not until July of
next year so this is to close
the gap for this year and the
needs that we've identified that
we can put this good money to
choose between now and then
that's the bill that.
L.
three percent of the of one of
Let the permanent fund to the
Thank you Mr chairman it acted
allocates two point five percent
of the state's bonding capacity
money to severance tax that
would be earmarked strictly for
affordable housing record that
doesn't start till next year
next year in July so this really
leaves a gap in you know to add
just a little bit because I know
what time is of the essence but
to add a little bit MFA the
mortgage finance authority have
seventy million dollars shovel
ready projects ready to execute
it but no funding to get him
done and so.
I just it doesn't it's like a no
brainer we need to provide the
funding for these projects and
have more homes for people so on
Scrase Senator thank you.
Governor you want to add
anything or thank you Mr thank.
Let's go to the audience anybody
in the audience here yes please
the former Oregon advocate for
housing and state representative
thank you Mr chair and thank
you.
Support for MFA and for the
housing I'm Alyssa can you guys.
For ten years I.
Housing so I love the past bill
didn't get here in time
yes support to advocate for it I
did send you a letter in
support.
This was the area where I had
the most bipartisan support
because all sides of the aisle
know how important supply is and
the economic development that
comes out of it the stability of
housing all of the kinds.
Renovation rental supply
firsttime homebuyers all of
those different things that MFA
does is just such a huge.
Anyway I can for that many years
I spent on this issue in Oregon
Law.
I was appointed to the board of
the housing trust fund I had the
opportunity to be on their
monthly calls to make decisions
and.
The staff and of the other
advisory board members from
around the state so I urge your
support I don't think forty
million is very much to be
honest.
I or it's incredible use of
funds and leverage and.
Consider it great thank you
listen.
Anybody else was because yes.
Want to.
Thank you Maria.
Anybody here in opposition to
this bill.
About online anybody online want
to speak in support support is
at the there are that the same
to hear or you gave me some here
I see it's a different list
yeah.
Keep using your keep again will
confuse.
Chris Herbert.
Are you there.
Yes senator.
Of money the members of the
committee my name is Chris
Herbert I am the executive
director of the eastern regional
Housing Authority we work
closely with the mortgage
finance authority particularly
in the utilization of housing
trust fund
the funding and we've used on
numerous projects we will
continue to use it in the future
and it is vital so we stand in
strong support of Senate bill
one forty thank you Chris thank
you how but basically notice.
yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Betty
systems show over I'm here
advocating for nami New Mexico
and we stand in support of
Senate bill one forty
particularly to address
homelessness and the support of
and supported housing thank you
for your time thank you the
senator for Karen this bill.
Thank you Betty the governor L.
Dietrich.
Hi there my name is Gabrielle
the check I thank you for
hearing my comment members of
the committee I am here also
want to on behalf of non in New
Mexico we stand in support of
Senate bill one forty for the
purpose of supportive housing
for those with mental illness in
our community.
Thank you very much.
One more who is it.
The pop to the cut open ski.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is bill because of posi one of
the co directors of earth care
Santa Fe based community
development organization on the
south side of town and we stand
and strong supporter of one
forty for the reasons already
stated thank you so much.
Thank you Bianca okay members of
the committee anybody have a
question
Teachable moment they've
stumbled under.
I I have one.
Yesterday of people from heading
home the Albuquerque programs
that that works with the
homeless told me something that
I phone.
Total shocking and I just want
to spread the word about it
wherever I go you probably heard
from them to Senator that
currently in Albuquerque at the
west side shelter that houses
four hundred people a night
there are one hundred senior
citizens in that shelter.
Bill sixty five and over.
Whose rent was increased to
social security went up but not
as much as the rent and they can
no longer live where they've
lived for years and so they're
now in a homeless shelter.
In Albuquerque yes it will
because I used to be the
homeless shelter kick everybody
out and it did that done in here
you had to stay out all day and
then came back and I this is for
them we've made an exception
they get to stay there all day
they get to stay there but you
know where the Albuquerque west
side shelter is up in the middle
of the booties.
So this is not this is this is
not a good thing there's a
ninety one year old woman among
their number by the way.
Living in a homeless shelter
because she can't afford rent
and can't find anything that
about you will pay for.
We got it we got to do something
about this thank you senator for
bringing this Mr chairman thank
you for bringing that to my
attention I had heard something
about it but I didn't get a
chance to look at the whole
thing is you explained it thank
you for that and I I know that
is is taking notes here to to
see those anyway we can reach
out to them but I want to
briefly to tell you that at the
last meeting very important here
at the last meeting we had of
the mortgage finance authority
you know my chair that and thank
you for serving on my come on
our committee I say my committee
and in for so long and so we
approved an increase to the area
median income for those people
that qualify four it would help
people with a little higher
income to be able to be eligible
to get more down payment
assistance to live in a home
doesn't have to it's not about
rental or he but it's about
purchasing a home and affordable
again for the home hopefully and
and it would it raise the that
threshold so people can more
easily qualify now and so that's
going to help I hope areas like
our teachers police officers
home health care providers
whatever it may be in those
categories but thank you for
bringing this other issue please
write it down thank you thank
you yeah Senator Gallegos Mister
thank you and Center again
really good bill up when Chris
spoke permission Mexico Housing
Authority my wife works well in
when my mom got sick I tried to
get one of their facilities but
the White lacked limit is
probably here sometime beyond
that so I know even in rural New
Mexico there's a huge need of
the costs are very modders I
mean they they they goes by your
income basin so if you can
afford it very little out so I I
know there's a need their again
talk about unison Hobbs the
rulers are are as well as in
Albuquerque I know we don't have
as many homeless in the
southeast but it's one of.
Things seem more more of them so
I just wanted to let you go and
to give you understand my wife I
don't get paid for that just a
but anyway it's just a they do a
really good job and I just
wanted to give them credit I
know there's a huge main
southeast so with that are you
thank you senator Senator mais.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Rick as you mentioned.
To about percent of the of the
money we bought from the
severance tax permanent and goes
to this endeavor and there's a
year gap and if I may Mister
just to.
For the folks listening at home.
We're not gonna we usually use
our severance tax permanent fund
to bond for a couple outlay
projects.
It state policy two and a half
percent boom by law goes to
these types of programs but
because we have so much money in
a general fund we're not gonna
do that this year so we use cash
or general fund money for three
reasons one because we don't
need to borrow money because we
have so much cash so we don't
want to ruin our credit rating
also we want to let the fund
grow but that two and a half you
know we got to make sure we fill
the gap on that two and a half
as was referred to by Senator so
so what so it is state policy
it's it's going to be on going
but this year we're gonna used
to hopefully use general fund
money and the next year if we go
back to the severance tax
permanent fund so this is policy
in New Mexico of the annually up
to use a portion of our capital
outlay for this endeavors I just
want to make that point that
Senator made thank you thank you
for explaining that Senator very
important flexibility committee
in the past we have a motion for
depression Senator Sedillo Lopez
and a second from Senator
Tallman.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tomlinson yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes we have a to
pass one and eight.
We have a due pass on eight to
zero with one excuse thank you
so much Mr chairman I will go to
your last bill thank you yes and
hopefully three hundred thousand
yeah the Human Services
Department for a homeless
shelter and supportive housing
in the city of Santa Fe thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee this
here is I have an R. two letter
here just as to answer questions
in general about homeless
shelters if there are any
questions we I bring this before
you every year almost asking for
some funding we have succeeded
in getting some funding for a
homeless shelters that have
supported housing as part of
their component in not here in
Santa Fe but we have not
received funding from like a
general probation and house bill
two or anything but we have
allocated funding through junior
of those of us that many times
you know want to assist in
whatever way we can I'm hoping
that we can be able to
appropriate some funding through
house bill two if we can
negotiate something in finance
to get more for the homeless
shelters here you know we have
an enormous problem in that more
it's an influx of homeless
people coming into our shelters
and a COVID of course didn't
help anything around the state
but here in Santa Fe it's become
unbearable with so much need and
I was just hoping to be able to
to augment their services a
little more and if I'm allowed
Mr chairman I'll have it say a
little bit the structure that
the Mr Chairman senators thank
you Senator tradition I really
don't have much to add because I
think most of it was covered in
the last two bills of as you all
know there is a growing need for
homeless services supportive
services and specially for
housing New Mexico we've had a
crisis not only in the state but
across the country
One time with that but the by
the way I'm the executive
director said was the shelters
and supportive housing here in
Santa Fe and I'm on the board of
directors of the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness so
I've been involved in this work
on offer thirty six years so I
think I know what I hope I hope
I know what I'm talking about at
this point
but one point we're getting at
least it's Elisabeth we're
getting anywhere from half to
three quarters of our clients
through the there in the
shelters into housing in
December we got one percent
because there is absolutely no
affordable housing in Santa Fe
none whatsoever we've got to the
point where bart we're we are
buying bus tickets and sending
people out of state even clean
people were from New Mexico
because they have nothing to go
to so any help would be greatly
appreciated thank you thank you
Mr to it the is there anyone
here who wants to speak in
support of this bill yes.
List of their again two hats one
is an MFA advisory board member
candidly about homelessness and
the other because I moved here
from Oregon having been a state
legislator I'm passionate about
state policy which is why I
chose to live in Santa Fe but as
a result of being a Santa Fe
resident I I see the state of
homelessness around me I know
housing costs are really high
here and I hope that you'll
support this bill thank you
thank you.
Yes.
Right right okay.
Thank you Maria yes ma'am.
I think if you could come
forward because they don't pick
it up we use the money I can't
resist the teachable moment here
as well.
There's a Mike good news that
might okay.
I'm Catherine Freeman from going
in New Mexico thank you to
Senator Rodriguez for this most
important bill all three of
these I can't resist another
teachable moment to remind
everybody have critically
important these issues are to
our children and families we
have more and more on house
families more and more homeless
families across our state and we
all know as senator Rodriguez
mentioned unless we get all the
systems in place there's really
no way to afford our families
the opportunity that they need
thank you thank you thank you
thank.
Anybody up here they are thank.
Yes we have a on zoom we have
petty okay is there anybody here
in opposition overview go head
to head no.
Human Services Department still
supports this bill Alex cast
year Smith acting.
Alex casteism and acting cabinet
secretary for the U. W. counted
secretary for the Human Services
Department just standing in
support of this bill right thank
you.
Anybody it so is the honest
speaking in support.
Yes Mr chairman once they can
support the is the vote on this
for the mortgage finance
authority we have several
contracts with a the structural
it out here and take a list of
as they do a tremendous job and
we're definitely in support of
this bill thank you right thank
you is it.
Anybody here in opposition to
the bill.
Thing then we go to the zoom for
those people who want to speak
in support and the first one is
that a cease notice **** show
over.
For over.
To get away did you hear okay
sorry here I am okay Mr chair
thank you and members of the
committee
nami New Mexico as well as this
Santa Fe our local affiliates
stand in support of this bill
for all the reasons noted you
know we see it every day in our
community where in Santa Fe and
it's so needed so thank you
again and senator for
And bring that bill to us.
So then the second person in
until zoom to speak in support
is Meryl Lieberman.
My body I just want to say I am
so proud to news in Santa Fe and
have worked for so many years
with Edward archer let the and
all of us that are trying to a
Medicaid homelessness I see
homelessness is a social justice
issue and we're all in this
together and I strongly urge
support of this bill thanks so
much thank you misli room
members of the committee Senator
Gallegos.
Mr and etcetera thank you I had
a question but the young lady
from Oregon left I understand
the Portland had a fifty percent
increase in homelessness in the
last three years as hoping
because she's legislature to get
understand what caused that but
Mister chairman Senator put my
concern or question was I
understand we have like
seventeen can't much here
Senator is that right.
Mr Chairman all it and it answer
that because he's got the
current figure this last week
Mister Mister chairman Senator
to be honest with you I really
don't know cap there aren't
cabinets all over town there are
dozens and dozens but they move
around a lot either the police
or somebody else move on and
move somewhere else there are a
lot of the cabinets in the area
first up in the foothills
Mr chair Senator in general so
this is a those encampments are
beyond what you guys do shelters
the cashier shelters are
physical locations these are
just ten cities that as we move
around as chairman Senator yes
that's correct okay well and.
Those that we try to get them
into the shelter so we can get
them services that they need but
fortune lot of those one hundred
and shelters.
Okay where and and I guess the
Mr Chairman center and gentleman
the.
The chancery shows that there's
a need and and I guess for me it
would be better have a structure
place I know a lot of times
Albuquerque places are
designating areas for those
shelters to go to are not
children tent cities go to try
to manage and that I just
warning because I'd heard that
no with seventeen Kaplan's it's
almost for you if you're doing a
physical facility it's almost
come in never ending battle if
you look what happened or that's
why I wanted to find out what
because that just thinking
through Mr and Senator with
climate that we have here in
Santa Fe turned whether it be
really hard organised Weiss is
bad.
And for the North but I just was
hoping she'd stayed to give some
insight but that's my question
thank you for that Sir thank you
senator Senator Bennett.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Rodriguez for being the.
The home of a champion of our
caucus I think yeah you're just
you're tremendous Mr Archuleta.
I'm curious with this three
hundred thousand.
that is being proposed.
How many more individuals and
our families would be helped.
With the appropriation and how
many are you helping now Mister
chairman Senator well first of
all of this appropriation is
approved
is set up by there's an RFP that
sent out so there are other
agencies that can quote it
doesn't come directly to us I
just want to explain that
but we serve about two thousand
people here we have five
facilities throughout Santa Fe
we have two shelters one for men
one for women and families we
have three supportive housing
programs basically hundred fifty
apartments scattered throughout
town we have case managers
therapists counselors the whole
team that work with these folks
at all I all the facilities
we save about two hundred fifty
people a night but all
throughout the year we serve
about two thousand we have
people come to our door just for
food for clothing for medication
whatever they need so it's about
two thousand people here the
research.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you Mr Archuleta
and just one comment Mr chairman
if if I may.
I really like how all three
these bills have come together
in one afternoon because and
I've said this before I've yet
to meet a four five year old who
was talking to his classmates as
educator whose rate has picked
his or her parents and say when
I grow up I want to have a
substance abuse problem I want
to be homeless the state they
don't want to do this right
eight a life can be very
traumatic for some of our fellow
residents and so it's so nice
that we have we're showing
compassion and with that
compassion we're showing cash to
help them out and so thank you
chairman thank you senator thank
you Mr Shalala thank you and we
do have a quite another question
or the same question from
Senator Gallegos we have an
answer person in here who can
answer it Senator Gallegos thank
you Mr chairman Senator the
legislature from organs backer
I just had a question for you
ma'am so I understand Portland
has had an increase in
homelessness in last three years
of fifty percent would you have
been in your legislator an
understanding of what causes it
and what organs doing to route a
Kate that.
That's an excellent question.
Permanent supportive housing
rental housing assistance.
Actually built from zoning to
design to construction all that
takes a long time so there's a
little bit of a backlog on that
and I and I will say to all of
you when you when you put out
I'm out of money like this it is
two or three years before you
start seeing results market also
passed a measure that allowed
everyone ten.
And I personally supported the
effort to decriminalize
decriminalize drugs but the end.
If you're gonna make it a
public.
Issue you need a good system
and.
So that is also contributed
greatly to the problem last week
Portland has a very poor charter
to some government it's the only
city if.
It's a it doesn't have a city
manager and they actually just
bowed.
The state not the city
management the city was really
poorly run to the.
Doing so that despite the fact
that the legislature every.
By the time I left it was
written.
It was the right move but
there's a lot of other.
Mr chair and etcetera
Madam I appreciate the I think
that we're tracking with you and
I don't think we have a solution
either and so the the three
hundred thousand Mr Chairman
center and
Madam is sort of like a drop in
the bucket I think we need to
look long term you know I can
when we got our marijuana bill
passed in my area of the state
we saw more more problems so if
you get to the larger
communities it is going to drop
people for that reason and I and
I appreciate your honesty
because I really think the
decriminalization is going to
add on top of that as we go
forward so I appreciate you
coming back in a thank you for
your honesty and now I do yield
Mister thank you thank you.
What's the will of the
committee.
Yes the second motion for two
passed from Senator Sedillo
Lopez seconded by Senator
Tallman and the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator myiasis yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tolman yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes seven eight two zero
one excuse and once again
Senator you have a do pass on
eight to zero with one excuse
thank you miss you for all your
work thank you Mr agility.
We'll go now to our first the
bill of on the on the calendar
from carryover and that Senator
Baca and we gonna go out there
with them Senator Gallegos
hearing.
You're welcome to either way you
choose.
With an all state here.
You might I.
Okay this is the Senate bill
sixty five the emergency powers
code changes.
The bill we look at last year.
I think we've tested out Lester
didn't that's correct Mr chair.
It didn't get beyond but after
this Judiciary I did go to
Judiciary were passed on seven
one I believe and ended on the
floor for it died it did we read
time from this right okay let's
try again.
Thank you Mr chair of for your
consideration senators I have
Senate bill sixty five which is
a public health renewal and
amendment of this bill was
previously cleared by this
committee really with the
overwhelming support and and on
to Judiciary again and and
cleared by them as well this
bill is really an executive and
legislative bill it is certainly
not a partisan Republican
Democrat bill this bill all it
does is provide for the
legislative involvement in
amending or renewing public
health emergency declarations I
I ice this is the this is also a
good faith effort and I'd like
to a point now again the good
the good chair here offered some
very helpful amendments that
were incorporated to this bill
last time it was in here and we
brought it back in all of those
and all of those are in here as
well all those changes that he
suggested this this bill
essentially what it does is it
allows for renewal or amendment
of a public health order upon
approval by the legislature it
it allows for forty five days
forty five days so that that
really what it does is is
preserves the autonomy of the
executive the executive as full
flexibility to take action Mr
chair if if there is a public
health emergency so for faced
with just as we were corona
virus nineteen the executive
would have the exact same
ability to intervene to make our
our state safe following that
after a no after a notices sent
to the legislature the the order
would continue on forty five
days and would be brought up for
consideration by the legislature
if we happen to be in session we
would take a vote essentially on
whether it would be renewed
then.
Did if we happen not to be in
session Mr chair then we would
Legislative Council would would
would take the matter up and
there would be a full there so
it actually allows for some
flexibility whether we're in
session or not preserves
autonomy for the executive but
in the end allows a provided
legislative bodies to enter and
give their input on the matter.
And with that I would stand for
questions Mr chair did you want
to add anything.
Mr thank you he did a great job
I would just say that from my
point of view and and I was on
the full sponsor last year
and I and I know there's a House
Bill currently coming through on
the house side but what.
My interest was and he did a
really good job explain the
automatic termination forty five
days I felt that we didn't get
an opportunity to have a
discussion on the emergency but
this restores the power of the
state legislature to have that
dialogue and I think that me
that's important I keep stated
if we work to given a vote up or
down then that lease has us as
part of the decision making in
the state and I think my
constituents expect that from me
and for that and that we've
already passed it through here
we you'll need all to look at
asking questions right I notice
in the analysis it points out
that we're in the FIR to point
out that the the house version
is a sixty day.
This
This is a ninety it's a ninety
day with the sixty four the
sixty day extension yes and I
I've looked over their bill as
well I'd like to think that we
in the Senate have lead on this
issue and we're looking at a
bill that has a little bit more
added flexibility at the in the
end our bodies decide which bill
that they like better and that's
that's really all I have on that
good.
Thank you senators chair if I
may yeah solve survivors in the
elevator the person
Representative Nibert in the
elevator is sponsor that house
for years and has one in
dialogue with him till I meet
with him later see if there's
would track the cars because I
think our just.
Thank you Senators let's go to
the audience is there anyone
here who wants to speak in
support of this bill.
Yes.
Can I take opportunity to speak
neither in support nor in
opposition okay I was wondering
if you're going to clarify that
so Alex yes you Smith acting
deputy cabinet secretary with
the department and I want to
apologize to this and not make
it into our departments bill
analysis but I did want to share
that at HSD we were able to
secure a billion dollars in the
dust an additional federal
Medicaid revenue during the
public health emergency and
millions of more additional
federal revenue for snap through
nutrition emergency allotments
during the pandemic as a direct
result of having a public health
of having a state emergency
declared by the executive and so
a limitation to that
declaration would hamper
administratively the ability for
the department to keep securing
additional federal revenue in
times of a public health
emergency or disaster such as
the wildfires so I just want to
make that comment thank you.
There anyone on the line of to
speak either for or against this
is there anyone here to speak
against this bill.
Members of the committee senator
committees.
Thank you Mr chair listen to
that last comment Senator does
this bill in any way affect the
governor's.
The ability to declare emergency
it does not and and we
appreciated the good work done
by.
Governor for.
For seeking additional federal
funds but this would in no way
hamper that if the bill the bill
would be considered within the
time frame of exploration of the
actual health order so if it's
renewed it continues in effect
as as if it never changed or if
the executive decides to amend
it it would continue under that
form we've seen several
amendments under the the current
health orders as you know and it
would really have no impact on
that.
Thank you Mr chair Sir just want
to clarify that because that's
what I see in your bill to is it
does not affect
any of that
and then I I would just probably
into the COVID
In a time of emergency I I
honestly I think the drafters of
our original and crafters of our
regional laws on this may not
have foreseen these kind of long
lasting emergencies of than we
all think about and we look to
the New Mexico so too should we
all think about while you know
it's an emergency go to act
quick but these these are things
that that generally kind of
you know simmer down or like it
you know.
Tornadoes hurricanes earthquakes
these are the things that come
in
and so I think this is is a good
approach to a longer lasting
emergency and we know that.
A diversity of approach leads to
better policy making we also
know that these widespread
emergencies despair at Lee
affect different parts of the
state differently southeast
Mexico maybe affected
differently than Albuquerque
etcetera and so when we have
these widespread emergencies and
when they are disproportionately
affecting different communities
in different ways.
We've got to bring our
representatives are centers in
on those discussions I think
it's going to only improve
communication
Lower the partisan divide and
ultimately improve the quality
of policy and decision making
that comes out so thank you for
the.
Thank you.
What was after him and then
Senator Maestas he wanted to be
on the list.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sponsors for the bill of I
agree with the sentiment that
input is is very important
and that the legislature has the
the time to to be able to
provide that input and that we
did learn a lot through the last
to art COVID crisis but I also
think we learn to that comment
crisis that forty five days is
just too short from a from a
medical point of view and was
what we're dealing with with new
viruses coming out we are
apparently the the CDC approved
a annual COVID shot and you know
maybe they're getting that down
on the other hand they also
acknowledge that that the COVID
in particular its ability to
mutate so fast is is incredible
and the more people who are out
and about and spreading the
virus to one another the greater
the chance for mutations that
any vaccine can't control and so
I have a hard time.
Even denying the public the
public health authority of the
governor but I appreciate the
input and I do think we're in a
learning phase and this is part
of the learning phase but
personally I would favor a
ninety day because I think
that's more
Relevant to this to the
challenges that we're going to
face in the future and again I
really want to emphasize the
point of more all out
interacting with one another and
unstable virus situation the
more we're going to increases
significant probability of
mutations that we can't get a
hold of and then once you get
one of those mutations that
takes off is the delta did in
the be
I and and so forth
I think that that we have to
have more time so I I'm not
going to support this bill I may
well support the the house bill
but again as we get to the end
of the session I think will work
that out but forty five days is
just too short thank you very
much Mr chair thank you thank
you Mr chair and I appreciate
the comments and this bill was
originally drafted and twenty
twenty one if Mister chair if
the if the good senator has has
really no other opposition other
than the time frame I'm happy to
entertain changing this time
frame and deter different defer
to your medical professionalism
in that time frame if if that is
the only thing holding up from
gaining your support Mister
chairman Senator I most
assuredly amenable to to moving
to a ninety day.
With with a with a thirty day I
the other thing is just with the
thirty day renewable just
because ninety days I think it's
much more appropriate but ninety
day with the thirty renewable
and then you know and then we
just bring the house version had
sixty day renewable yes I I
think thirty days is this is
sufficient
so I would if you would
entertain that I can go with
this the ninety third I
certainly would Mr chair and
senator I cannot have that re
drafted and what we can do it
right here unless you like to do
it now we can do right now you
want to make that motion yes I
would make the motion that there
be a ninety day
period and that a there be a
thirty day renewable and then
and then ensuring going through
the process as you have it
outlined here.
Thank you Mr chairman that that
would be a friendly amendment
for a second for that motion
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any discussion on the
motion.
Senator Maestas yes.
Thank you Mr thank you centers
exist just just to be a little
more precise by may that are we
looking at page four line twenty
just changing forty five to
ninety or what what specifically
are we changing in the document
so the page to it thanks to.
Right here.
So it's on page two line at
eleven K. forty five days and
then the renewal for.
Mr chair we would find the on
page two line eleven strike
forty five change to ninety.
We would find it again it's on
page four page four line twenty
section eighty changing the
forty five to ninety.
And I don't think there is a
renewable in here.
Yeah it's on the.
Of.
With that thirty days.
Yes medically after so okay
Mexico K..
What would it will that when we
don't have I can't believe that
you know still thirty yeah.
Nibert ties it is sixty but we
would let you want to leave it
at thirty.
Okay.
This is on fifty four.
Thank you for yes.
Both online twenty.
Page two.
The page nine eleven of two.
Thank you chairman.
That's it.
A simple little numbers change.
Any discussion any opposition to
this measure being amended in
this fashion Senator.
I am glad.
Senator.
It's still very different from
their personal.
Right here okay.
With I I.
Not sure what the.
I just I.
I just.
There is.
They're in their secretary is
pointed out there is a third a
number forty five on page six.
That needs to be changed.
That is on line I.
If you change that one also the
ninety day Senator yes thank you
Mr chairman thank you to our
competent staff we've
continually takes care of them
but he reads is built.
Thanks man.
Anything else interview is there
any opposition to making these
three changes in the bill.
Seeing none will consider the
bills have been amended and
we'll go to the audience for
comment.
We already went to the audience
for
Yes yes we already went to the
audience and do we have anybody
on zoom notice so okay we're on
the committee to well that's
right we already did Senator
Schmedes anybody else yeah we
have Sedillo Lopez on the bill
and Maestas on the bill.
Thank you.
question about the vote of the
majority of the members of the
city council currently the one.
I
have the ability to receive
basis that they do Mr chair and
and senator and good question
and of this was thought about
quite a bit actually the fact
that the meat on a thirty day
basis actually works well with
the amendment that that Senator
Hickey provided because with
that we will have it and at a
minimum two times to me to
consider whether to amend or
renew health order so if it's
working well I think I really
love the more I think about it I
like that amendment we have the
opportunity to look at the
success or failure of the health
order as it stands or sit wait
and and thirty days can pass and
then the the council can have a
vo at that time if they so
choose.
Thank you Mr chair and then one
of yes.
I just think it would be better
but I just.
I just throw that out.
Think about Legislative Council
reports.
Please.
But.
Goes on.
In
I I tend to agree with you
senator Mister chairman Senator
I tend to agree with you the the
challenge that was posed in
drafting this bill as you know
is you stated it well what we
are part time legislature I
think even now we're discussing
professionalism and all those
sorts of things and whether we
want to be a part time
legislature or more of a full
time legislature something in
between and you know exactly
what you stated is is really the
dilemma that we are caught with
so we're trying to strike a
balance with using as many
people as we could within the
legislature during the session
but still allowing some
flexibility without actually
having to call for a special
session and go through the
enormity of that so I thank you
for your suggestion I I
certainly will take that up
going forward and on that point
is the the meetings of the
Legislative Council are.
we're noticed about them we can
attend if we want to there's
never any any any any effort is
just waiting any member the
legislature wants to attend a
meeting of the council and I
would assume during the meetings
of the one or two I've gone to
the I and I had a question I've
been able to suppose that in
participate in the discussion so
I think if they are open to the
full legislature it's just that
their route regularly scheduled
for those meetings that lent
itself to this of this kind of
thing and I do agree.
Thank you Mr chair that's that's
the.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you.
Actors thank you Mr chairman Sir
Baca center again as I did
similar concern.
With regard to the provision
because theoretically we could
call ourselves into
extraordinary session and not be
able to deal with this statute
because it only limits us to
session four eight council Saad
propose Mr chairman on line on
for a premium page five.
Line for.
Of a commotion to.
Between the up the common the
word by says meets in session
comma by a vote of between
common by insert special session
or extraordinary session.
Com.
And make that most.
With theoretically if we want to
talk about it we're not
precluded.
Okay with that Senator you have
any objections to the home you
know a Mr chair just because
this bill's been vetted from so
many times
I'm really much more comfortable
with this just because we lose a
little bit of flexibility with
that
I would entertain it if it if it
means getting get out of this
committee you know I I but I
think that with the way this
works in conjunction with how
we're situated as a part time
legislature Mister chairman
Senator I think the flexibility
it gives us rather than calling
into a special session of which
requires of more than a major if
you will to to actually do that
this this works in conjunction a
little bit better so I have when
I say friendly helpful the
somewhat friendly friendly
amended I guess but I'm a little
bit more comfortable with what
we have here understood Mr
Chairman said a box that is all
about and withdraw the motion
and just go back to Q. innate
the up I actually like the
emergency clause access but to
the bill I think if we had an
implementation data fifty years
it would be the same as a
emergency clause but but just a
little I see with you the this
because because we don't learn
you know we don't learn from
history I'm really glad you're
dealing with this now
Because in ten years fifteen
years from now you know it'll be
lost we.
Even though the the so called
Spanish flu was a two three year
deal we just never.
Conceptualize that two or three
year time period because we're
just waiting a week from Tuesday
was gonna be over you know
with regards to the governor I
appreciate about the governor's
it shouldn't shouldn't pass
under to the political winds
like other governors and made
the call regardless of of
political fallout from.
And they were to come thought
was best at the time given
information that they had at the
time but up but also this
doesn't allow.
The legislature to weigh in on
the on the parameters and the.
And the details of the order and
so I think it's eight council
you know perfect world the
governor and let's council kind
of work that stuff out as
opposed to voting for an order
stopping in order I would
imagine it would be modified
each and every time I by the
legislature and the and the
chief executive and the and the
secretaries that be so I just
want to make that point but I
think the ledge council meeting
monthly.
With those time periods I think
is a.
Some that should be in the books
a hundred years from now when
when the government deals with
the second time or third time
thank you Mr into the you know I
appreciate those comments we
purposely left out any authority
to amend or or anything within
here because there is a
recognition here that the
executive needs that a sortie to
react and to be able to respond
unfettered two really anybody
that decisions must be made
quick and so what we wanted to
allow her that flexibility in
the for in the process we can
only give a yes or no and it's
up to her to decide to
parameters at this point or
whatever executive is in that
office at that time thank you
thank you thank you senator
Senator Hickey.
What's the will of what's will
the committee.
This we have a motion for due
process from Senator committees
seconded by Senator Gallegos is
there any other discussion
debate questions amendments
secretary will call the roll
Senator guy eco system Senator
Hickey yes and three comment
Senator Ingle Senator my Estes
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz the Pino yes then Senator
Hickey to explain his vote up.
I just.
The cost is to be aware of some
of the federal programs for
years this will fire the a
longer period.
Where that place.
I just I point that out
otherwise thank you for.
By.
Thank you thank you so by a vote
of eight in the affirmative zero
in the negative one excuse to
give a do pass and it has thank
you Mr chair as amended you have
to do best as amended thank you
Mr chair thank you members of
the committee thank you doctor
for your amendment today.
Thank you senators will go noted
Senator o'neill.
With his of a bill on.
Probation and parole violation
changes.
Though there's a committee sub
Senator.
Yes there is and so we need one
of our usual amendment our usual
motions that we get in these
situations.
somebody will move for it do not
pass on Senator Sedillo Lopez
you want to give it a shot so
you want to turn your Mike on
brotherly.
Thank you after all that.
thank you Mr chair I move a do
not pass Senate bill eighty four
and a do pass on
health and public affairs
committee substitute present
before.
Thank you did I miss anything.
For discussion purposes for
discussion purposes thank you.
Please.
Yes with the regular to pass
after the discussion and then is
there a second for that.
Well second okay Senator McKenna
seconds it.
Okay we're what we live we will
just discard your old bill and
wearing only the original bill
the new bill the committee sub
and and thank you Mr chair and
yes I bring another parole
reform bill in front of this
August committee that was this
week I think there was here
earlier
but but I want to acknowledge my
co sponsors Senator my **** who
probably wants to stay in New
Mexico the chair that he has up
there limit your Mike would work
his doesn't yeah I know it's and
and so also I'm here with Kim
Chavez Cook who is New Mexico
appellate public defender she's
my experts but basically let me
just start in on a big picture
here is the issue hi so here's
some statistics in two thousand
twenty two of the five hundred
and three hundred eighty four
five thousand three hundred
eighty four prisoners
incarcerated in our state nine
hundred and eight of them were
incarcerated doing time at
tremendous state expense for
parole violations that
represents a seventeen percent
figure of the people in prison
right now doing time not for new
felonies but a parole violations
at the cost of twenty two
million a year not that that's
should bother anybody I suppose
but it's you know one third of
prison admissions in two
thousand twenty two were per
parole revocations okay so
here's the deal if we
acknowledge that.
So much of of the crime problem
is the addiction problem Mike
you know the LFC analysis said
one third of those ninety
percent of parole revocations
are addiction related I know
this firsthand from when I used
to work very closely with adult
parolees
you know they can't often times
stay clean third they're doing
their best and got a job they're
doing their best but they yes
thirty repeatedly Hey so they
need to be held accountable for
their behavior for their relapse
I mean this is a public safety
issue but at the same time
if we acknowledge that that to
to go back to prison to serve
the remainder to three four
years whatever that senses is is
not not really the smart way to
go about it so this bill what it
does is it provides sanctions
you know Representative
consequences for for you know
I'm with for testing dirty
whatever the reason is for
parole revocation but it also
limits the time it kind of it it
knowledge is the severity the
the problem the basically it's
an addiction issue and and and
just it provides consequences
but not the full on go ahead and
serve the rest of your time big
picture we've talked about
technical parole violation
reform a lot on on interim CCJ a
lot we've looked at other states
what they have done I know
Senator my S. this is as
sponsored built in this area
and what we did the genesis for
this bill is that one of those
CCJ meetings that justice action
network presented and used on
Louisiana as a as a model for
for something that's being done
you know I know we're not
Louisiana though with there also
are relying on oil and gas
almost as much as we are but
it's basically Bob pattern.
After that and then at this
point I can just turn it over to
number eight to to explain the
specifics of the bill.
Thank you yes miss Jessica S.
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you to the sponsors of this
legislation and as a little bit
of historical context for
probation and parole supervision
there back in the very old in
days when someone committed a
crime they were given an
incarceration sentence and that
was it when they did their time
they were set free there was
nothing more to it there was the
very very earliest manifestation
community supervision was very
much Dick directed as an
alternative to incarceration
with a rehabilitation focus
that's the core concept of
community supervision in the
nineteen seventies and eighties
we started to move away from
that model as tough on crime
became sort of the rallying cry
around criminal justice and the
philosophy moved from one of
rehabilitation and an
alternative to being more of a
surveillance type supervision so
probation and parole officers
went from a social work function
to more of a law enforcement
function so what was supposed to
reduce incarceration ended up
becoming a driver of
incarceration so with that in
mind that the data that the that
Senator o'neill just described
shows how much sort of resources
being spent on punishing
violations with incarceration we
don't have great data for New
Mexico because we have what we
have parole violation numbers we
don't distinguish between
standard violations and
technical and we have no data
whatsoever for probation
violations because when someone
goes to prison on a probation
violation it's logged as just
going in on the underlying crime
it's not separately identified
as being a probation violation
so we just don't have those
numbers and the LFC FIR
knowledge is that but nationally
forty five percent of prison
admissions are of a
conglomeration of probation and
parole violations and that's a
nationwide about twenty five
percent of the expanding prison
population we have some.
Idea in New Mexico based on a
study done by UNM where they
actually went and opened the
files on every individual case
to figure out the reason for
admissions and over an eighteen
month sample period that we're
study found in this was in
twenty seventeen so it also
hasn't been done since then but
over that period of time
probation revocations were about
eighteen percent to prison
admissions so if we take that
number plus the numbers we do
have for probate parole
violations we're looking about
thirty percent of people going
into the prison system.
So we have a lot of room for
improvement in probation parole
supervision based on studies
that are being done nationwide
about what works and what
doesn't there are but this bill
only looks at one narrow issue.
It is taking a step forward to
you've relying on all available
research to focus on targeting
the sanctions for by particular
type of violation as Senator
o'neill mentioned that we have
borrowed a lot of this language
from Louisiana in current in in
including the definition of what
is a technical violation and
codifying the idea of graduated
sanctions which are incremental
responses to non compliant
behavior and includes
noncustodial sanctions based on
studies that show that they are
just as effective as custodial
sanctions.
These include community service
GPS monitoring drug and alcohol
testing and targeted needs
responsive conditions so adding
new conditions of someone isn't
doing well saying well maybe you
need these additional
requirements things that are not
just lock him up I'm almost done
I promise so language added to
both sections of the bill
recommend target a target
maximum for technical violations
for first and second and third
technical violations there after
on a fourth technical violation
it's current law the probe or
can do whatever it wants just
like it can now the district for
a parole violation District
Court can do whatever they want
under that they can currently do
now for probation violations
once you get to a fourth this
unlike the Louisiana bill that
could Committee substitute has
been updated to have those
graduated sanctions match the
Bernalillo county existing
technical violations program so
the original as file version of
the bill used Louisiana
sanctions steps which were
fifteen days thirty days forty
five we've replaced that in the
committee sub with what
Bernalillo county uses which is
the first section is non
custodial a second is non
custodial but a little bit more
and then we don't get to
incarceration until the third
technical violation with a
maximum seven days at the third
there after the fourth section
again they can do whatever they
can already do under current
law.
So I will just wrap up by saying
that numerous studies have found
that community basing tions are
just as effective if not more
effective than incarceration at
correcting behavior in South
Carolina when they adopted a
graduated sanctions approach it
reduced full revocations by
forty six percent when Hawaii
adopted a similar program they
found probationers were fifty
five percent less likely to be
arrested seventy two percent
less likely to use drugs and
sixty one percent less likely to
skip appointments fifty three
percent fewer people have their
probation revoked in Texas our
sister states which went county
by county the comparison by
county showed that counties that
adopted graduated sanctions cut
their technical revocations by
sixteen percent were other
counties saw an increase in
revocations and I will then turn
to Louisiana from whom we have
borrowed some of this language
where they kept their sanctions
at ninety days and their
original statute statutory
change side decrease without any
increase in public safety a
decrease of incarceration and a
savings of seventeen million
dollars Louisiana has since
updated there is to have a
capital much lower cap the
fifteen thirty and forty five I
described and as I mentioned our
bill has gone even a little bit
further in the other direction
to to me or what the current
local rule adopted by the second
judicial District Court realize
and I would just note for that
committee that a similar bill
Senate bill one forty one pass
this committee in twenty twenty
one although there are
definitely some substantive
differences between the two
thank you for that with that
will stand for questions let's
go to the audience first.
is there anyone in the audience
wants to speak in support of
this bill but if you okay let's
start here and then we'll just
work that yes please.
Come up but here that we're
getting a lot of people
complaining about our zoom not
picking up common unless we use
the Mike.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Rikki Lee Chavez I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of this measure and all
the measures that become but
that have come before the
legislature seeking to address
reform with probation and parole
violations we believe that the
state could use all of the funds
that the sponsor and miss Thomas
cook highlighted on assistance
for substance abuse and
substance misuse many people who
do find themselves in that
revocation space need those
kinds of interventions and
treatments in order to make sure
that they do not repeat these
cycles they're not receiving
those currently and that's why
we're seeing some of this
happened the data suggests that
that is where the main the main
problem is and our final point
would be that there is
substantial substantial data
that shows that a system like
that being proposed in this bill
does work to limit those
revocations and increase public
safety thank you for your
support thank you Richard.
Yes ma'am please come up and use
the Mike.
Thank you on a day and the cash
so just be eighty four addresses
a really crucial failing.
Practice for dealing with
technical violations of
probation and parole putting
people in jail even for short
time can have tremendous
negative effects on individual
but also in their families and
children they can undermine a
communities own interest in
supporting the success of people
released from incarceration I
see my own son struggle with the
stresses of trying to build a
life post incarceration finding
housing getting and holding a
job arranging transportation so
we can get to a job and get to
where he needs to be to put
comply with his conditions of
release thanks can quickly
become overwhelming mistakes are
easily made sometimes result of
logistical barriers such as
finding child care for your kids
are missing the bus being
arrested or jailed for any
length of time can have
devastating effects on the
probation or their family and
their children even a few days
in jail can cause you to lose
your job I can't imagine what it
would be like to worry for your
kids safety or even wonder if
you lose them altogether
essential people who aren't a
threat we need to support not
hinder their success out here in
the world thank you thank you
miss cash.
Yeah next.
Thank you Mr chip is working.
Hey good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Riley and I'm here on
behalf of the all good here is
for the justice justice action
network we stand in support of
this bill the data shows us that
using jail stays to punish
supervision violations did not
improve probation and parole
outcomes and offers no benefits
over community based sanctions
so for that and the reasons are
already listed we stand in
support of this bill thank you
thank you very much.
Chair members of the committee
up to hold the button down
because it is.
Chairman and members of the
committee meetings and I will
send them speaking on behalf of
the ACLU of New Mexico in strong
support of this bill as the
sponsor and miss Thomas cook
stated of such an enormous
percentage of our pop are
prison intake population comes
from parole violations
and this means that an
extraordinary share of law
enforcement resources and public
safety resources are
consistently diverted towards
imprisoning people you're not
for new crimes or
causing anyone harm but because
you know someone forgot to call
their parole officer or because
they tested positive for drugs
and alcohol and it doesn't take
much creativity to imagine any
number of better uses for for
those state resources no so what
if instead of punishing people
for struggling when they return
home from prison what if we
really truly invested in their
success the substantial
resources that are currently
expanded to enforce technical
parole violations and
revocations across the state
could instead be used to expand
transitional housing options
substance abuse treatment and
other really important health
services for people returning
home from prison The New
Mexico's really put itself in an
impossible place we fail to
provide basic services to
support people's reintegration
to present from prison and then
we punish them when they
experience challenges and it's
an indefensible arrangement and
something that has to be stopped
in this bill does a good job at
getting us in that direction so
thank you thank you yes ma'am.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is rave
enough you know that symphony I
would like to express my support
for this bill you've heard a lot
of really great data and
statistics actually come from a
statistics background as a
researcher I agree with
everything that's been said
I also have personal lived
experience through friends and
family who have struggled with
addiction that.
I'm sorry.
All right thank you.
This is very recent for me and
single family friends struggle
with the diction in this way.
Certainly supports the
statistics and data that drives
up this discussion of high
recidivism rates here in the
state of New Mexico.
And.
I would like to see the chair
members the committee provide
better alternative ways to
approach public safety rather
than incarcerate which tries of
these recidivism rates and
therefore makes many people the
committee feel that we are very
New Mexico is a very dangerous
place to live and really there's
just a lot of people here that
are struggling thank you very
much for your time and
consideration.
Thank you.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill yes
please.
Do.
Thank you for this problem.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
the committee my name is Melanie
Martinez I'm the director of
adult probation parole and it's
not that I oppose the bill a
discount currently supported in
its its current form I think
it's important to have all the
stakeholders at the table like
we did with the geriatric
medical program
so they all have input I think
it affects more than just
probation parole the dust the
judges the judicial authority
law enforcement and I think
there's more to the building
just you know I I do want to
mention I talked to senator
o'neill briefly in two thousand
two thousand sixteen we stopped
the thirty sixty ninety day
program technical violation
program because there wasn't a
treatment component attached to
the jail sanction and it's
important that they understand
the assessment that we currently
do kind of with their violation
tells us what we should impose
on them not someone's opinion or
anything of that nature right
now they get up to seven.
Seven preliminary violations
which is a positive you a before
we even think of doing a full
violation report so we exhaust
all resources anything available
to them and their community
wherever they're at before we
even recommend relocations I
think that's important majority
of the returns that go back to
prison art squanders and for
those of you someone who fails
to report
usually they're arrested on new
charges that was sixty seven
percent of our returns
and when they are returned there
returned on very serious charges
we had over a hundred and sixty
seven arrest last year alone
with firearms I think that's
important to know.
the technical parole violators
are being returned are usually
our sex offender population they
fall under a different contract
a different type of supervision
so that's majority of our
returns but in the current draft
I I I we can't support it so
thank you Mr chair you've seen
this substitute bill briefly I
did read through it but I
briefly thought I I'm not sure
the address is indeed the
concerns you brought up that
okay very good thank you thank
you Mr Martinez.
Anybody else in opposition to
this measure.
So we have some people and soon
want to comment I have Barron
Jones from the ACLU.
Still there.
Martin yes Representative.
Mr Johnson.
Eight on the government to
accept so excuse me thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee on my name is Barron
Jones I'm I'm with ACLU of New
Mexico the senior policy
strategist and the ACLU is a
proud member of the New Mexico
state school listen the
coalition the strongly supports
this legislation for the reasons
already stated we would like to
add that the bill represents a
cost saving measure for the
state that could be reinvested
like many folks that the state
of New Mexico everyone seven
already and reduce my thanks
please bear with me but right
now what we have in our
department is on the seriously
source staffing issues and poor
medical care that I'm create
safety concerns and one way we
can on work to mitigate those
safety concerns by reducing the
number of people that we are
power plants our prisons and
jails so I think the Sanchez
bring in this measure and I'm
and I encourage you all to vote
in the past and excuse me for
being twenty thank you thank you
Mr Jones.
Did you want to respond to the
we made records of the proboards
of yes yes thank you Mr chair
members and I I appreciate the
feedback from from is Martinez
director Martinez we have worked
on this issue a lot in the past
so I a lot of it sounds feels
familiar and I I do think
there's room for us to continue
to work between committees with
corrections to address some of
the practical concerns I do want
to directly respond to the
the the statement that the that
all probationers and parolees
get seven technical violations
before they get a violation of
formally launched against them I
believe the the director that
that is the official policy and
practice that is not what I see
for clients I do think that
there is variation around the
state and how that policy is
applied and I have certainly
seen clients who get a full
revocation of their probation
which means getting the entire
balance of their suspended
sentence which for probationers
can be decades theoretically for
a technical violation maybe it's
not their first but if it is
that will that still seems like
a lot of time for what is
ultimately a technical violation
and not the commission of any
crime so we can definitely talk
to you the rest of the
stakeholders more in the in the
time between this committee and
the next if we are given that
opportunity and that we have
reached out and just haven't had
a chance to sit down yet so I
appreciate that and if I may
thank you Mr chair yeah we will
I was we look I look and I'm
sure Senator my assist looks at
the LCS as a partner in this and
so we do appreciate the comments
of Melanie this Martinez and
also that the US secretary of
corrections system for F. I just
have a hard time with the notion
that most of these folks the
nine hundred and eight inmates
in two thousand twenty two that
most of them are sex offenders I
I have a roll hard time with
that with that statistics so I
need to that does not ring true
at all to me
and so I want I will look
forward to visiting with miss
Martinez about this but of
course we and we welcome the DA
and put you know this is just an
issue we've talked about it so
much for C. for years and
interim committee and I just
felt a strong need to introduce
something that was proven to
work in other states and.
Data to New Mexico and so forth
so having said all that.
Thank you and and one thing that
comes to mind immediately is it
would be great to have those
data.
Maybe it would be great to have
a reporting system that would
provide us with the real picture
of what's going on so that might
be something we need to also
work on members of the
committee.
Senator was to do did you want
to say anything here the co
sponsor your thank you Mr
chairman senator Neal.
Thank you Mr rose cook for your
tremendous work on this the
for allowing me to be a co
sponsor the
Appropriations of reform is
just.
So needed in the state it's it's
from the probation component of
criminal justice is the way to
really really fight crime
tremendously by crime
but what we learned out of the
October two thousand seventeen
report from LFC is that the vast
majority of probation violators
and parole violators we're going
to back to prison on what what
this bill refers to us technical
violations they were not
breaking the law they're
breaking the rules
and so what's important is in
till bills like this the
criminal justice system.
As a no tolerance policy when
you break the rules of and so
can't deal with relapse you know
can deal with relapse from from
folks struggling with substance
use disorder
And so this deals with that in
which relapse is all part of
recovery you know it's very rare
if not impossible to fully
recover without.
Without one or two relapses is
how you handle the relapse in
our so anyway we got to figure
out in statute how the probation
department deals with those
things that don't jeopardize
public safety it all comes back
to public safety and so what's
interesting about this bill Mr
as the and prior bills it was a
straight delineation between.
Thank you all or not breaking
the law this one actually.
has more teeth that I think the
probation officer can use and
that's on the page of top three
and which technical violation
definition is of violation of
conditions of release or parole
that
That does not either create a
threat to the probation or
parole The or others in other
words if someone can not break
the law but pose a threat and it
falls into the standard is the
standard violation category so
this this does you know have
that arbitrary definition but
much more thoughtful how to deal
with public safety issue so I do
I can go on and on but lastly Mr
chairman the up.
The big appropriations reform
bill that we did in two thousand
nineteen I want to thank the
generated from this representing
the justice center the up we
have an expert from Austin Texas
of from the council of state
governments and the two thousand
nineteen appropriations bill
passed the house fifty one
sixteen past honorable Senate
twenty six to six it was vetoed
on other grounds by the
honorable chief executive and we
were supposed to come back the
very next year and just do the
bill.
but it got that got caught up in
with some opposition house bill
two sixty three and twenty
twenty passed the house forty
seven seventeen what was
fascinating is that of those
seventeen no votes.
Only six of them were from the
minority party.
Folks folks on my side of the
aisle voted no because they felt
it didn't go far enough that's
how educated the house was at
that time on these modern
you know management tools for
for put the probation department
and then of course it could
because of the thirty day it
didn't get a chance to to pass
the Senate so here we are six
years after the two thousand
seventeen study dealing with
what what we should've done you
know six years ago and so it is
the it is gonna take
institutional change it is going
to take a cultural change within
the department you know we we
commend the secretary and and
and and director Martinez for.
For for for for tackling this
you know but the culture change
should happen from two thousand
seventeen and will continue not
just to the statue but monitor
the cultural change because if
we can lower recidivism we fight
crime it's hard and it's hard
thank you Mr chairman thank you
a sentiment thank you senator
Senator McKenna and then Senator
Sedillo office.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator o'neill and thank you Mr
Chavis cook for being with us
this afternoon
I really support the concept of
this bill and I learned so much
at these discussion meeting so
it's so wonderful to be able to
serve in the Senate and do this
I do have one question
chairman Senator and Mr Chavis
cook and that's something you
said in your earlier
presentation.
And that is put probation
violation recording for Rinker
serration is not recorded it's
not taken in and I'm wondering
one how were you able to just
two additional it for this
presentation and to what can we
do to fix that.
Thank you.
so I'll start with the second
question Mr Chairman first if I
may um it Senator that how what
we can do to fix it so the the
the I mean at the most the
easiest solution is for the
database the prince Authority
building used by the corrections
department to have either a
separate admission category or a
way to flag and then track the
recalls for an admission being a
violation
that doesn't exist at all for
probation violations it does for
parole violations but for even
for pro violations it doesn't
distinguish by standard versus
technical type of violation so
those would both be things that
would have to be there would
have to be some change in the
software they use so that
there's a box to check or
something like that
the way that we have gathered
the numbers that we do have the
parole violation numbers are
there I can't the the LFC
Representative FIR that was
provided to the committee
estimates seventy percent of
those are for technical
violations I couldn't tell you
how LFC makes that estimate I'm
sure they would be happy to to
answer legislators question
about that
but the way that we the other
piece that we're using for the
probation numbers is a study
that was done by you know social
scientists at UNM who dug in
beyond the reporting that's done
in the the the software within
the department of corrections
they actually went and opened
individual files over an
eighteen month period and looked
went back and looked at the
paperwork with their with human
eyes that's how they had to do
which is much more time
consuming but they did that for
that study that that senator
Maestas riff referenced as well
that was done in twenty
seventeen.
thank you chairman thank you
senator and thank you Mr Travis
cook and that's what you just
explained I was just speculating
that's what it took one by one
look at each file and so that
this terribly kind time
consuming uses valuable energy
and I'm just wondering if the
department of corrections would
be amenable to.
Asking for whatever it would
take to supplement the database
you know I will know that you
ask we have the secretary here
so madam secretary I I'm not
sure you just got in Senator
you're you you've been filled in
entirely on on senator McCain is
question but she's asking if you
know one of the issues we keep
running into is that the the the
the the data about the.
The reason for the
parole violation is is not being
captured and and what would it
take to begin doing that and are
you amenable to doing that and
would it take money and if so
Senator o'neill will be glad to
provide you with his junior bill
money to do it.
Senator Mr chair.
The I use the might cause a pick
they will pick up on zoom unless
you.
Mr button okay.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Senator McKenna so the question
is an interesting one and what
Mr Chavis cook that is
absolutely accurate so for for
many years we've been using a
legacy system that was
implemented in the department
probably around nineteen ninety
nine and we have been in the
process over the last few years
of developing a new system but
in the meantime we didn't want
to just wait for some new system
and sail the numbers aren't
available the numbers aren't
available so we did you know I
as far as of the numbers that
she was referencing I couldn't
speak to that is as I understand
it was in twenty seventeen so
before I had access to that
level of information I was in
the prisons working in the
present at that time but when I
came into this role what we
realize in working with the
legislative finance committee
and with our analyst was that
the agency had been providing
just these data dumps coming
from this old system and the
information was not being
filtered not being cleaned and
it's kind of like you know one
of those systems where people
have just been doing what they
had been doing for so many years
and piling stuff on top of stuff
on top of stuff and it wasn't
entirely accurate so what we did
when we were trying to really
figure out the true nature of
what was happening with
recidivism what were those real
numbers it took a big huge
effort so we had a team of
probation and parole officers
and people from the reentry
division working like around the
clock for more than a year and
what they did literally pull
every single file of every
single person who had released
and they they went back we have
them go back six years and the
reason that we did that is
because reentry numbers aren't
good but for three years worth
of data so we wanted to chunks
of that information and when we
went through that we got finally
for the first time we're able to
see really deeply what was
happening and why people were
being violated and what we found
was that what we were reporting
was really like almost like the
surface numbers but we weren't
being able to give any.
A of that deep detailed
information about why a person
was violating so was it because
they were committing a new
offense or they were charged
with a new offense but then the
charges were withdrawn before
the violation took place that
looked like a technical but it
really wasn't did a person
abscond and then take off across
state lines create a dangerous
situation for other people and
we were finally able to break
all of that information down for
you and I would really be happy
to provide that information that
we have to this committee I'll
be happy to send that to all of
you and of course share with the
senator and I believe we've
shared it with miss cook through
the sentencing commission we
worked on these bills and things
like that through reform this
far as this bill is concerned we
do have some concerns with that
I believe that director Martinez
already spoke on it and what are
concerns really is that.
We feel that it really just
takes away the options that the
probation and parole officer has
to designate something a
violation you know we want to
work with people we don't want
people to have to go into jail
and do a sanction even if it's
just a fifteen day sanction they
lose their job their spot in
their treatment if their living
in some sort of supported
housing etcetera they lose their
bed and so we're very concerned
about what happens if we have to
put somebody in jail in order to
call it a violation and so our
concern is is that by the time
we actually have a very first
violation it's probably actually
the seventh or eighth violation
so I think there is definitely
more work that we could do on
this to possibly get something
over the finish line but in its
current state we're not
supportive of the bill I hope
that answers your question
Mister chairman Senator McKenna
just to follow up a little on
your your answer on the data
portion will that data now be
routinely gathered it with the
with the depth of the of detail
that you outlined.
Mr chair yes us so we went
backwards and we continue to
maintain that data collection
moving forward it's done still
in a very rudimentary way though
I mean we're maintaining
spreadsheets we do have our new
system that we expect to be
coming online later this year
and we do believe it will be
able to give us that same level
of information thank you thank
you madam secretary thank you
senator McCain is still your
floor thank you chairman thank
you senator miss cook and
Just just one more follow up to
that data.
Question that was the the legacy
program so what is the new
program is that is that a new
venture.
It's coming online the ones
coming online this year yes Mr
chair Senator a new system is in
development it's called on me it
will be fun like this year on
the okay great thank you very
much thank you chairman thank
you senator thank you more I go
to Senator Sedillo Lopez I I
should have said this some time
ago and I just done maybe people
are probably sitting here
waiting for Senate bill ninety
nine the rent control provisions
anybody here for that.
yeah I'm sorry Senator Lopez is
notified us that she's not going
to be here today so we're gonna
roll that over to Monday.
When you sleep with to Wednesday
so she can do it Monday either
when.
When Wednesday so we'll hear it
next Wednesday and I apologize
for that.
I will let people take a few
minutes to leave.
So.
To provide
very judging.
It was nice to see you all
however.
I don't know that is a no no
okay.
Yes he did that Wednesday
Wednesday.
All right.
We reserve the.
I really.
Can we respond to the
secretary's comments so yes did
you want to respond to those
coming or go to Senator so the
low just reached for.
thank you Mr chair and and
members I did want to just
respond to one one of the
comments that and not data
related that that the secretary
just maybe and I do think it's a
a sort of hold over to the
earlier version of the bill from
twenty twenty one so I just want
to assure the committee that
this bill does not take away any
discretion for Pete probation
parole officers entered they're
not required to give anyone jail
time this was drafted in a
completely different way so
everything that happens
administratively internally
within the corrections
department within probation and
parole division before it would
get to either the parole board
for the court is unchanged by
this bill the previous version
actually made changes to what
was what PO's were required to
do this bill is gone in a
different direction so I just
wanted to make sure that was
clear to the committee and
senator methadone thank you Mr
just big picture mean of to
follow the reasoning of DSC
there's there's no problem
everything's fine Hey you have
no problem with it at you know
and and that that's not true
justice that's why this bill is
right here I mean we have a real
problem with the number of
people that are in prison for
technical parole violations so
that's why this bill I I just
don't buy the notion that this
is that we got this well if it
gets out of this committee I'm
sure you'll have an opportunity
to the corrections department
and the federal board current
rules rule Division staffed
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I certainly
have heard about this this issue
over and over in courts and
corrections so I really thank
you for bringing this bill is at
least from the certainly
educated me about the need the
need for this and I think the
data is is going to be very
important
do you happen to know whether
the data indicates the race or
ethnicity of the violators and
did you notice any patterns.
Mister chairman Senator would
you like me to take that Mr
chairman and senator Wirth the
data I have does not include
that information as a breakdown
of a subset of probation parole
violators what I it worked off
primarily for for this analysis
is that New Mexico's sentencing
commissions numbers and so they
they run a bunch of reports that
get published they have
breakdowns of race and ethnicity
of the overall population and
then we have breakdowns of why
someone is in prison but I have
not seen an overlapping
calculation of the the two
statistics so there is a
breakdown of race and ethnicity
of the overall population but I
don't know how that trickles
down into the probation and
parole violation subset I raise
that issue because has we
develop the data I just hope
that we include that because we
definitely want to Mr chair look
for dis disproportionate
Violate you know people finding
the PO's finding violations
technical violations of
violations and and look for look
for
For those kinds of issues and so
I I hope that of that the data
will include that race and
ethnicity and tribal membership
as well
I've been pushing for that with
the sentencing commission so I
try to push for it any chance I
can and then Mr chair I'm
interested in on page three the
the definition of a technical
violation can you give examples
because it was interesting to
hear of that that may be true
that that
This particular administration
may only be of dealing with
technical violations of sex
offenders but you know whatever
but we have to look at future
administrations and future
practices as well and and
curtailing that if it is true
that you know we've we've
addressed it but can you give
some examples of of.
Of a technical.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator the most classic
examples of technical violations
are at testing positive for
drugs or alcohol or missing an
appointment or more than one
appointment even consecutively
and the it could also include
other violations of conditions
that would not be illegal for
anybody else's Senator Maestas
alluded to it's not something is
against the law it's just
against your your rules that
have been imposed on you
so implement or something sure
so that's a good example as well
so not not being able to keep
employment I had a case where
someone was not supposed to was
supposed to stay employed and
had been like submitting
applications and and just wasn't
able to get a job and and it
ended up not being the basis for
violation but there was a
violation brought for that so
but I don't think that happens
all that often frankly with the
employment if an effort is being
made but if someone's not making
an effort I could see a PO
wanting to raise that as a
violation
you know there's for there with
the there was a on and of the
comment made that said regarding
people who are on sex offender
probation supervision and they
certainly have a longer laundry
list of conditions to comply
with but something there and
this is I think I'm I use this
is an example because and it
allows me to also emphasize
language Senator Maestas
highlighted which is one of the
can standard conditions for a
sex offenders are not allowed to
have like internet access on
your cell phone that's one of
the conditions because it's it
it can be used to to sort of
scope the internet for for
potential victims I suppose is
the is the logic behind that so
for someone like that if they
had been using a cell phone
improperly that would be a
technical violation in most
cases but the way that this
definition is written under the
circumstances what they were
using it for specifically could
give the state an opportunity to
argue that that does create a
threat to others and so that not
although it looks like a
technical violation for that
part.
individual would not be and so
that flexibility there is there
as well so that that something
that might be a technical
violation for one person might
not be for another and and if I
may the LFC analysis that you
have a basically ninety percent
of technical parole violations
are addicted and addiction
related ninety percent.
No I I appreciate that and and
finally if you said this I
apologize because I was reading
the bill the new bill at the
beginning what were the results
from the second judicial
district change
you know the ones that need so
you to change this bill to be
consistent with what the second
judicial district did do we have
an analysis of how that worked
there.
Mr chair and senator that is a
fantastic question I don't have
that today I'm I I should now
that you mention it that would
be a great thing to have they've
had the tech that technical
violations program in
Albuquerque and they have it in
a number of jurisdictions around
the state number judicial
districts
for a very long time so many
years I'm sure there's a wealth
of data about how people do in
that program it's run a little
bit differently you have to sort
of often it's not it's not
automatically every technical
violation at certain
probationers opt into the
program but I'd be happy to get
that information for you thank
you well thank you again for
bringing the bill and those are
my questions Mr chair thank you
senator Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator very open to this bill I
have some questions for.
Can there be disagreement.
Between the state and the
defense on whether a violation
constitute a threat or not and
if so how does that get played
out.
thank you Mr chairman Senator
that's an excellent question yes
there could be especially into
the language I just highlighted
because there could be like I
said a certain condition might
be technical for one person but
not technical for another person
the way that that would play out
is that the whatever the the
probation officer in the
probation and parole department
believed cat category they
believed it fit into they would
pursue the violation that way
and then once it got to the
hearing whether that's in front
of the parole board or in front
of the court then the the
probation or the pro we would be
able to assert their position
that this actually does
constitute technical violation
which highlights actually really
important piece of the
procedures of this bill which is
that the the sanction to impose
whether it's going to be a
technical violation sanction or
standard violation sanction that
decision doesn't happen until
that hearing anyway so it's the
perfect time to raise that
argument.
And Mr Senator Mr chair Senator.
What are the requirements that a
judge has to meter one of the
requirements that the
prosecution has to show that
something constitutes a threat.
Mr chair and senator at the if
upon passage of this legislation
it would be the a step
essentially a statutory
construction of the language of
this bill so it would be does it
create a threat to the probation
or this is new new language this
is a new standards so there's
not precedent for it
you know the the law evolution
would have to work itself out
okay Mr Chairman said that's
exactly what I was asking is
there precedent is there is
there no you know this if I
meant right sort of thing a lot
of this comes individual
situations I mean it's yeah but
you can't codify.
These kind of decisions it's
basically and I again as I've
said repeatedly I really trust
you know the powers that be to
parole board probation officers
you know that they had they know
what a threat to society is that
we're all about public safety
you know this is really not to
be lost public safety is
paramount you.
And Mr chair Senator of I can
just add that in the in the
realm of parole violations the
the pro four has.
Great discretion their decision
is practically on reviewable to
administrative decision that you
have to do so to the District
Court to challenge for a
probation violation there's a
lot of there is a lot of case
law around probation violations
and what judges discretion is
and so a lot of those kinds of
those larger sort of standards
would apply to the decision and
there is great discretion on
those issues okay Mr chair
Senator is is report cutting off
removing an ankle monitor under
this bill would that constitute
a technical or standard
violation.
Mr chair Senator I think that
would fall into that it would
depend on the circumstances
probably if it was being cut off
in order to go do things they're
not supposed to go because crime
to go you know those sorts of
things than that there would be
the argument that that does
cause a threat otherwise it
could be in certain
circumstances considered a
technical violation it would
really depend on the factual
circumstances around and
structure and that seems like a
flagrant flagrant violation I
think anybody this is a you
know.
So okay that's not what we're
talking about people cutting
their a great right Willian Mr
chair set were my I'll we're
might my questioning is going is
I'm trying to develop a spectrum
of water the tedious tiniest
technical violations and one of
the worst technical violations
we're the team used standard
violations and one of the worst
Senator is that's what I'm
trying to get here okay so thank
you for bearing with me
but I I will say if if it's all
possible that this state statute
in this bill.
Allows cutting a come on or off
to even have the chance of being
a technical violation I do have
a little heartburn with that
because we I mean we have some
we have some tough stuff that
goes on the associated and a lot
of it's the media so I don't
want to let the media stories
Dr my understanding of reality
but we we had we have had some
problems with that's a problem
so
so I I I don't know I I you may
want to look at that
Mr chair Senator what about
possession of firearms is there
any possibility that the the
defense could say well they were
in possession but they didn't
brandish it they didn't use it
but there are other felony
possession could that be a
technical violation Mr Chairman
and Senator note that could not
be a technical violation because
it does constitute a new
criminal charge rates are the
definite circuit okay thank you
and
Shares Center.
I had a question about that
raised new criminal charge.
If it's a it what whatever crime
some assault if they.
Receive that same charge that
they were you know sentence for
If if they do the same thing
again is that still meet the
definition new criminal charge
or is it just it this new
iteration in its state the same
charge but it's a new a current
so can you is is there any
technical problem of this
language in the same state
Mister chairman Senator I do see
what you're saying and I don't
believe that would be a problem
I think that that that everyone
would be that to understand that
it's a new instance even if it's
the same statutory crime okay
great
Mr chair Senator.
If.
If ninety percent is is just a
positive you a or or is it a
drug related thing did you have
did you ever look at the
possibility of just doing just
catching the ninety percent in
just doing the drug stuff and
and are you even open to doing
that.
Mr chairman I would I would love
to know the Senators beyond that
might my position is that we
would it makes more sense to go
to follow Louisiana's approach
and go a little bit broader
because even though there are
ninety centers are maybe drug
related to that doesn't
necessarily mean they're all
positive test results of that
could capture also you know
missing appointments because
they and I'll tell you this is
very real I I I don't have
numbers on it but anecdotally I
can tell you it's very real that
missed appointment violations
are very often because someone
knows that they're supposed to
get tested that day and they
know that they will not fail or
that they will not pass
attention okay yeah and Mr
center yeah I and I want to get
I mean the the no problem with
that at all
I would like to briefly discuss
domestic violence.
Is there is there any way.
That because I I can just see
maybe some scenarios where it's
an instance of domestic violence
and there's an argument or
disagreement on whether this
constituted a threat or not.
did you did you all look at that
and is is there any.
is there any instance that we
could be capturing.
A possible domestic violence
issue in downgrading it to a
technical issue because they say
no it really was not a threat to
the the spouse or the or the
partners.
I'm Mister chairman Senator that
that's also a very good question
I don't think that there is a
huge risk there with the
language as written I do think
that because someone is on
supervised release which is
already considered an act of it
know giving someone a second
chance on their underlying crime
that judges are going to be
skeptical and err on the side of
caution when assessing that kind
of a situation let me Mr chair
Senator let let me rephrase the
question don't I didn't ask that
question very clearly so I'm
sorry
could you tell me maybe three
four five common examples of
conditions of release for a
domestic abuser.
Sure so certainly Mr chair and
senator not having access to a
firearm is a big one because
that statutory for domestic
violence most of domestic
violence convictions
and no contact order with the
victim is is usually in part
part of the probation conditions
and it's separate from any other
civil no contact order that
could be there there's usually
also the the condition related
to consuming alcohol and drugs
in recognition that that is
often times a driver of domestic
violence behavior
and you know I mean that's
that's three and if I could come
up with any more the early
targeted domestic violence but
those are the kinds of things
that courts impose on that point
also attendance at every turn
over Schardin.
You just.
Mr chair Senator test Senator
Sedillo Lopez could give another
good example there's true
treatment programs and core
classes that are often ordered.
Okay Mr chair Senator I I until
another little heartburn here
addition first ones that come
under issue second is domestic
violence it if there's no
contact but they break that
condition I can see them
breaking the no contact in still
arguing there is no threat you
know well they're being nice it
was just a text messages to call
was just to drive by the house.
I can tell you that's gonna get
goose bumps to somebody I mean
it and and it's not necessarily
going to be known as a threat I
would look at an exception for
domestic abuse I really would I
mean are you open to that in my
building Mr done reasonable and
as always and love your
questions they really.
Demand a lot on the part of the
sponsor the thing is again we
are relying I rely personally on
the judgment of the individual
parole officer the individual
you know the parole board these
people you know if we get into
late we're gonna make an
exception for this we're going
to do an enhancement for that to
me that isn't the right way to
approach it I just because I've
been a part of that system I
just have the utmost faith in
the wisdom and you know public
safety
mantra that they operate from so
I I feel like any kind of
exception or this or that it
gets into the it's it's it's
just to me of the works against
the spirit of the bill and it's
just just but I hear I
understand your concern I guess
additional like every almost all
the examples that you have
brought up like it's people not
you know a firearm used by you
know you found your violated I
mean it's
kind this coming off an ankle
bracelet I mean hello so to me
it's it's again it's just we're
working with the system you know
a lot deus is done really good
job in a lot of ways with
updating their approach to
technical parole violations but
it's we just feel like something
more needs to be done yes yeah
Mr chair Sir I like is I'm I'm
very much on board of this bill
I I I want to be tied in I but I
just when I I mean we we do
treat domestic abuse very
differently mmhm I mean very
very differently its a carve out
sex offenders huge car about
right there registry and stuff
there are carve out some in in
in and I just I I just want to
make sure and once again I'm
very very very open this bill
I'm all the drugs to phones I
I'm just want to be tight hi by
I mean I support the but I
called the spirit of the bill
hundred percent but I I just
wanna make sure it's good
because and I I do believe we
are potentially going to tie the
hands of the pro for with the
service are
and you know because.
They're they're gonna say.
Now we've created a two tiered
system which I think is good
right I mean absolutely good but
the the fact that it just says
does not create a threat
I I think we're not gonna
capture quite everything we want
to and just like your responses
okay come under of course well
if it's of course then it it it
should be a standard violation
it should be in statute and so
anyway that that's all that I
have you know it did so I was
just thinking of.
What what could we be
potentially defining as still
not a threat as a technical
violation but still pretty bad
and in those conditions of
release for domestic abuse I I
still think we're not capturing
them I would love for you to you
know take a look at the it
sounds like you guys gonna talk
with the department anyway but I
I love free look at income under
a love for you to look at
domestic abuse because of the
things that this really came up
in but otherwise like I said I'm
I'm I'm real good with with the
bill mostly so thank you as
always.
Thank you again.
Mr Chairman thank you Sir
appreciate the dialogue I also
like to add is you're gonna be
talking to the Department users
just a lot of little things that
but I do have a couple questions
I've been thirteen losses.
I and it is really hard to get
in in one of my concerns was in
in this bill would it cause a
delay in the courts that would
hold
Basically that they're they're
parole time might be shorter
than the court hearing does that
ever happen is is you reduces.
Mr chairman as thank you that's
an excellent question I believe
that was something I was
actually raised in the LFC FIR
on the original bill as filed I
do think that that issue has
been addressed in the substitute
so one of the other changes that
was made in the substitute the
on to the that that exact
sanction for the the graduated
sanctions is in the provisions
regarding arrest on a violation
it does include now language
saying that if it's a technical
violation that's being brought
before the parole board or the
courts by the the department
that issue a notice to appear
instead so that they don't get
arrested and held in custody
pending their hearing for that
exact reason it would be end up
being much longer than that
resulting sanction and
potentially if they only had a
small I'm a short period of time
left on their entire parole term
it could end up using up all of
that time as well so we
addressed that issue with the
the notice to appear language
that was added to the substitute
thank you for that and I
appreciate that because of one
of the hardships as have Mr
chairman.
In center the other thing that I
have a question on is you know
you talk about community based
sanctions and this would
actually reduce their time but
you felt that it would.
Help them in their behavior.
and I'm just trying to
understand that because.
Family okay how many to the time
you don't don't they're going to
do it and I'm wondering how as a
community based sanction how you
get a better result than long
term.
Mr chairman and senator that's I
mean that it's a sort of
behavioral health answer and so
I wish I had a degree in that
but what I can tell you is that
the studies that have been done
comparing community based
sanctions with incarceration
sanctions have shown the six X.
the success rate so that how
that plays out exactly and why
I'm not a psychologist you can
explain why that is better I can
tell you that part of the reason
is because going into jail and
some of the public comment
touched on this going into jail
with the sanction can have all
of the sort of downstream
negative consequences on a
person's life that don't happen
with the community Sebaste
sanctions so if you go to jail
for you know even a week that
you could lose your job you
could not have a lot of of
things that then when you come
back out suddenly your life is
in shambles kind of thing so it
avoids that problem at least at
those early early graduated
sanctions the other piece of it
is to bear in mind that the
judge the bill gives the judge
discretion about what that
community section would be and
so they can tailor it to the
individual if this person is
struggling because of the you
know substance use maybe they
can find a community based
section that helps them
specifically with that issue if
their struggle is that they have
a really in stable home life
maybe they can find a community
based section that's that help
them address that particular
issue it allows for more
individually targeted responses
to non compliance with that Mr
chair and senator the community
is safer if the given parole it
does not re offend this is not
sent back for a new to you don't
it's it's an everyone everybody
roots for the person to recreate
their life in a positive way as
as as the representative from
ACLU to knowledge said you know
we want to support people in
their efforts which is not to be
minimized after a life of crime
I mean I've dealt with this
really personally you know
professionally and it's this is
we're asking a lot of these
individuals and so many people
there.
Want to do right that this is
this to me is a smarter way of
dealing with it you know if
somebody loses their job because
they've been violated for not
being able to stay clean you
know the family suffers at
etcetera etcetera so so to me
these graduate this graduated
sanction approach is the way to
go.
Mr chair Senator thank you so
recently I had to reach out to
my nephews parole officer in
Colorado so his drug use and
it's easy and he's out he's in
he's out and I asked him because
my mom's funeral that if they
would remanded then my coach the
because he can give severe
beating fifty over steps is I'm
going out on a limb for and I
understand the shore like
community section but my thing
is and and we've not got there
we've done it now in February
but my thing is historically.
He's out for a very short period
of time.
And so watching his life in
knowing that they're given and
breaks that it's not taken and I
just I just wonder percentage
wise how many that.
Are given committee sanctions
Pratchett hearing to the rules
and controlling their outcomes
Mr.
Mr chairman and senator and
there's obviously going to be
variation and there will be
people who are not able to
succeed even when given those
extra chances
and that will then get to the in
the bill The fourth technical
violation provision which is
smearing current law where they
can say alright that's it you're
you're going in they have that
ability they don't have to if
they think one more chance is
still worth doing they can but
they have the ability still at
the fourth and the other thing I
would just say is that the the
the the large percentage that
the studies show do succeed when
given those graduated sanctions
is reflected in states that have
already gone this way and I I
read it at the very beginning
but South Carolina it was a
fifty forty six percent
reduction in revocations Hawaii
eighty fifty three percent less
likely to have probation revoked
I mean so it's big numbers that
we're talking about.
Thank you for the question
Mister chairman Senator Mr is
our one chance I can ask
question Mr Martinez for
department.
And and miss more yes thank you
Mr chair of my question to you
is after hearing the dialogue
here and knowing that they're
gonna be approaching you to try
to resolve some of those do you
have a better feel so my heart
right now as I wrote fix
something here for we send it
out I know this can be discussed
right here in the next I'm
currently at the no stage just
because I want to make sure that
when I both Ford on the floor
but it's already resolved I'd
like to vote yes let's just
wanting how you took the
dialogue that we had here in
the.
Mr chair Senator thank you you
know permission pro already made
significant changes and I know.
At heard Senator only allowed
unclear where he said the you
know the departments in denial
and we're not you know we
implemented a and a science
based assessment tool in two
thousand sixteen and that did
take time for by and from our
officers but.
We've been using not till it's
scientifically based it's not
opinion based so we've been
using metal when someone
violates
even when they do well you know
it allows them to
lessen their supervision level
and if they violate the that
might not change their
supervision level but it's not
opinion based so if an officer
likes you doesn't like you they
can't supervise the based on
that
but you know I I do think it's
probably my fault for not
educating what we're currently
doing and maybe not providing
the the data to prove that we're
doing and you know not just
saying we're doing something so
but I don't mind working with
the the sponsor and senator
o'neill I I respect you know
what he brings to the table
but a lot of the things that and
I'm sorry the.
The presentation that was done
recently we're already doing
that we do community supervision
we go out to their employment we
go out to see them in their own
environment
and as far as you know up
squanders failure to reports we
exhaust.
Probably.
Seven things prior to submitting
a report so we go to the last
known address.
Last known employment.
We contact the emergency however
that is family member we sent
him a letter and this takes
about thirty days before we
actually departments Conder
unless they're sex offenders
that's handled differently but
You know the the up scanners we
do arrest out in the field we
don't overestimate their their
place of employment we actually
support that we're rest very
violent offenders the last I
think you saw with standard was
arrested with the million fennel
pills in his possession.
Those are the ones we go after
we don't go after the ones that
are are are working hard trying
to make a living we work with
them if they missed an
appointment we reschedule it if
they test positive we don't put
him in jail if they're working a
program we listen to what the
treatment provider suggests and
we work with them we know that
it's not a one size fits all and
it's taken time you know I've
been in the system for twenty
years so I can tell you back in
the day I was the officer who
believe lock them up throw away
the key and now that has since
changed because it doesn't work
so I I know I went off on a
tangent Senator I apologize
Mister chair I hope I hope I
answered your question you did
and and thank you for that Mr
center I I guess I was just
getting to the comfort level to
have and just going backwards
I'm cert boards I've lost three
brothers due to basically
marijuana in in thirteen I spoke
to my high school in a total of
in Denver and they're wanting
marijuana bill can I told them I
would not do to their mom what
it did to my mall in in just
because I know our families
Vigil it's really hard for me to
understand how so as just
convert the cycle you have to
hit rock bottom.
Point you don't have anywhere
else to go up and up so I thank
you thank you for what you do I
think Center for bringing this
forward because that dialogue
has to be done and looked at to
see if there's a better way to
do this so with that I yield
Mister.
Thank you senator so what's the
will of the committee regarding
this bill.
Senator Maestas thank you Mr.
Great thank you senator Senator
Sedillo this you seconded by
Senator Sedillo Lopez any other
discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator guy Ecosse no I'd like
to explain level Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Senator my assistance yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
metes nope Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes me explain level Senator
Tomlinson yes Senator Ortiz the
PO.
Yes and to explain his vote
Senator Gallegos first Mr chair
thank you and center I really
appreciate the dialogue like I
said I still have a little bit
Harper I look forward to this
being perfected when you get to
the Senate floor because as
you've heard just some of the
issues I think you can make a
really really good bill of
something that just needs a
little tweaking so with that I
think you thank you thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez
you're coming thank you.
Forward into the.
Okay so for.
So Senator you're bill passes
this committee with the sixty
two votes with one excuse thank
you thank you and thank you for
the discussion thank you thank
you very much Mr chair Senator
moon yours will take you then
we'll take Senator Hemphill.
And if you didn't hear we we're
not going to hear today Senate
bill.
Ninety nine the rent control
bill that's been rolled over
till next Wednesday.
The state police officers
getting his ticket book out so
we could as for this or not.
But that's a technical
violations of water.
Senator Munoz your bill on.
Public safety offered officer
pensions thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Senate
bill ninety six extends a number
years a state police officer has
to use to increases benefits to
hundred percent currently right
now thirty years they receive
ninety percent is extended
thirty three years to read to
you a hundred percent the
currently state police for by
signing the P. R. A. S. funded a
hundred twenty nine percent
the change on this is so minimal
that's one tenth of one percent
or less than a million dollars
for the first year and the fun
starts triggering back up.
That I have expert witness chief
Wesley W. if you don't mind
introducing yourself I am a W.
four we agree with the New
Mexico state police Mister chair
members of the committee thank
you from here today
I just have a couple things that
just from a little bit of
background on state police side
obviously the bills fairly self
explanatory cinder set up size
it very succinctly but so in the
state police perspective in two
thousand twenty two this last
year we we greatly increased our
recruiting efforts the crew star
number of academies and.
At the end of two thousand
twenty two after all of that we
had a net gain of one officer
six forty four to be in the year
and six forty five at the end of
the year and in January first
for people retired so we are
negative three
the reason I bring that up is
Just obviously you as you're all
aware it's a difficult time for
a recruiting in law enforcement
and in addition to that we're
kind of period where we are
treated time we have a lot of
individuals who are getting near
the point that they are able to
to leave law enforcement and
retire
the couple just quick stats on
that from two thousand fifteen
to two thousand twenty state
police averaged thirty one
individuals on average per
quarter that were eligible to
retire from two thousand twenty
to the end of last year.
we average sixty three officers
per quarter so it's more than
doubled our eligible retiree
The number of personnel so what
we're trying to do with this
bill is that obviously we have a
lot of experience person and
with our recruiting difficulties
we want to keep as many of those
who experienced person as we can
myself and senator Munoz we're
volva Task Force from house
memorial thirty five from last
year the to several of
recruitment and retention
options for the state this was
one of the recommendations that
came out of that task force
And so obviously state police is
in support of this but I just
kinda want to get a little bit
background of from our
perspective like say we think
that it's critically important
that we keep a lot of these
individuals that are experienced
keep in mind the department as
long as we can we think that
this bill this bill will help
with that thank you very good
anything else Senator let's go
to the audience is there anyone
else is there anyone in the
audience of us to speak in
support of the bill yes she.
Mr chair members of the
committee this the.
Like all to understand is that
not only affects us affects both
a correction.
It all for staff and also.
The last few sessions we have
many conversations about keeping
senior officers the ones that
can train the new officers and
we can be better in our
communities and as deputy chief
resource that we currently have
a recruit scored thirteen people
in it right now so the front
door which the people coming
into policing organisation
anyways is verily cracked open
but yet the back door is wide
open and we're losing a lot so I
think this will help us retain
some of our more senior folks
and I would.
Thank you thank you chief of yes
John do you mind coming up and
speaking so that my can pick you
up.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yeah.
Thank you have to hold the
button to.
Three one.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John with youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor and we firmly believe that
this is a good measure towards
helping retained law enforcement
for sure it's a part of our
recruit and retain local law
enforcement so for those reasons
we think the sponsor and support
this measure you said local law
enforcement does it apply to
local law enforcement sorry but
if speaking but state police
yes.
Okay we're a local local law
enforcement is in the just a
regular Peoria native forest
chairman and local law
enforcement local P. has a
separate section in the para I
don't know what they're but the
funded ratio is right now but
it's not completely okay good
who else wants to speak in
support yes Sir if you don't
mind coming up and using the
Mike.
You Mr chair committee members
my name is top of the table I
don't I'm not pressing the
button yeah.
I apologize for that Mr chair
committee members good afternoon
my name is thought those Griego
what the international
brotherhood of like to workers
New Mexico and on behalf of our
members we're in support of up
this legislation and we believe
it's a it's a good it's good for
New Mexico thank thank thank you
have a good weekend.
And an agency Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee mailing Martinez
with probation parole and on
behalf of New Mexico corrections
department we fully support this
bill thank you good thank you.
Anybody else is there anyone
here who wants to oppose the
bill.
On the zoom we have.
Josh Anderson.
For rural you're you're posing
yes No.
Mr Chairman sorry Gregory with
P. R. A. P. R. A. has not taken
a position on this bill but I
wanted to be available for any
technical questions that may
come up okay great approval
you're up there hold make up and
just census one quick think.
It says in here in the analysis
we have that it will not affect
the the
the solvency of the of the of of
the this particular account is
that your analysis of it as well
Mr Chairman the state police
fund is over funded and when we
do our valuations we capped
pensions and ninety percent so
if this passes next year will
take that hundred percent cap
into effect so there will be a
slight negative at the beginning
but as these officers continue
to work continue to pay you even
though they're going to earn a
the larger pension they're gonna
be taking it for a shorter
period of time so over time it
is a positive to the fund
excellent okay thank you thank
so we have Josh Anderson on the
zoom Josh.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen we do
represent the folks with state
corrections and probation and
parole we definitely support
this bill we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing it forward
we think this is a better our
alternative to some of the
proposals around return to
worker double dipping which we
think is a failed policy two of
retain our current workers this
will allow folks to increase
their pension benefits slightly
and incentivize them to stay on
a few years longer instead of
retiring when so many people are
really at the peak of their
career so again we want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward we do represent us some
local law enforcement as well as
detention centers about seven
counties around the state CYFD
corrections officers CYFD
probation and parole I'm not
sure if there's an appetite to
expanded to those folks I'd love
to talk to the the sponsor about
that but we definitely support
the bill in its current form
thank you Mr chairman thank you
judge.
Members of the committee we'll
go to the committee for coming
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Tom.
Thank thank you Mr chair I think
this is a really great great
bill and I'm I have a I'm
delighted to support it I am and
I also wanted to
under article two twenty six and
twenty two The New Mexico
constitution
it prohibits legislature from
enacting any law that increases
the budget without
without providing adequate
funding and so it might I just
want to clarify this with the
chair of our of our finance
committee since the since it's
kind of as I heard it described
it's just an offset right that
would satisfy that would satisfy
that requirement because while
it the solvency it's it's over.
It's over funded so that is the
source of the money that would
be required so it satisfies that
provision I just want to clarify
and make make that point because
I really has you know I respect
the constitution great.
Mr Chairman center that exactly
director explanation is correct
the current fund is about a
hundred twenty nine percent and
if the Great and confirm that in
the mount of officers that
retire at the first year and in
thirty three percent is so
minimal that they think it's one
tenth of one percent or million
dollars and then the fun starts
three buildings officer stay
longer and they shortens their
life as a stay longer and so
there.
Less there's less time on the
funding so that's correct thank
you Mr chair I think this is a
great bill and I'm a I'm happy
to go for Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Center for bring this forward.
So.
This is a hundred percent
pension benefit after thirty
three years and four months the.
That's a tremendous best benefit
so it's how long has that my
aunt.
The other.
There's no other of.
Employees within state
government that have.
The benefit that Jenner is that
correct.
Sep legislators through the.
We we we were not paid.
Sorry I forget and we have to
pay in our own pension right.
We don't get a federal deduction
for that but no currently right
now there are ninety percent so
they stay the thirty years they
get ninety percent their pension
right at current at current
factors right now it's ninety
percent after thirty three years
and currently state police
officers do not get so security
they don't paint correct I don't
pandemic so security so this is
a single form of so they're not
eligible for social security and
pension fund like other state
workers are they they are
reliant on this one retirement
fund.
Well that's good to know I feel
a lot better now thank you thank
thank you
so.
The city unfunded there's no
offense is no unfunded liability
because this a hundred twenty
nine percent of funded.
So why is that so over funded we
have other funds that are
grossly underfunded because and
all I have to ask Greg apparent
exactly the rate in a higher
rate than anybody else with a
lower percentage of officers
taking retirement over time and
that's why the fund.
So Mister chair and senator the.
Do I hear from the guy from
A setting I just told on site.
The I guess it wasn't quick
enough on the drawing.
I tired envisions.
There's a.
Sorry.
That technology get a simple
question.
He can he came to my office to
answer I was impressed those
very this has not Mister
chairman Senator hi it would
consider when you just a state
it is correct to the the
contribution rates for state
to police officers are about
thirty six thirty seven percent
between the employee and the
employer so the benefit that
they receive were the rates were
properly established a way back
when some of our other plans the
rates were lower than what they
needed to be so that's kind of
why you see that disparity.
Thank you for that and have a
third questions already been
answered so that's all I have
Senator Mr chair thank you again
for bringing this forward I
support the bill thank you.
But so will the committee.
Senator Maestas.
Second in the.
Any other discussion.
The city of of a second to.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guy a ghosts.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senator smitteez yes Senator
Padilla Lopez yes Senator this
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes and
I'd like to make a comment.
I just found out why I have been
able to get Anthony Montoya to
work on drafting any of my.
Senator my assist texted me that
you've got a new job and that
you're not working at Karia is
that could put congradulations
Anthony it's good to see you
again thank you Mr chairman he
served I talk in the decided he
loved thanks in this budget
learned all of of he could have
we could have done the same
thing with MFA that he chose I
**** over estimate I will admit
to this that he drafted this
bill before he left Boca.
So wait you have a due pass I
have to make these innocent
Senator you have to do passed by
a vote of eight to zero with one
excused congratulations.
Senator Hemphill Korea.
Perea himself Karia Hemphill
thank you for listening.
This is bill in my list of.
Mr chairman there are trying to
fix that so tell you that.
This is the Senate bill
Search on Senate bill eighty
nine the supported decision
making.
The two.
And then you want test kitchen
in a.
And and okay and it turns out
there is an amendment to is this
your amendment Mr chairman
that's correct.
Provided you could explain the
bill and then we'll deal with
the amendment thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we have Senate bill
eighty nine at that clarifies
how supported decision making
works and creates a uniform
process it provides the
legitimacy necessary for
supported decision making
acceptance by an individual
service providers and
institutions it's going to
codify restrictions and
protections for people engaging
and supported decision making
and
the reason it's so important to
me and this is really a personal
issue I have a son who was born
with the extremely rare
autosomal recessive syndrome
when he was and he was diagnosed
with bone cancer when he was
four years old osteosarcoma had
a left leg amputation and
eighteen courses the
chemotherapy and he in addition
to having many physical
disabilities he also has some
learning disabilities however
non verbally he's very
intelligent and very particular
about the things in his life and
I'm so grateful that his dad and
I are recognized his level of
intelligence and his timing and
ability to make decisions for
himself when it comes to medical
decisions or educational
decisions we've also always
empowered him to be inclusive
and helping us help him make
those decisions and I know that
even though I'd love to live
forever I know that I'm not
always gonna live forever and
Nicholas is twenty seven now and
still lives at home with us and
for children like my son who are
going to thrive and be empowered
if we have a system like this
that supports them to make
decisions that affect their life
their quality of life so that we
don't have other people making
decisions for them I'm grateful
that I my ex husband and I.
Might recognize that strengthen
my son and we're able to empower
him to make those decisions but
I know not everyone has parents
like that or guardians who are
going to allow or include people
with disabilities and those
decision making processes so
that's why one I'm honored to
carry this bill and I have my
expert witness along with my
house sponsor and I'd like for
them to introduce themselves and
see if they have any additional
where we service Representative
Ferrary da of years of co
sponsoring the bill thank you Mr
chair yes in in our interim
health and Human Services
Committee it you know we've been
working on
Of the supported decision making
as one of the alternatives it's
much needed in our state and we
set up a task force of two years
ago or it seems like we've been
working on it for a few years
and too often
A guardianship is the go to
intervention and so we need this
extra step in the latter so that
it's someone's in the hospital
and the hospital doesn't know
who to discharge the person to
then they go to the courts to
get a guardianship this is
something that could be set up
in lieu of that and make it so
that people don't have to lose
all of their rights and we found
that people who don't aren't
able to make decisions for
themselves they lose a lot of
their own sense of of the person
and there they have shorter
lives and so there by then the
quality of life in the mental
health of people with
disabilities is greatly reduced
so this is something that we
really need for New Mexico.
Great.
Director Mike McCoy did you want
to say anything yes thank you Mr
chair I just wanted to give a
quick background on
developmental disabilities
council because it really
relates this bill and so the
yeah we have three programs
we're federally mandated to do
advocacy system changing
capacity building to improve the
lives of folks living with DD
here in New Mexico but we also
have uniquely Office
guardianship under our agency as
well as the brand new special
education on but and this bill
touches all of those programs
I'm so SB thirty nine this as
per decision making is
internationally recognized as
the foremost ravage in
protecting the league legal and
civil rights of people living
with disabilities and over
thirteen states have enacted
this this law I'm STM allows
people to retain control over
their lives and national health
experts overwhelmingly agree
that the ability to director own
lives is significantly
significantly increases our
quality of life and life span
and then being in power to make
our own decisions is the
strongest protections safeguard
against abuse neglect and
exploitation I we do have that
office guardianship of huge wait
lists which we talk about every
year during budget season we
talked about it yesterday in our
budget hearing we ask for big
increases year over year for
guardianship services we believe
that this kind of program is
sorely needed to reduce that
high level high cost
intervention that we're
providing in the state because
that's all we have available
we're also seeing and us the
special education on the program
school pipelines your schools
are telling parents you gotta
get guardianship of your
children in order to participate
in school meetings there's
telling them that and so we're
getting folks pushed and
guardianships because they have
no other way to support and
their children disabilities and
so the task force Mets last year
and it was at twenty.
I folks including lawyers who
practice in this field of
guardianship probate law
included the judiciary as well
as other state agencies of vast
majority of agencies were there
that also sent under council
will go through them all I also
had a experts such as the A. R.
P. and service providers of
course of people living with
disabilities themselves families
of people living with
disabilities and guardians and
so we had a broad range of
people from all different
backgrounds and expertise come
together to agree on what how to
best set up support decision
making the state and how to make
this and the most successful
strategy possible for us I'm so
with that I stand for questions
thank you Mr chair good thank
you anything else Senators Mr
chairman we stand for questions
let's go to the audience and and
well let's start with that
secretary you want to say
anything about.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's Katrina how
trump has a cabinet secretary
for aging and long term services
one of the programs that we run
is adult protective services and
we have seen an increase and
having to do guardianship
suggest because there's no other
mechanism to have a less
restrictive model in that vein
with will never have enough
money for for guardianship as as
we continue to H. and R.
population at this rate we
strongly support this bill in
the concept of this bill and we
really think the sponsor and and
the director for bringing this
forward thank you thank you
madam secretary and I neglected
to get to our men.
So we members the committee we
have an amendment that's been
proposed by Senator
Karia Hemphill.
And you want to go over that and
explain it actually don't have a
copy to have a couple can you
get.
Ellis is this year's really Mr
chair happy to
With that since I thank you for.
Just over with us yes so the
purpose of the amendments were
to strengthen the
The authority of the office of
guardianship to do stronger
monitoring around supported
decision making so the original
bill had us doing education and
outreach about you know the this
you know what this system and
process was about you know how
to set one up this would give us
at authority to facilitate the
the execution of them to help
with terminations and to help
with implementation of the these
STM to help folks trouble shoot
once they have these agreements
in place and also to give us
authority to monitor them once
they are in place making sure
that you know the supporters are
who they say they are and all of
the difference statutory
requirements are being met.
Okay so we we're we're just
inserting that pair that
paragraph about facilitate
adults informing executing in
terminating supported decision
making agreements.
And then you're remembering the
other paragraphs and then you're
doing monitor rather than
review.
And then online sixteen and help
instead of two.
Thank you and we're striking and
help inserting to.
To determine okay got you on
line eighteen striking for.
And inserting and assistance to
so the whole thing is just
strengthening the role of the
decision the supervisor decision
making yes service supported
decision making and then on line
twenty supported decision makers
and the supporters is struck
out.
The scope of.
The.
Supported decision making
agreement okay then on line
twenty five we strike one
hundred eighty nine you've
you've just the budget of a
hundred thousand dollars we have
an impact the act on the bill.
So you need you need more it
because I was just going to give
one person and maybe a little
bit contract okay.
So it's two hundred.
Everybody clear on the amendment
do we have in the motion
regarding the.
Seconded by Senator Hickey.
Any any questions or discussion
about the amendment.
Any opposition to this
amendment.
One more.
on the back.
Okay.
You're right.
A.
Representative Nibert.
So yes so it would be just a
person.
Full time employees.
two you think to present twelve
to.
That suggests for this issue.
From us said Senator a career
Hemphill is on the the but it'll
make the final decision on that
one okay thank you senator
McCain McKenna.
Any discussion any opposition to
these various amendments.
Seeing that will consider the
bill to be amended we'll go back
to the audience again yes care.
Chairman members of the
committee care candidate with
the national association of
social Mexico chapter this is
been so desperately needed for
so long to give people some
economy over their lives that
actually have the ability to
make.
It is so important that we not
to jump to guardianship when
people actually have the ability
to have sentiment decision
making power over their lives
and everything else was said by
the sponsor the Sanchez I should
say and their experts thank you
very much thank you for yes Sir.
Come up and and use my cash of
US Karen to the two thank you
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is O. T.
the Lumia I'm the advocacy
director for a a RP New Mexico
we thank the sponsors for
championing this legislation and
on behalf of our two hundred and
forty thousand members statewide
we stand in strong support of
this bill it's it stands in a
line when alignment with one of
our core principles which is to
empower people as they age and
choose how they choose to live
in live the their best lives and
so with that it really gives
people the self determination
and the agency and autonomy to
make their own decisions and and
and quite frankly also to
console you know friends and
family and and trusted you know
decision makers in their lives
to make those decisions so with
that we stand strong support
thank you.
Thank you.
Chair Ortiz opinion members of
the committee Alex Casio Smith
acting deputy secretary for the
Human Services Department I want
to stand in support of this bill
this goes a long way in
supporting that needs of many of
our Medicaid recipients in
particular who many are people
with disabilities are elders and
I also had the pleasure of
working on these issues at the
federal level during the Obama
administration at the
administration for community
living and I can attest that the
models that are proposed in the
legislation really do meet the
national best practices that the
sponsors are advancing so I just
want to extend our depart
Department support for the bill
thank you thank you Alex Ellen.
Come up and use the Mike yes
Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me just coming through I
can't tell from where I'm
standing of Ellen pines
representing the disability
coalition and we do stand in
support of this bill there is a
tendency to think that people
with cognitive disabilities
whether there people born with
down syndrome or elders who have
some degree of dementia can't
make decisions for themselves
simply because they have a
cognitive disability but
sometimes all they need is a
little bit of help and supported
decision making offers that kind
of help so we urge your support
of this bill thank you thank you
Elon yes Sir.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chairman and ladies and
gentlemen of the committee my
name is Chris Lori hi a work
with arc of New Mexico we
represent people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities from ages birth to
their last days I was one of the
members of the task force for
the supported decision making
along with another member of our
office with our New Mexico this
is been one of our legislative
priorities for the last several
years number of other states and
arcs have encouraged supported
decision making after seeing
international models from Canada
and Sweden and this is something
that we strongly support can be
used and and
instead of conservatorship or
guardianship it can also be used
in conjunction all of us make
decisions every day as far as
buying a house or getting
married at secretary and we rely
on other people for input and
discord decision making will
work for people with
disabilities will work with the
elderly as far as allowing
people to make decisions and
allow third parties to rely on
those decisions without any type
of civil consequences to the
individuals who are serving as
the supporters as well as the
third parties who are relying on
those decisions being made by
the people with disabilities and
that's important to note that
although these people are
supporting and decision making
they are not making the
decisions as ultimately the role
of the individual to make the
decision so this is not a power
of attorney this is not a
guardianship in which you are
having substituted decision
making as a supported decision
making so thank you dark New
Mexico stands behind us as well
we're also a member of the
disability coalition all of the
members of the disability
coalition stand behind us we
think Alice blue McQuay for over
hard work on this and also
Senator Karai a handle and
Representative Ferrary thank you
right thank you Sir anybody
else.
And we have somebody on zoom we
have
Sherri Dotson did you want to
say something in support of this
bill.
no Sir thank you I'll tell I'm
already spoke for us thank you
very much okay thank you anybody
else.
Anybody in opposition to this
bill.
Seeing none members of the
committee.
Questions are Senator of of
Hickey let's start with you and
then Senator Sedillo Lopez and
then Senator my.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for a very insightful
presentation of.
The this is health care this is
kind of managed health care and
I'm wondering if there is any
potential for insurer
reimbursement for these
activities if you have looked
into that to help support this
very valuable service.
Mr chairman of as Alice to
answer that thank you Mr chair
Senator
so I think there are some
Medicaid reimbursable activities
that may or may not fit into
these models and there are
certain chair supporter family
peer support type services this
is a conversation we've been
having on going with director
Jason Cornwell of developmental
disability support division and
so we are exploring those
options you know this is a new
medical you can be a medical at
a service like case management
but you know we are envisioning
a team of supporters I'm working
with individual on different
types of decisions and even
multiple supporters for wanted
this one kind of decision if
it's a complicated one like
finances and so
we are exploring the option
thank you for the question is.
Mr chair wouldn't other for
clarifying question it would
seem to me that chair might
reimburse for this activity
under their collaborative care
diagnoses collaborative care is
dealing with mental health
issues as well as
chronic care disease and
this type of informed
collaborate this collaborative
decision making might qualify
under that I would just urge you
to look into it again a service
like this I know we're kind of
putting these particular people
in place but I think it's a very
valuable service and health care
for quality of life health
improvement also I think if I
could sit down think through all
the econometrics at the moment
might actually save money not
that that's the the reason for
this obviously but I would urge
you to look at to the
collaborative care
Reimbursable code that now
exists in Medicare for this
thank you very much Mr Mr chair
Senator just on the point with.
Like in the media program
participants in the media
program we're getting Medicaid
was the.
Eligible for this.
Again Mr chair that is these are
conversations we've been having
with director Cornwell we're not
quite there yet because there's
CMS involved so we are we are
looking at possibilities.
Thank good Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
It's it's just such a great idea
to
To have something between a
guardianship and and full of
autonomy in certain
circumstances and I think it
does a pretty good job of
outlining that I just have a few
questions.
The summer clarifying and and so
my hope might make the bill
better has he proceed to
Judiciary but of the clerk the
question of clarifying is of why
would a supporter not be a
fiduciary because I would be
worried about it I mean I think
it's important to impose duties
on the supported that they not
be self interested in that they
not make decisions that would
benefit them at the expense of
the of the purpose of the
agreement that you know I guess
I just wondered why why you
specifically say very
when I'm thinking there's a lot
of benefits to making them be a
fiduciary and it's a heavy
responsibility.
Mr chair Senator that's a great
question and at this particular
provision that you're speaking
of actually came from a member
of our judiciary because there
was a really important
distinction to be made between
for example substitute decision
makers such as powers of
attorney and supporters because
the ultimate decision remains in
the hands of the supported
decision maker they are the
ultimate decision maker and
supporters is there to help them
get there and so we want to
encourage people to be
supporters we don't want them to
feel like they have to make a
best interest determination and
whether or not they're going to
help the person we don't want
them to feel like they have to
be if you share because it's a
different standards different
legal standard and so to
encourage
As much a Tanami as possible for
the support decision maker we
did what we did want to make
that distinction that you don't
have that fiduciary duty you're
there to support you're not
there to to take this take on
responsible yes thank you so
much okay the that that makes
sense it's just there's so many
benefits which leads me to sort
of to the next question
I guess I don't necessarily
trust all people in the world to
be supporters and so you have
this qualifications of for
people a subject to a civil or
criminal order prohibiting
contact with the supported that
seems real this individual place
of the department of health
employee abuse registry of
import that the health whatever
the weight placed on the
department of health employee
abuse registry.
Is that.
Yes thank you madam secretary
can you answer them.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
it is actually comes from the
department comes out of the
department of health and it's
anyone that is and register
health care provider give health
care like a certified nurse aide
if they abuse someone and and
they're found guilty of that
they're put on the employee
abuse registry thank you Mr
chair I didn't know what that
was I didn't with one something
like that that's great and then
convicted of a crime involving
violence or dishonesty within
the preceding ten years ended
individuals currently
incarcerated so as you know I
was a and executive director of
a domestic violence agency and I
just think about.
Domestic abusers that often
never.
Never end up getting a criminal
conviction and never so I was
just wondering and and I think
that would be a very dangerous
person to have it as of in a
support role
I'm not insisting on it but I
just think you might want to
think about adding someone who
has had more than three calls
about domestic violence because
if there's more than more than
three calls it probably was
something there even though they
might not have been convicted
and the reason I say that is.
I'm not sure what the last year
statistics were but the
statistics a couple years ago
out of Bernalillo county for
convictions on domestic violence
was one percent.
When percent so that that's a
that's a bigger problem but it
shows that there might be
somebody who's been called and
and and has been accused by the
victim in the past.
And hasn't been convicted and
and I just worry about somebody
like that given my experience
and so I'm I'm just suggesting
that that might be something you
think about I have enormous
respect for the task force work
and so if the task force is it
interested I thought you know
why by respected I still support
the bill I just of.
I guess I just have some trust
issues I don't.
I don't know and then
with respect to of.
To what I think would be making
it better is I don't see that
there's a consequence like on
page eight the supported
decision making agreement is
terminated has to particular
supporter if and then you have
all of these of the seven things
that could happen.
Who terminates it is of course
the terminates at what's and
what's the process for
terminating the group the
agreement I feel that that's
missing and it would be a
stronger more effective statute
there's a kind of.
Action that took place or or
there's some kind of guidance to
the Department terminate the
agreement.
What what's the process.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Lopez
so this is of course eight
agreement between private
parties and the you know the
termination you know is just any
communication really from the
decision maker that this
agreement is terminated as
supporter can also terminate the
agreement
one of the things that this
model does is get people out
into the community so because
you are the ultimate decision
maker you know you and your
supporters go to wherever it is
that you need to go and make the
decisions that you need to make
and so these folks are hearing
from you with the help of your
supporter you know who may you
know help you for example if
your person with autism you have
sensory issues they might help
you find a darker room as you're
communicating what you need to
the person that you're talking
to etcetera so it's really an
accommodation is what you're
providing
and so this isn't at you know
this isn't like a power of
attorney for example where you
know courts could courts could
invalidate at a power attorney
you know I know of course of
replicable top attorney
individual can as well and so
there's there's not really a
system other than what I've put
in because I do think that we
are going to see a lot of
questions about what this is and
so we've tried to empower our
office to be that sort of
central resource we want to have
a central registry of resources
and information as well as
people right I'm human resources
to provide the guidance
necessary for third parties
attempting to rely on these
agreements as well as for
supporters and people who are
you know wanting to terminate
and that's why we strengthened
that language the amendment to
include facilitation of
terminations so you know put
helping folks put things in
writing so you know that support
decision making processes as I
don't like the supporter and
they don't get it that I don't
wanna do this agreement anymore
you know we can help them put
that term.
Nation in writing for you know
that person so that they're
clear this person does not want
you as their supporter anymore
so that's just that simple we
did a lot of consulting with
folks and the other states who
had this tax is actually the
first support decision making
statute in the country because
they're going to libertarians it
every over there and I can say
that because I grew up there.
No it's school there and so
we've talked a lot of folks
around the country from from a
really broad spectrum of
cultures and what we're seeing
is that
You know as far as folks using
this for bad acting I mean.
This is the best tool for that
you know powers of attorney in
other kinds of substitute
decision making are usually the
best tools for folks to try to
you know but I also I had many
many years I'm working in
suggested files and I hear your
concerns about that Senator
Ten or at it was ten years as a
case worker for a rape crisis
center okay thank thank you Mr
chair I just
think it would be strengthened
if on page eight instead of it
saying to.
It's terminated you know the the
agreement terminated that
You have the eight again maybe
empower the department further
the department can declare
an agreement is terror is is
terminated or the to put you
know because there's going to be
a lack of clarity because an
agreement between two parties is
the contract and the only way to
terminate a contract is really
going to court order if there's
any kind of violation of the
terms of the contract is going
to court and you don't
necessarily want these people to
end up in court because of the
whole point of of avoiding it
and so the problem with just
saying it's terminated it is
will will only.
Way I would think of as far as
reading this as an attorney as
I'm gonna have to get a court
order declaring this agreement
terminated and it may be easier
to have the department if it's
facilitating termination also
the the the the person that will
help out third parties they say
no this this or or help out the
individual by saying oh no this
agreement is terminated the
support is been placed on the
employee abuse register it's to
if the terminated the support
has been convicted of a crime
involving violence or you know
whatever that that somehow.
Of the be a process so that
there's clarity about when the
agreement is in place and when
it's been terminated and so I
mean I'd consider I'm not
suggesting you do it now but
just think about it on your way
to Judiciary
the supported decision making
agreement.
may be terminated by the
department.
More for found to be an active
you know something.
As to particular supporter if
and that ways in which
department you talking
this programs or the that is
supported decision making
program within the are in here
and those just on that point I
don't see anywhere in here that
when you've made this support
agreement it goes anywhere you
don't give it to is just between
you and the support there's
nobody else it is not filed in
the court is not given to the
Dr McCoy's Division is not given
to adult protective services
it's just between the two of
them so I don't know who would
be the one that would I mean
what all of this sets out is
because between the two of us
it's ended if somehow adult
protective services gets called
in or if this supporter gets
sent to jail or if that book but
nobody there's no government
official taking action it's
between the two parties this way
I understand it I I agree with
that that section ten you're
totally agree with that but it's
a contract.
It's a great agreement to me
means contract and so when you
look at section ten a person who
receives an original or a copy
of the supported decision cream
it shall rely on the agreement.
So if you have a person who
shouldn't be supporting the
individual so say I'm I'm
disabled you know I I have some
kind of disability and I'm
taking my supporter with me and
the supporter presents an
agreement.
And the and and something comes
out of that and then you find
out later that there was either
abuse or neglect or whatever
the third party can rely on it
totally with the third party
doesn't know that the agreement
has been terminated and maybe a
registry appropriate I don't
know I mean there might be a
better way but I just think that
decisions.
That are made with the support.
If that supporters should not be
involved in making in in helping
those decisions.
There should be some kind of
protection and I just I'm just
worried
again maybe it's a trust issue
but I of I'm a little bit
worried about that and I just
think it would be stronger you
know it's clear that this is a
good agreement and a third party
can rely on it or there's
something wrong with the
agreement and somehow there's
some some transparency some way
of knowing that the department
has problems with this agreement
feature that division this is
yes first take a look at or did
you discuss that at all you're
reading Mr chair and senator
Lopez we did we did discuss it
at length you know that actors
in the system miss using this
system this was a very important
topic and we did have a lot of
discussions around it and we
have heard from a lot of
different parties about what it
was but I think in the end we
all came to a consensus that we
wanted these agreements to be as
easy to execute as possible I'm
to be as accessible as possible
because we are talking about you
know a population of folks
living with disabilities and
to make it you know it's easy to
both put into place in terminate
as possible well we we do
understand there are concerns
about the third party reliance
you know that's why we're happy
to be a resource for folks who
want to call us you know in FY
and and also you know of course
like I said this is a agreement
between a supporter and decision
maker so the person is still
being the decision maker so if
they are showing up some place
with you know and they don't
want that supporter they're you
know they're going to be able to
you know say I this is not my
support I I don't this person as
my support so but again this was
a very important topic that we
all discussed at length thank
you Mr chairman I respect the
committee's decision I just you
know there is the hotline I I
just and there is the you know
reporting requirements so that
there is something but I.
You know what I'm glad I'm able
to introduce I respect the
judgment of the commission that
work so hard on this I'm
certainly not going to insist on
it but I just wanted to raise
that issue thank you very much
Mr chair Senators we'll put it
in for of consideration as we
look at further amendments
dealing.
Video center.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so
much for doing this I think it's
a it's a great thing and I
appreciate the work of the the
commission to get this to this
point excellent thank senator
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
chairman thank you center going
to help out thank you
Representative Ferrary the up
just a couple things to think
about as it moves along.
have similar concerns with
Senator Lopez but.
On page five I know it's not a
power of attorney you know that
I understand the argument with
producer because.
The the supporters and have any
assets of the the decision maker
to be applied to sherry
but the only thing that really
avoid any conflict of interest.
is page five line ten it says
avoid self dealing you know the
voice self dealing a huge I
would prefer to consider just up
you know the supporters I have
no conflict of interest with the
decision maker you know hard and
fast as opposed to like
encouraging them to to be at and
then also
On the bottom of page three and
as the the what the of the
agreement has on on line
nineteen it says list the types
of decisions with which the
supporters authorized.
Then on twenty one it says list
the type of decisions in which
the supporter is not authorized
I think there's going to be to
certain decisions that on either
list.
And so I don't my question is
why do you need paragraph six
what what can you just lock it
in that.
That there entitled to these
decisions and no others.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair Senator my SS for the
first question about self
dealing we can look at that
language that there was
extensive discussion and task
force about whether or not folks
who are getting paid to provide
services to a person should be
allowed to be a supporter and
there's definitely you know been
talked both ways the consensus
of the task force was that
because we are trying to empower
people to make their own
decisions including who their
supporters should be some folks
don't have a whole lot of
natural supports and they really
do need folks who care about
them know about them I know them
the best because they've been
caring for them for many many
years for them to choose certain
folks to be their supporters
even if they are paid supporters
also family members are rate
supporters a lot of the times as
well you know under the D.
waiver system yes system you can
choose your family to be paid
service providers and so we did
struggle a lot about you know
how should we
avoid having a conflict of
interest there and I think that
at the end of the day the task
force concluded that it was up
to the person so this is a
paradigm shift in how we think
about people disabilities they
get to choose who they want as
their supporter we I do believe
that you know there's room in
New Mexico law for stronger
protections for folks that are
that might be the subject of
abuse or exploitation I'm
certainly I'm supporting some of
these bills are going around
this S. session around that and
so I think that's where that
needs to happen that kind of
protection needs to happen it's
I think by trying to be
protective overly protective in
this bill we are sort of a new
we're we're going counter to
that the spirit of the bill that
makes sense and so that's where
the task force came out they
take your concerns very
seriously and there was a.
A second thank you to the
prohibitively no no I I'm just a
right I know the culture of the
New Mexico committee Mexico is
yes correct Judiciary yeah that
that argument I hopefully that
arguments persuasive there may
not be but we just a suggestion
I don't need an explanation but
I I I appreciate the work that's
been done because I know the
hours late second question was.
On the bottom of page three you
want them to list the types of
decisions you also want to list
the types of.
Decisions that are not
authorized I believe there's
going to be decisions that are
not on either list this gonna be
ambiguity my question is why do
you need paragraph six I think
you should consider it you don't
need to.
Moreover.
you know just why should why do
these programs six I think I
suffices what what's your
thought on.
I thank you Mr chair at Senator
myiasis
I.
The where you're coming from and
all discuss the the
and then there was some
stakeholders involved in this
process I think it's a good
suggestions thank you Mr
chairman thank you gentle lady
Senator Representative and also
on page six line twelve what
what the six repeats paid six.
Eight six line twelve.
some to keep in mind as well and
I appreciate the consideration
it talks about disqualification
and really has been convicted of
a crime involving violence or
dishonesty historically stat
statutory construction has said
a crime of of moral turpitude
and we're we're not taking that
word out of statute because what
does that mean
dishonesty is not defined in
law.
So I would suggest
You know if violence is the
issue if it I know this on you
may want to list dishonesty like
theft embezzlement.
You know because investment to
me is you out that is that duty
to to care the news anyway I
would I would up consider other
words to decide early will get
raised in Judiciary dishonesty
will not make it past committee.
I don't believe but I could be
wrong and then lastly Mr
chairman
Not I want to just take it for
what it is friendly advice you
know
But on the top of page two I
would like I know words the
words kind of.
You guys know these words up top
your head with justice it's kind
of weird I would.
Considered just calling on
paragraph be just calling I'm
decision maker.
obviously and paragraph do it
simple supporter and then on
paragraph see would be
US supporter decision maker
agreement just just to make it
easier on the eyes for for non.
Task force members thank you Mr.
Senator tone thank you senator
Maestas Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this forth
a couple quick questions sexual
answer you list the.
This qualifications of this
supporters you may give any
thought to listing some
clarification.
Mr chair Senator Tallman I
definitely have what I would
consider the ideal supporter in
my head
but we you know we we haven't
thought about qualification
simply because we don't want
folks to mis read the at the
statute is thinking there sort
of exclusive and then if they're
just suggestions and I don't
think they particularly belong
in statute and we do want to
give folks for freedom to choose
whoever it is that they want so
I guess we just don't want to
create some kind of prohibitive
less that folks can feel well
you know you don't need one of
these qualifications and
therefore you can't be a
supporter but thank you for that
the suggestion and you know if
you have some suggestions for
what this qualification maybe
we'd love to hear them.
Thank you for that answer is.
Mr chair in the it seems like a
terrific ideas common sense
ideas.
why it takes so long to
implement.
Mr chairman Senator thanks for
the question so my experience
and as a school psychologist
working in the schools I think
that there is a trend to
becoming more open to less
restrictive ways of making
decisions and we see that in the
schools as well when I first
started teaching back in
nineteen ninety four special
education services were provided
and very restrictive manner in a
separate classroom and when we
really looked at it educational
outcomes academic progress of
the students who are being very
restricted and their educational
Teaching service.
The way that their curriculum
was being provided I think that
people started discussing how
can we be more inclusive and
with reserves to certainly
research shows that the more
social interaction people have
the healthier their brains are
the more cognitive
Stimulation that they receive
they live longer so as more and
more research and data is
collected we are better able to
see the benefit to these less
restrictive supports and
services that we can provide
people with disabilities so I
think it's just a natural
progression of having
discussions about this
collecting data and evidence
that shows the benefit to this
at to society as a whole.
Thank you for the answer thank
you again for bringing this bill
forward it's so I have sent I'd
like to just add to that Mr
chairman and senator Tom and
when they were read vamping the
guardianship program was that in
twenty fourteen.
even earlier than that later
think later sixteen seventeen
eighteen
it was such a big left that they
were able to get to the point of
you know looking at supported
decision making so I just
explain why it took a while so
now we've been working and the
task force has done a great job
of you know bringing this all
together.
Thank you for the answer and and
I just a Frank Murray our
analysts to the legal attorney
and an analyst for the committee
has found numerous citations in
state statute to use the term
dishonesty you know the for
example in the of.
In the records rules legal
notices in oaths of section and
the law enforcement section in
the agriculture section so I
guess it's a term that is used
at least.
Multiple times in statute so
thank you Mr chairman keep that
in mind as you look it up I I
just wanted to bring up a couple
things seems to me that what
you've done here is is very
valuable when we did revamp the
the guardianship statute it was
clear that.
That guardianship is an enormous
step it takes to a the the
person who is declared the the
person in need of of of of of
this guardianship loses all the
rights over all their decision
making and it becomes very very
difficult to recover them so
what you've done here I think is
is incredibly valuable for a lot
of people in that it'll give
them a way to avoid ever winding
up in guardianship.
to avoid getting into court.
And it'll legislation or the
courts a lot of time on cases
where it's going to be a
Solomon's decision anyhow I mean
these marginal cases where the
person seems to be really
capable but they're also you
know having trouble with certain
kinds of decision making your
supported decision making act
gives an open an alternative for
them to to seek I do think you
need to have some mechanism in
here Senator Sedillo offices
comments bring it to mind but
also just in your
on page nine that whole thing
about that the program is
created how are you even going
to know when to people in red
toner to people and as tech made
to supported the decision making
agreements there's no way that
that's filed with somebody or
registered with somebody it just
it just happens between the two
of them.
And I that probably is going to
be an area where you're going to
need to establish some kind of
central.
Place for the at least file a
copy of the the agreement or
something of the sort not a
court necessarily but your
department probably I just throw
that out is it seems to me that
is going to be very hard to.
To enforce these things later on
down the line you know I mean
you're relying on the person to
do it themselves.
And your office is offering a
great deal of help if you don't
even know when they've been
signed.
It's going to be hard to see
what I'm saying.
That's the.
I think this is where this is
going to be an issue is when the
person is trying to avoid.
Guardianship so let's say
somebody wants to put them into
a guardianship and they have a
supporter and they have a
support agreement so the
guardian maybe filed a lawsuit
or something and then of the
supporter.
It's going to say no this person
is being supported by me and
this is how they're being
supported and so you're gonna
have
I think that's how it's going to
end up being supported and and I
just I'm just trying to think
through what that's gonna look
like they're going to produce
the contract.
The court's going to look at it
and probably evaluate is this
sufficient for the person to be
to have the independence or this
other person tried to put them
in guardianship correct and this
isn't working.
And so I guess I'm talking a lot
but I think that that's the very
point of of this is to make this
work
the bottom line is you want to
keep them out of a guardianship
or the individual wants to be
out of a guardianship.
Because his as was pointed out
it's a horrible thing to be in
in a guardianship.
So Mister chair and Senator
Lopez so to your point this
isn't a complete replacement of
guardianship you know there are
still going to be folks who do
need guardians you know that
level support needs to be
available for people who need
guardians but this is just
building out an extra layer
between what we have which is
basically nothing up or powers
of attorney I'm I will say
though that you know in other
kinds of documents such as
powers of attorney there isn't a
central registry you know once
you put a power attorney into
place this is you know of it's a
private agreements and we.
Envision this working with.
Documents and tools such as
power's attorney medical
decision making acts and you
know other kind even treatment
party and ship if you are a
person with mental health
challenges trimming
guardianships are of the
temporary but very effective you
know help that you can get it is
support decision making but it
usually terminates after six
months to a year and so we're
seeing it we want to use in
conjunction all these different
areas I. E. I'm not.
I guess my initial reaction is I
don't know if I want to do a
central registry because then
does not become effective or
valid if that you know it's not
on it so I'm gonna let Mr
chairman thank you thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez for for
those considerations and I guess
R. my experience I have power
attorney for my son and there's
no central registry or anything
I just downloaded simple form
off the internet and we had it
notarized and I provided it to
his clinic for example and so
and the only reason I want him
to be empowered to make his own
medical decisions all of us in
the family were vaccinated for
comment he chose not to be and
I'm really proud that he made
that decision we don't judge em
we empowered him to make that
decision and never question that
and took it upon the rest of us
to make sure that we were as
safe as possible to keep him
safe because he has some other
issues that could have
complicated that but the power
of attorney gives me the ability
to sign forms for him because
writing is difficult for him you
he was born without thumbs and
he's not gonna be able to do
that really efficiently so I can
do that easily and make that a
little less stressful for him so
there are certain decisions that
I can make but with the
supported decision making act
how I envision that is the
person who always has the
ability to make that decision
under that act is going to be
the individual would be my son
if that's what we decided to do
so that's never going to change
he is the one in power to make
their decisions he might have
supporters saying oh we want
this but ultimately that's going
to be Nicholas who is has the
authority to make those
decisions decisions on his
behalf and so if there is
additional oversight by the
council or the commission that
is coordinating this and and
monitoring and I think that I
would feel comfortable as a as a
pair.
Rent to it's not gonna be able
around always or be able to care
for my son if he outlives me
it makes me feel much better
because it's still giving him
the support he needs to be able
to make those decisions without
having a guardianship which so
much more restrictive and I
don't know who would get
guardianship and maybe they
would make take a terrible
decisions and he would be very
upset living under those
conditions so my hope is that
he's always seen as being
capable of making those
decisions that affect the
quality of his life.
So the the all the the
amendments we made to strengthen
section fourteen is still.
All voluntary it's still when
two people need your help your
available but there's no prior
review on your part to your new
programs part of those
agreements.
We are providing the services
and we're going to put ourselves
out there is find if somebody if
somebody wants to call you up
and check have we covered all
the bases you're there to help
them but they can make their own
agreement and and and and you
wouldn't know about it
necessarily yes under the
current bill as it stands here
folks can make their grievance
you know like like powers of
attorney it was it was a great
example of that that clarified
for me with just Mr chair and
but we will be offering our
services as filters so you know
if folks want us to help them
choose who the supporters are
I'm in a lot of supported
decision making models with the
facilitator does is there kind
of a medir sorts may sit down
with all the different parties
help everybody help everybody to
understand what the rules are
what their responsibilities are
where the limits of their rules
are and you know help folks who.
Check off what they're required
to do under the law for the
agreements but but you're right
Mr chair it's you know we're out
they were previous of that there
but people have to ask for
services because.
Anything else anybody else on
the committee was will the
committee moved to pass second
seconded by Senator McKenna.
And the clerk to call the roll.
Senator excuse me Senator guy
Ecosse.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle Senator Maestas
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Sir Thomas.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes okay so you
have a do pass on an eight zero
vote with one excuse thank you
Mr chairman as amended yeah we
did amended as we can members of
the committee Mr chairman I fell
down a flight of stairs but it
was so important to me is it was
it here in the building well it
was it was at lunch time at my
replace those babies are always
not push said listen to divest.
So that's a good made.
United feel very special because
the M. two came up and almost
sent me to the hospital but you
may needs supported state
working.
That's right there but for the
grace of god go live right.
Senator Hickey thank you for
okay.
Thank you.
Let's see if we can finish up
these last two bills before you.
Point we have two more Senator
Hickey and and then my bill.
The
you what we had just in the
interest of time
Mr chair bill eighty one.
Senate bill eighty one
essentially Senate bill eighty
one allows nurse practitioners
and
physicians assistance to
certified that in individual has
a medical condition for which
would disqualify that individual
from immunizations currently
there has to be a physician
signature on that and it's
really not necessary for the for
people to drive and go god only
knows where to be able to get
the president's signature and
like to introduce my expert
Linda Siegel on the bill for her
comments Linda this brief
comments this bill came about
because the nurse practitioner
down in Los Lunas had a long
time patient minor child who had
some kind of allergy would that
was going to prevent some kind
of immunization I don't know the
details of it all and so she
signed the form which the
department of health puts out
and the form said physician only
so the department of health
would not accept it and this
nurse practitioner had been this
child's primary care provider
for ever and so that's what how
it came about and this is
something we've been working on
for years of about six or seven
years ago we look through all
the statutes to see where it
says position on way and where
appropriate we added nurse
practitioner or other advanced
practice nurse and so we've been
cleaning up the statute from our
perspective and so this is one
that somehow is miss you Mrs yes
they have an appointment let's
go to the audience anybody in
the audience in favor of this.
Yes.
USA think come up and use the
Mike.
There is a hand held would be
better.
All the button that.
Hello yes hi so I'm my name's
Alaina dances I am the Medicaid
medical director and I'm a nurse
practitioner it's up to the
first time in this practitioner
has ever been a Medicaid medical
director so I'm very supportive
of any bill that allows me to
practice fully I was a primary
care provider for the last eight
years I was that my patients
only provider of the most of the
time and when something needs to
be cosigned by a position it is
a it's a big burden to patients
so I I didn't know about this
bill that I really appreciate it
I'm glad I was in the room
that is good for us to meet the
new Medicaid director welcome.
Anybody else anybody in
opposition to this bill.
Anybody on this soon they've all
gone to dinner I think she.
Members of the committee.
You move a do pass.
It
there a second second seconded
this question from senator
Davis.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I appreciate this I was
just trying to find out so as
they evaluate you to find out if
you're able to take any kind of
shut what are they looking for a
reason being is I've got a
friend of mine that his mother
got the COVID shot in her left
arm pulled up he got it in hand
up the ended up both dying but
they later found out in him it
is name Seaver and that they
took some growth of blood draw
and they found out that their
body was fighting it but I don't
know you know you're talking
about nurse practitioner how
would they determine who's
qualified who's not.
Basically.
Basically the medical history of
the patient if there are such as
allergies and what have you at
the if it's a in a base the.
immunization and they've got a
history and so forth so
essentially would be through the
history the situation you're
describing I don't think.
Particularly are be happy to
talk with you one off on that
that I don't think that's the
situation here
The
But I see where your question is
coming from but essentially just
that the medical license the the
the capabilities of nurse
practitioners MPAs to determine
a contra indication I think is
very appropriate and that they
do not have to have a physicians
Mexico authorization thanks for
that Mr Chairman Sir Vince and I
agree with you we we are so
involved with practitioners now
that they need to have the
freedom to I just took on anyone
making that judgment call have
they determined so if it's just
for our history and our
allergies if it's a known.
medication
thank you could related to a
because in fact with COVID we
didn't have that so they were
just out right to get chance
looking quite
so with that of you thank you
thank you senator anybody else.
We have a motion and a second
the secretary will call the roll
Senator guy Ecosse.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator my Estes yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator sweeties yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Thoman yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes thank you have a do
depressed Senator on an eight
two zero vote with one excuse
Yahoo final bill of the night is
my bill of the pharmacist go
practice can you have an
amendment on that Sir photo we
have an.
Senate bill ninety two.
I think I have thank.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
The amendment will you please
give me one yet the memory.
This is the one is when you guys
do that someone just.
I think.
To.
The.
Okay the answer to.
Are you going to fix it it's
either.
Two thousand twenty one.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is a bill that we
heard during the interim.
It's a it's a it's a bill that
that was brought to us by of the
pharmacy.
Who is from.
The I didn't go to the internet
but okay so this is not a bill
that we heard during the interim
committee this is a bill that
was brought to me after the
hearings of the interim
committee by farmers by the
pharmacy association and and and
the the essence of the bill is
that we have already in New
Mexico clinical pharmacists
pharmacists who have extra
training and who are who are in
in in power by our laws to
provide extra services they
provide clinical services and
the those included at formular
is that they can that they can
of the prescribe for their
patients what we're proposing in
this bill then is to expand that
formular to include us slightly
broader scope of the of the
practice for the farm for the
clinical pharmacists and with me
is Mr Dale Tinker the lobbyist
for the pharmacy association.
Mr chairman Dale can care with
New Mexico pharmacists
Association and there's a list
of treatments in here and I do
want to tell you this.
This bill came out of yes
actually been introduced in the
number of states around the
country it is they is based on
federal law that allows for cleo
Wade tests.
and so we felt that with the
shortage of providers in New
Mexico and the difficulties of
getting providers there are
some.
The public health treatments the
pharmacist could help with and
so those are included in this it
pharmacists have been able to do
clear wave cast for years but
they have not been able to treat
them we had to pharmacists of
Addison the patients back to
other providers to be able to
get prescriptions and this bill
would solve that and.
And hopefully allow pharmacists
pharmacist to do treatment on a
on a few categories I will tell
you that I have spoken with the
Chairman and chairwoman of the
New Mexico Medical Board
the director of the medical
board the director of the
medical society and the lobbyist
for the medical society who has
expressed concerns about this
bill I committed to work with
them between this committee in
the next committee should get
out of this committee so would
we are collaborative we try to
be collaborative this bill is
pre file so I assume they would
have seen it but apparently they
missed it didn't come didn't ask
me of about it and so I get
committed to work with them on
resolving their concerns between
this committee in the next
committee.
Thank you and with that Mr
chairman I'd like to move the
the amendment that that you have
before you.
Okay.
So it it I think it's simple
cleanup language it doesn't
change anything substantive
no it doesn't change anything
services Mr chairman Center the
intent of this actually
the sponsor of the bill asked me
if this bill would cover
what's called prep pre exposure
prophylaxis for HIV treatment
and I said yes and since then I
talked to several other people
said no it doesn't so it
clarifies that in in the
intersection in the bill that
that would cover prep and pap
pharmacist currently have the
ability to do epis called on
poster pre.
Post exposure prophylaxis and
that means that pharmacists can
treat
folks with HIV after the fact.
And so
It's possible for them to treat
prep yes or to prescribe prep
right.
And that would be on on of the
page ten
no page nine line twenty that's
where we do that.
On page
The ten line seventeen.
We strike that is.
And we insert it in lieu thereof
including tests.
So that it reads making
including tests.
The NMAA guide to clinical
decision making including yes
waived pursuant to the federal
the C. L. I. A. amendments of
nineteen just a client that he
was referring to before and then
the final one is on page eleven.
Line I.
To do with insurance through
yeah this has to do with
insurance reimbursement.
And we we strike Hey.
And we make clear that it's.
and in network pharmacist.
Thank you Mr chairman if I may
that last amendment was state at
the request of the PBMs we are
have that covered in the the
insurance code but they said
they would feel more comfortable
it was a clued in this bill as
well and so we agreed to do that
it it doesn't really change
anything in my mind but if it
makes a more comfortable then
that's a good thing.
We certainly don't want to have
uncomfortable PBMs
So.
The.
Senator Hickey has a particular
fondness for TV and.
And with that Mr chairman we we
would I would move the adoption
of this ammendment.
We have a.
Okay the amendment.
Or maybe some discussion okay we
at anyone want to the body of
one discusses.
I discussed the bill I I mean I.
Okay first on the amendment we
we we have a motion that movie
of that movie I I remember the
committee I can move the
amendment and you said filming
moving it three times now so I
think trying to get your
attention the motion as second.
They want to call the roll
please that's what the question.
this is discussed.
Yeah I just Mr chair if I could
Yeah I just just on that point I
think this sort of treatment of
people is on just by PBMs
because they control the formula
areas they control which
medicines you get in can't get
all the sort of stuff and I'm
I'm really sick and tired of how
my patients are being treated by
these folks and they're just
they're just unfairly try
channeled and and and the choice
of drugs is is restricted and so
I I don't have a problem with
the technical aspects of the
other parts of the amendment but
all this kind of let's
restrict you to in network you
can go to this hospital you know
I anyway I can get on a big
soapbox but I I've had to treat
patients in Roswell the
Albuquerque because of this in
patients in network stuff so I'm
obviously fed up with it and I
can't I just can't support that
part of the amendment so we
we've been adopting them as
unanimous of just want to be
clear that we could do it plus
what could happen over thank
you.
Any other comments.
Hearing none of call the roll
please.
There's a guy a ghosts.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator Maestas Senator McKenna.
I miss the discussions I think
it's best if I recuse the
program.
Yes.
For the state you can stay on.
We haven't got.
I'm gonna pass.
I'm also going to pass I think
that that was actually pretty
good point.
Okay Senator McKenna is passing
and senator shady says no and
senator little Sedillo Lopez
you're gonna pass on it will
pass and and I mean what is it
when you state the one not of
staining what I want to pass to
let others with we're on the
amendment that's right and so
I'm not the last person.
After everybody are you passed
you just passed I just have okay
the senator called Sliq and
senator Ortiz Y. Pino will you
go back to the past excuse me.
Senator McKenna Senator McKenna.
Well I guess I need to recuse
myself because I missed the
discussion on the amendment.
Or is this.
This.
Senator.
Okay and I will get her Senator
Sedillo Lopez Michael back to
you
I think I'm gonna vote no and
explain level.
And I will yes.
And and the amendment is adopted
on a four three and one excuse.
You have in that the development
center.
This is my vote.
What we refer to the doesn't
want to vote on it so this
should.
I can't say no or yes Senator
should take a.
People online we have been going
to the audience yet or.
On the bill then again in the
bill we have to do it on the
amendment so if you it's up to
you you're Cherry this if you
want to take it is.
So we have five four.
People have to say I for people
opposition one in support of the
bill thank.
Miss Mister chairman we getting
my vote to give an opportunity
to talk about the amendment.
No okay bill is they want to
talk about the bill it sounds
like not the middle okay go
ahead and thank you I don't
think it's necessary to to have
for I think it's just because
it's it's in other areas of law
so I think it's just cleaner not
to not to be duplicative so that
I I am not supporting the
amendment because of.
For but it passed so I just
wanted to explain why.
Okay thank you for that
explanation I will open up to
the audience the one in the
audience the opposition to this
Senate bill ninety two.
Gentleman the federal
opposition.
Support first gentleman that
standing up you doing opposition
first yes of.
That.
The negative.
Thank you.
Thank you senator members the
committee my name is Rick
Madden.
Retired family physician thirty
eight years and the land primary
care.
And I actually have reservations
about this bill I am hesitant to
come out in full opposition
because I do understand that the
pharmacist play very important
roles part of the team.
And I'm not going to indicate
that.
What I'm seeing is actually a
substantial expansion of the
scope of practice and it's not
just being able to prescribe
something for simple upper
respiratory infection or Yu GI
it includes things like HIV it
includes things that would under
a public health order offered
extreme expansion so my concerns
are that.
I guess my question is is this
really a primary care bills.
As a primary care physician is
impending it's affected I am
actually required standard of
care.
And I think this missing from
this bill.
To make a record.
Of my evaluation.
And diagnosis.
And the thought process that
goes into making a treatment
plan.
In the absence of that this bill
does not anyway I think require
that I think it's really
deficient of meeting a standard
of care in primary care.
So I think there needs to be
additional language and for that
reason I would oppose it.
As a threat to another thing
that happens I think when we
have alternative sources of care
even though pharmacists are
often one of the trusted sources
of advice for patients.
Is it fragments Care.
So I have patients who come to
me and they've been to urgent
care or they've done online care
or they've seen somebody who has
no medical record.
I have to ask for the
information to be sent from to
me that's interoperable issue
which is been around as a
problem ever since the two
thousand was at nine when we
were talking about in rocked
ability.
And that's still a big hill to
climb.
So I don't have the ready
information to Habel help advise
my patient when they see me
subsequent to what happened
elsewhere that fragmentation
actually eight to quote lower
quality of care and higher costs
because the subsequent visits.
And also there is no medical
record in this bill so I even if
there were an encounter that I
would hear about I couldn't
access what the thought process
was.
What would happen if a
pharmacist.
Had somebody with a cough would
they examine the patient.
My experience within given
pharmacists clinicians.
Is it they do not have adequate
training to do a physical
diagnosis.
And to take an adequate history.
They're very good at many things
they do.
But that actually put a
stethoscope on the chest is an
integral part of pre making a
prescription.
So I think there's some
deficiencies there that need to
be thought out as wealth in
terms of qualification of the
pharmacists to do some of these
things so I think the bill
actually has some pretty
significant shortcomings and so
I just speak in opposition and
I'm speaking for myself as a
clinician and the chair New
Mexico Academy of Family
physicians as well as the New
Mexico Medical Society.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your comments and
anyone else.
Mr chairman members the
committee Kerry robin printer
registered lobbyists for the
medical society I say were
opposed to day but I very much
look forward to working
collaboratively with the
pharmacists and some amendments
on this bill to get us closer I
think specifically the things
that we're looking at our and
page nine line twenty four round
respiratory illnesses Page ten
lines two three and five on skin
conditions Miner on Google
uncomplicated illnesses and UT
eyes and I think that if we can
shore that up on the medical
board did approve test and treat
on strep flu HIV and COVID in
the winter so I think that with
some more conversations will are
going to get there and I will
take full responsibility I miss
this one as Dale Dale said so
we're we apologize for tonight
but but we we feel confident
that we can work together in
order to get language I'll make
it work thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very committee one
else in opposition.
Hearing none will now turn to.
They are just for comments and
that support the gentleman in
the front.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Pat block registered
lobbyist for Walmart we rise and
support of this bill is one of
Walmart's a priorities across
the country I'll be as brief as
I can and I'm sick it just going
to call back to a couple things
you'll see in the significant
issues portion of the F. I. R.
the a UNM health sciences center
notes that we have a
Inadequate ability to deliver
medical services right now and
we also have an under utilized
workforce in the pharmacists so
I think with the combination of
those two things getting to a
place where we have acceptable
bill to everybody will really
help out deliver better care and
better outcomes with the same
level of effort we have
currently thank you.
Thank you for your comments and
any
The lady in the front.
Mr chair members of the
committee a lot of the Medicaid
medical director so also and the
HSD representative to the
primary care council.
so HSD the spirit of this bill
is improving network adequacy
which we is is aligned with HSD
priorities also
we
Lost my train of thought there
but some of those concerns or
if.
Questions about how we would
operationalize it we also the
diagnosis list it's kind of hard
to get your arms around what
exactly that includes and which
codes we would allow a
pharmacist to use another place
that we see some questions is
retail pharmacist first clinical
pharmacists clinical pharmacists
the rules are enrolled in
Medicaid the bill that and that
is we have a process for that we
have tried to work with retail
pharmacists to get them to a
place where they are enrolled in
billing in Medicaid and it it
has been operationally
challenging but less than half
of pharmacists are enrolled in
Medicaid and that we also is
that I I need to know and some
documentation of what's occurred
and when we talk to pharmacists
in retail settings about that
they say that they're just don't
have kind of the infrastructure
and financing to have an
electronic medical record so
it's very hard to have a
flu diagnosis and no Associated
note so we would also like to
work with it like this is
something we are very interested
in but that there are some
details that really we've
already tried to work with on
this and and have some
challenges so we would like to
iron those out now with the with
that the Sanchez.
Thank you for your comments.
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chair Senators Joe
Anderson assistant dean for
curricular affairs with U and M.
college of pharmacy and I rise
in support of this legislation
and I did want to just address
some of the training of our
graduates at the UNM college of
pharmacy they require three
years a pre requisite training
heavy science similar to medical
school in terms of when you're
general chemistry when your
organic chemistry biochemistry
physics calculus six cetera and
mean physiology and then in the
professional program it's a four
year professional program
leading to the doctor of
pharmacy degree thirty two hours
are committed to clinical
reasoning and pharmacotherapy
and so in terms of assessment
training they do get assessment
training they do not get you
know the differential diagnosis
training that physicians get and
so it's very focused more more
so but the training that would
be required and that hasn't been
discussed here but the board of
pharmacy requires additional
training for pharmacists to be
certified in these prescriptive
areas that's always been the
case and that's it beyond that
training that's it G. din in the
college of pharmacy and and so
not as much I the pharmacist
clinician is the the one that
has the physical assessment
training
and so that the pharmacist
graduating from our programs get
physical assessment not to the
degree that that the pharmacist
clinician gatt send so that
additional training if required
would include the the physical
examination necessary in those
areas and then in terms of
documentation that's also
included in the protocols that
we currently have for example
the pharmacist if it's a
community pharmacist or
at independent pharmacists they
have to communicate with the
primary care provider any
clinical decision.
That has been made for treatment
that's in the protocol with the
board of pharmacy so just wanted
to mention that thanks.
Thank you for your comments.
Thank you Mr chair Senators I'm
Melanie Dodd and on the
associate dean for clinical
affairs at the UNM college of
pharmacy where I practice as a
pharmacist clinician
specifically in the area of
geriatrics and I stand here this
evening in support of this bill
for a number of reasons one in
particular I think as we all
know we lack access to primary
care across this country and in
particularly here in New Mexico
where at least in the US twenty
five percent of our residents do
not have access to a primary
care provider I'm in even more
so here in New Mexico especially
as we get into our rural areas
and this this bill in particular
will allow that increased access
to for certain conditions As are
outlined I and I think that is
an incredibly critical I as we
try to provide high quality care
to all of us.
I'm and I think we have in place
and certainly open to that input
as we look at the bill further
to make sure we've got the
quality components in there the
safety elements
and as was mentioned by the
previous speaker we do have
included in the language when
you look at
page on page nine line nineteen
it's specifically refers to all
of these are pursuant to a board
approved written protocol and it
is within those protocols we're
all of these issues that have
been raised by previous speakers
would be outlined so it's going
to speak to the training I it's
going to it which would include
things like the essential
physical assessment it's going
to speak to the documentation
which I think is also critical
for all of us is health care
providers as we communicate to
provide the best care that we
possibly can so again I stand in
support of this bill and I look
forward to our continued work
together.
Thank you for your comments
though we have six.
Well online in opposition.
First one is Katherine
Hendricks.
Good evening Mister chair and
Committee I strongly oppose this
legislation and agreed that it
needs having amendments and
changes but folks as it is now
we strongly oppose it overall
antibiotic resistance is a huge
concern patients with the
urinary tract infection are
often prescribed antibiotics
inappropriately many you TI's
will resolve themselves with
different treatments other than
any antibiotics for example
postmenopausal women who have
utilized symptoms due to a lack
of estrogen which need to be
treated with estrogen creams not
antibiotics of the eighty ways
guidelines stress physical exam
and medical history to ensure
there are symptoms which would
require those antibiotic
treatments and not contributing
to the antibiotic resistance
that we have going on in this
country physicians have the
education and training to
responsibly treat you TI's
without adding to the ongoing
issue
you certainly have a physician
on your committee that would be
able to answer those questions I
mean honestly it's like asking a
home handyman to come require
your house with new electricity
can they do it maybe should
thank absolutely not so
I so we stand a strong
opposition to this legislation
is this thank you okay thank you
Mr Hendricks for comics next up
we have Nancy right.
Good evening Mister chair and
committee made members my name
is Nancy rights I'm a
pediatrician I've been in
practice in Las Vegas New Mexico
for twenty one years I'm
speaking against of this bill
now the shifting of tasks from
physicians to non physicians
group non physician clinicians
like what's discussed here can
work under certain conditions
with appropriate oversight or in
emergency situations but this
bill is just too broad
infections in children such as
with streptococcal bacteria or
pediatric urinary tract
infections or skin infections or
HIV these are not simple medical
issues you really need to
training and experience to
safely treat these conditions
and that means medical school
and residency and it requires
years of training I have a lot
of respect for pharmacists they
are highly trained and essential
health professionals they are
not trained in the evaluation
and diagnosis and treatment of
medical conditions I recognize
and I'm very aware of health
care accessibility problems in
New Mexico after all I practice
in a rural community but there
is a shortage of pharmacists to
we don't have enough of them so
this bill is written is just not
the right solution thank you.
The fear for.
I think you're walking out of
the.
She's.
Right now we have next we have
Jennifer Stevens.
Thank you good evening everyone
I'll keep my comments brief
I'm Jennifer Stevens I'm with
the the executive director of
the American
Association of clinical
urologist we echo the A. the A.
UA's comments in terms of our
biggest concerns of this bill or
the diagnosis of you TI's and
the aunts and the overall
antibiotic resistance is a huge
concern of ours and the lack of
training and experience and
qualifications at a pharmacists
has when dealing with with such
diagnoses so with that we we
strongly oppose this bill and
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you and next we have Karen
Carson.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you I am
speaking in opposition of the
bill personally as a position
however I do want to clarify as
the chair of the New Mexico
Medical Board that we did review
these propose point of care
testing and treatment protocols
but only for COVID strap and
influenza and we did approve
these protocols after multiple
meetings over two years with
changes made to protect patients
as.
Much as we could because we had
concerns for patient safety with
pharmacy treatment and and we
wanted to make sure that those
were very robust but they were
only for COVID strap and
influenza these protocols are
also still pending the nursing
board and the board of pharmacy
still has to officially approve
these protocols in the training
outlines and the trainings have
still not been fully developed
and so the other at.
Requests disease processes that
are included in this bill was
not something that the New
Mexico Medical Board was asked
to review and it wasn't anything
that we looked at we don't have
protocols and for that reason I
do I want to clarify that as the
chair of the board but also
personally that I'm in
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Misty was next on the list we
have Karen Carson no she just
both
of you because okay I'm sorry.
Okay as thank you Mr Carson and
stuff is very Anderson.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you
so one a urologist with over
twenty years of experience
practicing in Santa Fe and also
I'm vice chair of the New Mexico
Medical Board I echo with Dr
Carson said in terms of the
medical board that we even
opportunity to review and study
these additional diagnoses for
given a reasonable
idea whether this would be
considered safe from a medical
standpoint personally as a
physician and very opposed to
such things is the diagnosis and
treatment of urinary tract
infection and skin conditions
urinary tract infection for
examples one of most commonly
misdiagnosed entities and and
all of medicine and it can have
pretty significant repercussions
did we mention antibiotic
resistance which is an enormous
issue for all of us.
And that's just one part of
these antibiotics can have
significant complications with
the gastrointestinal tract
and there are things in the
differential diagnosis which
always need to be considered
including things like cancer.
so from that standpoint I think
the providers that are treating
diagnosing you're extracting is
need to be very skilled and
physical exam and differential
diagnosis which I think is
unlikely to occur in a twenty
hour for example of course same
thing with skin conditions you
know just general physician with
years of experience sometimes
struggles with making it a
diagnosis of the skin condition
that can be a bacterial
infection from the viral can be
in a lurch reaction can be
cancer so you know I I don't
think it's appropriate for
someone again when it goes to
perhaps a weekend course I don't
know you know what the extra
training would be to be making a
diagnosis of a bacterial
infection of the skin and per
prescribing antibiotics so I
have great respect for the
pharmacists I work with them all
the time and press their health
with dosing and pharmacokinetic
t's and everything but I think
this is too broad of an increase
in scope of practice I
appreciate your time thank you
very much.
Thank you for your comment that
concludes.
Comments from on.
Opposition and we have one that.
Online.
Supporter.
In the Rikki Lee Chavez.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee this is
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf CVS
health we want to thank the
sponsor and its technical expert
for previous forward we are
proud to support this bill and
we encourage and we appreciate
the technical specs to make the
law consistent with other areas
thank you.
Thank you for your comments and
I.
We'll we'll turn to comments
from the members of the
committee first up we have.
Senator
Committees.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Sir
I want to point out some I
really like about this bill is
the top of page eight.
right now you know as we had a
lot of pediatric respiratory
illnesses come through and still
coming through people have a
hard time getting for example
like nebulizers for kids things
like that so that part of the
bill would be very good.
The pharmacist could you know
give the give the kid a
nebulizer and get them their
respiratory treatment as well as
the diabetes stuff so I think
that's really good
and I deficit point that for the
bill I I'm glad people brought
up thing about resistance
because I was I was going to
bring that up
I will repeat I I agree with
much of what was said in a but
but I I will go one step further
What was talked about was is the
training but I want us to think
about practically how this is
going to play out in kind of big
corporate America health care
in a and I.
I kind of say that I mean Madam
in a negative way not trying to
be overly negative but that's
just the fact that people can go
into CVS and Walmart and
Walgreens in these places.
And I I just I know how rural
works I mean people are going to
go there they're gonna shop and
when they go to the this
pharmacy they're going to expect
to get something there the
people are not maybe every now
and then turned down but they're
going because they say I have I
have this I had a special
effects I've got this content is
provided AS the pack I need this
and they're gonna be given it
and so that's just another level
of concern that I have for
antibiotic resistance
because of how it's gonna play
out in the in the corporate
world okay so you know big the
concern there I I don't think it
the state too much more except
that
My view of how it is and I wish
Center o'neill is here because
you love to say sh back because
now we're staff right but as as
the health committee and when I
these my style we have the scope
of practice problems you know
the so so the eye doctors
optometrists are house of you
know they they really need to be
Pretty pretty smoothed out
before and I think we're we're
to have too much of a gap even
long session we have too much of
a gap of of kind of the scope of
practice issue and I I I would
like to I think section to the
bill probably just realistically
needs to be worked out in
interim period.
in that maybe the bills was more
optimistic than I am but I just
think
realistically it is the this big
big scope of practice is just
and it is is an intermission
community bring not just the
urologist in about a lot of
people together and and I I just
would like to see that and then
I could see a lot of late I'll
say one last thing that I think
is innovative about this bill
and that I like is Page ten
number nine.
You know the this bill allows
another system of delivery for
treatment and I think I I I I'm
not sure if I'm settled on the
the language but I think if you
we have a high community spread
in a certain season of a certain
communicable disease and we're
unable to get people treatment
we could kind of unleash if you
will this other mechanism to get
people drugs other either
preventive or or therapeutic and
and I think that's pretty cool
and and I I I think that needs
to be looked at and I hope that
part of the bill kind of goes
for it's very very loose right
now for me it's it's of maybe a
little too loose but I I really
like that and I think it could
be very helpful during some five
of the you know disease outbreak
or were were community spread as
high of a certain illness or
something
I think that's all I have it's
it's certainly like I said
session to too much I love
section one all that the bill
spots who seek input the in his
great experience is going to do
this bill be interesting
but I certainly in is is for
money I'm gonna say no to the
bill but yeah maybe maybe just
as it may be a hit I don't know
if you're a minimal distracting
section two because like I said
the nebulizer issue the diabetes
issues very important and I in
that bill would just fly through
the session I'm sure to be
helpful for a lot of people okay
that's on his thank you.
Thank you senator thanks
chairman I wonder if I could
just Mr Tinker to respond to to
the issue raised which is that
we should vetted this thoroughly
with the medical board and the
allegations made by the chairman
and the vice chairman of the
medical board that we didn't run
these by them and I wonder if Mr
taker could address those.
So I had.
Mr chair
I I would like to express that
the the chair of the medical
board and the vice chair are
confusing a bill that are at an
issue that we did bring to the
medical board
a protocol and pharmacists
currently have the authority to
do protocols they're approved by
the medical board the nursing
board and the board of pharmacy
that protocol went to flew COVID
and stress it was very narrow
but I have to tell you it took
well over two years to get the
medical board to approve that we
started at the beginning of the
COVID.
treatment pharmacists were
instrumental in building up
front and trading COVID
providing vaccinations
we work at getting pharmacists
the authority to prescribe packs
of the because it's a
relatively
well it's a very good drug for
treating back for creating COVID
I got COVID I used it I was
definitely worked for me so but
but I want to tell you that
there it was confusion about
this bill this bill is about
CLIA waived tests which is a
federal
health and Human Services
program
and it lists those tests that
are that are authorized under
CLIA waivers all the pharmacist
can currently do play away
testers yes I'm sorry and that's
it current of Tory that
pharmacists have they have to
register with the department of
health to be able to do those
tests what they can't do is
prescribed for those tests and
and.
So that's what this bill
addresses is the authority for
pharmacists to be able to.
Right those conditions and
prescribed for those tests and I
assure you the board of pharmacy
when they adopt protocols will
address those antibiotic
resistance pharmacists are more
aware of antibiotic resistance
issues and most other providers
they're very well aware that we
will address the concerns
urinary tract infections in
those things with the with the
medical society we've committed
to do that we will do that but I
just wanted to say they're
confusing this bill which is a
national this is pattern on a
bill that passed in Delaware
it's now of
approved a similar bill in seven
states around the country twelve
other states you're introducing
this I see where the
Medical Board might be concerned
about that but but it's clear
that here in New Mexico we have
a provider issue and so that's
the attempt just to address that
every protocol that are
associations put forward has
been about a public health issue
and and this is no different
than that these are public
health concerns and we're trying
to address that.
Is that.
So thank you for your remarks
next on the list is Senator
cables.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
in a question and Mr I was can
do a tabling motion but I'm
wondering if you would be
amenable to rolling this to get
all the parties you've got two
very good of medical
professionals here in the room
and I would hate to vote for
this to go anywhere do we
resolve it he's work sh sh back
I call it Senate health because
I can't say the word sh back up.
But my thought is we're here
this is a good idea he's picked
up some really good points I've
got a bill come for you and I
talk to you because I'm working
on additional Parma's for the
primary benefit managers on some
of the costs it same center it's
an idea but I would want to have
a fair hearing and with all the
opposition we had I'm just
wondering if you guys would look
at coming table with the
gentleman saying if we can at
least a piece the medical
community that is not to be
thinking about.
Mister chairman Senator guys we
have agreed to meet with the
medical society and work through
those issues we'd like to get it
out of this committee and move
to the next committee but we
will and we've committed to to
work with them we know that
connects Committee I think is
that
judiciary tough Committee as you
know Ezzell it's not one I ever
look forward to with it any of
the bills I work on is that as a
representative for pharmacists
but eight eight you know it's a
necessary one so
I would would rather see it move
on and work with the.
What have concerns between now
and that committee.
Mr chairman I I I sometimes
wonder what world the doctors
who are commenting that this is
going to be such an infringement
on on people's health care and.
Pharmacists have no business
getting into these fields I
wonder what world the rest of
this what will they think the
rest of us live in for most of
us if you try to get in to see a
doctor with any of these
conditions you you'd you'd be
cured you view you have had care
yourself by the time you get in
to see a doctor if you went to
an urgent care facility it sit
there for twenty hours and may
not even get in to see that this
the real world this doctors
aren't available for most of the
stuff the real world this you go
to the pharmacy and you buy
something off the shelf we're
saying there may be trained
pharmacists who can do a lot
better than that for you and
let's give them a shot at.
I I don't know for what in the
world the drive from the from
Washington who is calling and
thinks we live in in New Mexico
there are doctors on the corner
doctors don't do home calls and
you can get in to see you and if
you want to if you want to get a
new primary you have to wait.
I don't know if you could get in
to see one.
Most of us go to see nurses with
the nurses of practitioners
because they're available the
doctors aren't available to the
rest of us.
So this is simply a way of
trying to deal with a very
limited number of relatively
minor or or already approved
things but the budget by the
federal government situations
that the doctors.
That simply aren't for the most
of us going to be able to
provide it's not like we're
asking for of something instead
of going to the doctor it's like
we're asking for something
instead of going to the to the
to the off shelves in the in the
drug store and trying to leaf
through between the Mexican
medicines and the and the you
know the ones we saw advertised
on TV that you know.
The real world is a very
different one from the doctors
were described.
Mr Chairman Shera I see the real
world upside down and many of
our issues here in the capital
but this is still Senate health
and I would love to have this
resolved in here in that when my
comments I just region's going
to tabling can't right now I've
got four but it's just one of
those things this is a committee
is being asked to look at these
to patients with that I yield
thank you.
Go ahead
I I think it's important to
remember that this this
committee
We're not Judiciary but
judiciary does have.
Role in this and they're going
to try to make it as tight as
they can be and I also really
for us.
That that's built it can be up
given the input so I hate to the
delay the process so I with that
I'm going to I guess you're not
forced to pay promotion after
the.
But anyway I I've when the time
is is is the program that like
to make a motion for the past
Senator he.
Thank you Mr chairman we are
late into the evening and I
think we're all kind of a little
short
and
I basically kind of written with
little mini dissertation here
in a lot of observations this
evening it I feel are are very
valid.
one I love my pharmacists I
really do I mean they're they're
great.
and I think clinical pharmacy
has a major role to play.
But thirty five hours in medical
reasoning I'm sorry.
A physician spends two years on
clinical wards as it is a
medical student.
And then spent three years in
residency which is also clinical
that's not thirty five hours.
What I would really love to see.
Is.
Not doing this bill.
But rather coming back with the
bill that creates a task force
that really lays out what should
be done to create the clinical
pharmacist and the scope of
practice that goes along with
that and to be and to be done
very carefully there are major
dangers in this bill.
You've spoke about COVID Sir.
That.
With the bill is not creating
clinical pharmacists we already
have clinical promises we don't
need a task force to create
clinical pharmacists.
Okay foot up thank you for that
Senator I guess Mr chair Senator
whichever
We we don't have.
We don't have the clinical rigor
that is needed to keep people
safe taxable plaques.
Apax of it many doctors would
now say you should not have
taken plaques of it because you
Madam suppress your immune
system to have further
resistance later on that's a
very technical decision that
needs to be informed by
experience that's just to give
you an example.
Number two.
Antibiotic resistance antibiotic
resistance.
Is a huge issue.
It used to be the Zee pac was a
very effective medication at one
time now it's got so much
resistance is pretty much
worthless and except for
particularly mycoplasma and even
that is is going down that needs
to be thought through very
carefully the medical record
that the good doctor spoke of
there is nothing here centers on
page eight line nine and the
maintenance of proper records
which are already required by
the clinical pharmacist but what
what is that what is that in
terms of the reasoning of the
diagnosis the laboratory in what
have you what I'm saying is that
this is too broad it's not well
thought out the insurance
companies will not cover it
under the code they will not
cover it you're gonna have to
build that into it and alls I'm
asking is that we show our duty
of care is legislators to the
safety of our constituents by
taking this back to be
rationally thought through and
build a structure in which a
number of these conditions could
be expanded.
Right now it says that the
pharmacy board will set the
the direction for whatever one
might take and and it doesn't
say in consultation with the
medical board and I think you
have to bring that expertise to
bear so I'm looking at this bill
as the right idea.
But not nearly well vetted and
off and I don't think you're
going to be able to vet it and
get a good enough before it goes
to Judiciary I think it needs to
come back next year with a
dedicated group that looks to
how to do this and and consider
all these other issues that are
not being considered so I will
advocate not voting for this
bill I agree there's not there's
not enough practitioners in the
state that's an issue that we
have to do within a number of
other ways like the Medicaid
bill in paying physicians a
competitive wage we shouldn't
say that to batch born in New
Mexico you don't get to get high
quality medical care so we're
going to send you to people
who've got some including but
haven't had the experience in
practice did you really want is
this a melanoma or is this an A.
K. I was at the dermatologist
today you know that and and that
raises the specter of
malpractice insurance what if
the pharmacists Miss Gallegos a
melanoma those that's just a
little skin these well they
don't have the experience to do
that and so when you talk about
skin lesions common A. K. versus
basal cell verses squamous cells
which unfortunately
metastasized and one of our
previous congressman died from
that congressman Schiff you need
to have the expertise we need to
address the shortage issue in
other ways but we need to expand
that the capacity to practice
and I would really hope that we
would put a group together to
look at this and do it work at
three U. N. M. where there is a
two colleges working through the
boards and and put some urgency
behind that The Tonight I can
not endorse this bill and would
ask my colleagues to vote
against thank you doctors anyone
else so want to speak before I
called and Senator gave us for
the second time.
Thank you Mr I'd like to do the
motion table.
Which is not available right.
So.
This call the roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna no Senator
sweeties.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Thoman no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino no not explain my boot.
It failed.
The due process for for I thank
you I'm sorry no it's going to
three five three five and one
excuse.
I agree yes I know of one excuse
and thank you have a reviews
another to pass I.
go ahead I just want to be
clear.
You know the it's a team effort.
This is not doctors against
pharmacists when I failed to
mention.
Is my mother who is retired now
is a clinical pharmacist she
worked and supported me and my
two sisters as a single mother.
So you say you love clinical
pharmacist hi my mother my
single mother was a clinical
pharmacist so absolutely there's
not this is no animosity here
you know all this stuff
absolutely a role but I want to
just explain to the chairman I
respect the chairman that's
where I'm coming from I I want
to make sure you know that about
my personal backgrounds thank
you.
And I want to come in on my vote
and I apologize for interrupting
drive you get Google funds but I
wanted to explain when Dr Madden
brought up the question about
records that clinical
pharmacists already are required
to maintain medical records and
what they do that's already in
the law we already have a law
that does that so that's and I
just wanted to be clear to you
and I'm glad I got very abrupt
and very short because you
didn't seem to realize that
we're not talking about creating
clinical pharmacists we're
talking about expanding an
existing scope of practice in to
things that the federal
government is already set are
perfectly okay for clinicians
for for clinical pharmacists to
do the CLI a have been approved
and and other states and they're
approved by the state and so
with that I would I would move
to do yes Mr chairman.
There have to do this.
Senator seconded.
All of the room Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hickey no Senator Ingle
Senator myiasis yes six point
Senator McKenna yes Senator
metes Senator.
Excuse me sitio Lopez.
Yes center Thomas yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
And then Mr chairman we will
work for you are going to win
your vote and.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator to just I trust I would
just because I trust that the.
Officer will work with the.
Medical Society on programs five
six and seven to ten absolutely
with that was what I was gonna
say Mr chairman we absolutely
will work with the medical
society on they have a due pass
seeing what can I buy my vote.
I I yes three no and one excuse
I yes three no one excuse this
includes as many everybody have
a great.
I'd like to I'd like to spend my
vote.
I have to I have to agree with
Dr Schmidt is this is not
doctors versus pharmacists we
need the expansion of this but
it needs to be done carefully.
And I have seen a throughout my
career I have worked with a spat
advanced practice clinicians in
multiple areas and when it's
done well it really works well
to me there is a breath and CLIA
is just really refers to testing
it's not like the federal
government says this is a great
bill.
The it is Jeff yes.
And so I've I've I urge caution
and I think we had as I said an
obligation to our constituents
to keep them safe and I think
with the proper vetting in the
proper analysis in the proper
scope defined this will work
well but to blatantly allow
people to go out and say oh it's
skin conditions not listen to a
test when you may have a a
cancer instead of an ammonia I'm
sorry that's just going too far
for me and that's why I voted no
I do put and I just think it's
going to be too hard to settle
before it gets to Judiciary
that's why I asked for a full
year to do it.
The
family the districts for
