Interfering with that so in
anticipation of not being able
to do it this friday we we
looked at we don't have a lot of
alternatives so we're we've
rescheduled it for two pm on the
day we end up people can hang
around for a nice committee
lension before you head home we
could do it then so i'll pass
around or would have been have
the secretary passed this around
if you if you had planned to
come to the dinner and can't
come to the linchen let us know
one year.
Alternatively if you hadn't
planned to come to the dinner
but wondered but now want to
come to the luncheon similarly
as another place to indicate
that.
Yes.
It's hard to believe I know it
is I I was flat regular but yeah
now that the republican carcass
and monday will take precedents
over the floor though.
The republicans have their own
cocki.
No but they
would like them to come to the
committee dinner too.
Okay we're good counting senator
mckenna and senator most as we
have a quarter so senator by the
will start with you this senate
bill seventy one reading the
office of housing thank you
thank you mister chairman of
members of the commandment to
push that back a little bit i've
got a voice that kind of carries
seventy one yeah okay can you
hear me
okay so mr chairman members of
the committee I think it it's
not surprising to anyone in this
room or anyone really in this
state that we have a severe
housing crisis in front of us at
the moment we believe that the
shortage is somewhere in the
neighborhood of forty thousand
dwelling units
let's just let that hang out
there for a little bit
with this welling you know unit
deficit that we face right now
it's all over the spectrum
pretty much anybody that has a
home right now probably can't
even afford to sell that home
because it would happen to
prices recently then we also
have issues related to interest
rates and then we have issues
related to supply costs so
there's a number of reasons why
we're in the housing
that were in the housing issue
that we're in and so as a result
of the governor last year
decided to appoint a group
called the new mexico housing
investment council so with no
you know with the goal of
solving this problem obviously
but not no specific you've got
to do with this where that way
so what we did as we embarked on
a journey to learn as much as we
possibly could about the issue
so that was step number one
trying to determine as is what's
going on right now and
essentially we came to the date
and information that I just
shared with you then the second
step was why don't we bring in
experts whether they're in new
mexico or outside of new mexico
i'm topics related to simply how
traditional housing issues that
we face regulatory issues
permitting issues you name it
financing issues.
Cost of of home ownership issues
we brought an experts from
really all over the world that
came in and talked to this
council for the legislature
standpoint I represented the
senate representative married
with dickson represented the
house and here we are so that
was the second step so bringing
in experts to help us understand
the issue that we're facing and
that the third step in the third
thing we tried to do was spent
an awful lot of time putting
together potential solutions and
some of those solutions were
related to financing others were
the actual technical aspects of
a building a home cost
associated with that what should
we look like where the real
deficits so we very quickly came
to the point and understanding
of two major problems that we
have in that is affordable
housing and we already have a
terrific engine that bills a
portable housing here in the
state we have the mortgage
finance authority that does
project by project.
Affordable housing projects and
they do wonderful job there and
it's my friend i'm a voting
member of the oversight
committee i've been on that
committee for the twelve years
i've been here I love and
appreciate the work that they do
we also have a whole other in
and you know the work of this
legislation that you're seeing
before you today and the work
with the council we didn't want
to change anything about what
the mortgage finance authority
did so effectively in building
affordable housing.
However failed more money and so
you're going to see an awful lot
of legislation around.
Hello government how are you
thank you for making some time
to join us okay so as we
continue to move through how
much time the much time is added
okay so bottom line is we went
through the asian space as I
mentioned then we went into the
understanding the issue by
bringing experts from all over
the world and this is the work
of the new mexico housing
investment council created by
our governor michelle and
grisham understanding and
recognizing this problem so the
council was representative of of
myself a representative married
with dixon housing experts both
at the affordable level to the
construction level to the master
planning level to you name it
anyone that had anything to do
with housing and then we also
like I said brought in experts
from all over the world in some
cases to truly understand this
issue but we did land on the
fact that we have this great
engine this great thing going
with march finance authority why
wouldn't we now move in the
direction of work force housing
we are the tenth one of the temp
fastest growing states in the
union for people moving into the
state and for economic
development and job growth and
that is a lot of the work of our
governor this legislature and
just playing old hard working
new mexicans getting the job
done but people need a place to
live and it needs to be
affordable so the second piece
was let's work on work force
housing also so then the council
came forward with a couple of
things that the at the
conclusion of our work and one
of them is that we enhanced the
dollars flowing too with the
mortgage finance authority and
all the wonderful programming
that they have in place and we
don't want to mess with that at
all we want them to continue
doing their work the second
piece is to create an office of
housing coordination which is
what i'm here with you and
before you today right now we
have another bill on your agenda
later I will discuss some of the
financing but that office was to
create it to work on these
coordination issues whether they
be permitting
certificate of occupancy zoning
you name it infrastructure what
are these issues so this office
is responsible for.
Creating a state white housing
plan that is actually different
from the one that the mortgage
finance authority puts together
on an annual buying or basis in
and mister where what is my
expert today he's going to talk
about the real differences
between that plan and the one
that's going to come together
here and then the second piece
with that why don't we take the
bill that are the acted
representative dixon and I
created last year called the
opportunity enterprise act and
further expand the work done
there from a workforce housing
standpoint and fund that office
appropriately so you're going to
see some legislation later on in
your agenda to date it to fix
that issue and i'm only
referencing that mister chairman
because all of this comes
together you know when we go
through this office of housing
him a coordination.
That's not to say that the
the new mexico finance authority
were the office of option
enterprise access and the
mortgage finance authority
that's not to say that these two
officers won't work together on
very large projects.
Am if as going to continue doing
their work the domestical
finance authority through this
other part project that we're
working on will work on on
infrastructure to these massive
large developments for work
force housing so you could all
back together and there's an
awful lot of coordination in
moving parts and things that
have to happen here and so as a
result that's one of the key
reasons we believe we need this
housing
office of housing coordination
so that's essentially what the
legislation does
we've done a lot of work ahead
of time this was not something
we did **** nearly I mean we
also spent an awful lot of time
making sure that in this effort
Affect on the great great work
that's done by the mortgage
finance authority we want them
to continue on their swimline
continue doing what they're
doing we simply want to enhance
what they're going to be doing
so as a result you're going to
see where you have a great
discussion on this today the key
functions that are mandated in
the office of housing will be to
conduct strategic and levels and
level statewide planning and
goal setting and that's
accountable for driving the
goals that are set out in the
state white housing plan to
track in published data that
predicts trans and measures
outcomes to important policy and
investment changes.
To provide technical assistance
and training to local
governments which housing is
done in our localities every
which way from tuesday we simply
want to learn from each other
best practices make sure we take
that on down the road to the
next community or if they need
help solving an issue that their
facing to deliver housing how
can we help them do that in this
office will help us put that
together so we can overcome
those barriers bring together
partnerships and make this
happen for a state and then the
final key point that's mandated
in the office of housing in its
legislation is to support as I
mentioned earlier work force
development in the housing
finance development and
construction trades and so with
that I have some this is the
first time i've had this
opportunity to have our governor
come and sit next to me for a
piece of legislation as an
expert witness and she has a lot
to say on this topic and i'm
very proud to have her here and
then we're going to hear from mr
wearweath who is the current
office of housing.
Uh director so can I do michael
well they are the mike he had
the hand held the hand held on
I think that might work in the
leaser for the government
government governor welcome to
the committee.
Hold it away.
As i'm so loud senator
can everyone hear me okay mister
chairman is that all right that
I be recognized cause i'm in
addition to your very busy
schedule.
And live alright thank you
gonna be one of my last times if
ever to be able to
be before the distinguished
chairman said it or teasy peanut
and want to be sure and do that
because he's been serving since
I was the secretary on aging
since I was the secretary of
health and how lucky am I to get
to make a pitch and you don't
want me answering some of the
questions you don't need me for
that but I thought it might be
useful mister chairman and
committee members to talk about
why this is so important and
without taking too much time I
know how busy we all are I
thought I might take us back
senator to the early childhood
education care department and
what are the key issues was we
do a lot we were already doing
early children education wasn't
quite universal we were already
doing home visiting we were
already doing instant mental
health we were doing a number of
things in a number of different
places in state government and
at the end one of the court
issues certainly when I ran in
eighteen was elected and started
serving in nineteen is too many
families did not have access to
early childhood education and if
you might remember I made a
presentation with my then three
year old granddaughter miss
avory stewart to senate finance
and there was a lot of
consternation about the
permanent fund and about other
funds and state government about
duplication about who is going
to do what it exactly whether or
not we really needed that effort
and in that year I didn't win it
this is our second year
expecting to win it now that's
the secret sauce.
But you might remember that the
legislature awarded us three
hundred and twenty million as a
result of that hearing and then
I believe successfully we have
demonstrated at having that
department has been a game
changer for new mexico families
and in fact it's led to a
position now we're we're going
to be the only state in america
to have universal child care and
the only state in america with
the constitutional right which
i'm incredibly proud of that
happened because of the
leadership of senators just like
the senators sitting here today
and largely early childhood is a
non part is an issue evidence is
clear makes the difference and
it will move the needle in
education how we get there what
we do how much money I realize
they're going to be a different
a set of different opinions in
the same way we were successful
there and I wanted to make that
statement about kids including
my own kidders who needed to
have the right supports in the
right place.
Tied for first place for me
directly is the request from new
mexico families to do something
about their housing we get
hundreds of calls a week
hundreds of families that are
one minute away from being
displaced and on the streets
there's not enough in reynold
assistance there's not enough
building there's not enough
support for work force housing
companies are asking me to help
their own employees navigate
through the system and I know
that you heard we he wrote in
our bed from jordan gutas father
family.
Really struggle to find the
right programs in the right ways
because they exist in many
different places he almost was
enable to secure a house for his
family and in the end was way
more than they were anticipating
to spend which means this family
is going to be in a really tough
position in the context of being
there day to day week to week
and monthly budgets right now I
have spent and so is my
constituent services team
months trying to make sure that
a single marm.
With an eleven year old child.
Who's living in a very temporary
not secure trailer on land.
It is a available to her for
short period of time doesn't
belong to her and she's in this
situation because family members
died who were the life line and
the link to her stability and
her sons.
I make probably with the nasa
canadies my constituent services
director twelve calls a week
trying to navigate housing now
she also doesn't want to move
her child from school fair.
Child's doing really well in
school mister chairman and i'm
happy about that and the whole
community and my office food
heat any other supports we can
provide while she waits to stay
in a community where she's not
going to separate after the
death of other family members
her son from the only community
he knows but there is no new
building in this community there
is no new apartment complex so
we're gonna wait for a voucher
and a placement if we don't move
faster and that's going to take
everyone rowing together
we aren't going to be able to
make the kind of dents that we
need to and we're seeing it
playout in risks for families as
I described today the mexicans
who were priced out of houses in
every single community
and as you've met with field who
sitting behind us who works in
my office as well that we are
trying to navigate one house
populations to stable living
environments there are no
options for any of these
populations and that's before I
talk to you about aging
populations and where they're
going to be and I would like to
just remind the committee
briefly that we have where the
highest per capital percentages
of older people in the country
and that is growing rapidly and
also would like quickly and i'm
in a wrap up in three minutes
that we have one of the most
challenging sets of populations
that are sober nations in order
to also do housing and I might
point out that the housing
programs that we have.
In the authorities that we've
established don't work in a
situation where you don't own
the land.
There's a number of places that
we have to lean in better we
have to coordinate better in
somehow I believe it's not about
the office of housing and the
opportunity for the whole of
government to lean in from work
for solutions to human services
and medicated aging department
and of the folks who develop who
lend money who create an
ecosystem those are your
authorities mfa and nmfa we need
them.
But some of this is seemed to be
the translation here is that
there's a takeover take over
this bills very clearly an
office I don't know the last
time you saw a governor but then
hundreds of millions of dollars
and requests to other entities
that don't I don't have direct
control over unless our purpose
is to create more opportunities
through every single vehicle
twenty seven other states have
these officers I think that's
right that way higher we're like
one of the last states
states that that that's why I
have an expert so I don't five
deal is that another issue where
where's twenty seven states are
ahead of us and often remember
what that is for the next
committee I show up that
uninvited.
Um but thank you for your
gracious hospitality.
We have to get beyond that and I
just wanted to remind us that I
think we're all feeling pretty
good about our successors and
early childhood and in child
care if we want to feel really
good and be able to demonstrate
the kind of outcomes it's gonna
take all of us working together
and I need to have my own
situation in terms of an office
also makes this eligible for
other grants.
The other entities can't get
there not part of the executive
branch directly we want to
leverage every dollar in every
place in every construct and we
also have an opportunity to help
cities and counties because we
find through you all with that
work.
It means that their permitting
and zoning we can start working
together more collectively and
cohesively to do that
and then last and this is the
thirty second closing you know
i've spent I haven't been able
to talk to all of the
stakeholders were certainly all
of the board members and places
like mfa that it is clear to me
that there's a great deal of
confusion about what the sits
and a great deal with
misinformation which sometimes
happens and I wanted to be here
so that there isn't any
misinformation or
misunderstanding about what
we're working to accomplish and
how valuable this office will
and can be to the future of
every single new mexico family
who is it sure about their new
mexico dream because they are
currently priced out where there
are no housing options available
to them in any community
statewide mister chairman
committee members thank you for
your patience and this
opportunity to support senator
pidea and the state's experts I
yield.
Thank you very much governor and
the chairman of the astanda
warehouse who's director of the
house officer housing right now
can you sell his last name for a
secretary.
Them.
W e r w a t and i'm a housing
policy adviser to the office of
the governor were work.
Yeah thank you by the way
governor for your comment
appreciated thank you for coming
today and mister rower thank you
chairman thank you governors
thank you center per dear for
this opportunity to speak um I
should disclose the isaved in a
a non official capacity as a
member of their housing
investment council over the last
nine months i've worked in
affordable housing for the last
twenty years in new mexico I
feel housing i've made housing
plans for six local governments
and i've also had the
opportunity to do policy and
planning work around around the
country in that time.
We are.
In whatever is beyond a crisis
in this moment the average cost
of a new home in the last three
years the national association
home billers estimates up over a
hundred and forty thousand
dollars combined with interest
rates that means the median
income family has just gotten
the cost of a home in the way of
owning a home so over a quarter
million dollars of obstacles
we're starting to see core larry
effects with vacancies in the
public sector because people
can't afford to live in the
communities where they work.
And in many states we are
starting to see comprehensive
approaches to tackle these
issues and that means not just
subsidizing housing not just
having one of the most robust
affordable housing
infrastructures in in the
country I think but actually
working to bring down the cost
of housing and increase the
supply of housing
the thing that's most alarming
that we've seen in the last few
years is the vast fast majority
some estimates over ninety
percent of renter households
right now in new mexico cannot
afford the median priced new
home so if we're doing this to
working
that means that there are so
many other problems that we're
going to have to work to fix and
education in behavioral health
in early childhood investments
in housing are critical for
making sure that we
solve these problems but it's
not just investment it's about
working on the big picture the
state has married agencies that
work on housing today whether
it's cid and permitting or
see yfd and children there are
housing
activities happening across
state government but they're
happening without unified and
strategic deployment there's
ways that stay government it
could be working right now to
assist with housing that aren't
simply for a lack of according
to expertise and strategy within
state government and the biggest
picture is that in less we do
dramatic things to bring down
the cost of building new housing
and get the barriers out of the
way for adding housing this is a
trajectory that will not change
it will only accelerate um so to
us the office of housing is a
critical step to not just work
on subsidises affordable housing
for people who meet circuit
certain income limits.
It's about making sure that
every new mexican from the most
difficult to serve on house
person to the two income working
household they can no longer
afford to buy a house in the
community where they work has
someone who's working to fix
that problem and that problem
includes things like working
with local governments to get
regulatory barriers out of the
way implement best practices
santa fe has a zoning code from
nineteen ninety nine think about
the things that have changed
since that think of how much
santa fe changed since then
the we have an imagining
ray of builders and people in
the the development community in
new mexico but they're no longer
enough to meet the demand we're
trying to build over several
decades worth of under
production of housing all at
once rate so we need to be
working to grow our construction
work force capacity we need to
be working to pull the levers to
bring down the cost of new
housing in every way we can if
someone has an idea about how to
lower the cost of two bicycles
will work on it but short of
that we're going to do
everything else in our power to
do that and unless we do that
we're not doing everything we
can be doing for new mexican
families I think.
The biggest thing that you've
probably heard in in opposition
to this is the idea of
duplication I think if you're a
new mexican family buried in a
unaffordable housing payment
having more than one office
digging on this doesn't feel
like duplication it feels like
many hands make light work and
that's what we need to be doing
we all need to be working
together this bill calls for
extensive coordination with
state agencies with the mortgage
finance authority it includes a
language change to adds a board
position to the mortgage finance
authority board so we can sure
coordination non overlapping and
non voting member of the board
it is there simply to ensure
that we're working in lock step
and throughout the billion sea
language that calls for mandated
coordination and collaboration
which is I think it's you know
as as legislators if you don't
mandate coordination a lot of
times it doesn't happen so I
think this is an important step
a step that many other
communities have taken to
address the the critical housing
issues that if we don't take
dramatic steps
will see things like shrinking
impact of our affordable housing
dollars
shrinking outputs in terms of
housing big developers around
the state today are saying
they're
their pens are down for next
year and less something big
changes and we we need that
housing badly.
It's okay.
That's better what we said
center
so i'm we're ready to go
whenever you are mister chairman
that's our opening state
very good let's go to the
audience and get some indication
of whose hearings supported this
bill raise your.
Okay
listen how many you're here in
office if anybody's here in our
position anybody here in
opposition to the bill.
Okay well as well and our
positions will take one and
support we want to do it that
way
let's take list take five people
in support you're going to you
want to identify them senator
you want to speak in support
check
graduating
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is jd bowlington and I am here
today representing the greater
alba cookie chamber of commerce
and the city of santa fe they're
both support this legislation
strongly housing as a challenge
across the nation right now and
it's a real problem across the
mexico and it's an issue in
santa fe rent a sky high home
values have priced out many
buyers including first time
buyers and overall there just
isn't enough housing to go
around this bill will help us
understand and effectively
address our state's problems in
housing availability and
affordability and that in turn
will help us bite homelessness
as well.
The.
Mr care members of the committee
randy trainer representing the
new mexico home builders
association I was also member of
the governors a housing
investment council.
Two things became very apparent
very quickly as we were
discussing this the first one
was this is a production problem
we are simply not producing
enough homes.
Plain sim.
The second thing we did we
discovered early on was that
local governments control the
flow of housing.
In the processes that local
governments used to approve
housing projects are old and
antiquated they're slow they add
a tremendous cost to a home you
don't get a bigger home.
You don't get better countertops
you just get a bigger mortgage
because things moved out slow in
this process and so part of what
we need to talk about here as
local governments need to look
in the mirror about their
processes they're they're just
old and and equated I I used to
do this kind of work many many
many years ago and nothing has
really changed is just gotten
worse.
And and I just want to say
quickly that
you know i've always been a
supporter of the mortgage
finance authority and I still
and this isn't really about the
mortgage party as authorities
about housing.
And I would say that the
mortgage finance authority in my
view isn't designed.
To meet this particular
challenge what they do they do a
very good job of it with their
providing down payment
assistance to people that
there's no product for them to
buy.
We need to produce more housing
and we would support this bill
thank you
thank you.
As a chairman members of the
committee and sponsors and
supporters of the bill miles
conway and the executive officer
for the northern new mexico
builders association and we
stand in strong support of this
bill and some others on your
agenda today in addition I carry
the support of the new mexico
home builders association for
this initiative working at all.
As everyone has said it's it's
an issue of production right now
as we stand here today there is
an apartment complex within a
few miles of this very round
house and it would be very
appropriate for maybe working
people earning a very more
modest wage it is ninety percent
fall of los alamos national
laboratory employees earning
well over a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars here this is a
problem we call filtration in
the industry when when people
have of of more you know higher
means are occupying housing that
would otherwise be affordable
for working people so it is a
production problem and what you
have before you this bill we
have the opportunity for deal
bakers for people to stack money
together to make development
projects work because as anyone
in this room will tell you
whether they're for against the
spill
there's no financing for that
bridge for that road for that
utility or infrastructure that
we mentioned pencils a few
minutes ago the reason pencils
are down on big developments
cause it's just not penciling
out for a developer to feed
their family and also deploy the
kind of housing developments
that they they have in mind so
this this office can serve a
great role in getting everybody
to the table then nonprofit the
fourdashprofit developers the
municipalities and local
governments everybody working
together to create the kind of
housing production we need I
won't be repetitive but way
behind and production thank you
members of the committee
sponsors now government thank
you miles.
Mrperiod chair members of the
committee my name is healthy
canada and i'm the director of
public policy at the new mexico
chamber of commerce our research
driving new mexico's future
identified infrastructure is
essential for economic
competitiveness we applied the
governor and the sponsors of
this bill and the leadership
from the legislature on your
focus on how we use our abundant
resources on infrastructure to
continue to grow faster and
support new mexico for the next
generation housing is
infrastructure it will unlock
opportunities for work first
development and a better quality
of life this new tour will help
knock down barriers to
development and more supply and
bring everyone together to roll
in the same direction thank you.
Mister chair members of the
committee make very much it my
name is gary acceptance
disability rights new mexico I
also was only was selected on a
house the investment castle and
appreciate the governor
recognizing the unique
challenges for people with
disabilities and getting access
to affordable housing.
There's gaps out there we all
know it there's different
agencies doing different things
see why fd does some house the
hsd does amount the oh does some
house there's lots of different.
Parts out there we need
coordination in direction to
fulfill a vision for new mexico
from individuals with
disabilities in particular we
know also they are gaps out
there that we see there with
boarding homes there's only
three license boarding homes how
can we address this and now
urban airs but the rural areas
we know there's an enormous
number of individuals and
shelters that are older were
side shelter large population of
older americans so we need to
look who can help lead us with
the medicaid fund the other
american funding and all these
other funding streams with
eleven fifteen demonstration
waivers that can help provide
the type of support that is
needed the help individuals we
think in office to help
coordinate that will help
achieve th.
Thank you gary.
Now somebody wanted to speak in
opposition.
But we have one oh I thought you
said they didn't want to.
And support
how many
okay well come on up and get
ready to give you but will take
the three on line supporters.
I squall her non desk.
Thank you chairman member of the
committee money is possible on
this I am representing sanity
habitat and habitat of new
mexico
I liked my voice to be echoed
today by four hundred and fifty
folks who are sitting on a
waiting list right now for
affordable housing this office
is needed duplication it needs
to be we need ten of these
offices and so state and I hope
that the committee will support
this thank you.
Thank you mister.
Carlos.
I thank you very much my name is
carlos tomorrow consultant to a
variety of different local
governments threatening mexico
we work in large communities
like santa be will sound like
all the people were also working
in small world is like you can
carry cars that seem
is really unfortunate you know
we're working with a lot of
jurisdictions that are trying to
repeat the wheel trying to work
on the issues around housing
supply around financing around
development in something that
you see a lot of is that there
are existing barriers which are
discouraging or disabling the
building that these local
communities to provide a board
of the housing or two added
implements different kinds of
economic development land used
policies and changes because it
isn't right now and knock
passing and windership around
how to properly do that I think
and that they is doing readable
job working with services and
getting different funds for me
but when we think about the
system at a meet your housing we
need to have a much more needed
approach and I agree with all of
that
with old supporters on this
around some of the individual
aspects of alvis specific office
to felt that thank you very
much.
Thank you carls.
Adam johnson you're next.
Hello mr chairman members of the
committee thank you my my name
is out of johnson and I could
recommend business station she's
a historic preservation at
because
profit i'm speaking from a
cultural heritage perspective I
want to act mister conway at the
new northern extra home
builders.
You have when we have a housing
affordability issues multi
generational families people who
have really corners blood
sweating terrorism to what new
mexico is a millions are being
pressed out and its important
for us to have an umbrella
organization to orchestrate
these efforts across the state
because it's not responsible but
of course needed across the
board thank you very much.
Thank you okay now we'll go in
that of who is this.
Okay is that chris.
The.
That those are the out of the
phone itself.
Very sontaggers in a point.
So we'll go now to opponents if
you go ahead and use the
handheld mike.
Mister chairman members of the
committee my name is money so
that i'm the executive director
of the new mexico collision
homelessness.
We stand today with some
conflict with sp seventy one the
spills were presented as with
more questions than answers why
in office of housing when the
last office of housing shut down
its duties were transferred to
mfa so why is the need for an
office of housing when mf exist
and carrying out what is already
laid out in sp seventy one.
And these dollars could go to
its housing and services that
directly impact those of their
unhoused or precariously and
house.
We know that housing and
homelesses are two issues that
need more attention in our state
a duplication is already being
done and unnecessary late last
year the coalition published and
updated housing analysis.
On the funding that is needed at
the state level on order to
address the issues around
affordable housing homeless
prevention and we believe that
this is where the focus should
be and we're in office would be
more beneficial.
In addition we have some
questions around why housing and
homeless are being separated.
Homelessness is a housing
problem and should be addressed
together in order to make
meaningful and direct impact I
want to be very clear we are not
opposed to an office of housing
we're opposed to the way that
this bill stands today and so we
can not support thank you.
Thank you money next.
Members of the committee and my
senator I think your mike may be
off.
Tapped it on top and see if it.
Okay.
My name is winter daughters and
I am the ceo of the new mexico
eviction prevention and
diversion nonprofit.
I also want to say that I am not
speaking for a larger group but
for my organization in
particular.
And I also am not opposed to a
centralising force for housing
it is needed what is lacking in
this bill is centralizing force
for all of the nonprofits and
other entities that have picked
up the housing work since the
housing department was wondered
down in the nineties.
Also
here in santa fe there is a
committee of folks with lived
experience of being unhoused and
they have a saying nothing about
us without us
and that's the issue here when
the housing investment council
was first created I went
upstairs to try and attend
the announcement in the first
meeting and was not permitted
and.
And the industry as you can tell
from the commenters today was
heavily represented that is a
concern for the non profits as
we just don't have the capacity
to tell you guys the stories.
That we encounter every day.
Also with regard to how the
council actually operated they
were supposed to have by laws
they were supposed to be votes
but it wasn't a democracy they
were also posted produce a
housing plan but they did it and
I don't think that a housing
plan can be produced by july
which is what is in this bill
now.
I went back east in the fall and
met with the harver joint center
on housing and that was my law
school corner law school.
I met with a law school
colleague who does tech in law
at sufficient school.
The.
And I also went to princeton and
met with a viction lab.
Myself money many of the other
non profits that weren't
involved with the council.
Have a lot of expertise.
I'm also concerned that the
people on the ground.
Did not contribute to this so
i've always thought like let's
do some regional tours and let's
let's pool people together in
each quadrent
plus a couple in the metro areas
and let's really hear and not
just be told.
What we want.
I also had what a point out
something with regard to the
department of finance and
administration which i'm not
sure what administratively
connected means in the bill.
But.
Dfa sat on twenty million
dollars in rental assistance.
And so that is money that did
not go out to help new mexicans.
Additionally the lsc report had
another fifteen million in erap
two dollars that have not gotten
out.
So I don't know if the fa is the
place to do it and I think you
guys all know that we've had
that the state has had real
trouble pushing out the money
that it has appropriate.
Finally I just want to say that
the lawyer in me has real issues
and I hear my law professors.
Just debating with me about the
language in the bill.
I concur with the auditors
analysis that you can't tell who
trumps who.
And that's a real problem and
you're gonna end up in you know
very likely could it end up in
court and you're going to have
to interpret I also there was an
idea and they're about to tribes
and I actually had that same
idea went to indian affairs and
testified and said hey we can
help and they were like put me
at a place and said no actually
the tribes have to come to you
have to come to the state first
and that's true their sovereign
entities and we're already
working on.
In short.
We do believe in centralization
we need it.
But this bill.
Is not it
thank you miss mister anybody
online
carlos
or larry santa.
Good afternoon mister chairman
it's larry santa
and I like some of the others
who are speaking in opposition I
appreciate senator padia who is
elevating the conversation about
the fact that we do need to do
better when it comes to our
housing and affordable housing
my concern and speaking as a
private individual as a taxpayer
that the response to a lot of
problems in the state seems to
be to grow government to have
another office and the financial
impact report on this bill is
unique and that has three other
government agencies saying
this could be a problem fa notes
that this would be duplicative
of much of the work that's
already been done and creating
duplicate duke look at have
agencies can decrease
administrative efficiency.
The office of the state auditor
raised concerns about senate
bill seventy one though it might
cause conflicts with
stakeholders they go on to list
a lot of what those conflicts
may be.
And finally the state
treasurer's office suggests that
these conflicts along with the
lack of clarity in the bill
raised legal issues.
The last thing that we need and
I can tell you from my interact
with a lot of governmental
agencies and I worked for the
government for thirty years so I
know what efficiency looks like
within government and whenever
you get too many hands on the
inefficiency takes over I
encourage you to look at the
financial act report and what
the other agencies including the
m f a which the bill sponsor
said he is very familiar with
the work sound the governor's
very familiar with all that
encourage you to look at the
fact that they're saying this
b seventy one would create
conflicts and overlaps and the
work is already being done.
Thank you.
Thank you learn anybody else is
there anyone here from the
municipally.
Okay I have a quick announcement
before you go to you against
senator to respond.
Someone named victoria.
Left her phone in the ladies
restroom
so if there is a person named
victory is missing your phone
but that's what I wondered is
that that
that they've put the phone in
room three twenty eight if you
need.
Senator please respond okay
thank you very much chairman and
thank you too supporters non
supporters or warm supporters I
think all of its very helpful
feedback I just want to dress a
couple of the points of them
will go right back to you chair
so we can start giving the
questions from the committee on
the dfa connection to the fee I
just want to underscore that
this governor has decided to
elevate this issue right to be a
near direct report to her to
bring all of that attention to
this particular issue so when we
say the department of finance
administration administratively
attached that simply is attached
and sits there as an office for
the staff and the employees for
their human resources functions
their budgeting there are this
in that that's that's really
what that's all about so I just
want to make sure that that's
clear it up for folks in might
be concerned.
The at the administration of of
the office the the goal setting
the delivery the service
delivery of the office will
report directly to the
individual to my right which is
to the governor so when we need
to have things door is opened
and issues resolved and
attention brought to what have
you it will come with the full
weight and force of the
governor's office to get this
work down so I just want to
mention that as point number one
point number two I did hear an
awful lot of.
This issue that issue that
coordination is that this is
exactly what you just heard
chair members this is exactly
why this office is needed
because you have so many hands
in the part of housing and I
just want to underscore that
this is the office of housing in
a would be the housing
coordination and so as a result
you're going to have a sounding
board that can be a repository
for all of the folks you just
heard from the issues it may
reside add for it from you know
issues related to homelessness
this and that and so all of that
is going to fall in in the lap
of of this coordination this
coordinated effort so I I want
to say that i'm so glad that the
feedback that we just received
because I was restorers reached
over to the governor said this
is all very helpful and the
reason I feel like it's helpful
is it describes exactly what the
problem is so that that's point
number two that I wanted to
mention based on the feedback I
just heard point number three is
this governor has also decided
that a biflicated approach to
housing and the unhoused ie
homelessness.
Is just as important.
And we can't underscore the that
that is so critically important
in this discussion.
So she has elevated this to a
director I don't know exactly
what your title is exactly but
i'm sure it's related to housing
yes as tousing the housing
portion of this exercise and
then we also have any whitfield
here who is focused on the
unhouse and homeless issue so
the third part piece I wanted to
mention to you based on the
feedback is yes while I heard
that loud and clear this
governor has decided to make
both of these issues just as
important as the other one and
then the last thing that I
wanted just talk about briefly
is the comments related to
duplicativeness
nothing in the legislation here
and i'm I would i'm an asked
angle here just a moment to talk
about the difference between the
housing plan that this office is
going to be required to produce
versus the housing plan that the
m f a the march finance
authority is produced but.
Nothing in this legislation is
going to complete me complicated
that with my opening statement.
The good work that the mortgage
finance authority does so we we
we do need to let them continue
to swim very fast in the lane
and give them the money that
they need to do their work and
then also allow this other
component of housing which you
heard in in some of the
introductory remarks is yeah I I
have a son that I just brought
back to new mexico is he said
msw is about to get us elsies he
can't afford to buy a home.
It's hard to get in his saving
left and right workshop we're
going to help him and everything
so so as a result every spectrum
of of it needs housing is going
to be positively impacted by
this office so I don't know
governor did you want to make
some more comments or
thank you at senator pity at
mrperiod chairman committee
members
I do really I spent a wider time
and I appreciated the comment
about traveling I did my share
of traveling and I required that
my staff did too we went to the
top cities for addressing
homelessness we went to the top
cities and talked to their local
governments about leadership in
getting housing done we I have
certainly spent quite a bit of
time with the new mayor of los
angeles former congresswoman
mayor best so I think that is a
very valuable exercise.
The.
But.
Government can and does often.
Follow the silos in the
statutory design and the federal
requirements for new number one
of these projects so you heard
about you know this happens here
if this happens there see why if
these already there they're all
very specific and specialized
and they have to be in order to
meet the children's code or to
meet the federal ground.
When you don't coordinate them
and i'm in italian I I asked the
legislature and I won
I asked the legislature to pass
the law so we'll see a far
one of the staffers remembers
the long term care act.
Does anybody here remember the
long term care act.
The long term care act says that
all of the departments that work
on
issues related to care care
giving or disability again
grandparents raising
grandchildren so basically every
health and human service
department.
A required to work together.
Let me just say that one more
time it is on the books still.
I had to ask the legislature.
To get the human services
department.
To talk to me as the ageing
secretary.
Has anybody remember that debate
about back with remembers that
debate not bet you were the
department and i'll bet the
department of fell stood up in
opposed.
I'm sure you did.
I wanted anyway.
And sense that coordination.
We're seeing better and greater
service delivery
the very populations that we all
independently represent.
It does actually take a design
and it takes a statutory
commitment because it is very
fluid and I will also tell you
the number one issue for dealing
with homelessness issues is to
get the providers support and
clarity about who they serve and
in my last year and a half and
senator pope thank you very much
for your work i've got about
twenty different providers who
serve the same fifty people.
So do i.
But we don't get outside of that
work we need the right lanes
with the right traffic plan with
a very clear destination with a
return trip in the way that we
do that is in a housing office
and people I think get very
uncomfortable when I appreciate
hearing it directly a text
courage.
When it looks like somebody
could be looking and helping the
work that you do this is gonna
take a village every one into
mexico is going to have to be
clear about our housing work and
I want to make one last point
that wasn't made since i've been
governor the amount of money
that's gone the housing and
services for the unhoused.
Is about twenty five or higher
times in the last several
governors combined.
Seventy five million just in
housing so it's not that we're
just trying to create a saying
we've actually demonstrated
we're doing the thing and we
can't get enough of it built we
can't get enough of it desired
we can't move it fast enough and
every time we
ring our hands.
About if we're going to step on
one person's toes or another
that's another family that loses
and one point.
To the person i'm sorry I don't
know who it wasn't good for you
who said dfa didn't spend all
their you wrap money they didn't
and they got to a lot of trouble
and the person who was in charge
of that no longer works in state
government.
I also am highly accountable and
I went right to the federal
government and got most of that
money right back.
Because you're right we should
not be leaving money on the
table anywhere takes courage to
point out when a governor and
their team didn't quite meet the
mark but we also learned from
the mistakes that we make so
we're really clear that we won't
make them again and now dfa
would be accountable to the new
office of housing in our plans
about who is doing and spending
what so thank you for this time
today and thank you for all of
the testimony by everybody who
is participating in this
committee here.
Thank you mister chairman.
Okay we'll go to the members of
the committee I I just wanted to
ask one quick question before we
get started with the other
members of this last comment
that the governor made the the
now de will be responsible to
the office of housing for their
housing.
The end of february and
albuquerque i'll be there this
is about making sure that we all
share ideas and actually mfa
ought to be and will be invited
to provide constructive
criticism above the things just
as you heard today or maybe the
state isn't leveraging enough
you know when we do it in
directly I don't always know.
I need to do legislatives we
don't always know.
And we need to know and if
there's an idea or statutory
change or department that's in
the way of mfa mse or anyone
else we ought to know what that
is and then address it but we
have to be seen as better
partners and not competitors and
what is clear to me that but for
now and whoever did what I i'm
pretty sure it was danish legal
who did this but or randy
trainer one of you
but.
It it's never comfortable to
create new things and to ask for
a movement the healthcare
authority his heart.
Is the ecd was really hard we
did the money it was so hard.
And I controlled all those
entities directly it was so hard
we waited mister chairman till
the next year to describe the
department it always feels like
it's competitive and when it
feels like it's competitive
human nature is to feel like
you're being identified as one
of the problems where
identifying mfa is one of the
solutions which is why in
separate proposals but hide the
office of housing we are
requesting huge amounts of money
I have to say one constructive
criticism about mfa which is why
i'm going to go to their
meetings they don't ask me to
help them wibby money across the
finish line and they will say
mister chairman i'm quite
effective at that so this would
be an invitation to make sure
that they get their fair share
so that i'm presenting and
pushing their agendas and
budgets as well
okay committee members who who
has questions who has sent you.
The.
Thank you miss chairman thank
you senator governor
director for your presentations
today was very informative I
will say I have been heavily
laughing that this is a
duplicate activity
and
i'm seeing I hope in this is
where my questions are going to
go
and and i'll start with a little
bit of context in that sometimes
having come from the business
world I get really frustrated
being in government
that are being a part of
government and doing this job
because of the lack of
coordination between departments
I mean is it as i've done health
issues new pack I mean just very
very frustrating and who's on
first
is it now to me is a very
powerful question that needs to
be answered and clarity needs to
come and so the folks have been
talking to me saying we already
do this now i'm hearing things
that are different and and I did
say I think I said director I
would listen to day two your
presentation but I want to put
it into some some context and
then from that will come
questions first of all governor
it's very helpful to hear you
have the courage to create the
hca.
This.
Just before that I wrote a fifty
one page paper that concluded we
need an h c a I think maybe you
got their first ident but all
the things are coming now into
the health care authority that
we put into that paper
and the ability to create their
help create vision for what it
can do literally we can be a
state that doesn't see
healthcare costs who are by any
more than three percent of the
year as a number of other states
and I think you may have learned
about from interviewing the
former head of the health care
authority and in oregon so that
that gives me a lot of belief
that you'll be able to pull this
off and and but I I do have
questions about the the
coordination components and the.
And I don't know much about the
mortgage thought i'm sorry but.
When there is a difference of
opinion between the direct
during his staff and the thought
and the animal method and the
new mexico finance authority who
who brings clarity or how is
clarity brought so that we have
every difference's opinions are
really important and good and
that that's when your best
thinking when heads knock that's
when you get your best
solutions.
So how is that going to be
resolved because inevitably it's
going to come up and and you
know there's going to be
probably on mfa some sensor well
this was my turf and night
you've kind of come over on that
and is my job secure and and now
all these other things play into
it but how do we would resolve.
Any conflicts and get to a
decision that we take action.
Air governor
may I i'm gonna do it this way
not be faster I don't want this
hearing to take as long as it
would if I were actually the
sponsor of the bill so
on the duplication side which
isn't the focus of your question
think about this if you might
formy senator as the department
of health and the public school
with health think you went out.
You need both and one isn't
gonna necessarily agree with a
particular priority of another
and that will play out in either
the department of health
operating a non similar service
somewhere or operating on that
similar and asking the
legislature in terms of funding
which model you prefer to fund.
I think the biggest set of
conflicts are actually in
describing the legislation
because there's discomfort there
and I think largely that could
be attributed you know to my
office and the council will we
were trying to get the private
sectors barriers quickly as
clearly established and so we'll
take responsibility for that
i'll take responsibility for
that but that the beauty of this
is our efforts are about
coordinating and i'll tell you
what I think honestly is that
when you get people all in the
same room more often the
likelihood that we leave the
room agreeing is much higher and
for whatever reason the state
didn't do its job the
authorities are too busy these
are the stuff is hard and it
takes everybody's work in twenty
four seven it takes a new desire
to sort of get us all to think
about which to share ideas we're
not going to have any ability to
tell mf what to do.
In the beauty of that is now I
mean as a governor i'd like to
be able to tell all the
legislature as you know what to
do that the beauty of me not
being able to do that is that
you do get independent decision
making and you do get earnesty
and transparency about where you
don't agree which is going to be
a very powerful legislative tool
will also in my view be a very
powerful opportunity for local
bodies of government because
they'll see where there may be a
gap this is to invite people to
focus on the gaps and the
problems of together so I just
don't want to leave the
impression that this housing
office would have any authority
to tell anyone that they have to
do something differently their
job is to try to coordinate so
that we do things better to
gather and things get done
Tensionally conflicts will come
different points of view will
you spend the time as you spent
then to get everyone on the same
page and and then I have one
last question
doctor fair
member trying to really move
this issue and I and I
appreciate that I think you're
giving me another opportunity.
The people agree and disagree
with me a lot all day long and
they should.
And someone I think you know
felt like maybe this wasn't as
democratic across us that's an
important thing to hear so we'll
have to really lean in there so
that it does feel like it's a
very democratic process but at
the end of it somebody does have
to make a decision here's with
tribes me healthcare costs drive
me not because we have a lot of
money senator because people
can't get into get their health
care and they get sicker and I
lose my mind.
I am losing my mind.
Of the number of people who were
coming to us and egging us the
fine housing solutions for them.
I'm gonna lose one on it on a
gentleman that's been in and out
of housing he homeless he is
served by every single provider
in albuquerque and me.
And I have had to move him I
can't tell you soft has got
significant behavior health
issues but honestly I will tell
you this I believe without me me
directly so it drives me as
serving people he would not be
with us today I have rescued him
from jail I have rescued him
from an appropriate facilities I
have rescued him from long term
care I have rescued him from
border care and for other you
know legislators have been here
a while do you remember a robert
mccanny he sended her who used
to wear the
winner boots and the heat lived
here I got him in the housing in
about nineteen ninety eight and
you know he lived with me for
almost a year.
Before he got housing.
Because I couldn't stand it but
all of us policy makers me too
you gave me the money I couldn't
find him housing in his mental
health issues got a booted from
the prospecturian retirement
center that's now being
developed you're in santa fe yet
no place to go so I brought him
home with me.
Now robert died because at some
point I got him in the housing
here and it didn't work out
because it was hard and he left
and when he was wondering the
streets of albuquerque was hit
by a bus.
And I was there when he died.
I held his hand for his last
three days so we're drives me
senator is I don't want to hold
any more hands.
I want to actually cut the
ribbon while they crossed the
threshold of the house of the
the door of the house you're
running or owning where their
building equity in a real life I
need to do whatever it takes
until the state turns the corner
that's why it's important to me
i'm in.
I'm in and I hope that that
feels good to the people who
are wanting to work together it
wouldn't be in this committee
even debating against us to some
degree if they don't care about
housing they're here because
they care.
And mrperiod
chair and panel and governor I
hear your passion
and and and I know you have
passion and we often share some
of the same past maybe not the
pathways but here's here's my
passion.
Substance use rehabilitation.
It doesn't work without housing
and he's kind of like massive
hierarchy in a food shelter
health networks metal health
then you can build the nice exam
type of that.
The m.
I will say that
I am frustrated as i'd look at
that issue as anyone were
because it is it's been so
frustrating for thousands of
thousands of years that we once
with learned how to use alcohol
making and the the problems with
it but I think we're maybe
closer to understanding what we
have to do to help generate
surprise and.
Essentially it's gonna take any
ad we we don't have a plan we
have a lot of little good
programs that we just don't have
a plan and I actually wish you
create an office of
I don't know what you call it
sobrie the ear or
what what's from the courage to
change the surrounding the
surround I mean that where we
all try to get to as we either
live
why I I with more and alcohol
hits as my children have taught
me said the air don't want to
use substance of you anyway you
get the idea we have to get
people sober it's hard I think
most people want to get there
some have the the the craving
pathways much more than others
and they are harder but housing
is definitely a part of this me
what we know today is that in
individual who have finally
agrees to go to
an rtc
residential treatment senator
i'm sorry
and and then really you've got
to get taken out of your
environment you can't these iops
don't work
they you've got to do that and
that's at least ninety days
which is part of my past metal
health party last year or a
hundred twenty hundred and
eighty days then they have to go
to sober housing now this is
where housing comes in I don't
think it's the expectation of
the state
or of us at the state's gonna go
by a bunch of sober houses
because then people go crazy
about zoning whatever but but
the entrepreneurial your
community is doing it and there
are several sober housing it's
not regulated that's next year
we got to come back with
regulation and that
every got to stop them awful
stuff that was happening in
arizona taking people having to
mexico but you know and that's
probably for you know if you're
really lucky
ninety days to a year and a
half.
And then and then real housing
of whatever sort in what I would
love to see out of this office
in conjunction with the health
care authority we have a
division of behavioral health
and I would support an office
substantially it coming out of
your office to work maybe under
the the healthcare authority to
put this all together and this
is an essential peace to sort it
I get that so
I guess the so I want to make
that point and i'm i'm assuming
in you don't have to go online
that you're going to put that in
there the other thing that i'm
i'm learning up here i'm still a
freshman but
when I see so often as every
view bills is very lower
research and see a lot of
emotional you know oh we should
get it better just because it
should be better but there's not
a lot of research and having
actually get it better and and
looking at other states and
copying what they do and so I
guess I see this is a
fundamental research how do we
do it right with the knowledge
base that that we can draw upon
in the research and the other
states how do we do this so we
get the biggest bang for the
back and and and you're right
there are federal grants I can't
tell you how many federal grants
in the department of agriculture
for health I mean it's it's they
probably are the biggest funder
of health bigger than cm HSD so
i'm i'm hoping that this is the
direction you're going to take
it and so that when we come back
and listen we you you're
presenting down your presenting
how you've moved the needle and
so
the last question I have
because.
In what i'm hearing today which
is different so i'm i'm really
leaning towards going your way
and and listening as good but I
the other thing that we often
don't get in the legislature is
accountability for things that
we pass I mean they they go
often they don't happen money
isn't getting spent over and
over again could we I don't know
if it's lhs or whatever but
could we get an intern report to
a interim committee out of the
legislature how it's going and
here from both the house the
mortgage authority and your
director so that if there's more
legislation because I hear
there's questions about
that we can do it in in or do
round the basis of fact and
people giving us input so that's
my last question I know I mostly
made a statement but housing for
substance use and then a review
this summer I thank you mr
chairman and and i'll just take
this from governor eight so
everything you just said III
love what you just said I I just
want to remind the committee of
the first two items I mentioned
when I said but the office is
going to be mandated to do and
it's all around what you just
said senator so conduct
strategic level statewide
planning and goal setting so
therefore now we have a goal
what were what is our north
start what are we aiming at and
then accountable for driving
those goals through
implementation so that date and
information comes back here
second also on your point
senator track and published data
that predicts trends and
measures outcomes to inform
policy and investment changes
now what we didn't show up and
say is we want to five hundred
million dollars to build five
thousand
units we don't know that so this
office is going to be charged
with coordinating the data
collection of the date analysis
the delivery of it the trends
were does it almost like a heat
sheet of the state if you will
later over the state to tell us
where it is where it isn't and
where we need to be investing
those dollars so from that
standpoint yes and I did here I
know if the governor wants to
comment on this but all the
things you were mentioning I
know that she's working really
hard to tile that together
because.
Your right senator it's both
it's not just having housing
because there's all sort of the
other all sorts of other things
the story that the governor was
telling about the individual
that had housing but for
whatever reason needed the
behavioral health part as well
so that they could successfully
make that work for them so
you could send your mechanic
you're next.
She'll be followed by senators
tollman my estash meetings in
recurtion.
The.
In your chairman thank you
senator thank you governor thank
you mister were wear I really
appreciate this really engaging
conversation and this is a
really big lift chairman
governor senator and daniel and
daniel thank you for talking to
me on the phone so long the
other day I really valued that
exchange.
And.
I think was really important to
me to express chairman governor
senator
is.
As much as I am enthusiastic but
what this office can do.
The.
In the way of production we're
still gonna have to tangle with
zoning
and the prohibition of rent
costs
senator will person I we did
we did introduce the bill we
wanted to repeal the the rent
control prohibition last year
there were five of us who.
Sponsored legislation to address
the ever rosing costs of brents.
And every single one of those
bills were tabled.
The.
Oregon and california are the
only two states nationwide that
have a state wide rent control
laws
and as much as I want this
office of housing to do
I think we're still going to
have to tangle with the ever
rising costs of rent.
Because greed is not good.
Greed is not good.
I always thinking about our
lowing come people are housing
were insecure are section eight
recipients who are being turned
away right now.
Are santa fe workers who are
driving to real rancher because
they can't afford santa fe
rents.
And I was really taking a back
chairman governor senator last
year when my bill.
It it wasn't tabled yet
I was waiting for my first
presentation.
But.
It really was upsetting to me
the communications I got.
That were negative on my bill.
They came from some brokers and
some real estate agents are all
of them who said it would be
disastrous if new mexico had
rent stabilization.
And I counter chairman governor
and senator what's disasters is
when new mexicans cannot afford.
I free seen rent and they have
to leave.
The home they love the apartment
they love the condo they love
and all that's the support
friends and care givers that may
live around them.
And I remember chairman you
mentioned last year when we were
talking about these bills that
you heard about a woman in all
the curty who quit not forward
her increasing rent because she
was on a fixed income and she
was finding shelter at the west
side shelter.
So.
So
so thank you chairman thank you
governor and senator for taking
the song it is an it's it's a
huge left.
I simply thank you daniel for
acknowledging.
Work.
Where I was coming from when we
when you and I spoke.
And how I really want new mexico
to.
To adopt some rent
stabilization.
Because I just fear regardless
of how much building we do.
Folks are still going to be left
out.
Thank you appreciate the time.
Thank you senator of senator tom
in your next
thank you mister chair thank
you.
Person.
I never figured out how to do
that.
So
I
october this.
The fact that the new executive
a long history of that doing
strategic statewide planning.
Though.
Um and I talked about we don't
have the plan for you can have a
development water infrastructure
they ever health capital outlay
and forget that so do we have a
statewide to use a plan for
housing.
Thank you mister chairman center
told them
we currently don't have a plan
within state government m f a
produced a strategic report
relatively recently
I think in the scheme of things
it's a very good document with
very comprehensive data and a
lot of really great
recommendations
where I would rather
differentiation with what we're
proposing is that one if you
were to look at the nine or so
pages of recommendations and
mfa's plan repeatedly they call
for implementation within state
government whether it's
regulatory changes new
investments.
And there's simply no mechanism
for a quasi governmental
organization to drive this
I don't think we have other than
funding recommendations a single
policy change in state
government that's flown from
that that that's flowed from
that plant currently.
So in that respect
this office the the mandate to
create an annual plan is a new
approach and it's a best
practice in terms of coupling
that with a very concise and
updated data framework it
creates an interative process
for policy development for
funding that lets us know are we
doing the right things let let's
legislators now are are the
investments they're making
having impacts are we moving the
needle.
Unless we have that everything's
an ectotal right and and that's
unfortunately what we're doing
right now is an anecdotal
approach we have lots of little
pieces everywhere so i'd say
that is the main differentiation
with between the mfa's plan and
and what's being per post by the
office of housing.
Oh thank you for that answer and
thank you mister chairman
according to the title of the
activities the but be airing the
director of the office of
housing to the new mexico
mortgage finance authority
so she can be what's the
organization charge and other
places is this new office going
to be embedded in the mfa I mean
it mr chairman senator tallman
that is specifically included eh
to address some of the issues
around duplication.
That is an exophasio member so
that is not a voting member of
their board but that is someone
that is in the rim that can
report out on activities of the
office of housing and also be
intimately aware of everything
happening at m f a
the office has proposed as you
may see is a very small budget
that's partly because we don't
see a need to create a giant
infrastructure we have m fa they
have a hundred plus staff
working on housing rate what
we're talking about was a
coordinating and planning role
and I think in many ways until
we have that plan we don't know
what other work needs to happen
so we've included a very modest
request in terms of funding and
in that estimation of four to
five f t s.
I just want to follow up for
that where is that that's not in
this bill.
It is not and senator peer has
some nerve and you all are going
to have to put money in in this
committee I just that I would
like the mood just a little
I have taken care of the budget
requested his fts in the
mechanisms that the legislature
has already given me you know I
I believe that old outage if
this is your priority but your
money were your mouth is so I
did so you're paying for it out
of the executive the guy of the
governor's budget how big is
scaff will you depends on that
as it depends on you know how
well I do in the next couple of
hours with the senate finance
chairman does anybody have any
help there anyone anyone use the
would be rely on to get to
give me your list right now
because we're involved in a
teasing but as you know we're
not we're about to put all of
that to bed it really is going
to depend i'm going to put
enough money that we meet what
we've designed for you to have
an opinion about I don't want to
stay that course so certainly
not more than four but as we do
the final negotiations and I
figure out how much folks cost
us another issue while new
mexico is very proud to be the
state that has the number one
ranking for wage growth in
america it's going to depend on
who it is that we need to hire
so no more than four I hope no
less than three just gathering
the data attending everyone's
cross pollination of meetings
being really clear dealing with
all of the local government is
more than a one person job in
the failure that I made to start
a learned by learn just as much
by the things you do well as the
things that you I didn't do as
well when we are bright miss
with filled into the office
given all of the sagas between
protecting people where they are
in rants and house houses
understanding substance abuse
and surviving understanding
behavior of.
You know I really wanted to
focus on the providers their
expertise and issues with are
are growing unhouse populations
the notion that one person even
there's lots of providers right
there is incredible experts many
of them write behind me.
It's more than one person just a
coordinate that and have a sense
about where we are this office
is going to need more than one
person so no more than four and
likely will land about paying
for three but the money is now
in our priorities and will be
funded in the money that's
already been allocated to us
thank you government I do have
yes said he told me this does
the floor oh thank you mister
church's I just want to make a
quick comment to reinforce what
doctor hit he said about
accountability I couldn't agree
more with him in all the chinese
I tell everybody shining star of
the budget feature is yet less
see that you are terrific
of reports and they make a lot
of recommendations but
unfortunately
the
legislature that doesn't adapt
most of them but moving on to
the next question.
So there was no mention of
homelessness until we got into
the
comments from the audience
so I was wondering.
What is it is there going to be
a interconnection between the
rising housing prices.
There are causing homelessness.
Thank you mister chairman and
senator so we actually do have
the director of the that portion
of the officers with us today as
well I look the r a the mister
chairman here from her on this.
Mister chairman senator talmin
the really great thing about the
office of housing is the
comprehensive data and so we can
through the office of housing
look at what is the rising cost
of housing connect that to a lot
of the homelessness data that's
already out that they're connect
that to data that i'm going to
be pulling for homelessness to
really look at the why in the
connection between housing
substance abuse behavioral
challenges court systems all of
those things and really make
sure that the office of housing
has that in the state white plan
thank you for that thank you
thank you for that answer
a good friend of mine asked me
to ask that question I hope
she's happy with that answer two
more quick questions
mr chair.
If this has already been touched
about but in the analysis.
To stay out of here in the state
treasure uh have some concerns
that
this knew
plan does not express a process
for conflict resolution when.
The.
Point local or state goals and
housing conflict with a
statewide plan
so.
You may have already partially
answered that but uh
what what is your response to
the concerns of the treasure in
the auditor.
Yeah.
I don't really understand the
concern I did raise it
I spend every day managing
conflict there will I am sure no
doubt be a disagreement about
what's the first priority or not
a to not support the number one
priority that's identified I
every state elected it's the
number one polling issue for
both parties.
Is the growing unaffordability
of housing so I don't understand
it but I did a spend some time
speaking directly with the
treasurer who I greatly respect
that admiring I have to say to
her credit as she said to me
that she hadn't really read the
bill and I think after our
conversation in after i'm sure
she has read it by now i'm not
sure she would feel the same way
I can't speak for her.
But I don't I think that I think
the confusion still is that
there's a tempt to force someone
into a decision
coordination is about
understanding everything that's
happening and why there are
beariers that still exist.
And not about making someone
have the same position we have I
will assure you that in the next
sixty day session this office of
housing and everybody else who's
investing is not going to be on
the same page with behavior
health housing with housing at
cfd with where we're spending
housing at HSD which is now
going to be the health authority
of the house authority we will
never be on the same page and we
probably shouldn't be because
the new answers here are
important we just heard from a
sanitor that you know maybe from
her perspective that the best
thing to do would figure out in
lowering the cost of rents will
my number one idea that that is
you need more things on the
market to have some the number
one thing for about for crime
we've got a lot of jobs but we
have other issues so it's very
flew it and I think that was an
attempt by both of them which I
appreciate to say
in the first reiteration or
iteration this is the
reiteration it seemed to me more
like the health care authority
and more like the early
childhood department we should
just combine a bunch of things
and keep these experts well you
know people can do their jobs
from their independence seats
and do them really well and that
point was me.
To me and I have real clarity
about it today it is why we're
not combining everything
ordinating and giving an office
the kind of president it needs
across all these issues and all
these populations and I think
that that lead to some of these
statements and constructive
criticisms I accept them and
it's why we've got this new bill
and so I want to be sure to say
that the auditor and the
treasurer both elected officials
who the greatly respect I took
their consideration in their
comments to heart and we made
some very significant changes in
this proposal so it's to tell
you to trust them when they give
you information because they are
they were right about that thank
you government for that answer
in those.
Mister chair I deserve a very
one.
Come at last comma you know we
have an interesting trend going
on here.
We have.
Senator
curry or t p.
Suggested away create a
commission for cyfd i've signed
under that
another.
Proposal has been a week.
Go back to the old education
commission.
The.
And doctor hickey as then a lot
of time.
Made use of his expertise to
create a housing authority.
And now we're talking about.
Reorganizing the housing so.
When things don't go right we
start to we we organize.
But i'm here to tell you after
my many years and management
that people trump organization
in other words you could have
the best organization in a world
but if you don't have the right
people it's not going to get
done but if you have the right
people and you have a bad
organization
you can still get you get things
done so.
People are really the key not
the organization thank you
mister charles all
thank you senator we have
senator masters followed by
center through smes thank you
mister chairman center but the
mister were wather honorable
governor thank you I have always
listen to miss silver and course
mister from the west side.
Regarding regarding these issues
and I read the analysis and kind
of heard some concerns and then
I read the bill I want to read
the bill you know from that
perspective and I don't see the
same concerns I just don't I
think I think folks are.
All the responsibility some of
the agency analysis is just kind
of overthinking you know
we need up a kitchen sink.
Whatever meter for a kitchen
think approach to homelessness
to the unhouse housing it was a
remarkable study that the city
of seattle did it came out in
july and see the settle studied
the post jim crow zoning laws
and all these zoning laws and
voting one insists great ideas
at the time
you know wanting to have
beautiful neighborhoods in
perfect communities and and they
are.
They added everything up and it
was somewhere between six to
thirteen billion dollars in
generates generational wealth
that was lost in the black
community in seattle because
they were unable to build a seat
as divided their properties do
other stuff that the zoning laws
prohibited them and so we we get
into a little bit and I I like
the this comes to provision mr
chairman governor that that.
That that this housing office
for its policy won't count on as
well.
And and and look at some of
those things the city of all the
tricky didn't proposed ordinance
to allow subdivisions and
cassiet as the subdivisions
failed because he does passed
theoretically we could do that
at the stable and I would make
people mad may make me matter as
an individual but we all have to
give a little bit of our own
personal ones and desires
because we simply do not have
enough housing in albacricky in
the mexico for the unhoused
bottom line and so when there's
a.
Someone proposing to build up an
apartment house that's four
stories high.
Someone will literally go to the
city company say it should be
three stories because the four
story blocks my view of the
sunday is in the morning on the
way.
And that's real and that's
awesome but
we have to pick and choose and
we have to decide what's.
So anyway mr chairman center for
the governor I see all I see is
a definition of housing.
The office of housing.
And the purpose of the official
study evaluating coordinate.
Ah the director shall be
appointed the office shells
submitted state housing plan by
july first and i'll get to that
in the second provide technical
assistance to local governments
technical assistance to
developers technical assistance
to
indonations tribes and publish
identified programs assist the
mortgage finance authority the
assistant.
In coordinating funding work
across jurisdictions to promote
regional plans coordinate state
agencies collect and report data
evaluate the data with a
geographic gaps and do the
patient services.
And and a few other things and
those are awesome tasks to to
get done and then you have the
housing plan done by july it's
pretty aggressive and awesome
and the plan she'll just do a
statewide immensory of housing
needs analyzed local zoning
permitting and building
inspections assessed barriers
you know
strategies to other many housing
discrimination I mean the plan
has its has its tests as well
i'm looking forward to that plan
and participating in either the
plan or the or or the the
written plan to the
implementation the plan.
Through executive leadership and
through legislation next year
so.
It doesn't like without a hate
to break the news mischairman
governor if the housing office
suggests to the city of our
cricket hate cut down your
zoning approvals to ten days the
city can save no one to do that
I mean they don't have to do it
they don't have to do these
recommendations they don't have
to participate in these ideas
but I think the the moral
authority that that
that that this would have
through the governor's office
with buying through the
legislature I think is a great
idea I I think it's better than
just declaring the housings are
in having him run around and do
things I think this is more
transparent more democratic and
and now.
And more forward thinking so
anyway I can go on and on I
couple questions mister chairman
of the commerce does this some.
We tweaked the anti donation
clause in the constitution
last year and and my phase
charges with them.
Mf is charged with the is the
entity responsible for
implementation and oversight
would that change.
Mister chairman senator no
actually nothing would change
and and all the applicable laws
around antidonation would apply
here as well right I think
mister chairman center governor
the the only thing it really
changes in terms of m f a's
reality is an additional person
on its board to to tie in that
communication and coordination.
Miss chairman center you're
absolutely right and to avoid
duplicativeness which was one of
the concerns and avoid confusion
so there's there's sort of in
the boat rowing the boat
together rather than doing
something over here in santa fe
is doing something over an
albuquerque versus los cruces
someone's going to be out there
actually casting a coordination
that and just you know decision
the sentiments of the center by
the atmosphere chairman of.
One of the state agencies is
just doing awesome where you
don't have.
Uh you know I think over a
hundred and twenty workers and
just great leadership and I I
don't see how this interferes
with that.
Ah and maybe even in in handset
so anyway i'm in support of this
endeavour one quick stylistic
thing
I know if I don't find it now
texted to you but it says up.
The.
On page for state agencies etc
etcetera shall participate with
and assist the office.
We can need to write it in the
opposite to say the office shall
coordinate and seek out you know
so it's the office that we're
ordering something to do we
can't really order these other
books in statute
thank you mister and thank you
for that senator thank you i'll
take a look at that what line
are you talking about make sure
seventeen yeah it's four line
seventeen twenty when it says a
private sector housing
stakeholder shall participate so
perfect thank you.
Senator smitties to be followed
by senator cutting thank you
very much mister chair and
senator and and governor thank
you so much for being here
tonight i'm gonna go home and
i'm gonna tell my kids I got to
talk to the governor tonight and
they're going to get a real big
kick out of that
all right we'll do that
but but thank you it it does
mean a lot it it is helpful to
you know here your thoughts face
to face
and so I would like to talk.
A little bit about and try to be
as as positive as I can what
i've learned or being
legislature you know for the
past or many years is
I I came in saying just saying
no a lot and didn't offer a lot
of just positive constructive
feedback so let you can talk
about my assessment of the root
cars and then tell you what I
like about the bill and then
tell you a kind of some
constructive crisis at the end.
But I I think you know we seem
to be on agreement that one of
the major root causes the
production of housing we're
having that that trouble so so
we we've got that
but then I would ask the
question well then is is the
problem we're having building
housing a problem of government
disorganization.
And and I don't I don't see us
being able to make that argument
of saying you know what the root
caused problem is just that our
government's disorganized.
And therefore we haven't been
able to produce housing I I
don't buy that I think we we as
a state actually spend quite a
bit of money on government per
capital right I think tenth in
the country or something so I
don't think it's it's a
disorganization of government
that's that's the recause of
production
one of the root causes though
that I do think is the
probably inappropriate monetary
policy from the united states
federal reserve.
You know we know mathematically
just basic economic principles
that win when we have cash a lot
of cash injected the supply of
money injected into.
Whatever market we are going to
have asset price increases first
we're gonna have economic kind
of boom with economic activity
but they were gonna have
inflation in those in that order
and that's exactly what we saw
after the feds injected a lot of
cash in february of twenty
twenty
you know the s and p five
hundred went up sixty seven
point nine percent from its
march twenty twenty low that's
huge right but we expected that
that that's math.
Second housing prices went up
eight point nine percent in nine
months we have asset assets
going up right caused a housing
going up
but but the worst is you had to
come we were to know this story
we know the end of the story
gdp growth was booming fourth
quarter twenty twenty one seven
percent seven percent growth
rate you know
anyway so economic activity went
up but then.
The monster write the big
inflation came in peak at nine
point one percent in july twenty
twenty two.
So then what we've done
obviously is we if you didn't
get into the market and locking
your mortgage now number one
your house price went up right
but then got even worse because
then the interest came up and
we've been without contracting
the in that monetary policy so
it's this whiplash people the
middle class the poor got
whiplashed by the united states
federal reserve it looked all
good in the beginning right
we're in a crisis but now we're
contracting that and and getting
into the housing market is
almost like twice as much per
month now for the same quality
of house it's it's insane anyway
but that's the root cause among
these anymore about the math
part that that is a root cause
problem and so III really want
to want to come out this from
how how how do I see root cars I
I just don't see you know the
united states federal reserve
policy has nothing to do with
our government organizational
level right and so hence you see
where i'm going I don't I don't
think the best solution is to
really reorganize government but
I do see some things in the bill
that I do really like and so.
I I really like
I put some check marks your
price provide on page two
provide technical assistant to
local governments that's awesome
you know ped i've always said
about pd I want the pd resources
to the local school boards and
say hey we're here to help you
with career technical
development for our teachers
right I think that's that that's
my favorite function of people
same here I think I think number
two technical assistance local
governments that are having
trouble that's great i'll i'm
very glad that's in the bill
same thing with number three
technical assistant to local
governments in the nation's
tribes really good.
I'm same thing with number four
I have no problem with with
submitting a state housing plan
I think that's a great idea to
very good right and I see that
is as technical assistance and I
don't think the mfa can do all
this alone I really don't so I
think those are all really
really positive things
there is something there
actually there's two things I
don't see in the bill that I
think might be needed to at be
added to the bill.
And that's just I I don't see
the word homelessness in the
bill or or on house people
experiencing almost I mean is
that if i'm am I missing that or
or is that does that need to go
on the bill because I I let me
just tell you where i'm going I
would actually propose in a men
met to to the kind of the duties
here we have twelve listed on
the state housing plan and I
would suggest we just go ahead
and add a thirteenth and it
would just say something like
this thirteen for developing
behavioral health housing.
Senator
and housing options for the on
house.
Because if that if if we don't
put the words behavioral health.
Or homelessness into this bill
i'm i'm kind of i'm just
wondering if you agree with me
and think that those words need
to be in the bill.
The.
Yeah no yeah that's that's all
this my question and doctor when
you're sixty five if you
distract me when i'm making your
presentation it's done so
thank you for letting me do that
there's a couple reasons it's
not in there and I don't think
it would be an unfriendly
amendment.
But the lesson over this last
year is the development in the
zoning in the permanent side as
it's own set of very significant
wardinating development aspects
and while I am not in economist
and pieces of what you've said
about their federal certainly
they're all factual I may have a
different response in terms of
what they've done and think
we're all seeing now you know
the leveling off and I think
people are expecting simplest
interest rates to come down
local
I grew up here santa fe is not
been a robust place for
productive quality of life
development.
No matter what's going on and so
we've missed most states.
Pushing out this has to be what
we are focused on because we're
in a continue to price people
out I mean they build houses for
people who are going to spend
the most money on a house in can
that's another design that was a
flawed all across the country
the state as well.
While the office of housing will
in fact ordinate i'm i'm worried
about this word now and lean in
to our are coordinator for
issues and services for a
homeless and unhoused
population.
In meeting with local bodies of
government.
Just the issues just the
behavioral health side of
homelessness.
Is gonna take and we're going to
do it I I am I am lazer focused
mister chairman and senator i'm
doing something about
homelessness which is why we've
got a public safety issue about
pan handling which is why we've
got a commitment bill which is
why we vet turned around how we
do medicaid which is why we're
saying people can't make
decisions for months based on
both the brain changes due to
drug or substance abuse and or
the combination of those two
things with a diagnosible mental
health issue or disorder and so
it's complicated.
I don't want to I don't want to
miss the mark and while it's a
friendly amendment when I think
we're happy to do that that but
we were trying to really focus
in on here is.
We're gonna have leadership
across our departments they are
all doing something with this
population.
But it doesn't move the needle
in the way it needs to
i'm an outcomes person I I want
this needle moved.
We're seeing a growing
population i'm very concerned
about it which is why i've been
traveling around for best
practices places like houston
and talking to governors across
the country more likely
participating that area with the
national governor's association
is going to take everyone
figuring it out.
This housing office and I read
your your comment in the are bad
and really appreciated is
actually you know i've worked
for a governor who is just about
smaller government and he was
right in a number of ways and to
try to reduce regulatory burdens
I sort of stole that from former
governor gary johnson in the way
in which we committed to
reducing small business regs by
twenty four twenty five percent
I think we've exceeded that and
also reduced those regulatory
burdens and regulation and
licensing but I don't I do it
whether it's bigger small and
not we we we should care it's
really about how effective it is
an elevating the things that
people know where to go know
what it is no then i'm directly
involved does change outcomes
almost immediately so it's not
really a reorganization.
It's a recognition that this
priority is getting too little
in too many different places.
An elevating it and
consolidating it saves money
makes us more effective and
creates clearity for everybody
including in the development
community but I can see how we
got here in a way we.
Tripped over ourselves a little
and so we haven't let real
clarity to those points and I
actually frankly appreciated
your statement to the press very
much and also appreciate that
you know I don't build it bigger
with you don't know where you're
headed that doesn't do any good
but I do want it make it more
efficient and I do want to make
it more visible and I do want
faster quicker outcomes for both
areas here and there is a saga.
But a lot of california's home
was population particularly in
the la area is simply a matter
of economics so we can prevent
that with this office of housing
a lot of the people currently in
its changing.
In new mexico have significant
additional behavior health and
related issues.
And while I don't have all the
evidence today but I I will have
it shortly as we have people
working on and including it you
and m.
Lot of people are coming here.
But a lot of people are being
brought here by states who
refuse to take a leadership
position.
And make a difference for these
two sets of populations people
who are on the edge.
And people who sent the sixties
and seventies have never had a
fair shot at getting productive
treatment and respect about
their particular significant
mental health issues and related
challenges now but anyway I
really appreciate those comments
and we do we want to spill the
work for people we want it to
feel like we are being smarter
about the things we could be
smarter about to move the needle
and thank you for letting me say
that and thank you again for
carrying enough about this issue
to be weighing in appreciated
the public sentiment very much
thank you mister chairs.
Yeah if it's not a simple yes in
an easy s for you guys there's
any level reluctance i'm not
going to make that motion i'll
kind of maybe.
Someone else if they like that
maybe they can make the emotion
but I don't want to I don't want
to you know rock the boat too
much I just want to bring it up
because when I think about an
office of housing I think i'm
open this build i'm to see the
words homelessness i'm gonna see
the words fantanel i'm going to
see the words behavioral health
and i'm to see a lot of the root
cause problems and I just I just
don't see it once again it's not
a critique i'm just that's what
I expected to see and I don't I
don't see and that's why I want
to bring it up so I like I said
i'm not going to make the motion
but I will I will kind of
you know basically kind of wrap
up with with my
my my my kind of thoughts on.
On on what I think we could do
that may even work either a
longside this bill or in
addition to the bill or or
whatever I I do have some
concerns about we we had a
really big housing bill last
year in this committee about rep
control.
And someone in that that bill
diedn't committee I I believe
and you know it's interesting
the.
There was a woman here that he
just moved here from la and and
she told the committee she said
well housing prices are just out
of control in la and and someone
in this committee said well do
they have rent control and she
said yes and I I just thought
well you're your advocating for
some of the policies that are in
place where the housing it is
out of control so why were we
bringing the same policies here
where we don't have a good
example and i've heard those
cities brought up which which
gives me a little bit of.
Of concern you know organ was
brought up eugene's number one
rate of homelessness in the
country number one they've got a
big substance abuse
la number two worst highest rate
of homelessness in the country
and I just think well if we're
going to bring those policies
here no doubt they have serious
problems and they need help and
lot of people need help but I
don't want to bring those
policies or they just don't seem
like they're working well
seattle was brought their first
fifth worst in the country for
rate of homelessness and I think
well I don't want to bring those
policies here i'm sure they're
they're working hard now to
institute new policies but I
don't want albuquerque to look
like those other cities with
with the homelessness problem
and so that this gives me a
little bit of a pause but I I
would say this in enger
johnson's broadband johnson told
me this I went to a talk I
didn't talk to him but I he was
speaking and he talked about you
know if you want less of it tax
it if you want more of it
subsidized
I want to just throw out a
couple of I don't think i've any
more questions but I want to
throw out a couple of maybe
ideas or concepts especially
with all the stay holders when
the governors here a lot of stay
colders are going to be here I
you could bring a lot of of good
folks with you you have an
earlier senator
so might as well throw it a few
positive ideas and my colleagues
try out of I think it was food
housing and health care where
those the three.
Mesdlers hire okay anyway we'll
just go with food health care
and housing okay
you know we we don't we don't
tax food in mexico I was very
proud to vote against a food tax
I had the opportunity to do that
for god thousand house of the
senate at that time.
And you know it's a basic thing
that we have health care.
I I say well if health care is a
right why are we taxing it what
what that is doesn't make sense
to me same thing with housing if
if if access to housing.
Is it so crucial and so basic to
our society why are we taxing it
it's because we have this gross
receipts tax model.
And and and and it it really is
is crushing to those businesses
that are supplying basic needs
for us you know and and so thank
we wouldn't have that issue with
food but we do with housing
healthcare we have those issues
that I think need to be fixed
and so just couple ideas.
We could incentivise
municipalities to get their
permitting done faster and I
think the state can do that a
couple different ways we could
say hey if you rely a lot on
construction g r t.
You rely a lot on your impact
seas so the state is not gonna
allow you to collect all your
impact fees if you don't get
your permitting done.
Right
that's a little that's it maybe
a stick there but a carrot could
be you know what.
If
as far as construction great if
you guys are doing a good job if
we get in the permitting done we
as the state will not collect
our portion of that grt or a
portion and we'll give it back
to either may just just the
municipality or maybe a split
between the building mister or
whatever it is whatever
combination is that concept okay
so I think that's a subsidy
where we can say we want more
housing the state should
subsidise it.
I don't think we need necessary
office but let's just subsidize
it subsidise the building
subsidies and reward
municipalities and or penalize
them for not getting their
permitting done I think that'd
be great I think it is a simple
solution my opinion.
So so anyway that's that that's
I think that's all I have
mister chair you know
we we shouldn't be imposing a
grt model on a basic thing like
housing we need to either give
massive deductions or subsidies.
The great model does not fit in
this state when we have a
housing crisis for housing we
can keep it for other stuff if
we want but let's not apply
let's not apply at all or at
least let's not apply it as much
when we're talking about
housing.
The.
This is hard to believe that
senator mechanic can't hear you
is your mike.
Yeah no no senator mechanises
that was saying wonderful things
about you and i'm sorry you
didn't get to hear them sorry
but but the point being that.
I really believe in this concept
I I hope I went we'll see what
happens
but I really think that there's
a lot more development here and
they do think it it is going to
touch many of the issues that
you state and the only reason I
wanted to comment on it wasn't
to create a debate or greater
disagree these are the
conversations we need to be
having a lot more often not just
during a legislative session
about housing and the points
that you may we want to know
what mistakes those other states
made and one of the mistakes
they may they waited to damn
long to deal with a housing
crisis or behavioral health
issues and then you end up in a
cascade of issues you can not
get in front of and I agree with
you I don't want any community
to reach that and many of my
colleagues not all of them have
heard me say last year we're
twenty four months away from
albuquerque being in the
situation where we are we're
always going to be behind it.
I don't want to be behind it I
want to be in front of it.
Now I can't promise you sanitor
that if you vote for the spill
or not.
That i'm going to be in front of
it in twelve months.
But I can tell you this you're
to see a lot of action out of
the state and our partners to do
everything we can to in fact be
at least even or in front.
Nothing will be left on the
table including if it's relevant
a proposal to this body for tax
issues we have to do everything
and we have to do it right now
and I appreciate the opportunity
to respond to your comments
thank you mr chair and and
senator ma'am and governor
longer some it really is nice to
have a a positive conversation
with you even though we we
disagree a lot of issues but
it's very nice to just have a
really receptive and positive
and and and thank you for
showing up once again I mean
sometimes that that really says
like that you do care because
you physically showed up.
The.
Senator mccurtchen followed by
senators of the low.
Mr center madame governor
I do have enjoyed the
conversation so much I didn't
realize that we'd pass two hours
already
on it
and so
I I do I do want to go back to
the beginning of of the debate
and madame governor as you said
you know you appreciate
agreement disagreement and opens
up a dialogue and I feel like
it's it's been very helpful this
evening to enjoy that dialogue
however I have I have received a
lots and lots of emails as I
know
many of the other senators have
on the panel in opposition to
this lots of emails and have
been lobbied a lot in the hall
and I come in the the the two
emoted up and and spoken against
because we're able to have a a
constructive conversation and so
I am extremely disappointed that
we didn't have any more of you
stand up in opposition just
according to what
I had in my inbox and I and I
know the some of you
particularly in the hall are
here and and refuse to stand up
and if we're unwilling to do
that and we're unlinked to start
to conversation and run willing
to solve any problems and so
just with that i'm going to
offer my soap boxer but I did
spend a good portion of my life
in construction and
there the the one main thing
that I think we're going to have
issues with is the city councils
we've done development and and
and worked on those things and
the only way to really get
housing more affordable is to
build smaller houses so nine
hundred twelve thirteen hours
homes were people can afford to
own them and it is so important
in order for that generational
wealth to transfer we have to be
able to create it first and so
as we create it we have to have
you know entry level homes and
sometimes those are the homes
that everybody just wants right
next door you know that's what
they say is only to something
that you want for your neighbor
right like you don't want your
neighbor tell you that.
That you you can't let your
grass grow
but but that's that's really
what that's really what happens
you want to be able to to tell
him or heard that that he can't
do that but you need to stay on
my business so
in the development projects i've
been involved in we stand up we
actually had one in carlspan at
one point in the city had
approved a map and it said this
is going to be multi family
housing on this thirteen acres
it was approved had had.
We had so many people in
opposition stand up but at the
same time we had people and they
said what are these what are
these homes going to cost we
said are target is about a
hundred and seventy to a hundred
eighty thousand and they were
they were about eleven hundred
square foot town homes they were
great started homes and people
could stop thrown there there
that their money away and start
believes in equity and something
and we just had tons of
opposition the city council but
it against it and so when you
look at that you look at those
challenges and we obviously
respect the other elected
officials that uh that run those
in those the city council school
boards can equations are so
important in elections because
they really drive the
they drive the economic
development of the other other
cities and counties and so.
We have to we have to elect
people that have somewhat of a
backbone and have a vision to be
able to do this and maybe wish
them maybe with some coaching
and some and some help they'll
be able to
maybe be able to see the vision
so maybe a state white housing
plan is a good place to start um
so we have that we have the
zoning issues another one of the
of the difficult hurdles the
cidy cid we send plans at the
city they don't call you back
matter factor said a couple of
plans in about three months ago
cinnamon and never heard
anything ever heard anything and
finally they said all yeah we
don't we just we don't take them
that way we have to have them
digitally like okay well that's
fine for the last forty years
i've always sent him like this
i'm fine to and find a change in
send them digitally only but no
one even responded to me and and
we were we were doing we were
doing a small
small round of housing it was
that was remote required the
state of new mexico to be the
inspector on there because we
were outside of the agreement
they they had with the cities so
that so we've got that in those
and those are men and women need
to show up and they need to and
they need to be in the city
office and they need to be able
to prove those plans and what
contractors through because a
lot a lot of the contractors are
not professional permitters they
are builders and yeah they've
got an idea that's put on paper
and then we're ready to get so
so we've got that the other
thing that that we have and I
think these two go hand in hand
as we have an awful labor
shortage was really really
difficult to get to trade you
know it I mean each back
plumbing electrical those things
are extremely extremely
difficult to come by and i'll
tell you in in my experiences as
a contractor it's really
disheartening we we had a lot of
really good people and sometimes
we had to let those people go
not the really good ones we kept
them rails much with your could
but they're bad actors
everywhere and so we would we
would work with you know
the partner were for solutions
or whatever it was.
And I would have
I can't take how many people
that I had I had positive drug
tests not alone five p directors
but a ten panel drug test and
they would test positive for
extremely hard drugs and I would
send the reports and I say I had
to let so and so go because he's
unsafe to be on the job site
because he cannot operate
equipment I can't have him
driving a vehicle and we did
random drug test to try to run a
tight ship and make sure that
everybody knew that we had a a
standard that we had did here
too well
I just finally gave up keeping
records because they would award
unemployment to all those all
those bad actors they were just
awarded every time and it's
really disheartening when you're
when you're trying to keep a
whole crew of people safe and
you're trying to perform and you
know you've got large companies
threaten you with liquidated
damages because you're supposed
to have twelve guys on sight
nine of them showed up and and
you know you just sometimes
can't send those people out so
the parliament work for
solutions is all help as well
because those people are still
capable of working but when they
work for a long period of time
and they're let go for cause
then that and and then they're
able to get unemployment
insurance they don't come back
into the work force and that is
really really difficult and
they've still got good skills
and they can go to another
company and hopefully get get
cleaned up and I had hired some
of those people back you know
six rate or ten months later in
all we sell que how you're going
to be we're gonna we're going to
draw testing more frequently and
and they'll see not so we would
want to work with them but when
you go through all of that then
we have
we have houses that have to cost
more because they take more time
to build and it's and it's
difficult I know that we're
going to talk here on senate
bill one ninety five year in a
minute well maybe we will maybe
it's a minute maybe it's longer
than that
madame governor I am surprised
that eh mr chair has not ordered
dinner seen as how you're in
company here as well so that
sometimes he does sometimes he
does do that maybe there's
barbecue in the back like there
was a couple.
The days ago
it's not okay
their nobody can yeah we did
tonight okay so I would confirm
that it is not back there it was
a shortage I didn't think we.
Oh mister mister chair you give
me the short agenda every time
every time
so just a few things I I have
gotten a whole lot of emails in
in opposite to this and and i'm
doing my best to represent my
constituency
and ennah and I believe i'm i'm
not supported on order minutes
that are that that are coming up
now I think we do have some
I think we do have some
real things that that we can
look at and i'm going to
recommend for for doing it
trying to solve the issue
because it is it is an issue we
we we've got to have housing is
going to be affordable got out
people do it they're it there is
kind of going to be I think a
lot of
push back for municipalities
when we say this is our state
housing plan let's get linear
let's not get like I think I
think those are going to be a
whole lot at a holiday issues
and they were some maybe some
leadership we can overcome them
later I I think now is not the
right time for me but but do
appreciate the discussion mister
chair senator and and and and
madam governor so.
Sorry I agree with you about
some of the challenges that city
check again many of those things
have actually been greatly
improved thanks to many of the
builders I want more and
certainly if you don't mind I
would love it not during the
last week of the session but i'd
have a
are as super intended reach out
to you because i'm very
concerned about that and about
having enough work and having
enough accountability there
that's the why don't come down
all the time I found out about
the stuff I got fixed it wasn't
even gone to play it in the bill
but they're true and so I just
want you to know that I don't
have any trouble recognizing
where we can make improvements
and that I can do something
about that with her without
advancing but I really hope I
advance but
we should be doing that work
anyway it's the same issue we
have a workforce problem and i'm
not in control of all of the
statutory benefit aspects but
these are important issues for
us to get right wholesale
everywhere so thank you for your
comments I really appreciate
them.
Absolutely thank you governor
and chair and senator it's not
absolutely it's not lost on me
on the regulatory and I have to
tell you one of the things that
we debated at length on the
council the governor pointed us
to put this plan together is
we're doing regulatory stuff
every which way from tuesday and
i'm sure that's very difficult
on a business like yours it's
very difficult in my business as
well so what we believe is
there's also no central
repository to drop the concerns
off to get the thing analyzed to
get it resolved and that's what
you were going to one of the key
things are going to get out of
this office and then that will
be you know recommended to the
legislature the coordinated
effort will then go into the
cities and attempt to work with
them on things that are
important to them to help you
resolve issues that you've
outlined but because we don't
have a coordinated effort it
just nobody really knows where
to go to resolve these things
and now you're going to have a
central repository central place
it's going to eat sleep and
drink in our governor's going to
hold them account applied just
know that's how she in a in it's
going to.
Mister chair center medium
government thank you very much
thank you senator senator said
the elopes thank you mister
chair senator governor at such a
treat to have you here
I it's interesting because this
is a little bit building or on
what has been said
and I really appreciate the
responses because I at when
people came to labour me I said
i'm looking for two questions
when what's the duplication if
there's duplication that's a
problem and I also wanted to
understand this issue of of
authority in and I understand
this bill a lot better because
of this presentation because
there's no attempt to displace
anybody and earn I think that
that's good
when when I was at enlightening
with the idea we got a federal
housing grip and so we were able
to provide housing to victims of
domestic violence and we worked
with the housing coalition.
And to try to.
Tried to coordinate and I would
say the coordination was mostly
reporting what we were doing and
talking about other grants that
are available pretty much that's
all we could do so I am excited
about a plan because you know
some people were focused on
housing for behavioral health
some pete some people were
focused on housing for victims
of domestic plans so they
wouldn't become homeless and it
felt to me like.
There may be was some kind of
priority.
But I didn't see it anywhere you
know what I mean are we is our
priority to aliminate.
It will help victims of domestic
violence from becoming homeless
so they could actually leave so
many people so many people don't
leave because they have no place
to go and and that's really a
important
yeah you know it's just a
problem that I saw right there
in front of me and so when I
read that the the I think that
the housing plan each of these
elements are great in particular
you know particularly
discrimination housing
inequities.
It felt like a lot like to deal
with coordination of zoning
issues but III didn't see and
this is what's building and III
didn't see dealing you know
addressing the house of
population and I didn't see
the behavioral health addictions
we saw in brilliant county for
example they built the the tiny
homes
and you couldn't get into the
tiny home if you had an
addiction issue so they were
vacant for quite a while
that
those kinds of issues could use
coordination too and so I and I
don't i'm not going to.
Makes the motion to let it the
house the the the hours late but
I do hope that this.
Um organization this this
coordination does include some
kind of fightfulness about
prioritising housing among
populations that are really
vulnerable like victims of
domestic violence like people
with behavioral health problems
like people who are just really
at risk it feels like yes yes we
have a problem for everybody but
I don't want to see the
vulnerable left behind and I
trust you to to do that.
It's not in the bill and and I
just hope that in and I will
share with you that i'll be
asking questions about that you
has you come before the
committee because those issues
seem to never be addressed
one small response thank you
senator excellent points by the
way but you know if you look at
the what the office shall do
really starting on h two line
fourteen all the way through the
twelve points we're not
necessarily in a delineating a
particular subsection of the
Vision the plan coming forward
to address multiple things even
beyond the unhoused issue the up
but I do agree where I do agree
that we've left out and we do
need some reaction between
hopefully we getting out of us
getting out of here in the next
committee assignment
on the paper healthiest that
absolutely we need to have that
a little more stronger in this
in this piece of explanation but
I don't want to.
Okay i'm being quickly so on
page three line fourteen
forty to cross state agency
state and regional housing
authorities and appointed
commissions and councils on
housing to implement actions for
housing or supportive housing
services within their ex so
there it is so so but again I
also want to just once again
it's there but probably could be
a little stronger so I agree
with you there it's not in the
plan it is you know the what
this you know how plans are
they're going to address each of
these topics and then hopefully
there will be an additional
topic addressing.
Vulnerable populations and what
the challenges they they're
seeing that's that's all i'm
saying thank you chair and
senator and we have been writing
absolutely every single thing
down as we've been this has been
excellent governor
we never get to the priority
population's mister chairman and
senator because we don't have
enough going on and so that it
becomes really draconia who goes
first.
Who goes second.
About a situation where we
identify how much needs to get
done so that we are treating
with respect and dignity
everyone who finds themselves in
a housing crisis which is what
we believe should happen and I
think that's why it's caused
some of this consternation
because if you're the advocate
and we need them for a
particular group in your
particular group is waiting and
that particular group is an
identified directly that doesn't
feel good but then if we try to
list everyone then it's going to
feel like we've purposed leave
left some out and then there's
mistrust this is about building
invitory and policies that
create equity dignity and
respect for everyone that needs
housing so that we can move the
needle because we're all I can
really point to is that we're
seeing a growing need not a
diminishing need and it's not a
reflection or a finger pointing
which that's the that's the
negativity here people have
assumed that because we said
we're not getting it all done
that someone's failing what
about a situation where we could
do better if we do it together
and there's a focus that's the
point of this legislation
senator masters for the second
time thank you mister chairman
center for the governor movie to
pass
anybody else any other is there
a second.
Secondary by senators at the
elophants any other discussion I
have some questions.
I think one of the the dilemmas
one of the reasons mfa
there was going to be
duplication is because much of
what we discuss to night
is there a face responsibility
already they have the hudd
support of they have the state
support of housing many they
have the heart she emergency
shelter money all that is it
so
I mean I i'm one of the dilemmas
I I think the bill creates much
of what's in the bill is not
what you said you were going to
do it i'll just list some of the
things that you said you were
going to do that not in the bill
you said you first of all the
men from heaven said we really
need this because they'll help.
All the pre previous
conversations i've had with you
have been around work for his
housing
there's nothing about work for
his housing in the bill.
But that's what you said this
would do that with distinguished
differentiated from what i'm a
faders and yet there's nothing
about that in the bill.
The.
Constituent services the
governor mentioned that one of
the things she hopes this would
be able to do when people are in
direct rates they'd be able to
call this office and find a way
to get in two housing find a way
to get there their viction of
waiter whatever is going on.
That's not in the bill
silver housing senator he said
we need so browsing you all said
that's great we really need
sober housing that's not in the
bill.
The.
Affordable housing that's my
face responsibility you have
told me very clear this does not
duplicate because they do
affordable housing we do work
for us as he can be very
different and yet as soon as
anybody brought up any of the
affordable housing things right
we'll be right on it.
Kitchen sink
is for I mean it's like this
these three people that are
going to be hired are going to
do everything.
The mfa does plus the other
things and I just think you're
creating an unrealistic
expectation.
For what this office is going to
be able to do with three people
so my question governor for you
is this if you don't get this
build test you can still do
everything you're doing in the
bill because there's no money in
the bill.
You're the one finding it out of
your budget you're the one who's
going to hire the three people
to do this you could do that why
do you need to build.
Because we haven't really do you
think that's a unfair way to do
this mister chairman I didn't
mean to do that but didn't sort
of rather I think collectively
it's fair to say that we don't
think we have enough housing
solution absolutely so in las we
decide in statute.
That we are going to do every
solution what would anyone in
the state of new mexico think
that would be any different I
put seventy five million
everywhere including mfa i'm the
only one not mafe who asked for
more money for mf there's a
second bill by senator rodriguez
but i'd like without my budget
comes first my was in there and
it was higher first the bill
more money in for opportunity
it's not with all the stuff.
If you want there to be a
priority for housing.
You want it to be.
Clearly stated and I tried hard
not to try to do all the pieces
but rather discuss what we can
do and honestly mister chairman
I kind of like being
underestimated.
Because frankly.
We've done a time.
Including through covered fires
and floods is I would submit to
you that we've gotten more done
with less we have our own
vacancy rates we have our own
challenges I don't get to bost
local governments but we have
really done some incredible work
and we've actually done some
incredible construction just
take a look at all the new
hospitals look at you and am's
hospital that's up we're getting
it done this will help me get it
done and I assure you that three
or four people is I need help
can do the work that i've been
doing in a vacuum which I
shouldn't have to do and it
wasn't about giving constituent
services a quick answer it was
to let you know so maybe i'm has
spoken that statements I want to
clarify thank you for giving me
that chance we get so many calls
where people are stocked and I
think that's the senator cities
as this point every population
there are stock.
And its leading to so much
consternation and it's causing
us as a state government to have
to deliver any a number of
additional services like I said
about the single man so coats
heating food gasoline these all
safety school navigation
homework internet amazing if I
didn't have to do all that
because she had a place to live.
But I do now.
She doesn't have a place to live
now we're gonna we're gonna be
successful I think I think I
think i'm a month away and we're
gonna solve that problem.
But mfa didn't solve that
problem because they have their
role and we've all said good
role.
In animathe didn't solve that
problem and the city I don't
wanna small city so I don't want
to call out my constituent that
city didn't solve that problem
and their housing department and
human services couldn't solve it
by themselves in the point is
it's going to take a leadership
entity that leads it starts to
see things you can solve by
ourselves and helps all of us
deliver results from every
aspect and that's why i'm so
confident that this will make a
difference and if we don't do it
tier point there are things that
I can do they won't be as good
and they won't be as meaningful
and we won't be eligible for
grants and we won't be able to
leverage and support your
efforts in the way that you need
us to and that will be very
disappointing but i'm gonna keep
fighting you know me I will find
a way but this makes that way
faster smoother and more
productive at
a good ended you want.
Yeah thank you chairman
senators
I want to could just clarify
so one of the big important
things that we're trying to
tackle here is that no one cares
about work force housing in
their scope right now it's no
one's job to make sure that the
family that earns a little bit
more money than qualifies for an
assistance program is getting
housing and so that is a central
focus of this office that but
really it's about the spectrum
of housing from the most
vulnerable unhouse populations
through those working families
that make too much to get a down
payment assistance grant or a
subsidised home that still can't
buy a house we have to look at
the big picture and it
integrated spectrum
this office is not gonna
duplicate what m f a does really
well with their affordable
housing programs we are going to
care about that sector and make
sure that m f a has a resources
it needs that the fall resources
are the state government or it
there back that way plugging
behavioral health services into
the tiny home developments of
people with substance abuse
problems can actually live there
those are the coordinating
things that we have we can't say
this is someone's territory and
and they're just going to do
whatever they're going to do at
a house to work together and
that's that's the point of this
I did highlight the work force
housing stuff because that's the
big issue that no one's working
on right now and that's a
central priority that i've heard
from and yet it doesn't appear
in the bill there's not a word
about work for his housing in
the end and chairman just
everything that was said I
completely agree with you and
i'm actually I think it's a
smart approach to start with
maybe three or four people
because the first plan is do
this summer on july first then
six months later and updated
plan then it's every twelve
months after that so I I would
envision that there's going to
be a a whole slew of things that
are going to come forward based
on that first six month then the
second six month and then and
and again we didn't call out
specific things or or entities
the one house.
Workforce whatever in the twelve
items that this office is
responsible for because.
All ever every bit of housing in
the housing condoner morning
right now it's going to apply to
all twelve of those items so
while it might not be called out
there I am envisioning unhoused
data and information and
analysis coming forward work
force challenges coming forward
a take taking a look at economic
debit data for new mexico on
what the future of workforce
housing needs to look like so I
think you're going to see a lot
of that in all twelve of the
items that we have here as it
relates to
each item i'm sorry.
My last question has to do with
the the the funds of the five
hundred million dollar fund two
hundred and fifty million to mf
two hundred and fifty million
to.
Who does the other two hundred
fifty million go to fa finance
authority so
the way the funds will be a
distributed will be I believe
it's
so it's actually at about
approximately a hundred and
seventy million at this point.
The mfa will receive I believe
it's forty million dollars out
of that they already have thirty
nine million dollars in the fund
that they already have so that's
about seventy nine million for
the work of the mfa and all the
Fourth on your agenda today so
i'm sure we're going to get that
about one of the morning but um
that when mister chairman is to
add additional language to the
act that representative dixon
and I created last year called
the opportunity enterprise act
that will be that the additional
language will make it
permissible for work force
housing so that's why you you
don't always see a lot you know
in the.
You know when in this piece of
legislation on the various items
we discussed a little while ago
so then approximately seventy
million to that will go to
commercial and one hundred
million that's already there and
then at the other hundred
million of the one seven year
spoke of earlier will go to
projects related to work for his
housing infrastructure massive
infrastructure produce
commercial
things like maxi unsolar in an
albuquerque that's bringing your
opportunity that's right that
company economic and your adding
housing and how much you're
putting into housing at the
moment approximately a hundred
million somewhere in there but
here again the reason that then
who spends it the new mexico
finance authority with an
oversight board that still
doesn't this area but once again
to avoid it to avoid the
duplicativeness in the confusion
we simply are with it from my
opinion we're simply giving
money to mfa to do all the
wonderful things that they do
and not complicate their life
and then having this other
component but then there's you
know if you look down the road
it's not to say that an animal
fa and m f a will work together
on major projects also we just
don't know that yet because
we're putting these two planned
what they got their plan they've
already put together very well
oil very well then in this plan
they will dovetail a major large
projects as I said mister
chairman that's largely
negotiated I have to say i've
never lobbied.
For so much money for people who
do not want it
so I that's a western learned
from mfa and others when the
governor's trying to give you
money say yes
when the governors round to
create an entity that gives you
more money here's a good idea
say yes because when the
governor works hard for money
have any of you ever wanted to
debate me about where we're
going to get money anyone.
I used to get in trouble do you
remember senator when they would
tell me don't let her go to
house appropriations because if
you were going to give her a
dollar you'll end up giving her
a hundred times that's something
I know how to do because.
I believe I have credibility
even with the things that need
improvement and there are many.
The ideas one of them there are
many we get the money out the
door in my three hundred twenty
million that then went down to
three hundred is now nearly
eight billion in a mexico's
moving faster for universal
early childhood then any other
state in the country.
And we're gonna do more let us
move that fast on housing let us
be in a position to use the
talent.
And the people that use
identified and add some folks
that do the work with you the
policy makers to make sure that
there's no stone left unturned
that's what we're asking for
here and we're dedicated to make
sure the current entities and
authorities continue to get the
kind of resources to make a
difference or they're going to
need them zero big issue and
it's a big problem and it's
going to take a lot of effort
from a lot of folks and it's
going to take a lot of resources
and sir I medical asking for
them so so the short answer then
to to my question with this new
office have anything to do with
that I don't.
Two hundred and forty million
dollars that you're put putting
out the door chairman center
the only roll around funding for
this office is to coordinate an
identify graph gaps and they had
find existing funding in the
state government that could be
better utilized for housing.
The.
Okay anybody else any other
discussions and it said.
I know this is going to probably
be.
A lot of principles are going
through my head kind of it's.
What I found tough being in
government has not getting
things done I used to be
incorporated.
Get things done.
And things get done when there's
focus and there's.
Very committed.
I believe i'm hearing senator
mechanic can't hear you so.
I believe that I am hearing.
Focus and the commitment to
leadership and I think i'm
understanding which I didn't
understand before house core and
central housing is in the line
of the.
And as I said earlier in
mazdale's higher archive food
health shelter food shelter
health that
that.
I I don't know how we're going
to get.
And I believe there is potential
to get some bride with so many
with our hugely addicted state I
believe that there is capability
within this without having to
specify to get there in this
will move that along I would ask
governor that that after this
hopefully moves forward that you
are also create an in office of
another office of behavioral
house and self I mean and in the
department but if we could
create that same focus and this
other issue that is eating out
the life of our state and that's
the addiction it would three or
four people who could come up
with the plan and capture your
passion for the leadership in
the focus so in the belief that
that you are doing that for this
issue and this issue is
absolutely tied to the other
issue I am committing to vote
yes on this and would encourage
my colleagues to take a risk
because I believe me anything
happens in government i've
learned unfortunately
yeah it's going to happen yeah
well when that this I believe
has the focus and leadership so
I am going to support it and I
hope some of the others is then
both counting here in my head so
we can at least get it to the
next committee and maybe you can
process some of these issues
that are being concerned so I
just wanted to offer that thank
you governor for your time your
passion your commitment
the is I always try to do as a
doctor that treats symptoms go
to the core the disease watched
at the center of the end this is
at the center of the union and I
I understand that now I didn't
understand that before I hope
those who talk to me earlier
will understand my thinking and
it's corporate thinking as well
as medical thinking to get there
thank you thank you senator
anybody else were ready to vote
secretary will call the rule the
motion is.
The dupass motion on this bill
and made by senator masters for
the second from senator save
office.
Senator hickey
yes senator who give out yes
center master masters boat yes
several more curtain so my catch
involves now center mckenna.
Yes that american votes yes
center neighbor center neighbor
votes now centers
sounds merely as votes now
centers that are lockers
yes seriously a lot as votes yes
senator
senator man votes now senators
appeal no.
So notice a pin of our snow.
So by a
better five to four boat we
table no we don't but that
motion fails on a fact alternate
motion.
No rec.
The.
Secondly we have alternate
motion to to
test as well as it goes finance
finance with a no
recommendation.
Any discussion to that.
Sex secretary will call the room
senator hiki
center he give out yes center my
stuff yes so may I still vote
yes said in my court and so my
car generals now center mckenna
yes said i'm again no votes yes
then our neighbor said a
neighbor boats now senator smith
is says merely as well to now
center city a lot biz.
Yes say the city of nobody's
votes yes senator the
senate tell me involves yes
center it is a pino.
No so that motion passes on a
five to four
vote and you move on to finance.
Thank you very much governor for
coming and taking all this time
I know you're so busy we really
appreciate it
thank you.
Thank you.
Senator how to me I will go
ahead and hear your bill next
senator driving sought to still
tied up in injuries.
Yeah but he was here with you.
No no no
no it's the one that would rule
with the.
Standboard standborn.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my expert witnesses
making his way from judiciary
but I will get started that had
built two forty eight seeks to
regulate the use of public road
rates ways and spaces through
the entancement of the unsafe
use of public roadways and space
as and then at bill two forty
one is a safety bill which was
written of the way to keep our
streets safer for pedestrians
and drivers.
The bill limit solicitation and
public roadways and spaces and
creates a new mister meaner
offense of aggressive
solicitation which is anyone
asking for money closer than
three feet to the person being
solicited as you may know new
mexico has one of the highest
pedestrian deaths for capital in
the country joining me later
this evening will be my expert
witness ben partner who actually
just showed up who would like to
also say a few words in regards
to the bill thank you mister
chairman thank you senator
mister berker
good evening mr chair members of
the committee sorry for my
turning as my name is benjamin
baker and i'm the public safety
advisor to old governor oh I
just passed on the huawei and
the way in here thank you for
indulgement opportunity to say a
few words as you consider this
legislation like to thank you
for your time and i'd like to
think the sponsors under her me
offer is willingness to
introduce difficult legislation
designed to improve public
safety.
As we know new mexico finds
itself in the midst of a crisis
though crisis rounds mexis
dubious title is a state where
you are the most likely to be
killed as a pedestrian.
I'll look in the study by the
governors how we see if the
association nationally seventy
seven percent increase in
pedestrian deaths in america
since two thousand and ten
upward trajectory max who has
been the deadly estate in the
nation in twenty two and twenty
one for pedestrians.
We're most almost twice is
likely to be killed as
pedestrians and new mexico then
in some of our neighboring seats
which I found surprising when I
exam statistics.
It's also an extraordinarily
difficult topic because being a
pedestrian is a malta factored
thing but the the similar you
know the factor in cemetery is
you're you're not in a car you
could be exercising you could be
walking are you could be doing
any number of things the fact
the matter though is that this
is a significantly dangerous
activity in new mexico
we contemplate that there are
many factors which contribute to
this car.
Horrible ranking that we hope to
change but we believe that there
is allegedly to propose on front
of you today and that is senate
bill to forty eight in part is
designed to thread the needle
that we as one's constitutional
rights related to the first
amendment and the clear and
prevailing need to change the
trajectory of new mexico's
pedestrian fatality
rates the act is designed to
keep pedestrians out of areas
with their increased risk for
danger of being killed mostly by
cars
this act additionally will
create a uniform narrowly
tailored state wide standard for
the issue at hand so that
leaders policy makers want
forcement and most important
these citizens will be able to
know with precision what is
allow one what is not
additionally this bill addresses
aggressive solicitation in
response to community concerns
related to the increased
perception of threats to
personal spaces the blocking of
vehicles and the persistence of
solicitors within our state
community the proposed penalties
you contained within the bill
are petty mister meaners or
mister meaners related to
aggressive solicitation which is
the lowest allowable under new
executive and while we fully
understand and appreciate that
this is not the topic without
controversy the statistics which
underly the problem or
uncontroverted it is simply not
safe to be a pedestrian in our
state.
It's our belief that this bill
proposes a narrow tailored
approach that considers free
speech and solicitation which is
neutral and content and allows
many other areas will remain for
that expression where the
governmental interest in public
safety is not nearly as pressing
to the community concern.
While this is the topic and
problem with me moving parts we
believe that senate bill to
forty eight will help us reduce
pedestrian deaths in new mexico
I remain concerned as many new
mexicans do what will happen if
we simply maintain the status
quote to this very difficult
problem I thank you for your
attention to my statement and I
stand available to your back to
the senator and answer any
questions that I may be of
service to this commitment thank
you mister baker is there
anyone.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this measure yes
please.
The.
The.
The.
Mister chair members of
committee deputy chief map room
to mister state police we stand
in strong support of this.
Anybody here in opposition to
this measure.
Okay let's just start your come
up use the use the mike and and
take no more than a a couple
minutes please.
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is daniel
williams I live in albuquerque
it's sometimes speak to you on
behalf of my employer but today
i'm speaking as an individual as
a person of deep and lifelong
christian faith I seek in
whatever flood ways that I can
to follow the teachings of jesus
christ human scriptures caller
elder brother and safe year I
mindful today of the words of
the gospel according to math you
the twenty fifth chapter.
The rates will ask when did we
see you hungry and feed you
worth you thirsty and give you
drink when did we see you as a
stranger or invite you in or
close you in your nakedness when
did we see you ill where in
president and come to visit you.
The holy one will answer them
the truth is every time you did
this for the least of my sisters
or brothers you did it for me
my faith calls me to respond to
my neighbors need with care and
compassion not with
criminalization b two forty
eight sadly is inconsistent with
the principles of my faith and I
believe with those of all
religions
at the nack to faith and
conscience I respectfully ask
you to oppose it thank you.
Thank you.
The.
The.
Like i'm always up here mister
chair members of the committee
my name is money silver and i'm
the executive director of the
new mexico and homelessness.
The coalition is made up of over
eighty agencies across the state
that support individuals and
families experiencing
homelessness and we stand and
strong opposition to
senate bill two forty eight.
This bill sets out to further
criminalise those experiencing
homelessness and in addition to
criminalise those in our
community that choose to help a
criminal record adds to the
already difficult situation I
find it employment getting
housing being eligible certain
services.
Finds and criminal records
provide barriers to becoming
rehouse and finding employment
why simultaneously failing to
increase access to services and
undermine the impact of service
providers.
How do we punish someone
carrying out life sustaining
activities and public when there
are few alternatives.
People who already suffering are
being further punished for
suffering.
Criminalization of homelessness
is aimed more at a visual fix
not the root causes not only
does it fell to address the
underlining causes but it
further undermines the
challenges of homelessness I
asked that the committee opposed
and it built two forty eight
thank you.
The.
Mister chairman members of the
committee on martial martinism
the executive director of
equality new mexico we are a
stateway else to be taking civil
rights organization
as some of you know and have
heard me say before I am also a
regular member of the
albuquerque social club outside
of the albacorky social club
every friday and saturday I
engaged with a nineteen year old
black game and who is homeless
and living on the streets every
weekend my friends my colleagues
my chosen family and I bring
cash food clothing and even
sleeping blacks often to replace
the items of his that have been
stolen during a pd sweeps of
homelessness camps i've asked
this young man multiple times
can I help you find a shelter
can I help you find resources
and he repeatedly says I am a
black gay man there is not a
shelter in the city that is a
safe for me as a corner on the
streets where I know i'm the
only person there the reality is
algeria people make up forty
percent of the homeless use
population in the state and in
this country we don't have
enough resources we don't have a
firming and safe spaces and a
bag of you not to pass
legislation that adds to that
struggle by criminalizing not
only clear and trans young folks
who have to ask for money on the
corner but those of us in the
queer and transcommunity who
have always taken care of each
other by stopping our cars and
supporting the members of our
family we we oppose the senate
bill.
Thank you martial.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee my name is
naomi bell as i'm the director
public policy at the account you
have new mexico i'm also
speaking on behalf of and am
safe which is a broad cadre
coalition if you will of many
organizations around the state
and we strongly oppose this bill
not only is it patently
unconstitutional but for the
reasons why i'm some other folks
mentioned here that the
criminalization of homelessness
and of those who
choose to help those people in
their most desperate
circumstances is simply
unacceptable if we don't want
people on the streets and we
have to house them thank you.
Yeah.
Senator members of the committee
chairman.
The.
To me this is it trickily
related to the discussion that
we were just having but I want
to call your attention to
something that you might not
know about so there is a big
supreme court case united states
supreme court case called grants
pass.
And it has been surprisingly
taken up by skodas supreme court
and so this.
I am afraid this bill puts us
sort of in the reverse situation
if you can follow me here of
where we were on
rate choice and abortion if we
do this bill now
and that.
Case comes down.
Um.
In my opinion not on the side of
the constitution and against the
unhoused.
Then.
I think we are this bill is like
the first little snowball that's
going to roll down and we're
going to be on a slippery slope.
I understand that
that myself all of us don't like
seeing folks on the street but
there are identifiable pipelines
marshall spoke about one of one
eviction as another one reentry
returning citizens are another
one and that's where the
evidence shows that we can help.
This is not going to
this then I hope us feel better
about ourselves those people are
still going to be.
Out on the streets.
The.
They did you please introduce
yourself again
sorry winter thought as a ceo of
new mexico eviction prevention
and diversion good thank you.
Anybody else and on the on the
screen we have two people.
Diane mccash you go first.
The.
I'm good evening i'm diane
mccash and I urge you to vote no
one esp to forty eight my
personal concern is that this
piece of legislation would
further commonize people who are
already struggling and marry a
difficult ways during our worst
copied winter my own son was in
the throws of his addiction and
on the street it sounds terrible
and it certainly is the mother's
worst nightmare but we could not
buy invite him into our home for
several reasons instead I
provided cardword for
installation and comforters for
him to be able to sleep outside
beside her.
Under those conditions of being
unhoused and with his addiction
ripping his life he had so many
pads to be in criminal eyes.
Asking adding asking for help
from strangers if you don't deal
it correctly to the list of
waste and up in jail doesn't
make sense anyone struggling to
the point of needed to ban
handle in order to eat or to try
to meet other basic needs is
already subject to scorn other
serious risk and being
criminalized although speed two
forty eight is an understandable
effort I believe that actually
be a cruel response to people in
need if an active thank you.
Thank you and finally saver.
I almost cried.
Go ahead so.
Are you there.
The.
She still understood you can't
speak oh she's slipped off
three other ones.
Okay quickly
i'm sorry mary lou
merry lu christi.
Thank you my name is maryland
christian I live in standard say
i've been bound to page place
which is our senator to assist
the on a house so the spell to
me reflects on people I see once
a week when we're cooking and
serving
meals it seems to try to address
two people people work our quote
can't handling on the street I
ever heard of any statistics and
say they are the people who be
getting hit by car so I don't
see this is a safety issue I
think you have an enforcement
problem unless you're going to
have the police driving around
looking for them and stopping
them who is who is going to even
report it assuming the place car
long forcement drives by see
somebody they cite them this is
a group of people they're not
going to make it to court so all
we're going to have is more in
more bench warrants against
people you're not going to have
a witness to testify against
them the other group of people
this seem to be going after are
people who are on the street
approaching people not in cars
that a person walking down the
street me trying to go into
albert the problem is if you
read the definition of an
aggressive so the citation is
very much overlaps with simple
assault battery mister meters
and we're just creating another
cry we're just creating more
work for days police public
defenders giving more people
with a crumble record and it
isn't going to serve the problem
so I appreciate the concerns but
I would you vote no one has
state you so much.
Derek scott.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for hearing
me
i'm not necessarily opposed to
it i'm kind of torn in this.
The way i've read that it does
kind of south problem i've seen
what's happened here and
albuquerque of people getting
hit i've nearly hit somebody who
was solicitation
myself there is an issue here
that does need to be resolved
but maybe amending it to be
under the discretion of the
officer as in could he been just
decide hey this one's not being
aggressive where this one is
because yes there is
aggressiveness in this and yes
people do attacked so and i've
seen unfortunately innocents
being killed by self on the side
of the street and of the most
terrible thing to see but i'm
torn because I do understand the
pan handling is the only way
sometimes you get money for a
hotel.
And being homeless myself years
ago it was something that I had
to do myself so I like I said
i'm kind of torn on this but I
understand what they're trying
to do here and so I would just
want to give that option thank
you
thank you mister school.
And finally we have current.
The rugger from the luther in
office.
The.
Go head current.
I think you're muted.
The.
Every go I believe i'm unmetered
now good evening mister chairman
members of the committee this is
curt reagar the director of
lutheran aberce ministry of new
mexico lived in after she also
expresses the position of in a
mexico conference of churches
and i'm here tonight to express
our strong opposition to sp two
fourteen as well and the
interest of time i'll simply
state that I would echo all that
has been said in the room in
opposition to this two speaker
two forty eight thank you for
this option to speak to you
today.
Thank you a mari agree ago.
This would be the last one.
Thank you mr care in members of
the committee but my name is
money a grego with the new
mexico center online poverty i'm
the director of economic equity
at the center the center stands
and strong opposition of the
spill while we appreciate the
sponsors intent behind the spell
to make public roberts broadway
safer unfortunately this bill
unfairly targets and house
people as this committee well
knows new mexico's in a housing
crisis that continues to worse
than with every passing year and
unfortunately legislation in
ordinances that prohibit
individual individuals from
seeking donations or selling
goods and services and certain
public spaces during certain
times only makes things worse
for those who are enhoused
as the governor mentioned
earlier when she addressed this
committee the goal should be to
navigate and house populations
into stable living situations
the spill would have the
opposite effect research shows
that criminalization efforts
like pan handling laws often
worse than homelessness and the
incarceration exacerbates
housing and employment
stability.
It can cost up to just under
twelve hundred dollars per night
to incur someone depending on
the county this is not how we
should be spending our states
money if we focused on a
dressing the housing crisis any
issues associated with can
handling will naturally subside
and for this reason we oppose
the build thank you.
Thank you media members of the
committee did you want to
respond to anything members of
the committee any issues senator
neighbor.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair.
When I read this bill
one that.
I would generally support I
disagree with the statement that
it's patently unconstitutional
about.
Um.
I do have some concerns and I
I think my concerns.
Will
maybe highlight that we're not
quite ready for this to move on.
And my concerns
well let me just ask some
questions and
see if we can get there from
here and mr chair and senator
you have defined a couple of key
terms in this bill traditional
limited
limited public forum and
traditional public for
and those are each key on the
issue of maybe rights of way and
so
i'd like to ask you mr chairman
senator interstate highways.
They have attendant rights of
way do they not.
Mister chair members the
committee
yes sir that's correct.
And mr chair and senator with
those rights of way.
B of sufficient size that they
would fall with them one of
these two categories that are
defined.
Miss
yes that is entirely possible
within the complaints of the
state.
Mr chair and senator is it legal
walking in and give me some
paper towels
now
mister chair
senator
is it legal for someone to
walk.
Within the right of way of an
interstate highway.
The.
A mr terror members of the
committee senator neighborhood.
There are provisions within the
traffic code that relate to
safety relative to traffic but
in terms of the red way yes that
is correct
I don't know I think there's
generally some probation of of
non motorized access to the
right away with them in her
state highways but I may be
wrong on that.
With respect to
uh the right of way where I
think I saw thirty six and
chooses is that correct and that
has some bearing on whether it's
the legal or illegal does it not
mister chairman that is correct.
And so a limited.
Limited public forum within a
ride of way means a pay medium
greater than
such
an and so it seems to me that
we're looking at this uh
effort to try to determine where
people can engage and
solicitation and where they can
and I may presume mister
chairman and senator that the
purpose of this is really to
make sure that we're can be
worse wish patient can occur is
within a safe safer safe
environment with that be
accurate
mr chairman that is correct and
so if its less than thirty six
inches why you're prohibiting
solicitation in that type of
medium although you're allowing
it in a larger type setting that
accurate that is correct mister
chairman
and so it's it's not prohibiting
that it's just limiting where
the solicitation could occur and
as I understand mr chairman and
and senator your testimony as
you concerned about the safely
maybe not so much of the
motoring public but you're
concerned about the safety of
the people who may be.
Occupying space within a fairly
narrow medium with that that is
correct mrperiod chairman it's
written as a way to keep our
street safer for pedestrians
so so I think I think that the
constitution would probably uh
allow time place and manner type
restrictions where there are
legitimate safety concerns
on page three.
We see that solicitation and i'm
looking at lines eleven and
twelve solicitation is allowed
in all traditional public forums
and if we look up above
what a traditional public forum
means it's basically within a
ride of way that is not a
limited public form within a
ride of way.
And and then it talks about some
other things parking lots and
then it has
well will get down to the the
time limitation but like parking
lots i'm wondering what about
special events.
I'm thinking about parking lots
at a ballpark.
Lobo
which you be familiar with
senator.
Yeah.
Should we not allow.
Some of this activity
to occur with him parking locks
it's at special events.
Mister chairman of the committee
and senator abert while I
deferred to the with difference
to the to the senator as the
sponsor of the bill that is
certainly my perspective this is
not designed.
Normally permitted events like
parades and and parking lots to
the to the example that you are
raised are not the intent from
my understanding.
Help limit to improve public
safety.
If we look down in lines
thirteen through sixteen
solicitation is allowed.
The.
Within a right of way and
limited public forums within a
parking lot provided it is
unlawful to solicit from one
half hour after a sunset until
one half hour before send rise
so.
At the union basketball games.
There may be a few games played
during the day but most of them
are played at night.
And so that provision prohibits.
Solicitation and frankly the way
things are defined I think it
prohibits passed out literature
you know vote for vote for greg
neighbor for senator whatever it
may be it would prohibit that
activity would it not between
those hours.
If you were soliciting yes well
but.
The.
If you look at the
the word solicit as the finding
your bill means they request by
a person through words signs or
actions for donations of money.
Other items about.
Appeals for support of persons I
would argue that.
My
vote for me is an appeal for
support of.
Persons being me as recharged
that's why there are people
soliciting yes so yes mister
chairman so
your bill would prohibit that
type of activity at a parking
lot of public parking lot mr
chairman during those hours on
the the house hour before and
after yes.
And.
Mr chair and senator this is
where I think you get in
trouble.
I think that this restriction
gets you in trouble.
Constitutionally
it's not a safety issue in that
context
yet
maybe a time place a manner but
your purpose for the time.
That may be the only time that.
You're going to have an event.
And I think I would argue mister
chairman senator.
That that time place a manner
restriction is not tied to a
legitimate public interest.
And I think when we look at
bills like this
to pass constitutional muster
you have to narrowly tailor it
to fit the the real purpose that
deals with the the public issue
and I would III support you on
the public safety issue.
But I think we've got a little
far there and I would incourage
you to look at that issue and
determine whether or not you
need the point in a little bit
thank you mister
erman thank you for those
comments thank you
next to the senator so the
olympics followed by senator
tomon senator masters and I will
note that senator I thought to
as requested that we roll his
firearms on play grounds still.
Over till saturdays of anyone's
here for the fire arms on play
it doesn't seem right that
there's so few people here to
talk about fire I was usually
I thought we were signed up yeah
we're not going to hear it
anyway so it comes over and on
saturday only if he brings lunch
with we should do that we should
get less
than the old mister chair
senator I couldn't have done a
better job of outlining the
narrowness the time place in
manner restrictions because I
think we've talked about this
many times of this committee
when you're dealing with the
first amendment you have to
really tailor these regulations
narrowly and for meeting the
spell I don't I don't see the
near the
narrow tarily tailoring and i'm
not going to repeat what center
neighborhood said I thought that
was very good I might even have
more problems.
With some of the some of the
provisions and as you know i've
said this before I I think it's
such a time and white waste of
money to pass legislation that
has constitutional problems
because you see the advocates
opposed to it they're going to
bring a lawsuit and it's just
going to be a huge waste of time
and money so I I can't support
the bill
then I I guess i'll just leave
it at that it's a lot the hour
is late.
Sir I just want to mention in
case you're here for the guns on
fire yes center driving so I
just announced these rolled that
over till saturday he stayed up
he started up on the fourteen
day waiting period bill and the
other in the other.
Yeah
so you're you're done senators
senator tomorrow and followed by
senator masters uh the situation
moved to table.
Them
emotion to table is a non
debatable motion.
Okay we have a motion to table
go ahead
thank you thank you mister
chairman thank you center how do
mean is to break up for trying
to solve these problems if you
throw like.
Ten ten up people in a room and
ask him hey what problems do you
want all of this are guaranteed
this will be on the list I mean.
It's sad that off which ten
people be good up keep stats on
pedestrian.
Fatalities are to see what set
of circumstances led to that I
mean.
Intoxication
wearing dark dark closed no
lighting or panhandling whatever
you know it's a big problem
this is is a good attempt to try
to pin point it's kind of weird
you know non public forum non
public forum and.
Kinda weird weird words but it's
trained up.
Taylor the interaction on paper
second appreciate that I I like
the.
Unlawful to solicit on.
It when it's dark essentially
one half hour after sunset one
half hour before sunrise.
The the kind of the aggressive
solicitation section.
Um.
You know you have the
solution as a petty mister minor
aggressive solicitor civil
station as a mistake.
We should both be petty mister
meaners or
the equivalent of traffic
traffic mister meaner zero to
ninety days.
Um.
I think I think despite better
left to the cities.
Um.
I think they think the point is
to connect with the person in
albuquerque.
There's a lot of organizations
and why is people that do not
want a pd
badged officers approaching
these persons but rather social
workers or people that are more
trained but it.
But I don't know what the
legalities are I don't know what
if they can just go up to
anybody on the street and
approach them or has to be some
kind of semi criminal activity
or or some community care take
her type activity but we should
definitely figure that out but
i.
Thank mister baker for his work
in wisdom and i'm.
Thank you.
We have emotion to table.
And secretary will call the rule
senator hickey
senator he give a center my
assessor yes as well yes senator
my country
my car general yes center
mckenna yes center mckenna votes
yes senator neighbor sent a
neighborhoods yes senator
speakers center city a lot
because yes to table
city a lot of his votes yes
senator santa man votes yes
center it is if you know yes.
Thank you centre by a boat of
eight and the affirmative zero
the negative the motion to table
mister chairman I want to think
everyone including those who
stood up in opposition of the
bill for their comments and so
thank you for spending a late
night I do have a thirty minute
speech that I want to share with
each of you
have a good night tomorrow.
The last bill we're going to
take up tonight is.
The housing fund changes house
bill one ninety five is.
Representative yes.
Representative of surrounded and
miss russell from the finance
authority.
House bill one ninety five.
Like this is our first house
bill congratulations you get the
coupon
for a free chip to spec.
Thank you mister chair thank you
senators tonight and presenting
house bill one ninety five which
amends the opportunities
enterprise act on that we
established about two years ago
at what this act originally did
was it created the opportunity
enterprise review board and they
would look at development
opportunities for economic
development time so you know
when we were passing it we were
thinking of these
economic centers think of you
know the clovis is main street
or others like that and how they
could really develop it to make
it something great and so what
we saw this past year was their
first application period they
had thirty three applications
forty two percent where from
rural or
frontier communities and they
are and they were worth over a
hundred and thirty million
dollars and so you know all
together we had this really
great out for excitement around
this respond and so in the
interim in the over the mfa
oversec committee we heard a
recommendation for changes to it
and so what this bill and the
housing fund to the
opportunities enterprise act
found itself under the new
mexico finance authority which
is why I have a market a rustle
here with the ceo of the animal
and I also have down your worth
with the governor's office i'm
sure you're familiar with him
yes we just
and so on what this does it
create a fund in the budget
there is already
under twenty five million
dollars that is in the budget so
far at least it's coming from
the house site and this one
would allow them to to help
developers build housing that is
affordable as we all know mfa is
really the place to go if you
need vouchers or you don't make
to get affordable housing this
feels that other gap for middle
to low income folks that really
just need a house that's
affordable under the median cost
of housing in the state and so
this would allow those
developers to build those units
and give them that up front
capital as we know a lot of
times especially in development
that up front capital can be
very difficult to get a hold of
and that can also drive up the
cost of housing for individuals
so that's what this creates that
same opportunity enterprise
review board would then have a
three experts on housing added
to it.
The auditor has requested no
longer to be a member of the
board
he but the m f a director would
be instead
so we'd have the housing
expertise to make those those
loans in the they do would be
that they would be you know get
these low cost loans for these
types of development and I would
all end there without anything
we can stand for questions
did you want to say anything
that.
Thank you chairman
representative
yeah I beat anything this is
part of addressing the spectrum
of housing issues we just talked
a lot about we currently don't
have any funding sources that
deal with this this is a really
different approach than what we
do with the mortgage finance
authority in terms of
traditional subsidy programs
this is really a finance program
that's designed to incentivise
the private sector to move into
this space it's a one time shot
of a lot of not a lot of funny
but considerable amount of
funding in the housing world
and to us it's really designed
to address the housing supply
and really it reached the
missing metal housing so in the
bill language you'll see it it
specifically calls out folks
that over their current
affordable housing income limits
but that.
At praising that's below the
current market rate housing
availability now we know this
varies widely around the state
county by county that's why
there's not a hard limit in
there the new mexico affordable
housing act and the structures
associate with that mean that
each relevant community around
the state creates their own plan
and ordinance which sets their
own income limits we have some
counties and cities that have a
hundred percent a m as a limit a
hundred and twenty percent a m
some of the assistance programs
the mf does go up higher but
that's why it's written the way
it is is to allow us to evaluate
individual projects based on the
affordability in the in the
local way they're happening
this rustle did you want to say
anything.
Mr chairman no other stand for
questions okay good is there
anyone here in support of this
bill.
Yes.
Go ahead will start in the
threat and work back.
Yeah yeah you do because it
that.
The live stream of picture.
Miles conway
northern new mexico builders
association associated with the
national association home
builders in mexico home builders
association all standard strong
support of this bill what I
believe is so exciting about it
missed careman members of the
committee is that this fund has
the it's a brand new idea it's a
very new idea and I think what's
exciting about it it's it's
gonna help us articulate all the
different sources of money so
very close to us right now just
you know maybe a couple miles
away from here there are housing
projects that are ready to go
with master plans but we can't
fund or find financing for the
bridge for the developer can't
find finishing for the bridge
now once we could perhaps
hypothetically apply to this
fund then all the sudden m s
money starts to come in and
achieve say the thirty forty
percent of affordable housing
you want to build in that
development and then that the
market rate or the lower market
rate deemed kind of work force
housing or in the effortable
realm that gets built too so
this is a new idea we stand in
strong support I know there's
been a lot of talk and whispered
around that you know we're
trying to build a bridge
everyone's looking for a troll
underneath this bridge there's
no troll underneath the
spreadsheet really trying to
bring private sector nonprofit
municipal local state government
all to the table stacked the
money and get into some housing
production thank you for your
time the standard strong support
thank you miles.
Randy
mr chairman.
Randy trainer with new mexico
home builders i'm beginning to
wonder if my station in support
might be an impediment to
passing this bill but i'm gonna
stand in support of it anyway
part of this this idea here was
a really grew out of the work of
the housing investment council
in one of the things you know we
we try to find something that
would make a meaningful
difference to providing housing
you know i'm almost a shame to
say that my builders are not
building homes for new mexicans.
Because as we heard earlier you
So we're building a lot of homes
for people from outer state and
we'd like to build homes for the
workforce group you know that
the missing middle we call it
and and as many of you probably
know that you know the
infrastructure caused a front
that that's money that's a lot
of money spend up front and
invest up front as you won't see
any return on that or you know a
long long time and so this is a
revolving low low interest won't
phone that will help us start to
lower the cost of some of this
housing so we support this thank
you great.
Anybody else anybody online
mr sir regret go ahead.
Thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee david
spadra director of government
affairs for the new mexico is
the station of real tours today
we stand in support of house
bill one ninety five an extender
graduate to the sponsors for
reinforce this piece of
legislation as we're allocately
aware of the availability and
affordability of housing it
become pressing issues both
nationally and within new mexico
we commend the provisions
outlined in house bill when
ninety five which promised to
help increase housing
affordability in new mexico
thank you.
Thank you mister.
Bullington.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee that
this bullington and I am
representing the greater album
cookie chamber of commerce and
the thirty different steady of
santa fe both of which support
this legislation we want to
thank the sponsor
representatives deroto this bill
is all about partnering with the
private sector to create an
expand affordable and work force
housing it's about providing a
mechanism to make loans of up to
forty years to development
partners partners it's about
beefing up the oversight board
and expanding that board the
powers to include evaluating
partners and projects for
suitability for assistance we
need more housing and
encouraging well better
partnerships with the private
sector is a win when and we
strongly urge his committee to
the port and pass house bill one
ninety five.
Thank you jd
members of the committee.
We have emotion for a dupass
from senator tom and seconded by
senator so the olovest
discussion senator neighborhood
thank you mr chair.
Mr chairman representative would
you kind of walk us through.
How this works are these grants
to
builders are these direct
subsidies to buyers what exactly
is the money.
Whose hands does a money get
into and and is it a loan or is
it a graph thank you mister
chair think you represent
senator thank you center
will have it
absolute so first of all it is a
lot and the process we
anticipate will be a lot like
the economic development arm of
the opportunity in a price act
which essentially what happens
is application period opens up
applications are sent in and
what the opportunity enterprise
review board will consider and
rank on is community involvement
zoning rules in that community
and a variety of different
different aspects I want to just
point out briefly that in the
economic development one is a
model that would also be seen in
parallel they consider community
impact and support job creation
and employment applicant the
that the business is readiness
and need and their location and
industry similar
review at a qualities will be
considered in the housing aspect
and at that point the
opportunity enterprise review
board will rank which
development which developers are
working within their their
spectrum and really placed which
ones they think are most in in
best position to be given alone
at that point it goes to the
animal fa go to the underwriting
and they see which ones they
could underwrite confidently
they feel confident that process
on what they learn last year in
the first round of of
applications was that they did
need to give a bump to role in
front of your communities
initially there was a this is a
hundred point scale that you're
judged on initially they gave a
five to ten bump for rural or
front here and they actually
increase that to ten to fifteen
instead because they notice that
the that the real communities
weren't getting enough
representation so we anticipate
something similar to this chair
and senator just especially
because when you're looking at
developing in places where the
work forces growing as we see a
lot in southern new mexico we
really want to see give them
that credence and also developer
that's going to go into the rule
areas and invest their you know
would also be included as well I
don't know maxber want to chat
anything to that as well.
Mister chairman.
Mister chairman I would only add
that in the opportunity
enterprise act initially there
was not any direction in statute
for how to prioritize these so
it took a little it took some
time for the opportunity
enterprise board to develop the
standards that the sponsor just
went through here in section six
on page twelve you'll see that
there's clear direction to from
the board from the legislature
to the board to prioritize
projects that are in political
subdivisions that are
implementing zoning reforms that
support housing development
projects so there is a lot more
targeted to getting a efficient
use of the dollars and so there
is additional uh direction that
we didn't have the first time
and that'll help us in
developing both the rules in the
policies that prioritise these
projects it's the incentive for
the communities to make some of
the changes that I think you
heard earlier or impeating
efficient use of the dollars and
and development speedy
development of housing and so we
we have a loan to I presume a
builder.
Is the loan secured by the real
property or is there some other
security that backs up the loan.
Mr chairman though they will be
fully secured loans that does
statute does not direct how to
secure these loans that will
happen in rules actually
established by the new mexico
finance authority but if they
are similar to the rules that we
have for the opportunity
enterprise review board loans
which are approved by both the
oversight committee of the m f a
as well as the board at the end
of the they can be real property
secured they can be
there can be other additional
uses they could be lamb that's
not directly involved in the
enterprise or in the project
itself when you have for
instance infrastructure it's
really difficult to attach
infrastructure
to lean and frastructure to get
any value from that so we have
looked at unrelated property in
that instance in order to try to
figure out how to fully secure
infrastructure loans which I
anticipate will be one of the
focuses with the housing
development fund and so mister
chair and representative if the.
Loans made and it's secured by
the real property that's the
where the homes will be built
as a purchaser of one of those
homes I presume there's some
mechanism to release the the
lane on that light so that the
purchaser takes it from clear
and.
Is the builder then required to
remit the funds for received
from that buyer to
the finance authority.
Mr chairman I think there is
going to be a this could be
multi family housing rental
housing it could be for per it
could be for purchase housing it
could be infrastructure so there
are three different types of
housing that could occur as a
result of this and there would
be I think different scenarios
based on that kind of project if
it's a multi family rental
property
then I believe we keep a lean on
that the entire time if it's for
profit obviously we have to do
what you've just suggested which
is released the lean or have it
restrict there would be I think
a deed restriction there but we
would certainly
give clear title to the
property owner when they
purchase the facility well I
would uh mister chairman
represent I would assume that
that depends on who's buying.
The multi family property if
it's if it's a third party and
the builders receiving
fair market value for that
building.
Then the lane needs to be
released and and it would seem
to me that the state to secure
rock to
get the money at that point in
time as to that the property if
the builders building a multi
family unit for their own
account.
Them I could see where that that
mortgage if you will would
remain in existence for a term
of years
and the builder wouldn't have to
pay that back in one lump sum
but i'm just hoping that the
state has a mechanism so that if
they're selling these lots or
selling the property to a buyer
whose receiving.
Title free and clear of lanes
that it's the state that gets
the money back quickly and not
allowing that builder to simply.
Pay out over twenty thirty years
whatever your term is
it and have used that money for
for term of years because that's
not what we're trying to do
we're trying to get the stop
built.
Get it in the hands of people
who
you know need the
benefits that were trying to
provide that is if you can make
these loans at low cost to a
builder they can build it
cheaper therefore they're going
to receive in theory less money
for that.
Property when they sell it
everybody can understand that
but if the builder is going to
have a thirty year loan.
Interest free or low vointers
there's no incentive for them
the pay it back quickly I mean
you love me
million dollars
old something and pay it back
over time and have used to that
money but but I hope there's
something in there and I don't
see the legislation but I hope
there's something in there that
it when they sell it to the
private entity whether it's a
corporate entity or whether it's
an individual.
That when the builder receives
that check.
That the state gets the loan at
least as to that.
Pro rate deal yet paid back
and I just want some insurance
on that on that for a mister
chairman I I can assure you that
again there are number of
different scenarios are goal is
to get the money back as quickly
as possible and revolve that
fund but to make the deal work
so it's it's that balance the
initial legislation under there
was a past two years ago had a
minimum term of fifteen years
for loans made to private
entities and a maximum term of
thirty years what we're
recommending here is that you
actually eliminate that minimum
term because in fact the first
one we looked at could be repaid
in five years and we didn't want
to have an artificial impediment
to the return of the capital so
it's exactly the point you're
making our goal is to get the
deal done in a way that's
efficient but then to return the
dollars as economically feasible
as possible and as quickly as
possible for that very reason.
Mr chair that's all the
questions I could senator hickey
thank you mister chair and thank
you for bringing this and I
think I just had a deja vo in
the good senator with
a representative and I am trying
to remember the bill and he was
it was questioning me but last
year and
and I somehow had really good
answers but
but I I wanted to take his
attack and press it a little
further because I do think that
the purpose of this is to get to
move it through quickly I so i'm
having a problem with the thirty
year pay back to a builder
shouldn't they really be able.
So maybe in a randall property
but still in a rental property I
mean they they build and they
and and rare properties get both
or someone else buys the
mortgage I know my home mortgage
has been bought and sold and
team times and so i'm wondering
how is there a provision in here
that gets the money back.
Fast but still probably allows
multiple unit.
Housing which then says
potentially rent but
but i'm what i'm looking for is
how does this house is moved
fast and with the pressure and
the builder to get the money
back to the state so I can
recycle and thirty year I don't
want to give them the.
Thank you chairman senator
representative
I think the only places that we
will want to contemplate long
terms like that are really multi
family housing and those are
typically advertisation terms
they're not actually the the
life of the mortgage
most multifamily properties tend
to be sold or
renovated within about ten to
twenty five years in most cases
we wanted at least in the
initial conversations and the
drafting of this to allow the
ability to have those long term
loans I could give you a
scenario for instance
you're building an affordable
apartment complex you're using
this one to pay for
infrastructure which is
something that mfa doesn't
currently fund this as a wed
dove tails with our existing
subsidies housing programs.
There's no immediate pay back as
you're not selling the units
you're renting right and had
actually has rules with their
their mortgages that you can't
have any debt with a shorter pay
back period then the term of a
hudd mortgage on a multi family
property and so it's about being
able to use this in an array of
situations and I think that's
something that when it comes to
the rule making process and then
eventually the scoring of
projects we the the board would
evaluate whether
parking some money for ten or
twenty years the benefit was
worth tieing the money up for
that time it would theoretically
be getting a incremental return
over that whole time and earning
interest so it's not
the same as a subsidy program
where you park money in it and
it's there
so I think certainly the vast
majority of what we're
contemplating is the scenario of
a single family home that when
it sold the money that was
invested in it would get repaid
at that time but we do want to
leave the range of housing
available as an activity there's
no real mechanism in a multi
family project to immediately
capitalize after a completion of
construction and pay back alone
so we didn't want to eliminate
the ability to fund multi family
housing because that's a need a
rental housing huge need right
now and if as we know if you
don't have an affordable rental
you can't save the down payment
to it to buy a home so it's all
connected and
thank you mister chairman
continued to take this
tac
how much money is in the fund
the
red through here in its in house
bill too is that a hundred and
fifty million two hundred and
fifty point
seven and maybe i'm yeah thank
you mister chair think you said
it are it began last year I
returned two years ago at
seventy million and then in the
budget this year there's fifty
million for the economic
development arm of the
opportunity to enterprise a fund
and then.
For the housing arm it's one
hundred twenty five million and
so this year would be
appropriate at a hundred seventy
five total.
Thank you
so if i'm an entrepreneur and
i'm building of like where I
live in north east.
I'm seeing some huge apartment
complexes that we go where which
we need.
But.
Gonna cost
all that I mean well both a
hundred million two hundred
million and i'm just worried
we're going to tie up this money
I mean I I understand the need
so in the rule making how do we.
The.
How do we know that that we're
not going to get it all tied up
in one or two apartment ventures
when when we need the housing
and they were going to get the
money back and recycle it
mr chairman if we took if we
look out what we currently do
with the opportunity enterprise
again at the point system one of
the points you get higher points
if you are leveraging dollars
and so we don't anticipate being
a hundred percent of the funding
unless of course it's
infrastructure in which case
it'll have a shorter emergation
period and pay back so we
anticipate blending with private
capital to get these projects
completed we don't anticipate
being a hundred percent
financing for the sort of
vertical construction there's
capital out there this may be a
way to get the project on faster
because it may require you know
in certain parts of the state
the appraisal values are not
quite as high as the
construction costs costs so that
I think it's it's intended to
bridge there so
I believe that you will see
that the money won't get tied up
in just two projects.
Or
thank you miss russell that's
helpful.
Um.
And now i'm conduct demonstrate
my freshman ignorance here
when rules are made how do we
legislators know that the intent
of the rules are kind of what
you said.
And mister chair can you play
please pay attention to this
mister chair.
You mister chair i'm so sorry to
interrupt your communications
i'm getting page to go to
another meeting okay the
what I again I don't know how we
get follow up again this goes
back to lhs this summer we
approve these things and we
never know if they happened
don't happen or if it follows
the interest in oversight
committee for the finance and.
Like ours is in oversec
committee for so we so we trust
them
that's what the obvious activity
supposed to do okay mister
chairman and there's two sets of
rules that'll be implemented
here so there's going to be the
rules that the opportunity
enterprise and housing
development board I think it's
called would now be called they
have to do their rules pursuant
to the new mexico rules act and
so they'll be the regular public
promulgation of rules the new
mexico finance authority however
has a different role process and
our process is to take to the
new mexico oversight of
legislative committee in armed
committee our rules and they
have to approve the same set of
rules as the board of director
so they are direct oversight
there is legislative
thank you mister chairman and
miss russell so there is there
is an interim I I i'm i'm
starting to remember that now
I get totally swallowed up by a
light just all some room forget
that there are other committees
that are doing
this for mortgage finance too so
each of them have their own
oversight yeah okay so okay
that's very helpful so I guess
maybe what i'm doing here is
expressing my intent as member
we we did the venture capital
act and you know too many people
I say it's a jobs bill I mean at
the end of the day it's a jobs
bill
because it's going to create
jobs in new mexico and this is
going to create I believe jobs
and more construction so for
with a wrapped turnover of the
money that's where i'm trying to
go that that that happened so
i'll i'll just leave it at that
and I trust my colleagues to
quick questions one what how how
do you decide what interest
rate.
Mr chairman that's a made
pursuing to the finance
authority rules on our loan
program you so you always come
in a little bit below mr
chairman in all of our programs
were their market or below
market the only market rate
program we have currently is our
public project revolving fund
which is said it tripley tax
exempt rate so for a market rate
it's pretty good are current
opportunity enterprise fund is
said at sixty percent of prime
last question on page fifteen.
There's a change from your
current policy in which you say
municipalities.
With the population of less than
forty you change that to sixty
of how come in which new
communities will be eligible mr
chairman that change makes us
consistent with tip the job
training to yes and so right now
there is sixty thousand and so
this allows us to align all of
our definitions for rule for
front year and for others and so
it it doesn't change
substantially a number of
communities may be rosal maybe
mister chairman over sixteen.
Oh so rise probably they were
over forty no they probably
would be eligible for these.
The.
And mister chairman I would note
that these this of this ability
to do the non urban
prioritization false to the
finance authority not to the
opportunity to review board so
if we get scores if we get two
identical scores one for an
urban community one and a non
urban this allows us to
prioritize the non urban over
the urban so they can genuine
continues with.
Secretary will call the rule.
Senator
senator hickey we rule
yeah yes
yes center masters yes
yes that are my country there
are my catch involved yes center
mckenna.
The.
Sicilia
chairman.
Yeah this isn't as correct yes
is the dupass i'm sorry should
have made that clear okay I
bought yes
yes center and I bought.
Center library was yes
center city a lot best yes that
is that a lot because yes center
tomato center it's easy now yes
center to be no votes yes
congratulations you ever do pass
on a seven to zero vote thank
you very.
And
members the
the business of the committee is
completed tonight we want meet
friday so will meet saturday
morning but i'm nine thirty nine
thirty
because because that floor
session is going to go so they.
It's gonna be on gun the gun
bill.
The paid family medical.
Maybe some more gun bills to you
that paid family medical be
saturday
in archime yeah in our committee
we have the sort of thread.
We don't have a lot of house
bills coming over yet so
we don't have that little
probably still be unless we get
a bunch.
That's been suggested
usually when we have a lot of
those in.
Yeah.
