and very full today.
Um, before we, uh, begin with
the hearing.
Officially, if our secretary
would call roll to establish a
court.
And our block
Senator Boone,
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegosen Nova.
Pinto.
stop
Senator Serio Lopez.
Senator Hickey here Senator
Lopez.
Here.
We have a corn present, so I'm
gonna let my vice chair.
take over. Well, I start.
Senate Bill
4:30, neglected child
definition.
OK
Senator Lopez, the floor is
yours. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, what Senate Bill 4:30 is
proposing for our consideration
is to redefine.
Uh, what
And who a neglected child is uh
within our abuse and neglect
act, the Children's coach.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
A neglected child, um.
is defined as who is without
food, shelter, cloing education,
medical or mental health
treatment, supervision, or other
car or support necessary for the
child's well-being because of
the behaviors of the child's
parent guardian or custodian or
the failure or refusal of the
parent guardian or custodian to
provide such care.
Or support
able to do so or when offered
financial or other reasonable
means to enable the parent or
guardian or custodian to do so.
Um, Mr. Chair, as we go through
the bill,
The in June of 2024, the
Children's code reform task
force, um, released its initial
report.
That we was to revise the
definition for a neglected
child.
And to prevent child removal and
longer stays in custody when
poverty is the only issue.
Um, the task force, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee noted
that the amendment to the
definition of neglected child,
as is currently proposed in
Senate Bill 430.
clarifies that poverty alone is
not neglect and must be made on
other conditions, and 2,
clarifies processes to prevent
child removal and longer stays
in custody when poverty again is
the only issue.
And Mr. President, members of
the committee.
This particular um issue around
poverty is not just here for New
Mexico. It's a problem uh that
is common across, um, every
state in our country, or
sometimes poverty has been, is
confused with neglect that will
cause children to enter or her
and foster care even when the
parent, guardian, or custodian.
Has not wilfully withheld basic
necessary resources, and again,
Mr. Chair has clothing food.
And others uh necessities uh
from a child, and it was our
conversation, working with um
different experts and those who
work with children in the foster
care system, that poverty alone
does not constitute neglect.
And um we felt that it's not a
rationale for child welfare
involvement and part of our
discussion, Mister Chair,
members of the committee, um,
was also to see how resources if
if a child is found to be um
In need of food, clothing.
Other necessities is what we
could do as the state to offer
resources to help that child and
family.
And Mr. Chair, over the summer,
um,
We also happen to, I happen to
participate in a Senate Memorial
5 task force, which the Senate
did pass last year, and that was
working with um
Different uh persons who were
appointed by different entities,
both the House and Senate.
And of course the governor, our
secretary Casados was there. She
had her staff present.
And
Some of these are linked in
together in many ways, but I
know that the secretary, they
have uh construct, you know, how
would I say, reconfigured.
and resource centers um around
the state of New Mexico, which I
think also lends itself.
If this bill were to move
forward to actually be able
For New Mexico to offer help.
Uh, to our family, so that the
children don't.
Landing to a system that's
really not friendly.
So, Mr. Chair, I'll, I'll, I'll
stop there.
And um I'll answer any questions
as we go through our discussion.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Uh, may I see hands of
those who are in support of this
bill.
OK, there being more than 5, if
you can organize among
yourselves.
As to which 5 are going to speak
and we will hold.
Comments to 2 minutes a person.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Teresa Casados.
I'm the cabinet secretary at
Children, Youth and Families
Department, um, and as Senator
Lopez stated, we worked on this
issue over the summer through
the task force. This is
something that we want to ensure
CYFD that we are not removing
children for poverty alone. We
want to make sure that we're
giving resources as we implement
our multi-level response. It is
something where we will be able
to help families to ensure that
they're receiving the services
they need without the removal of
children and really building up
our families.
thrive, as she mentioned, we've
built our multi-service, I mean,
our, um,
Family resource centers across
the state. We have 4 of those
that are currently operational,
with two more scheduled to be
open this year, and we have
received our um mobile unit
which will be out in rural
communities soon, so we're
really excited about this and
want to ensure that we're
keeping kids safe and not
removing for poverty. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Laurellyn
Violanta, and I'm the
co-executive director of New
Mexicoan. We're an organization
that partners with young people
to lead positive systems change.
Children's.
solely from, from their
families, solely for conditions
of poverty. That's why I stand
in favor of updating the
definition of neglect in the
Children's code.
I also encourage deeper
reflection of the definition to
make very clear that it is about
the refusal of providing basic
needs, not a judgment of a
parent's failures or struggles.
Please support SB 430. Thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon,
chair, members of the committee,
Mike Gittini with both Futures
New Mexico, and we strongly
support the proposed changes in
SB 430 that redefined the
definition of neglected child,
ensure that children are not
unnecessarily separated from
their families due to financial
hardships alone. By clarifying
that inadequate financial
resources, so social isolation
or non-conforming family
structures should not
automatically be grounds for
child removal. This bill
promotes a more just and
compassionate approach to child
welfare.
Additionally, requiring efforts
to provide parents with
financial and practicable
practical support before
removing a child helps
prioritize family preservation
whenever possible. These
revisions align with a more
equitable trauma informed child
welfare system, and I urge to
pass on SB 430. Thank you.
And keep
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Marissa B
Hill. I'm a former foster youth,
also uh advocate of locally and
nationally, there's some young
people that came with us today,
but there wasn't enough seats
and I want to stand in support
of this bill with a further look
into it to make sure that we're
not further separating families.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We have 2 people on Zoom who are
in support.
First is Waba Hubbert.
Why, are you there?
Yes.
You have the floor.
Deering members of the
committee. My name is Quva
Hubbard. I am a bold futures
leader and I have experience
helping families navigate the
child welfare system. I am in
support of Senate Bill 430.
Poverty is a risk factor for
neglect, but poverty does not
equate to neglect. Poverty alone
doesn't mean a child is in
danger, unloved, or that their
parent can't care for them,
while, while it can make it
tougher for parents to fulfill
their needs. Many still
genuinely want to improve their
circumstances and support their
kids.
But they just lack the resources
to do so. The indicators for
neglect and poverty often
overlap, so it's important to
dig deeper and understand the
situation better in order to
take appropriate action,
supporting parents in the child
welfare system has shown me just
how tough it is for them to
judge financial stability,
consistent work, childcare, and
home life while managing a
part-time job is disappointing
to see that, see them labeled as
neglectful simply because they
can't meet societal standards of
what's considered normal or
wealthy in a
income state, single-parent
households face daily struggles
that aren't neglect, but rather
a lack of resources and support.
We need tools that focus on
identifying poverty, and it's
related social issues instead of
just labeling parents as
neglectful. It's unfair to
assume neglect when parents are
just trying to survive without
adequate support. Poverty
impacts various aspects of life,
including income, food security,
housing, and it's negative
effects on health and
well-documented. We should be
advocating for these families
and providing the necessary
interventions rather than
sticking to outdated definitions
of neglect. I'm in support of
House Senate bill.
4:30.
Thank you very much. And next is
Jeremy Martinez.
2 minutes.
Jeremy
Hi, um,
there.
Thank you for letting me if I am
uh in your guardian and I am in
support of this. We often see on
a state, um, a lot of families
being um
That they say neglectful for not
being able to provide the
necessary things, but most of
these parents just lack of
support and resources and like
everyone said, we desperately
need that. So until we provide
that, we cannot punish family
until we support them. So I am
in support of this. Thank you.
Thank you, Jeremy.
We have anyone in the audience
in opposition.
Seeing none, do we have any
online?
Madam Chair, do you have any
comments after the comments? OK,
so now we'll go to the
committee.
Motion for a due pass in a
second.
Any questions or comments?
Scott.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair, what?
Precipitation
for this change.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Scott.
There have been discussions over
the years.
Um, about the children who enter
RCYFD system.
And in my conversations with
many different groups over the,
the last, especially the last
two years.
Um
Looking at
Listening to families.
who have had children, um,
Taken into custody, when you
hear their situation and really
look as to.
What
Precipitated, they're being
removed.
I think it depends, of course,
for a review, um, and that was
part of the question that we
raised for the Children's Code
Task Force. It was an issue, Mr.
Chair, Senator that was raised
also in the Senate Memorial 5
Task Force that we met this
past, um, last year during the
interim.
In talking about what we can do
to help our families so that.
If a child is.
If if the family is reported
that there's an issue, they,
they feel the child's been
neglected.
Then what tools can we do to
help guide the department,
making sure that when the child
is, um, if there's an evaluation
done seeing exactly what the
circumstances are.
And as I mentioned, Mr. Chair
Senator, it's not an issue just
for New Mexico when we talk
about poverty.
Um
It's across this country.
As to how other states are
beginning to address this
particular issue and redefine
what poverty is, um, when we
talk about neglect, um, with
regards to children who have the
potential of being removed.
So it, it's not just something
that's just come up, Mr. Chair,
Senator is, is taken about 23
years for us to come to this
point to begin the discussion
here with the legislature.
On this proposal.
OK, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
Poverty seems to be.
The overarching theme of this
piece of legislation, that is a
child should not be.
Considered neglected just
because of the circumstances.
Of the family. Do you have any
statistics?
its support
children being removed.
From the
Family environment.
Purely because the
Um, Mr. President, I mean, Mr.
President, as we get used to
that on the Senate floor. Either
Mr. Speaker, Mr. I'm Mr.
Chairman.
Um, I know that, um, there,
there are statistics, um.
And I, I know that the
department is here, but I don't
have any specific at this point
in time with me, um, but I know
when we were in the committee,
there were, it was, it's not a
huge number, um, that were
presented to us, but even if one
child is removed because of the
financial, whatever.
That circumstance may be that
is.
Uh, that can be addressed by the
resource centers, which is where
um I know the secretary and her
team have been working on.
I think that it's beneficial
because as one less child who's
in the system who's traumatized.
by being removed from their
family.
And Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, did
I hear?
The way of CYFD here in the
audience.
Would they be able to shed some
more light.
On statistical evidence by.
Um, is the secretary, if I, I
think she's still here in the
room.
issues.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
thank you. Can you repeat your
question for me just really
quickly to make sure I
understood it correctly.
Oh
Mr. Chair Ma a chair and expert
I.
I
What kind of statistics that
CYFD might have in their
possession.
With respect to children that
have been removed.
Um
their home environment.
Or neglect
It was largely a consequence.
Of their financial
circumstances.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
thank you. So CYFD's policy is
not to remove a child.
Only for neglect.
Uh, we substantiate on neglect
if it's willful or deliberate
actions that lead to a child
being unsafe.
Um, so neglect in and of itself
would not or poverty would not
just be a reason that we would
go in and remove.
Um, I believe as Senator Lopez
had said, sometimes, you know,
that can be left up to the
opinion of somebody going in, so
we want to ensure that we have
language in there that really
protects the child and that that
it's deliberate in the way that
we say it's not just for
poverty. um, when we look at
repeat maltreatment, a large
percentage of the repeat
maltreatment is for neglect. And
so as we're looking at those
numbers and really trying to
ensure that we're.
families where they are getting
them the services that they
need. We want to be able to
provide them services through
our family services division to
really be able to look at the
family and look at their
circumstances and determine if
there are other services
available within the state where
we can help them to address some
of those issues of poverty, um,
without removal of the child.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
An expertee.
I don't see anything in this
legislation.
With respect to
For example, drug abuse.
Can you tell me what role that
would normally play.
In circumstances or does it
normally play?
In circumstances leading to
neglect.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
um, yes, if there is drug abuse
that leads to a child being
unsafe, then that would
constitute a removal.
If there is a family who is um
Maybe using drugs and they are
seeking out assistance to
receive treatment.
And the department doesn't feel
that the child is in danger in
that situation, we would work
with that family to help enable
them to get that treatment that
is needed, um, and then refer
them to our family services so
that they're still engaged with
the family, but there, there's
not a removal and they're not in
through protective services.
OK.
Mr.
And turn expert, what is the
prime directive.
Of CYD.
When you
When you wake up in the morning.
Knowing that you're going to see
some cases of abuse.
In neglect
is holding that family together.
Or is
The welfare of the child.
The prime direct.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott, the
welfare of the child is the
prime directive of children,
youth and Families department to
ensure that they are safe in the
environment.
OK
That's all for now. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Cynthia.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am
I agreed to co-sponsor this bill
and I was really happy to do so
because when I was in La
Seitario.
It cost the FYR says it costs
$27,000 to take, to have a child
in foster care?
And I just remember thinking,
God, if my, my client had
$27,000. He wouldn't find
herself in these circumstances
has sometimes the neglect
allegation was because
She left a youngish child like
an eight year old at home so she
could get to work and she left
the child at home until her
grandmother would get off work,
um.
And, and, you know, too much
leaving a child at home.
Of course is not great for
children, but she had to do it
to put food in that child's
mouth.
And so those kinds of cases just
absolutely broke my heart.
Um, and so if we were to put,
and I just felt we could keep
cha families together if we put
the resources towards supporting
the family and a less resources
into uh
The cost, the major cost, I
think 27 actually is low because
I don't think that that covers
the healthcare that is provided
to the child and the other
things that have to happen, the
court, uh, cost of having it
reviewed, and I think 27 is
probably just the cause that
goes to the when he's to the
foster parents.
Um, and then it did. I mean, I
remember, um,
A mother describing going up to
this beautiful home where her
child was living in the foster
care and thinking,
Wow. Is it best that my child be
in this beautiful home, um, and
I just, it, again, it broke my
heart.
So I'm really happy. Um, I also
remember the presentations by
the task force at legislative
Health and Human Services this
summer, and they were quite
compelling.
So I'm strongly in support of
this bill and looking forward to
voting for it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Do we have any other questions
or comments from the committee.
Yes, and Charlie. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Senator. What effort, um,
S T YFD committed to
In training their investigators
around internal bias.
So I understand the intent of
this, but I, and I support it.
I'm really curious about
The children that are removed
are are more often they're
black.
Brown children
So what effort is CYFD making to
ensure
That they're investigators for
removing children from.
Oh, she laughed.
Oh
Mr. Chair, we still have a CYFD
official here with us.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Um, thank you. We are constantly
looking at our data, um, from
Our safety tool, which is the
tool that we use to go into
homes when we investigate. They
provide a yearly report about
Who was um removed the age, the,
you know, demographics, and then
we try to look at that report
and say, are we making
consistent.
Decisions upon removal.
When we get that report, then we
will look with our training unit
who is currently our training
unit is being revamped,
completely revamped within CYFD
to say what biases are we.
Possibly happy within our
department. So, um, I'd love to
sit with you, um, and talk, and
we can review that report and I
would be happy to.
Um, talk with you further, and
I, I'm sorry, my name is
Valerie. I'm the deputy
secretary with CYFD. I, I'm
sorry, Mr. Chair, I should have
introduced myself.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator and your deputy
secretary. Um, and then just to
answer one of Senator Scott's
questions that was posed
earlier. I understand about 80%
of children in state custody
right now is due to poverty
related neglect.
So it it it it up to 80% of
those cases.
are related to them.
Just
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, 80% of our cases are
neglect, period.
And everything that falls in
that way, uh, category you're
correct.
Mr. Chan, uh,
secretary and
including poverty.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions.
Yes, Senator Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, they
center.
And, um, Adam,
But yeah, where'd you go?
She was called out. Are you the
deputy secretary?
Senator, yes. I'm sorry, what
was your name? Valerie Sandoval.
Valerie Sandoval? Yes sir. Thank
you, ma'am.
Um,
Mr. Chair
And um well, they, there she is.
The, the secretary
Said to they're gonna remove,
well, we, you guys and CYFD.
I'm trying to, let me ask you
ask you this way.
Does this bill lower the
threshold for removing children,
uh, Mr. President, Madam
Secretary, out of the home.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
I don't believe it lowers the
threshold.
I'm over here. Are you asked
that question? Yeah, yeah, I
did. Sorry, I walked midpoint,
sorry about that,
um, that's chair Senator, I
don't believe that it lowers the
threshold. We already don't
remove children for
Poverty. It's not part of how we
just remove them. This really
just strengthen that and says,
you know, it puts it in law that
that is not alone a determining
factor.
So I believe it's what we're
doing right now, but as I said
earlier, if it's a factor along
with something else that puts
the child at risk, even with
this language in there, we would
still remove that child.
OK, um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Madam Secretary, you, you
mentioned, unless I, maybe I
didn't hear it correctly, but I
thought you said
That the department would move,
remove children from homes in an
unsafe condition, is that
correct?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
yes, that is. OK.
So Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, we, we've talked a
lot privately about some issues
and, and you know where I'm
coming from, uh, I'm looking for
objective.
Standards, not subjective
standards, that's just the way.
I kind of look at the world, um.
Tell me from an objective
standard.
What, what would be some unsafe
situations, uh, because you, you
said drug abuse.
Now is, but you also said if
they're trying to get help with
their
Substance abuse issue, they
would remain in the home.
Uh, now, to me, drug abuse could
be very subjective of the
definition. So let's talk drug
abuse real quick, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary. What's, what's
the objective?
Measurement for drug abuse that
CYFD would remove a child from a
home.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
if the parent was unable to
provide adequate care for that
child and the child was in
danger.
Then they would remove from the
home. If a parent is um using
drugs and they're reaching out
and we go in to do an
investigation and they're, you
know, actively trying to get
into treatment or they can't get
into treatment because we have
limited facilities in the state.
We would work with that family
to work with that adult to get
them into the treatment to help
them through that. And at the
same time monitor the situation
at home. Is there another parent
who can help with the situation.
Is there
grandparent who's willing to be
the safety monitor to ensure the
safety of that child. Our goal
is not to just go in and remove
children from that environment,
unless it's unsafe for them.
So an unsafe environment does
not necessarily equate to
somebody who's using drugs, and
so together if that creates that
environment, we would remove.
But our goal really is at that
point to ensure that we can
strengthen that family unit. It
may be temporary custody of that
youth while the family gets the
treatment or the services that
they need, um, and then look at
reunification. It may just be
that they're not willing to get
treatment and it's an unsafe
environment for the child, which
would then be an immediate
removal.
So
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary, I, I
don't see the difference between
Somebody who's abusing drugs.
I'm struggling with this one.
I'm trying to understand
somebody who's abusing drugs.
Apparent
Uh, and they're not, not getting
help, and I don't know if
they're abusing drugs is
If it's
You know, met
Cocaine, marijuana.
Um
Fentanyl, I mean.
Take, you know, take your pick.
And then if somebody is
Trying to get treatment, and I'm
not sure if they're trying to
fool you or whatever because,
you know, you've seen that
happen before with people. I
mean, I've been around.
You know, growing up with the
drug addicts, unfortunately, in
my family.
Were they, well,
tell you one thing,
But they're not really
Trying to get help.
I mean, because, you know, our
priority is to make sure the kid
is safe. That's it.
And
And why would we want to remove
A kid from a situation like that
where
We don't really know if they're
Be honest about
Trying to get treatment.
But they want to keep custody of
their
Right
So Mr. Chairman Senator Block, I
don't believe that the language
that's being proposed in this.
Yeah
I
Specifically dealing to um
parents who may be addicted to a
substance. It's really talking
about poverty and not removing
for issues of poverty, such as
lack of food, inadequate
housing, um, lack of
transportation. So those issues
that are specifically related to
poverty are issues that we're
looking to ensure that we're not
just removing for poverty. um,
drug addiction or drug abuse is
not considered poverty.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Madam,
I'd agree, that's a neglect.
I would agree that's like.
But there's also different
things. I mean, I, I, I read
through the bill and and trying
to just get my arms around this
because
I, I don't see the standard.
Or neglect because it's
subjective when
It's subjective for every
different family, it really is.
I mean you could have, you
talked about removing
Kids from an unsafe home based
on neglect, I mean that could be
anything from
You know, certain types of
animals in the house.
It could be cleanliness of the
house that could be
Um
You know, so many different
types of things that is an
unsafe environment.
But I'm trying to understand
what the what the standard and
the threshold is.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Block, I
think the language would have to
be, I mean, the.
Guidelines for the department
would be set out for them and
what that looks like. I think
what we're really trying to do
is not make it where, you know,
in one part of the state, a
child gets removed for something
and in another part of the
state, they don't. We really
need to look at the standards,
look at the language, determine
what constitutes poverty, um,
and then really say, OK, if it's
just this alone, if you go in in
your house is messy.
That's not grounds to remove. If
you go in your house is messy
and there's no food and there's,
you know, other risk factors
than that would be. And so it
would really be laying that out
of the department as far as what
those guidelines are for removal
and ensuring that it's still
going to be subjective because
you have humans doing that
analysis, but giving them clear
guidelines so that they're
better able to make those
determinations and those
decisions on the safety of a
child.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Secretary,
but isn't
Isn't there some, you have a
process, some type of flow chart
though that puts some objective
standards into those subjective
decisions.
So like you just talked about
when it could be um
You know, the house is just a
pigsty.
Right, I mean, and it's just
You got cockroaches, you could
have hunta virus, I mean, it's
It's not safe, so.
We talked about a process, so
you have a process in place like
a checklist process a flow chart
where you go down, down, down,
and then
You got a score, like, OK, it's
above the line. We gotta remove
this. We gotta remove this kid
or it's doesn't quite meet it
close, but we gotta provide some
type of assistance.
The family
Is that what you're telling me?
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator Block,
our staff does use a safety
assessment tool, um, as a guide.
It is not a be all end all that
says if you get 7 check marks,
you get removed. Um, it's really
a guide for them to look at to
be able to determine risk and
safety factors for that youth,
but again, a lot of that is left
up to the individual that's in
that situation at that moment,
and I will remind you that CYFD
does
not have the authority to make
the decision to remove that
child.
That's done by law enforcement.
So we're there and we do an
assessment. And if we feel that
the child is at risk, we call
law enforcement, and then they
come in and they ultimately have
the decision and the authority
to make the decision to remove
that child. So we work closely
with law enforcement, so it's
not just one person making that
assessment, um, it's
two people that can communicate
with each other to ensure the
safety of the child.
was here so Madam Secretary, I
mean law enforcement.
It, I mean, that's you guys have
a huge influence in the law
enforcement decision.
That child, I mean, I can't
picture law enforcement going
in, they're not trained for that
stuff.
You know, to say, all right, we
got to remove this, this kid or
these children.
Um, so your, your department has
huge influence. It's very much
weighted with law enforcement.
Can I assume that?
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator Block,
it is very well weighted, but
not in all situations, do they
agree?
Well, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary.
What, what would those
situations be because I, I'm
guessing that the disagreements
are probably far less than the
agreement.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
that is correct.
So, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary.
When a the new part of the bill
here on page 8 on, on line 17.
It says when an alleged
neglected child is delivered to
the department.
It, why is it alleged when
they're already being taken out
of the home. Do you?
Isn't the assessment already
done, so wouldn't that be a
neglected when a when a
neglected child is delivered?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
you know, when we go in and they
think there's an immediate
danger or immediate need, they
removed the child. The
investigation continues, and the
investigator has several days to
complete that investigation, um,
and then within 3 days has to
file with the court, um, based
on their findings to
go before the court to say this
is what our preliminary
investigation has shown, and
then at that point, the court
then decides if the department
continues with custody of that
child.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, what, what's the
average time that um
a right of pencil somewhere.
Um
Um
What, what's the average time
for an investigation when a
child is removed from a home to
being put back into.
What's that timeline like?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
that varies. So the department
has, as I said, up to 3 days to
file with the court, and then
there's a 10 day hearing after
that, um, and then the
department has 45 days to um
continue and conclude that
investigation. So after 45 days,
the child either we work towards
reunification during that time
period, um, or they, then the
case can be transferred over to
our permanency team. It can
happen sooner if, you know,
It's egregious and we know
immediately we're going to take
custody, um, but they have 45
days to conclude their
investigation.
OK, just a couple more quick
things here, um.
What, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Secretary, what's the average
age of children being homes in
New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator Block,
I don't know what the average
age of a child is. OK, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, when a
child is removed from a home.
Um, let's just say in a rural
area.
Um
I always use Cuba.
familiar with Cuba.
So a child gets removed from
Cuba and where does that child
go?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Block,
the child immediately would go
with the worker to our office.
They would start making phone
calls.
Oh
I'm not familiar with the
closest office to Cuba.
Well, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, is there, is there
one in Cuba or they got Rio
Rancho or Bernalillo Albuquerque
in Sandoval County, OK. So that
child would go with the worker,
they would immediately start
looking to see if there is a
family member that is um
eligible and qualified to take
in that child. That would be the
first place we would look at
family at kinship placement
first. Um, so they would start
making those phone calls
immediately. They would look for
that individual if they find
somebody.
they go, they do a preliminary
assessment with them, um, and
then they have to go through the
kinship licensing process if
that's where the placement is
gonna be. If there's not a
family member that's available,
um, I would venture to say
depending on the age of that
child, if they are under the age
of 12, they would probably then
from Rio Rancho be driven to
Albuquerque to our receiving
center, um, where it's open 24
hours a day and it's staffed
while they're still making those
phone calls to either continue
with
kinship placement or if they
determine that there's nobody
eligible to do that, then they
would reach out and start to do
a um temporary placement in a
foster home. OK.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
that Senator.
Yeah, you said a couple of
questions.
Just too quick, quick, fast, one
quick follow up. All right, so
thank you.
In regards to their education.
If you take them out of their,
their town from Cuba and throw
them in the Rio Rancho, I mean,
you're totally putting their
life upside down.
I mean they're out of their
schools, they're out of their
friends.
Um, oh quick.
How quick do you put them back
into a some type of school
setting which may not be their
school because you have you're
making all these phone calls.
doing this investigation.
And, and the child is
Sitting there little concerning
to me.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator Block,
that would depend on the age of
the child. If they're not school
age, you know, they would
probably be at the receiving
center while we do that if they
are school age and they're in
school, our goal would be to
find a family member in that
same community, or if not a
family member, a foster parent
in that community.
When there's not somebody
available within that community.
That's when it gets really more
difficult and you have to, you
know, move them to another
district. We try to do it as
close to their home school as
possible and then we provide
transportation for them to go
back to their school district.
If that's not possible, then we
work on getting them into a
different um school district to
continue that education. We've
recently brought on somebody as
our director of education to
help with that process and be
that individual that is ensuring
that they're getting registered,
that they.
Records are, you know, available
that if there's an IEP that
needs to be done, that that's
happening quickly.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr.
Uh, we have 2 for a 2nd time,
so, uh, things were going on
quite a while in this bill, uh,
first, uh, Senator Cedillo
Lopez, a quick question, and
Senator Scott, a quick question.
Uh, thank you. I just uh wanted
to follow up on the question
about why it needs to be a law
and not, I'm very happy that
this is the current policy at
CYFD, but I think it's really
important that it becomes a law
because um
policy a lot depends a lot on
the leadership. I want to
congratulate you for making this
a policy, um, and also state how
important it is to make it a
law.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sanders Scott
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, Madam Secretary.
Page 519.
Paragraph A
Can you represent to the
committee that that is your
standard operating procedure
today.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
yes, for those reasons alone, we
would not remove a child.
Mr. Chairman Senator Scott,
that's correct.
OK, so
Mr. Chairman
Madam Chair and Madam Secretary
were put in the statue.
operating procedures that
Enshrined currently in the
rules.
is that
Pretty much
Where this is
No.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
um, yes, I believe that we're
codifying the practice to ensure
that, you know, through
different changes in
administration that this process
continues.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Scott. OK, I think we had a
motion, uh,
Senator Pinto, uh,
Made a motion for a due pass in
by
Senator Cedillo Lopez and
secretary call the role.
in our block.
Thank you
Senator Boone.
Yes
Senator Charlie, yes.
Gallegos.
Nova Pinto.
Senator Scott
Serio Lopez.
Yes, Senator Hickey.
Yes. And I love it.
Yes.
They have they do pass on the 90
vote. Thank you very much.
And
I'm sorry.
Senator Black, I'm sorry. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Thank you, uh, Madam Secretary.
I just one of the concerns that
I have and I, I don't know if
you can fix it, but it's just
the, the pro the the the process
itself with objective standards.
I mean, I, I supported this.
And then I, I, the other part I
didn't like in the bill was the
word medical because
Medical neglect is already
neglect.
So I, I, I don't like that, but
I think build.
The Bill can do some good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you.
Next up we have Senate Bill 360,
Safe Haven for infant at infants
at changes, Senator Padilla and
Gallegos.
And just have senator, before
you begin your presentation. Um,
it is the intent of the chair to
end around 7, 7:30 this evening.
Just so that everybody knows.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I sent a
text to
Padilla to let him know that we
are starting. I hope he'll come
and use finance.
be also, um,
I don't I,
uh.
Senators, I don't mind starting.
I've got
Secretary CYFD with me and um.
On what the sham, who is the
assistant fire chief in
Espanola
Um, Madam Chair and centers,
we've been working on a bill.
For years, uh, this is probably
my
We've tried this.
In the sector and I are trying
to come to an agreement on this
minor, um,
Details, but what this bill
does.
I'm turning sinners is give us
an opportunity to protect the
mother.
And to clarify some.
Statute that creates an issue
with CYFD as it's currently
written, uh, currently, what
happens is anytime he maybe is
dropped off at a safe haven
site.
Uh, in the, in the safe haven
box, uh, CYFD the way it reads
in statute, they have to look
for the mother.
Or or the parent
And what we're trying to do in
this bill and the next one,
they're a little bit different,
uh, same outcome.
The uh
Oh
In the
But the intent is to see what we
would have to do to be able to
protect the the mother and
continue to use.
The Sahan baby boxes are going
forward and I'll yield to my
I sent out the deal.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and my
apologies for being tardy. I was
across the hall in Senate
Finance. That's the committee
I'm on. Um, I don't know what we
did exactly, but
Mhm
Oh,
OK, so thank you, madam.
was the vice chair and the
ranking member Senator Michael
Pita, thank you. Essentially
what we're trying to do here is
this, as we all know that this
did exist, you know, about 50
years ago or so where you would
go down to the fire station if
you were going to uh relinquish
a child, and I know we have it
in our community where Senator
idio Lopez and I are from and a
few others and
Um, you know, just kind of
worked itself out.
I think that we've had some very
unfortunate situations that have
happened recently.
So the effort here is proposing
significant amendments to the
Safe Haven Infants Act, the
primary objective.
is to enhance the safety and
accessibility of infant
relinquishment.
by permitting the use of infant
safety devices and that way they
are defined.
The key provisions in the
legislation or authorization of
Infant safety devices to allow
uh fire stations and other
public areas to be able to be
certified so that they can
utilize these devices.
definition and standards
essentially an infant safety
device defined as a medical
apparatus designed to ensure the
safety of the newborn, and it
can be installed um according to
specific regulations and
designated sites.
The operational requirements are
that it be available 24/7.
And that uh there be uh
professionals that are there to
receive the the child for the
infant.
Maybe there's a situation there
where the child needs something,
the infant might need something
immediately. So we want to make
sure that they're staffed 24/7
and those are the locations that
would be selected.
We do have a confidentiality
protection clause.
In the legislation because we
don't want there to be a
situation where folks, we have
these available but they
wouldn't want to use them for
whatever reason. This will allow
for confidential, uh, use of
those.
And then there are immunity
provisions, safe haven sites and
their staff are granted limited
immunity for life from liability
when acting in accordance with
the act and essentially Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, um, there's a lot of
emotion going on in that in that
drop off and that that
relinquishment we want to make
sure that that's, that's handled
the right way.
Why would we want to do this
again, enhance safety for the
infant, increased accessibility,
legal clarity and protection for
all involved.
In support for safe haven sites,
whatever they be or where
they're selected.
That's essentially what the
legislation does and
Co-sponsor here also has a bill
that I'm sure you may hear
today, Madam Chair, and.
I wanted to introduce that. Uh,
we have the cabinet secretary
here and we have a professional
in the field from fire. If you
want to hear from them as well.
That guy goes, did you have
anything else to add?
And just wondering if you want
to hear from the secretary or
from.
She
Yes and if any, I, if either of
your experts would like to add
something, please.
head of secretary if you'd like
to.
The microphone if you wish
the hand health that can you
hear me OK with this one?
Yeah
OK, OK, Madam Secretary, members
of the committee, guys, thank
you. So, um, as you stated, you
know, I've been on the job a
little over about a year, almost
2 years now. Amazing. Um, and
we've had several situations
that have come up in the recent
past that it really led us to
look at this legislation and
make sure that we can um
Add some changes in here, while
still
Maintaining the if ifA
requirements of the statute, but
also take out some language that
requires investigations, um,
that is really defeating the
purpose of what this looks like
for individuals a really tough
decision to relinquish that
child, and so we want to make
sure that people know that it's
available, um, that it's safe,
that it's confidential, um, and
that it doesn't require CYFD to
then come in and do a full
investigation.
on that individual and look for
family members that would be
willing to take on that child,
um, of course, unless we're
required to do so under IOA. So,
um, I appreciate your
consideration and I'll wait and
see if there's any other
questions that I can answer.
Thank you. Please.
I'd like to say.
So Madam Chair, committee
members, John Wickersham, City
of Espin Fire Department
Assistant Fire Chief. So we've
been working on this bill since
2018 when we tried to get this
bill introduced, um, in 2022,
um, we had the unfortunate
Incident in Hobbs, and so the
mayor at the time said, let's
just get, let's just do it. Um,
and so that's where we're at now
trying to amend the bill so
they, we can include this in the
language to be protected from
with the state.
Um
This is, we have 10 throughout
the state right now. We've saved
3 babies.
So this is the, the governor
wanted to do a pilot program 2
years ago, and she gave us
$320,000.01 per county to
install a box per county. And
um, and she wanted to do a pilot
program. So at the time,
We did our box and then from
there it just we have 10
throughout the state now and
we've saved 3 babies. So I think
the pilot program has worked and
it's successful, and now I think
it's time to um to amend the
language in the bill to include
it. So Is time for questions.
Thank you very much.
We go to the audience. Is there
anyone here in the audience in
support of Senate Bill 360.
Anyone in support
Is there anyone in opposition?
Here in the, in the audience.
Would you like to come forward?
And please state your name.
And you have 2 minutes in which
to make your statement, please.
Thank you. Good morning, chair,
or good afternoon chair members
of the committee. Uh, my name is
Mikey Bazzini with Bold Futures.
We oppose this legislation, but
I'm also gonna read something on
behalf of a doula we work with.
Um, ourdula's name is Natasha
Bowman, a constituent of Senate
District 12. She says, I'm an
indigenous doula. I oppose SB
360 because it fails to address
the real issue, the lack of
safe, anonymous and supportive
options for birthing people in
crisis. Even with the provisions
in Section 8 that states inside
a facility that is staffed 24
hours per day and 7 days per
week by staff of a safe haven
site, I have seen firsthand how
vulnerable parents are forced
into making irreversible.
decisions under pressure. I once
worked with a young mother who
sought help from a
Christian-based shelter for
unhoused expecting women. She
had been promised housing and
support, but what she
experienced and said was control
and coercion. The shelter staff
monitored her, restricted her
access to outside support and
ultimately declared on her
behalf that she had chosen
adoption at the hospital, she
was surrounded by pre-selected
adoptive parents, not family or
advocates of her choosing after
the birth, she was abruptly
removed from the.
shelter left to recover alone in
a hotel with no resources. She
later confided in me that she
had never truly felt free to
make a choice that she had been
told she was unfit to parent and
that she has been given no real
alternatives. In a couple of
weeks with the protection of ICA
IFA, the baby was then returned
and she was able to flee and um
leave the state with her child
in fear that they would try to
take the child again. um SB 360
bypasses critical indigenous
child protection risk repeating
historical.
justices and prior prioritizes a
private adoption industry over
the well-being of families.
Please oppose SD 360. Thank you.
Kaitapa Wakahawata.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Donalyn Lorenzo. I'm from the
public of Ama and I have been a
licensed social worker for over
20 years, of which 12 years have
been indirect child welfare.
I am I am a mother, uh, auntie
mama, a grandma in our cultural
way, um, and more importantly,
of, of advocate um for families
going through the child welfare
system. I'm here today to oppose
SB 360 for the following
reasons. Change in the language
from the infant being left to an
infant being relinquished is
very concerning because parents
who may believe in their infant
may not know the word of the
meaning relinquished, which in
the world of child welfare means
they are relin.
their rights of the child, the
constitutional rights they have
to parent the child. When a
relinquishment happens in
voluntary or involuntary child
custody proceedings, the parents
are provided with relinquishment
counseling to help educate them
on what this means and to help
their desire um help their
desires to ensure their desire
to relinquish is voluntary. Why
wouldn't a parent who is looking
to leave their child at a safe
haven site be given the same
guidance and resources.
or services, including a
parent's designee is also a
concern because how would one
truly know this is a choice of
the parent. A designee could be
an abusive boyfriend, a mother's
trafficker or a healthcare
provider who has personal biases
like we just heard before. I've
been worried also about parents
forcing their daughters to drop
off their babies or teenagers
making this decision so young
and not understanding what it
means, the emotional toll is so
great and
The emotional toll is so great.
It may take longer and that's
OK, slowing down the process is
just fine. It should also be the
standard when there is reason to
know the child may be an Indian
child, which is state law, this
body passed in 2022. I also
think this bill squarely
It squarely illegal under
federal ICWA and New Mexico's
IPA, the tribe and the child
have a right to their
relationship with one another,
and that right cannot be severed
by dropping a child off and
walking away. There is still
legal obligations to follow IO
and I voluntary provisions.
Lastly, this bill seemed to
undermine the spirit and the
letter of IA Ifqua, the nation's
public and tribe's ability to
exercise their sovereign right
to govern matters related to
their children. It's clear.
This is not consistent with
federal or state law and it's
telling tribes and their
families and their future that
it's unimportant due to
convenience. I appreciate the
time you've allowed me to voice
my concerns, Stella.
Thank you.
Look,
we'll go to Zoom.
And first I had Barbara.
Yeah
Y E H L.
Hi, good
Good afternoon. Hi, this is
Barbara Yale. Um, I am a social
worker. I'm also a foster and
adoptive mom and um I was
appointed by the governor to the
CYFD Policy Advisory Council. I
also run a nonprofit in Chavez
County, that is a support group
for foster and adoptive
families, um, in my work, um, as
a social worker, I worked with
birth moms who um relinquish
their rights and with adoptive
families, um, and currently in
my
in Chavez County, I've worked
with foster families who um have
taken into custody and, well,
into their homes, um, the care
of babies who have been um
placed in the safe haven.
Baby boxes, and um, so I have
seen firsthand, um, some of the
issues that have, have currently
happened because this bill has
not been passed yet, and um just
the trauma that happened to the
newborn, to the foster parents,
to the CYFD workers, to everyone
involved, because there was not
a um concrete time limit on CYFD
to finalize, um, the relinquish.
and to have a
A plan, um,
Because there was still the 90
day limit, and um
There's been a lot of back and
forth for this baby that was,
was placed in this box, um,
And so I am fully supporting
SB
360 because um the
confidentiality is super
important. I was there when they
placed the box in Roswell, and I
heard the story of the woman
who, who created these boxes and
her hope is for these boxes and
um with Senator Gallegos, and I
know that um the plan for this
was for the, the birth mom or
the father, whoever, to be able
to have that anonymity to be
able to
To place this baby without fear
of
Of their name being everywhere.
And so this is so important, as
is having the strict timeline so
that there could be permanency
faster. So, thank you for your
time.
Thank you. Next.
Tatiana Prieto.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prietta with the ACLU of
New Mexico here and we are also
in opposition to this bill. I
will be brief. Um, we share the
same concerns that other
community members and advocates
have already expressed, and we
ask that you do not support this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you.
Jacqueline Yelch.
What do you mean
and members of the committee.
I'm Jacqueline Yal, member of
the Pablolita.
Currently serving as a social
servances director at previously
served at the.
for 15 years in direct field
work.
For 5 years, I previously served
as the president of the New
Mexico Tribal Indian Child
Welfare and that in the
officer's capacity for a total
of 8 years of 10 and 6.
Directly involved in the
drafting of the Indian Family
Protection Act, with many tribal
voices and testimonies and
remembrance, I strongly stand in
opposition of Senate Bill 360.
This bill references the federal
law of of ICWA, however, New
Mexico has a higher standard to
follow and comply with through
the Indian Family Protection
Act.
This bill appears to
intentionally move away from the
requirements of IPA.
If I was created and passed to
ensure our infants and children
were not easily removed and
placed for adoption. In this
field, it identifies a
parentheticee would be permitted
to relinquish an infant. This is
a dangerous and alarming.
And a section of IO was
established to prevent designees
such as medical staff, service
providers, and other
professionals that were
identified to coerce and
addicted or indigenous mother to
give up her baby to avoid
criminal prosecution and
promising a better life for
their child.
And immediate link and immediate
relinquishment in this field
would remove the required as to
determine if the infant is an
Indian child.
This bill removes the
requirement for CYFD to make
active efforts.
To provide
Intervention and remedial
service to a parent and also
remove the requirement for CYFD
to locate relatives and secure a
preferred placement with the
infant's family and their tribe
nation orblo.
This bill also decreases early
case collaborations with the
tribe who may have jurisdictions
over their members.
These are a few destructive
examples that would affect IFA
and that directly impacts the
child's unique culture and
political status, including the
right to participate in the
tribe culture and tradition.
For this at, at minimum amount
of care and members of the
committee, I respectfully ask
for a do not pass for 60.
Thank you for allowing me the
time.
Thank you. Jody Hendricks.
Hello, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I am Jody
Hendricks, the executive
director for New Mexico Family
Action Movement, and we are
actually standing in support of
SB 360 because no parent in
crisis should feel that they
have no safe option for their
child. This bill expands the
safe haven for infants Act,
ensuring that newborns are
protected and given the chance
for a loving home. SB 360
provides desperate parents with
a safe, anonymous alternative to
unsafe infant.
abandonment
By allowing monitored alarm
equipped infant safety devices
at Safe Haven sites. We ensure
that newborns are cared for
immediately reducing the risk of
harm. This bill is about
compassion, not punishment.
Parents who choose life should
not have to fear prosecution
when they are making the most
difficult decision of their
lives. Every child deserves a
chance at life, love, and
security. Then at 360
strengthens adoption pathways,
ensuring swift placement into
loving families. Well, it does
respect trial protections.
under tribal protections under
the Indian Child Welfare Act.
This is a life saving bill. No
baby should be left in harm's
way when safe options exist.
Please vote yes on Senate Bill
360 and give struggling parents
and vulnerable infants the
protection that they deserve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee, and we'll start with
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, ma'am.
Senator, um, I wanna start with
page 2, line 14.
Your bill references the Indian
Child Welfare Act? Why not the
Indian child.
which we just heard from
testimony is stronger than ever.
Uh mountain chair and senator,
if you go to page 8.
from the definition just take a
look at um
Yeah, like 16 if the department
has the information necessary to
determine that it relinquished
them and is an Indian child, the
child's child's tribe shall be
notified.
And then it goes on to the well,
and then in accordance with um
Equa and then on on section two
there the pre-adoptive placement
and adoptive placement of the
Indian child shall be in
accordance with.
Uh
Indian child placement
preferences, so
I don't know why that other
section is, but I would have to
pull that section of law to see
if it's also then references
what you're
discuss.
Um, Madam
and Senator, thank you. Um, it
does, and the reason I bring up
the Indian Child Protection Act.
Um, it's because
It, it's stronger than I.
Um, and ensures more placement
of Indian children who are
removed or
Um
In the case of this legislation,
abandoned.
Um, to have reunification,
right.
So that's one problem we have
with the bill.
Um, the second is also on page 2
line 19.
Um, what is the medical device
used to maintain an optimal
environment. What does that
mean?
So, uh, Madam Chair and Senator
A actual device was created by
an individual that brought this
forward originally.
We are concerned actually. I'm
glad you caught that. We're
concerned about the word medical
being in this definition.
Um
So
Ideally, what we'd like it to
say is infant safe device means
a device used to maintain an
optimal environment for the care
of a newborn infant affixed to a
safe haven site so that it can't
be removed, taken away, uh, but
So
That's what it is, but we're
concerned about the word medical
being included.
Because then that opens up a
whole other.
set of issues that could
potentially arise from a
liability standpoint, etc. and I
see the analyst in the back
nodding as well.
Thank you. Um,
OK.
And I'll, I'll get back to the
actual box itself in a minute,
but moving on to page 3 line 4.
Um, and everywhere.
Hence after we have left.
And replaced with relinquish.
Can you speak to why there,
there's that word change there.
Yeah, so Madam Chair and
Senator, the word relinquished
or relinquishing or relinquish
appears all over this
legislation.
You know, quite frankly, when we
were originally doing this work,
um,
I felt like
the word laugh or abandoned or.
Um, any other, any other terms
we just did not sound right and
did not sound kind and loving.
And so we fell on the word
relinquished.
Um, Madam chair, Senator just
relinquished in statute or in
law have a different
Um, legal meaning.
And
Any of the other words
Madam Chair and and uh I'm gonna
ask the cabinet secretary to
address that one, but it is, it
is my understanding that it does
not.
Um, Madam Chair, Charlie, I
don't know whether it's defined
as differently in statute, um,
but as you said, this was just
the term that we um decided on
in.
Making it softer in what is
actually happening with that
child. Madam Chair and senator
and cabinet Secretary, can I
defer to, um, Senator Siddio
Lopez to elaborate.
Um
Me met uh Mr. Chair, um, yes,
relinquishment has uh legal
meaning, and it is relinquished
when you in an adoption
proceeding, you can either
terminate a person's rights or
you can, or the parent can
relinquish their rights. And so
it's got some legal meaning,
which I think um
I'm not, I don't, maybe you
intend or maybe you don't, but
it definitely has legal meaning
and it's possible that a court
would look to the definition of
relinquishment in the
termination of parental rights.
And so Sherry, it was
intentional that that word be
put in, and that's why you see
it all over the legislation.
I'm Madam Chair and Senator,
thank you and thank you, um,
Senator Sio Lopez. It's another
extreme issue with this bill.
setting precedent for with using
the word relinquish.
Um thank you.
Page 3 again.
913 parent or parents designee
as parents designee defined.
Anywhere in statute.
We don't know.
That's actually I've seen it in
multiple piece legislation that
I've carried. I, I don't have
the actual definition for you
though.
I explained.
turned Senator Charlie, uh, just
to give you a little bit of
background on why that works for
you, so in the pole instance.
Oh when the fire department got
called.
There was a gentleman
Saying that you can drop off his
grandchild for his daughter.
And so the parent wasn't there
at the drop off.
as soon
Because I wasn't there either.
It was a grandfather.
I don't know that for a fact,
but that adds to portion
designate, and I've talked to
lesser counsel about that word.
They actually have a hardship
with it also, but there's got to
be a way to designate if I'm
asked.
To drop off my grandchild that
there would be an assumed value
that my child wanted me to take
that child from her.
placed it in the same box.
Um, and Mr. Chair and Senator,
thank you for, for that, um,
this bill, I understand it as
In reference to the next bill we
have, um, you don't use uniform
language all the way through.
And this isn't defined, so I
just marking another problem I
have with the bill.
Hold on.
Page 4, lines 1 through 2.
Um
If the infant child's medical
history and whether the infant
is a member of an Indian nation
tribe or pueblo, but we don't
reference your eligibility.
Why was that left out, madam
chair?
Thank you, chair. That was not
intentional, but we wanted to
make sure that we did everything
we could to figure out if there
was a connection there.
Uh, Madam chair, Senator, thank
you for that, and it's just,
it's another reason, right? We
have to, as a part of the Indian
family protection Act, uh, make
active efforts.
Um, and to establish connection
for an Indian child to their
tribe.
Um, moving on to page 6.
Line 4, section 3.
Um, written information
regarding whom the contact of
the department if the parent
decides to seek reunification
with the infant child. I
understand in the next bill
we're limiting that to 90 days.
Um, and this is Madam Chair, a
question for the secretary is
reunification not the goal of
the department.
Um
Madam Senator Charlie,
reunification is a goal of the
department, um, in this
situation, I think we were
trying to clean up language so
that if somebody, I mean,
sometimes it makes it impossible
for reunification if a baby is
dropped off and there's no
information whatsoever. The
department has no way of knowing
who to reunify that child with.
Madam chair, um, Senator and
secretary, thank you for that
reunification is not impossible
in the case of an Indian child.
We have extensive clan and
family relationships for that
child, um, to rely upon and to
be returned home. So I, I, I, um
have issue with that.
I'm not sure if I could just,
uh, I'm sorry, were there any
more on that point?
Would it be alright now I went
back to the term designee.
I apologize, Senator, your
question right if I went back to
the word designee, I want to
make sure that we addressed it
for the senator's question.
So yeah, designee uh can be
considered a term of legal art.
So I don't know that it needs to
be defined here. So I'm just
saying whether you whether we
like the word all of us or not,
but I just want to let you know,
we don't really need to define
it because it is a term of legal
art,
um, deny is a person who was
selected or designated to
perform a duty a role or to
receive specific rights or
obligations from another party,
so that's how it's defined in in
in the legal term of.
I know we're up beyond the next
one, but I just wanna make sure
we dress. Sure, but I'll go
ahead and go back to that one,
Madam Chair and Senator, for the
purposes of this bill as uh
parents designee has a
substantial role um and
responsibility, and I would
argue that it does need to be
defined within the statute.
Um, page 6, line 16 shall inform
enforcement to determine whether
the infant is missing or
abducted, um.
Um
Where, uh, where did this one
come from?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator Charlie, so
law enforcement has um a portal
where you can
OK. If you can determine, so
that would be um reported in to
make any efforts to determine if
the child was kidnapped, if
there's been um anything
reported of a situation so that
we would have information, you
know, before placing that child
to go out and do investigative
work.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator and um
cabinet secretary.
Um, I was just curious about
that one. page 6 also line 20
this looks like the first time
in the in the bill that I saw
child stricken and infant
replaced, and therefore, um,
Going on through the rest of the
bill, that's what's used. Why
did we move from child to
infant?
And the infant have a specific
definition.
These, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, uh, Charlie. These are
these boxes are designed for
infants. They're not designed
for a larger human being, I
guess would be one of the
reasons that it had to be called
out. I don't know if the cheap
ones to.
And you've seen these stuff up
close and personal, right, Madam
Char and Senator, what I'm
really trying to get at is if we
are using infant care, what ages
are we seeing?
And be relinquished at a, at one
of these sites.
90 days or younger. So from
birth to 90 days?
The
Yes, OK. Saint Haven calls it at
birth to 90 days. OK, thank you.
Uh, moving on to page 8.
Line 16 and 17 of the department
has information necessary to
determine that a relinquished
infant is an Indian child, um,
so this is going back to the,
the first question I started off
with around the Indian Family
Protection Act.
Um, if the department has the
information necessary.
The way I read this and
interpret this is, um, it's,
it's establishing an excuse.
For the Department.
If they have the information
necessary, they'll do it if they
don't, then we can't and we
couldn't and we won't, and here
goes 90 days. There goes that
child into an adoption.
Yeah, we, we have a little bit
of an explanation here. I mean
and I.
Thank you for cutting me off,
but, but I've noticed a lot this
is a very serious matter. So
it's a chair and senator.
We have to, if we're gonna make
a decision as a state to do
this. We have to have a solution
for this purpose. So that's what
we decided to define it as, and
then we have a further
explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. So to give you an
understanding right now in the
attic.
If someone takes a baby child to
a fire station or a hospital.
They walk in and they hand the
baby to a live body.
At that transaction, the
People from the fire station or
the hospital will ask.
Is this child? Can you give any
details and you give us history
background, nationality, um,
medical history, they have a
slew of questions they can ask.
The person, the mother, father,
however it is, is not obligated
to give information.
So what Monica Kelsey did with
Saint Haven box.
is to put in a packet so as you
open the box, there's a packet
of information that falls to
your feet.
And in that packet, there's
multiple things, there's things
that uh the Safe Haven Group
will give you like counseling,
uh, any kind of assistance, any
kind of um
that you might need to know how
to get if you change your mind
and you want the child back,
that they would be able to help
you with that. It'll also give
you some resources from CYFD,
but it gives you a place to be
able to give detailed
information on the nationality
of the child.
Possibly some medical problems,
possibly the child's name, if
that mother had pre-named him.
Um
It gives you the chance to do
that. Now, because it's always
been voluntary.
And there's no one to receive
the information, they can send
it anonymously.
And say I dropped my baby off at
Hobbs.
Fire station number one on May
5th.
And they will be able to track
and make sure that that child
is given that designation for
whatever it is, because there's
a lot of information in there.
But it gives the mother the
option.
Not a mandate, but the auction
to give as much detail as you
can.
I hope that helps and uh you
know I could just add so Madam
Chair and and Senator, so my
co-sponsor and I, we did talk
about this and, and I would
completely defer.
To what you believe is more of a
protection, and the act that is
more um
appropriate.
For this matter, and we are
absolutely, sounds like we're
gonna have to do some work on
this, so, but um
We would absolutely be
comfortable with replacing that
little section with IA if you
felt like that was a better
protection in this area.
Uh, Madam Chair and senators, I
think it's, I think it's a
conversation worth having. We
need to absolutely. I feel like
Any
Infant who was relinquished.
should not be subject to any of
these time limits written within
here because that child has a
place. It belongs.
They belonged in their
community.
Um, as you all have heard me say
time and time again in this
committee, others,
um, we have a unique political
status.
And the removal of Indian
children has been used.
To, to destroy culture, to
destroy language, to take land
and up until a couple of years
ago was brought up at the
Supreme Court as a challenge to
undermine tribal sovereignty in
its entirety. This is too
important to let it fall by the
wayside through this
legislation, Madam Chair.
Moving on to page 9, line 13. I
genuinely curious, what is the
father registry. I, I just
wasn't familiar with that.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, that is a registry for
fathers who can go in if, let's
say they're engaged in a
relationship and they know the.
That the female expecting their
child, but then they separate
and they go off. They can
actually go in and register.
Um, as a father that says, you
know, I believe that I could be
the father of a child and it
kind of connects you so we can
look and see, um, to try to find
that father to see if.
They would be interested in
raising that child.
Madam Chair, um, Senator and
secretary, thank you for that.
Um,
that question
page 10.
Uh, starting at line 12 section
A. So, the way I interpreted
this inside of faculty that has
stopped 24 hours per day, 7 days
a week.
Um
This contradicts
Page 3 lines 2 through 24,
section 8.
2 to 4.
So that's section 8.
means the hospital, so you're
qualifying, you're saying that a
place needs to be open 24 hours
a day, but earlier in the bill,
you said that um the place just
has to be, has to have staff at
the time. I was just noting that
for all of you that those are
conflicting and competing with
each other.
Uh, Madam Chair page 11
line for
Um
Examining or treating an infant,
installing operating and
maintaining the safety device.
So this is relinquishing.
Um, liability here, but what if
the infant dies as a result of
the installment, operating or
maintaining, maintaining of
those.
Safety devices.
Madam chair and um Senator, the
staff that have the um exemption
the the machine or the device
itself would be a product
liability, and that would be
separate and I see some nodding.
I'm not quite sure. I think I
got that right.
So that, that's why it's set up
that way. So the, the, the
device itself would be have
product liability.
Whatever it did wrong, whatever
was not working on it.
And then I'd like to go back to
your previous comment also, so
on the, the two definitions of
what the safe haven is, um, the,
the police, the areas that would
be identified would be
identified because they're 24
hour sites and fire stations are
24 hours. And so, and there's
always staff there and all that.
Just wanted to make sure we
covered that.
Uh, Madam chair and senator,
back to the question that I'm on
right now, exact, so we're
putting the right of the rights
of a company above the life of a
child.
And I'm sure know the complete
opposite if there is uh a
product liability, then that is
absolutely a no no, and that
would not be.
appropriate, and they would have
every full.
legal right to, you know, um,
file a lawsuit based on what
that.
product did incorrectly.
And then can we talk about
testing also because there's a
regular testing regimen. I'm
gonna ask the chief to talk
about that, Madam Chair and
Senator, thank you, but I didn't
ask about testing. I was talking
about installing, operating or
maintaining the safety device.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator on
page 11 also line 12, unless
evidence of child abuse and
neglect are present.
So we are creating um a legal
duty for
The site staff if there's um
abuse.
Evidence of abuse, neglect.
Right? So a safe haven site.
We have no legal duty unless
there's evidence of abuse and
neglect of um staff perceived
abuse and neglect. Now they have
a legal duty to intervene and
stop those.
Individuals relinquishing.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, they would have a legal
duty to report that as abuse and
neglect, um, so they would call
in law enforcement and they
would call CYFD to Sky to report
abuse or neglect.
Don't they already have, um,
Madam Chair, don't they already
have a a legal.
Obligation to report abuse and
neglect under current law. What
is that called mandate mandatory
reporting.
Um, yes, they do. OK. Uh, Madam
Chair and Senator, I don't know
where that's in there.
Um
Madam Chairing Senator, I think
this is a
Again, you've heard all of my
issues with um
How this does not work for the
Indian Family Protection Act. It
cannot work for the Indian
family Protection Act.
Um, I think this is a, a guy for
fast tracking adoption.
And um in the next bill we'll
get into the timeline that we
have, um,
And I appreciate the 3 success
stories that have come forward,
but this to me feels like
Um
We're trying to get those kids
out and um away from their,
their families.
90 days is just not enough time.
Um
For a parent.
To change their mind and come
up.
Um
We talk a little bit about the
baby box manufacturers, Madam
Chair, how much does it cost to
manufacture those and how much
is the manufacturer making on
these?
Madam Chair.
Senator Charlie.
So the boxes cost about $15,000
from Safe Haven Baby boxes. Um,
there's
Currently 2 that manufacture
these devices, um, we're, we use
safe Haven Baby Box. It's about
$15,000 for the device, we
leased the device, so we go
under contract with them. They
come and inspect it yearly. We
have regular testing. We test
them once a week. They're really
thought out, well designed
devices. They have 3 different
alarms that trigger that go to
dispatch to notify us if there's
an object in the, in the box.
Um, there temperature regulated
and um.
So it's about $15,000 for the
box, and then to install is
about $10,000 and then there's a
lease, so we, you have to.
$500 a year to lease the device,
and they do all the maintenance,
um, if there's anything wrong
with the device that we find in
our weekly checks, we shut it
down, we contact them, and they
come in and fix it.
Adam, um, senator and his chief.
Assistant Chief Assistant, thank
you, um.
Yeah, that's a lot of money, and
you said there's only 2
manufacturers who do this. Were,
were they the ones who brought
the legislation forward, Madam
Chair.
and Senator not to me at least.
Um, I agreed to carry this
legislation before the
governor's office. That's why
you see the GLG at the bottom,
so.
I can't speak for my co-sponsor.
I don't know if they spoke to
him or not. I, I've not spoken
to a manufacturer on any of this
fronts.
Madam Chair and Senator, that's
OK.
Um
I'll just close by saying, you
know, I, I'm extremely
passionate about this because of
Indian children, Native American
children. Um,
Before the Indian Child Welfare
Act was established into federal
law 70 to 80% of our population
was lost.
Um, our children were sold, were
placed in the homes of rapists.
Um, we were replaced.
Into boarding schools, beaten,
raped and killed.
Um
And we were fast tracked into
adoption so that we lost
connection with our community
culture and land.
Um
I cannot support this because of
It's current.
Um, how it's currently
presented. I understand that
there is a problem. I
understand.
That we need to have solutions
for this, but this will not work
for Indian children.
Thank you failed.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Motion to table.
There's a motion to people.
There's no discussion.
And block
No.
And her bone.
No. Senator Charlie.
Gallegos
And our nova.
Yes.
Pinto
And.
inner city of Lopez, yes, to
take.
And no hickey no.
And I love us.
no problem.
Yes.
And our Lopez
Yes.
By about a 5 to 5, the bill
sits.
Thank you.
Madam Chair I make one little
comment with your permission. I
just want to reassure the
committee in no way, shape or
form was this ill intended at
all, I promise you. And I think
you know me by now that I, I
take the feedback very well and
I just want to reassure you that
that's not at all what the
intention was here. Thank you.
And Senator, Senator, I will
also ask, is that you need work
on the bill?
And I think um
For the interim to bring it back
again next year. It's the
governor's bill.
So she may put it on her call to
come back also.
But I believe that.
Of the bills and I'm sure you
have my commitment we'll do that
and I'm not a sponsor on the
other bill at some of the excuse
myself at this time. Senator
also has a.
Adam, by tie vote.
On a motion of the table.
has failed.
are still discussing.
The bill
Well, you are correct. You, you
did correct me on it.
So, it's a, a tiny boat, 5 to 5.
Is there another motion?
I motion for questions I'd like
to ask.
Entertain another motion.
We can do that, but
Um
Lopez is before you.
Well
To try to save time because we
have a long, long agenda, um.
I'll go through, I think Senator
Charlie did a really great job
of it, this bill needs a lot of
work, just on the language, on
everything, uh, you need to put
eligible for enrollment in
there, um, I, I don't think you
should reuse relinquish.
Um, that has legal, legal
meaning that at least I'm not
comfortable using in this bill,
um, there's nothing about the
birth certificate and I just
throw it out there for you to
think about because that's,
that's a challenge, especially
if nationality is going to be
explored as Senator Geiger said,
um, and then
Um
OK, if, uh, yeah, we, we have if
uh.
I think Senator Charlie did a
really great job of talking
about that. I don't understand
how the putative father
registry, if we've got
confidentiality in this bill,
and you need to go to the
punitive father registry and
then you look at the registry
and the father has to say, the
child's name, the mother's name,
something, and I, I just don't
know how that's gonna.
Work, um, so I think you should.
Explain what, how that's gonna
work. I, I just don't see it
because what information you're
gonna have that's gonna allow
you to identify a putative
father is just window dressing
or what, um, and, um,
The the this legal duty stuff
too. I, I think that you should
make clear that if this company,
the Safe Haven Baby Box Company
doesn't install maintain or
operate this device. There
should be liability, and the way
this is written, it's really
unclear.
Um, and then,
Um, and then there's evidence of
abuse.
And they collect our or is is.
Conflicting with what you said
earlier.
About confidentiality. And, and
so I don't know, it it's the
bill needs um
Substantial work to hang
together and makes sense.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Madam Chair, senators.
I'm gonna ask this question
again.
And I asked, take the prime
directive.
Of this entire exercise.
I
What
You asked her that question, I'd
like her to respond.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, the
prime directive of this is to
ensure the safety of the child.
And so being able to then take
that child and um there was
never an intent to just be able
to rush through and work towards
adoption, but the situations
that I found had made it very
difficult to know if somebody is
giving up that child previously
what we do, we require an
investigation and we have to go
through the process to really
try to
Crack down who those parents
are.
And it defeats the purpose of
the
Being able to utilize the baby
box and remain anonymous, and so
that was conflicting and that
was really why we tried to um
clear up that language, but it
makes it hard to do an
investigation and know where
that child came from when they
can go in anonymously um
relinquish that child for lack
of a better term.
So, Madam Chair and senator.
This baby can be delivered to
that box.
With no information whatsoever.
Is that an option?
So men turned center, but
currently if you take it to a
fire station or a hospital and
deliver the baby with no,
they'll ask you.
You don't have to give any
detail.
You just hand the child off, the
nurse or the fireman will get
that child to a facility to be
checked out, hopefully the
hospital, and then that's where
the CYFD will take over, and
they will do everything. You
look at the one just down the
land. It took over a year.
For them to be able to adopt, so
it's not a short process.
I, I actually wish it was a
shorter process, but it's not,
and the other thing, uh, Madam
Chair and Senator, I will tell
you is this gives the ultimate
choice to the mother, so as you
remember in Hobbs, a lady threw
the child in the dumpster. I
talked to the family.
And I told them that I
apologized in 2013 the fire
station.
We did not make the mechanism to
educate our children.
So that young lady truly felt
she had no other choice.
This would have given that young
lady a choice if she knew. Just
think through if she knew she
could get on fire station or the
hospital, drop off that child,
their family is devastated.
Because a decision she made
under duress.
This box and the education
pieces that comes with it would
give our children.
An option if they make a mistake
or an issue happens that they're
beyond their control, that they
are afraid of for whatever
reason the parents, the, the
boyfriend, whatever the
situation is, these just gives
them an option to say, OK, I
don't want to do it at a
hospital.
Someone might see me. I don't
want to do it at the fire
station in front of the
assistant chief. I want to do it
in the safe haven box, and it
will alarm him.
That there's a child in there,
but she will be protected
because once the door closes,
there's seconds that take time
to get her or her to get
comfortably away before they're
alerted to come and check on the
child.
Madam Chair and senators.
I'm going to go back to the
prime directive.
In the prime directive is the
welfare of that child.
And it is without regard.
To the ethnicity, whether
there's any parents of tribal
connection.
It is without regard to any of
those considerations.
At that moment,
Other than the welfare of the
child.
Is that
Matermi turnenator, you're
correct.
And Madam Chair and senators is
their own.
Adequate opportunity.
Following
That is it.
Or the parent or parents to
change their mind.
For the
For the tribal community or any
other family connection that
that infant might have.
To get involved in that process.
And overcome the relinquishment.
Me turn center, you're exactly
right. In, in the packet,
there's enough detail to give
them on full control of what's
happening if she wants to give
detail, and I would say I may
have to have the secretary
correct me on this, but when
this happens, I believe from
what I've been told we need to
notify every nation or tri or
tribe and nation in Pueblo in
the state.
Because there's been a child
found.
And she may correct me on that,
but I think we do our very best
to notify everyone.
That there's not a child, uh,
to, to, to say that we're trying
to fast track. I don't believe
that. I think we're trying to
give them every possible chance.
Protect that child if he goes
back to the mother, there's a
process.
If the father comes up, there's
a process. If they do not.
Adhere to the process.
Then eventually that child
becomes.
Up for adoption and that's
something that CYFT has been
working with and for.
Like I say, the last one from
Milan.
It took over a year.
Because they did their due
diligence to make sure
everything was followed and
everything was all the dots, I's
dotted and T's crossed to make
sure everything's covered
before.
Two days ago, uh, that the uh
Martinez family were able to
take that child.
from land and make it theirs.
Madam chair centers.
The welfare that baby.
All were told.
This point
is.
Thank you, senator. Thank you,
ma'am.
Like.
Thank you, Senator Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of.
bringing the bill for it.
So these places where you said
that uh baby's been um placed in
the box.
You tell me what programs are
there in as far as uh
fighting shelter.
I'm sorry, Madam Sharon. Can you
please restate?
So we know that there are issues
in which a person abandons their
baby. So where these babies were
abandoned, what resources are
there for shelter?
The device itself provides that
shelter and then where it's
located I don't mean for the
baby. I mean for the mother.
Yeah.
In in some cases, we don't even
know who that is, right? I mean,
that's, that's not always
readily available.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so you want us to
For
Uh, they're like the babies, but
yet we're not even
Attacking the causes of the
reasons why.
So.
will probably give up their
baby, so there is no housing or
shelter where these babies are
being relinquished.
In the state. There's no
program, there's no place for
them to go.
Senator.
I'm chair Senator, there's
there, each, each community is
different, and I agree with you
granted, uh, but there are,
there are multiple services
available that, uh, and I was in
the, the fire department
themselves or the the agency is,
is coached and trained on how to
advise the relinquishing the
individual or the individual
that left the child.
So they would have a
conversation with them, you
know.
and let them know what services
are available to them.
Madam Chair members, I'm
speaking to specifically of
where these babies have been
relinquished within the state
that you know where they are,
but I would like to know in
these communities, what
resources are available for
shelter.
I don't know that I could answer
that specifically, Madam Chair,
but I'll have the assistant
chief.
Talk a little bit about what
that experience is like.
So Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Pinto.
So with our program with Safe
Haven Baby Boxes, there's a
1-800 number that's throughout
the, the community that we
This is the last option. This is
the last thing that we want them
to do.
is give up their butt, baby. We
want them to have as many
options of just place this baby
as possible. This is just of the
last option that they have, they
think that this is
Something that they can't
handle. They can't handle the
baby. This is the last option.
The current bill that we have
now, this is just an extension
of that bill. Right now, anybody
can do this, but they just have
to go to a fire station, save
him in sight and relinquish
their, their child. So the
current bill right now, there's
a bill that allows you to do
that. This is just an extension
of that bill.
Um, and, and there's throughout
these communities, there are a
lot of resources in our
communities, there's a ton of
resources for mothers, um.
To get help and to get what they
need for these babies. Um, I
worked really closely with the
social services director with
our city with Espanola, and
there's, there's a lot of
resources.
And we promote all these
resources. The last thing we
want to do is for this
individuals to give up their
baby. But this is a safe option.
To a bill that's already in
place, the safe haven lock that
already exists right now, the
mother can do this. This is just
an extension of that bill.
Madam Charon sponsors.
How many babies have been
relinquished in New Mexico.
Madam Chair and Senator 3.
So with those 3.
And those three communities.
How many mothers, pregnant
mothers are in shelters in those
communities.
Madam Cheryl, I'll ask the
secretary. I don't know that we
have that answer for you
directly, but we can get that
for you.
Um, managers, Madam Chair
Senator Pinto, I don't have that
information, but I can
absolutely get that for you.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
community, and those were those
3.
Babies were relinquished.
How many mothers are on.
Food like snack and receiving
services.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
I don't have those exact
numbers, but through the
department we do have
community-based prevention and
early intervention services in
all of those counties. It's
something that we're working to
expand. I think somebody
mentioned our um
Community-based centers that
we're building out, we do have
one in Valencia where one of
these um issues took place to
really and Roswell, yes, we do
those are two areas where we've
opened up our family resource
centers to really be able to do
more early intervention and
prevention work and, um, you
know, I can make sure that we
have um counseling for um
pregnant women to be able to
know that they have that as an
option to come before.
Madam Cha and sponsors.
Where those 3 babies.
were relinquished.
Are there substance abuse
facilities.
In which they there are pregnant
mothers.
Madam Chair, the three
communities were Roswell, Hobbs,
and Ole and I am personally
aware of services available in
two of those. I could not speak
for Hobbs. That's the only
community I wouldn't have the
detail on.
In bedroom chair and sponsors.
That those facilities, do they
offer or allow pregnant mothers
being housed in the facility are
they outpatient facility.
I could not answer that for you,
Madam Chan.
That the chair and sponsors in
those communities where 3 babies
were relinquished.
Or their educational services.
Um, that where the, the, the
mothers, pregnant mothers are
able to get an education.
Madam Chair and Senator, yes.
How many
are receiving an education in
those communities that are
pregnant. I don't have that
answer for you, but we can get
that data for you.
Madam Chair members and
sponsors.
Asking these questions because
they are underlying issues in
which lead
Do this.
And if we are not addressing
those issues, and we don't even
know how much funding we're
putting into those particular
communities, I highly doubt we
are really doing something that
is.
Um, needed.
We're not tackling the
foundation.
Of these issues.
Yeah, we're jumping all the way
to the end of saying, well,
Give up your baby.
But yet, we are not meeting the
needs.
whether there's abuse in the
home.
Where the mother.
And I hear anybody speaking
here.
That is in the community saying,
well, if this is available or
you know, this is because our
community has all these
resources and this is our last
option that we need to do
something.
Um
to go all the way to the end
there.
say, well, we're gonna provide
this choice for you.
But yeah, we did not even give
them an opportunity in between
or before that you have any
other choice.
to do anything, the madam chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senators, Madam Secretary.
Assistant Chief, um, you and I
have met before, and I've seen
these, um,
seen this uh baby boxing.
ation
Madam Chair and the piano.
Did he
These boxes save save the life
of the baby.
I mean I'm sure Senator.
Yes, I would say yes.
Uh, Senator Gallegos and Madam
Secretary and Assistant Chief
you
that oh yes.
You know, let me qualify that,
Madam Charity. Yes, it can.
In turn, Senator, I will tell
you that uh 3 instances they've
been used.
All the children
You've been healthy and are
either adopted.
Or in someone's home and being
cared for in the process, I
believe, of adoption, but I
don't know that for a fact. So
in the three instances in the
state that it's been used.
It has saved the life of the
child.
I assume you agree as well, OK.
Um, Madam Chair.
Panel, um,
Uh, I, I understand where
Senator Pinto was going. I mean,
this is, this is the last, this
is the last thing that happens.
There's a bunch of other things
that happened to the left of
this.
And here we are, uh, mother has
to make a
Very difficult decision.
Uh, it's
It is the priority.
The priority is the life of the
baby, no matter what.
Where, where the baby's from.
That's, is, is that fair to say
the priority is to
The life of the baby.
And Terence in a correct.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, um, assistant
chief.
The manufacturer.
You said it costs $15,000.
the box
Which by the way, there's alarms
on that and it's heated.
There's a blanket in there, um,
And there's cameras, I believe,
and there's uh alarms when some
when a baby is placed in there,
right?
And it costs about 10,000 for
the install, 25,000.
Would, would you agree,
senators, secretary, Assistant
Chief.
Would you agree that 25,000 is
kind of a bargain to save a
life.
Is that worth a life? It's 2 is
a baby worth $25,000.
The simple question, yes or no?
I would make that investment
myself.
I didn't hear the others. Yeah,
yes.
Center, yes.
Of course, exactly.
Of course.
Well, the line of question is,
That these boxes, Madam Chair,
and panel.
are critical.
saving lives
And not finding babies thrown in
the dumpster and hobs.
Thrown in trash
thrown on the side of the road.
Or wherever
Unfortunately
Somebody puts them there. If
this bill doesn't pass.
Madam Chair, uh, panel.
What happens
Madam Chair Senator Blan, this
already exists, so there's
already law that provides for a
person to go, um, and relinquish
a child in one of these boxes.
They already exist. It already
happens. This language is to try
to clean that up, um, for the
process that doesn't require
CYFD to come in and do an
investigation on the individual
who has made the difficult
choice.
To relinquish that child in a
box.
Right now under current law we
are required to go in and
investigate.
Perfect. Thank you, um, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You know, 2 days ago we had a
bill here.
Senate Bill 404.
It had a ton of issues.
A ton of issues in that bill.
And we as a committee, I didn't
vote for it.
I thought it was a bad bill.
But we as a committee admitted.
It had a ton of issues and still
respectfully,
I'm here for Senate Bill 360.
Would we be able to stay on the
topic? Sure.
Point is, is that
Either, either were consistent
or not.
Because this bill might have
some issues, I think Madam
Chair, Madam Secretary, would
you agree it's got some issues?
But
It should still be passed to be
to work, to be worked out.
To protect the life, the lives
of these of these babies.
So if we're gonna
If we're gonna act one way,
indifferent for this, it sounds
really the wrong message is my
point.
And I'll lastly say, Madam
Chair,
And senators, I want to thank
both of you, Senator Gallegos
and Senator Padilla for bringing
this forward because I think
this bill will save lives.
At a small cost of $25,000.
That's a great deal.
For that baby. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Pam.
Thank you, Senator, and just as
a reminder, we don't refer past
votes that were taken or passed
bills that's what we've already
taken care of.
So we go to that, I'll just
remind senators that we don't do
that. It's not.
The process that we
So
Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate
that.
You're still learning, Senator.
It's, it's the process. We'll
get there.
That there
Um, with that, I have no more
questions on.
My list and what is the wish of
the.
We did, we did not have
emotional Duke house.
OK,
I'm a it's all right with your
permission, I would like to
withdraw the legislation at this
time. We, we got to work from
the committee. There's a lot of
work that has to be done here
respectfully, and I appreciate
the members trying to help with,
with where we're at at this
point, but, um, you know, I'm
happy to do the work on it and
potentially bring it back next
year.
OK.
And it is a prerogative of the
the lead sponsor to do so.
So, would you wish senator.
OK. Thank you.
So
senator Gallegos.
You have Senate Bill 499.
Sahan infant maxim.
I'm sure and
the basics of the bill already,
so I just want to read through a
few similarities and some key
differences in
360 and 499.
In mentor, the purpose of both
bills is to aim to expand the
Mexico safe haven for this Act
to give parents additional
options for safety relinquishing
the infants they cannot care
for. There's some terminology
shift both bills.
change language from leaving an
infant to relinquishing an
infant.
And suggest more intentional
framing of the act.
centers the device installation,
both bills introduced the
physical devices for anonymous
infant relinquishment 499
introduced a safe haven baby
boxes whin Bill 360 talked about
the infant safety devices.
The uh Indian child
considerations both maintained
provisions regarding incident.
Indian children in the federal.
Indian child work we act which
we understand now, Madam Chair
and senators said that the um
There's a difference in, in the
way we need to go ahead and
Resolve this, uh, and we will
look into that. Uh, and return
centers the key differences are
uh the baby box versus safety
device, uh, who can relinquish
for 99 specifically mentions
parent as a person who can
relinquish.
360 allowed parents and parents
designee, um,
Parent's right of termination
processing 499 establishes a
90-day contact window.
Uh, after which the department
must file a terminate parental
rights.
Um
I won't go into 360 as much now
because you just now heard it,
uh.
499 in the device requirements
is less specific about technical
requirements for the baby boxes.
Uh, 499 also a notification
requirements requires providing
parents with explicit written
information that by
relinquishing the infant, they
are presumed to have abandoned
it and in the 90 day window for
contact.
centers, the department
responsibilities in 499, we
asked the Department of CYT to
focus more on the 90 day
timeline frame and termination
of rights.
And in 499 or the rule of 1940
does not specifically address
the department rulemaking.
And then finally, um, Madam
Charan Senators and Senate Bill
499 specifically exempts an
infant left in a safe haven
site.
From the grandparent
notification requirement, that
is.
Uh, currently in statute.
And with that I'll stand, well,
let me introduce my expert
witnesses again a minister I've
got amentarian centers I've got
secretary of CYD with me and
also
Uh, Lieutenant or assistant fire
chief.
Uh, John Woo for show.
Madam Chair, committees,
John was assistant fire chief
city of Esme.
Um
I just want to thank you for
being here and for listening to
this bill, um.
And I hope you guys support it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Teresa Casados,
secretariat Children, Youth and
Families Department, um, again,
the spell cleans up some
language.
safe haven law and appreciate
your consideration.
And turned, just wanted to let
you know on Zoom, I've got
Monica Kelsey, who's the um
founder and say baby boxes, so
she's my expert witness that is
not here in this chair.
Did you wish for her to say a
few words? Oh, I'd love that,
um, Moitor are you online?
Monica?
Yes, I'm here
introduce yourself.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, senators, my name is Monica
Kelsey. I am the founder and uh
current CEO of Safe Haven Baby
Boxes. Uh, I've been sitting
listening to the last um the
last bill that was heard, and I,
I just have a, a few comments.
Um, this bill really has nothing
to do with the boxes. It has
everything to do with protecting
mom. We are trying to protect
the mom from CYFD going after
these in after these mothers in
an investigation. Um, the box is
allow for
anonymity, uh, which the safe
haven law in general allows for
confidentiality, a parent can
walk into a hospital right now
in your city, hand a child to a
worker, turn around and walk
away, no questions asked. Um,
they, they can ask questions, of
course, but the mother does,
isn't required to answer them.
And so the box is just an
alternative to a last resort
option. It allows this parent
who doesn't want or can't care
for their child to place them in
a safe place instead of throwing
their child in a dumpster where
it sits for 6 hours.
before someone finds it, or in a
trash can in a hospital. You
know, you guys have seen a lot
of abandonments in the state of
New Mexico. And, uh, and we're
just trying to, to give these
babies a safe place, um, and
then CYFD can take the child
from there, follow all of the
regulations that are already on
the books, um, but not look for
mom, and that is why this this
legislation is so important is
our job is to protect mom and
baby, baby first, mom 2. And as
a child who was abandoned as an
infant, um.
I would rather know, uh, have my
life and know who my parents
are. And I know that it was a
very important um part of the,
the country's statue, um, but we
have to look at a child being
safe, um, because dead in a
dumpster, we're not protecting
this child at all.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak.
I'm sure, thank you and we'll
stand for questions. OK, thank
you, Senator. We'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in the audience in support.
I sent a bill 499.
Is there anyone in the audience
in opposition?
Senate Bill 499.
You'd like to come up and
Introduce yourself and make your
statement, please.
He's trying to keep it about 2
minutes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Mike the name of both futures,
and we oppose SB 499, despite
the implementation of these
devices, um, there's a
significant lack of
comprehensive research on their
long-term impact safety and
effectiveness in reducing infant
abandonment, while anecdotal and
if evidence suggests they
provide a secure option for
surrender, empirical studies,
evaluating their outcomes such
as infant health adoption,
infant health adoption success
rates and broader social
implications are limited.
there is little data comparing
um Senate bill to save other
safe haven alternatives such as
direct handoffs to medical
personnel without rigorous
research, it remains unclear
whether these boxes address the
root causes of unsafe
abandonment or of alternative
interventions could be more
effective, such as Jane Doe laws
and anonymous Biring, um, that
other countries have, and this
leaves little room to consider
the full spectrum of
reproductive healthcare to
provide real comprehensive
support for parents in crisis
and let's
and policies that prioritize
whole person care, financial and
housing support and culturally
competent healthcare. Thank you.
Kaitapa hakahia
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Donalyn,
uh, Lorenzo. Uh, I'm from the
Pueblo of Acoma and I've been a
licensed social worker for over
20 years, like I've previously
stated, 12 of which have been in
direct child welfare practice.
I'm here in opposition to SB 499
for the for the same reasons I
stated in the previous bill,
changing the language from an
infant being left to an infant
being relinquished is very
concerning. We have to also
consider those individuals who
may be forced to leave their
babies and we need to give them
an opportunity to understand
what what relinquishment means
in child welfare terms. I, I
also feel that if the
Indian Family Protection Act is
the standard here in New Mexico,
often referred to as the
platinum standard, and again, we
need to be able to ensure that
we are following the provisions
under IFPA, the Indian Family
Protection Act. Lastly, I do.
I do appreciate what the baby
boxes do and can do.
Um, for women who are um leaving
their babies voluntarily and do
recognize that it is an
opportunity for a mother um to
safely give up her child. That,
however, again, does not give
the parent does not have the
right to sever the relationship
between the child and the tribe,
and that is why I oppose SP 499.
Thank you. Bye bye.
We'll go to Zoom
Miss Smith
We'll go on to the next and then
come back, Miss Smith. Joie
Hendrix.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Jody
Hendricks, executive director
with New Mexico Family Action
Movement, and I urge you to
support this bill, Senate Bill
499, because every child
deserves a chance at life.
Safety and a loving home. This
bill expands New Mexico's safe
haven for infants Act, providing
more options for parents in
crisis, and ensuring that no
infant is abandoned in unsafe
conditions. Then at Bill 499
makes surrendering an infant
safer and more accessible by
allowing safe haven baby boxes
that designated locations. These
boxes provide a secure monitored
environment where infants can be
safely placed, ensuring
immediate care while allowing
parents to remain.
Anonymous.
It's already a scary thing to
come to the decision.
To leave your child in the hands
of someone else.
But this gives them the
opportunity to do so in a
compassionate way with no fear
of punishment. So that could
truly put their baby's needs.
Ahead of anything else. Some
parents feel that they have
nowhere to turn. Senate Bill 499
gives them a responsible
life-affirming option without
fear of prosecution.
This bill prioritizes the
well-being of the child. If a
parent does not come forward
within 90 days, the bill ensures
a swift path to adoption. So it
still allows the parent to come
back and change their mind.
But it makes sure that that
child is still able to move
forward with adoption after that
time has passed, allowing these
infants to find permanent loving
families as soon as possible. No
child should be left in harm's
way when safe alternatives
exist, then at the 499 provides
real solutions, real hope and
real protection for New Mexico's
most vulnerable, so please, we
ask you to vote yes. Thank you.
Thank you, Angie Smith.
We'll go on.
I have someone under CSU.
ANW
Hello, Madam Chair. Um, that is
me. My name is writer Sharon.
I'm with the coalition to Stop
Violence Again Native Women. Um,
I'm tuning in today to urge you
all to vote no on Senate Bill
499 as the bill is currently
written, um, uh, and also other
advocates have mentioned this.
There is no mention of the
Indian Family Protection Act,
state level Indian Child Welfare
Act passed here in the state
legislature in 2022. The act has
expanded definitions of
protections for Indian children.
Uh, these expanded protections
are important and especially so
for this proposed legislation
because it relates to the
sections detailing.
On if a child is determined to
be an Indian child, if calls for
a very extensive multi uh step
process through CYFD involving
involving tribes and includes an
expanded list of preferred
placements before adoption is
even considered. Uh, we worry
that through the focus on
adoption for a child placed in
the proposed infant safety
device, that this is just going
to contribute to the adoption of
native children outside of their
communities.
And um our native mothers and
children are sacred for our
communities and we believe in
steps that support them,
whatever their circumstances may
be, do not see this bill as a
means of support, but, uh,
encourage separation of them.
Um, thank you again, Madam Chair
and committee. We urge you to
vote now.
Thank you, Tatiana Prieto.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the American
Civil Liberties Union of New
Mexico, and we stand in
opposition to SB 499, while baby
boxes are presented as
compassionate safe options for
parents in crisis, the current
baby box system rapidly
terminates birth parental rights
and eliminates hope for family
reunification. Funds that go
towards baby boxes could instead
go towards supporting parents,
families, and communities here
in New Mexico. Every infant and
child deserve safety.
However, we respectfully
disagree with this proposal as
the best path to address this
issue, and we urge a do not pass
on SB 499. Thank you.
Elisa Martinez.
Hi, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Alisa
Martinez. I am the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for Life, uh, and for the 5th
year in a row, this legislature
uh is seeing this legislation
that really is prioritizing an
urgent and necessary life saving
action, uh, these boxes are
already being used without
consequence in areas of the
state and also in other states,
saving innocent lives from dying
alone, cold and in a trash can
and I would like to
that is a Native American woman,
uh, from the Great Navajo Nation
and Zuni Pueblo that I am more
concerned about Native American
babies being thrown in the
trash, abused, left to die, or
worse, rather than giving the
parents this option that already
exists, but adds anonymity.
That's what the issue of SP 499
boils down to, and this is a
last chance before the
unthinkable happens, like
January 7th, 2022 in New Mexico.
Three people were rummaging
through
dumpster for anything of value,
heard a faint crying from the
black, a black garbage bag
thinking it was a cat or a dog.
They opened it and found a
newborn baby who had been left
there for 6 hours, freezing in
the cold. Thankfully, that baby
survived thanks to sheerlock and
the haunting video footage of
Alexis Avila that shocked the
nation. You would think that
would be enough. Citizens and
headlines screaming for justice
in action. The baby box
legislation gives parents a
desperate
and safe option, but no, the
legislature did not act then,
and a year later, on January 27,
2023, another tragedy, Alexei
Treviso gave birth, tied the
baby boy in a trash bag and hi
hid him under the garbage. By
the time he was found, he
hadsuffocated alone, discarded,
and denied a chance at life. How
many more babies must suffer
before New Mexico says enough,
baby boxes aren't just devices,
they are lifelines offering a
safe surrender, a shred.
of mercy in desperate moments. I
urge you all to please stop
delaying any more lives from
dying this most horrific fate
alone from asphyxiation,
exposure, or worse. Pass this
legislation now because every
cry in a dumpster is a plea that
we cannot ignore.
We'll go back, Angie Smith, one
last time.
I'm sorry, Miss Smith.
With that, we will now go to
questions or comments from
committee members. I move to
table.
There's some motion for a table
motion.
There's no discussion and such,
and you could call on a table
motion.
block
No.
our boon. No. Senator Charlie.
Gallegos.
Inova.
Yes.
Pinto
And it is gone.
OK
In our city of Lopez, yes to
table.
Hickey table.
Explain my vote.
And I love it.
Yes
Explain your vote, Senator
Silvio Lopez.
Thank you. I think this one is
even worse than the last one and
needs, needs a lot of work.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator Hickey.
The 90 day provision is way too
short, particularly my
experience in the Navajo Nation.
people being able to work with
clans and other families and to
get that worked out. So, uh,
that's why I'm expecting. Thank
you.
Madam Chairman, right, and
explain my both as well.
Apologize. No, no worries. Thank
you, man. Um.
I also second the concerns of my
colleagues. I, I appreciate the
intent of the bill, but I do
believe that cultural competence
is extremely important when
crafting these pieces of
legislation, tribal sovereignty,
um, and the 90 day, uh, is also
very conflicting for me, but
thank you.
I think uh
Senator, your bill has been
tabled.
And I'm trying to, thank you,
thank you for the opportunity of
this how the sausage is made.
I'll be back.
Thank you.
Now move on to Senate Bill 176.
Medical malpractice changes
Senator Hickey and Senator
Woods. I think Senator Woods is
here?
Yeah
I
And as we're getting set up, uh,
the chair will take, um, when we
go to public comment because I
know the room is full of persons
in here.
I will take 5.
In favor
5 who are opposed.
When we go to Zoom, I will do
the same 5 in favor and 5 in the
post.
Just so we're keeping it even
that way we can get to
discussion on the bill itself.
As I mentioned previously, it's
He intended the chair to end
around 7 o'clock this evening,
so let's see how the bill goes.
Senator Hickey, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And uh with me is my co-sponsor,
actually, I'd like to point out
that we have
22 co-sponsors altogether of
both houses, both parties.
But we are, uh, happy to finally
be able to present this bill
tonight.
And with me is an expert
Christina Fisher from New
Mexico, and Senator Woods.
Um, Madam Chair, my expert is is
Albert Kwan. He's a
Practicing precision.
And
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, 176 is
medical malpractice changes. Uh,
this is not an anti-malpractice
bill. In fact, malpractice law
is a pillar of health care in
the United States and has been
since the turn of the
Uh
19th to 20th century is very,
very necessary as uh.
The malpractice in other areas
and attorneys that represent
people to help.
Keep people focused on always
trying to do the right thing and
quality.
And it is also actually, as
you'll see in the 3 parts of the
bill, a patient advocacy bill.
Uh, particularly for patients
who unfortunately have been
harmed and there is a
consideration for their benefit
in this bill as well.
So 176 is really about
rebalancing.
The bill to bring medical
professionals back to New Mexico
and I'll demonstrate that
connection shortly.
It, uh
Um
And also for patients to be able
To get the physicians who seem
to be leaving the state in
significant numbers. So what
happened in 19 because before
2021, things were relatively
stable in malpractice we had the
panel hearings in the panel.
With merit, without merit, if it
was without merit, there was no
cases that were brought to court
and now unfortunately, we're
finding those cases are being
brought to court, even though
the panel finds that there is no
merit and then we can get into
uh the threat of uh uh.
of the
Damages of
Punitive damages.
So
Um
The
What happened after this bill is
that the number of cases and the
settlements have gone up
dramatically in the state.
In 2021, there were 3.2 cases
per 100,000 people referred to
the national database where a
claim had been positively
adjudicated since that time we
are now at 7.2 cases and lead
the nation.
Uh, so we're learning from many
and you will hear from some
tonight that premiums are
double, triple, and for some is
a smaller hospitals, even
quadrupled.
The state has become potentially
uninsurable, not unlike Florida,
uh, with hurricanes, so many
hurricanes that now it's almost
impossible to get insurance, uh,
if you own a home on the coast.
Well
The, what we call the medical
loss ratio, which is the
difference between the payout.
Uh, for a, um,
Uh, a case and the dollars that
they put in for the premium, a
national average 73 cents are
paid out for every dollar that
is brought into an insurance
company in New Mexico.
$1.83 are now being paid out for
every $1 premium brought in, and
this is the highest in the
nation, and again we are finding
that the financially untenable
as we tried to find people who
will cover will right coverage.
The resulting loss in physicians
and there have been various uh
Uh, anonymous articles claiming
that we're at the national
average. In fact, when we look
at the data from the physician
advocacy Institute who looks at.
The number of physicians in
every state who are really in
active practice, what they do.
is they have access to all
claims in the state and from
those claims they count the
number of physicians, and so
that's really the most accurate
account of what first uh other
uh AMA, etc. they're making
estimates and it's mostly based
on license and uh Doctor
Richards from the university,
uh, agrees that he didn't dig
deep enough, and finding that
when he quoted a
Average, uh.
number of uh physicians that he
was working from the wrong.
A column of doubt.
So looking at first, but also
looking back at the position
institute, we found that in
2019, there were 3,039 active
physicians in the state counting
after the claims.
In 2023.
There that has reduced to
2,0791.
So we've lost to 248 physicians,
the only state in that.
The only state in the nation to
have lost positions at that
time.
So and the, when you do the
active physician count from
hersa, you find that our average
per 100,000 is 277 versus a
national average of 321.
So with that background, I'd
like to uh briefly say what the
bill actually does.
First, it limits the percentage
of attorney fees.
So that there is more left over
for the patient and not so much
taken by the attorney, and it
would follow California and
other states where if there's a
trial, the attorney gets 33% and
what's the settlement, which is
not nearly as costly detorney is
able to take 25%. Again, that
leaves more.
For the patient in New Mexico,
we have no cat.
Second, we have a uh system in
New Mexico where potentially if
uh a wrong is found.
Then we created a patient care
fund in order to take care of
the patient and the harm that
was done for a lifetime.
Currently
We are finding that
The and that's where our
assessment is made so that
there's a lump sum payout in the
beginning, and unfortunately
under that system the patient
again is potentially being
harmed if they need additional
care later in life. That money
is gone.
it's paid out if the, at the
very beginning.
The uh punitive damages, which
are awarded and we had the
highest award ever in the United
States in Albuquerque, uh, not
too long ago, 412 million.
And the, so we propose, again,
this is for the patient, uh, to
have 75% of any punitive
damages.
go to a patient safety fund.
Number one, that fund would
shore up the patient care fund
so that there's always going to
be money there.
It would help in staffing
ratios, so that they're safer in
institutions than they would be
today.
And unfortunately, while we have
a good peer review system in
hospitals. They have so many
providers who are no longer in
hospitals, and so we need to
establish a system of peer
review for people who work in
the ambulatory practices. That's
what this money would go for.
Now I need to be fair and say
that compensation is an issue.
New Mexico is 33% and 50% behind
the surrounding states, and
we're gonna have to deal with
that.
Bye.
New Mexico while feeding on
competing on compensation also
has to compete.
On medical malpractice,
Metscape and of a Time magazine
of health care, declared New
Mexico, the worst state to
practice in for physicians
recently.
So,
We are in a crisis, and
basically I ask everyone just to
stay how easy was it to get an
appointment in primary care or a
specialty.
And as the primary cares how
difficult it is to find a
specialist to refer to, and it's
also hurting workers' comp
because if someone is uh has a
worker's comp.
In 3
They're evaluated, but they
can't find the specialist to do
the second evaluation, so that
person is not working and being
compensated that whole period.
And so it, it's going to put at
risk our workers' compensation
system.
So
But this bill really does.
is to address
The issue, particularly the
issue coming up in the future.
Where we will need 2,000 100 new
physicians by the year 2030.
Also, 30% of current New Mexico
physicians are set to retire in
the next 5 to 10 years, and
finally, as you look at some of
the white hair up in this table,
we are at the advent of the baby
boom. We are the elephant about
to pass through the snake, and
there is not.
The medical professional
community that was able to care
for that demand on the medical
system.
So again,
I, uh
Ask the committee to consider
that this is not
trying to say that.
The malpractice community
attorneys or, or bad or
whatever. It's just rebalancing
the law back and 421 when House
Bill 75 was passed so that New
Mexico will be attracted to
physicians and I didn't talk
much about all the patients who
cannot get care, who are
suffering, who have pain, they
can't get seen by a specialist.
Most people are in a what's
called an HMO. They don't have
the ability to lead.
The state to get care outside
they are limited to what is
available in New Mexico, and
you'll hear about the difficulty
in recruiting very sharply, and
with that I turn it over to my
co-sponsor.
Um,
care I'd like for my expert, uh
Doctor Kwan.
Speak to a little bit about
this, this lever.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair and
Mr. Vice Chair and honorable
members of this committee.
My name is Albert Kwan. I'm a
physician.
I graduated from UNA Medical
School in 1983.
And often my service in the Air
Force, I practiced in clovers,
New Mexico for 30 years.
After 30 years of active
practice, I decided to
So-called semi-retired from
active practice.
I moved to Albuquerque.
When arrived in Albuquerque last
year.
I asked my wife to make an
appointment for primary care.
My wife told me she'll call you
and primary care clinic.
was told don't call back.
We have no appointment for one
year.
Here I am being a UN graduate.
provide care for 30 years and
underserved area, and I cannot
make an appointment for primary
care.
The reason is we just don't have
enough decision to take care of
the population.
25% of the UNM graduates will
stay in New Mexico.
75% review for staff.
This is a crucial problem,
malpractice is always uh
Important factor.
difficult to retain and recru
physician to come over.
We are number one in medical
liability in the whole nation.
Number one
And also, if you look at the
internet, they put down 5 states
do not retired.
New male got good culture, good
climate, but.
The handicap is healthcare.
Ben was in clovers like when
neighbors around me, and one by
one, they get older, they
retired, they moved.
They moved to Arizona and Texas.
I asked him why.
They say because of health care.
I also got a Texas license.
been informed by the Texas
Medical Board.
3 years ago, Texas amended the
malpractice Act.
And 2 years ago.
Texas but increased 10,000
physicians to get a license.
10,000
And here we are, over the last 4
years. We lost 8% of active
physicians.
It the whole progress and keep
on doing this. You keep on
losing physician and no
replacement.
The one who stayed behind will
be overworked.
That will increase the incidence
of mishap and litigation.
We need to think about the
future of the state, our
citizens and delay in healthcare
will have detrimental outcome
and also more costly, such as
colon cancer.
Early diagnosis is treatable,
daily diagnosis cause with
chemotherapy, radiation, and got
a dismal outcome.
40% of patients under Medicaid.
Our tax money paying for that
kind of care.
For Hater used the term the late
treatment is not beneficial for
the patient or a state economy.
Thank you for listening. Thank
you.
out of chair, I just want to
tell you, you hear many things
about positions leaving the
state.
Um, I just passed.
vote positively on a bill today
to try to increase the, the
physician repayment loan beats
in New Mexico to $75,000.
year
4 years.
So I'm trying every way I can to
attract physicians here and you
will get the chance to vote on
that bill.
Senator Brand had that bill come
forward, so each one of you will
have that chance to, to vote on
that.
With that, uh, I stand for
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey is
that you're ready for questions
also,
we're ready for those in support
of those who oppose.
OK.
So, we'll begin here in the
audience.
Those who are in favor.
And I asked for at least 5 to
please come forward.
Um
2 minutes each, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and to
the members of the committee and
to the sponsors of this pill.
Hi
I'm a retired cardiologist. I've
been licensed to practice here
in New Mexico since 1988.
From a past president of the New
Mexico Medical Society and of
the Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association.
When I first came to New Mexico,
our medical liability
environment was considered
really an example for other
states. And when I became
president of our practice, which
was a statewide practice. We
were better able
To recruit and retain physicians
because of our medical liability
environment.
I spent the last 12 years
working on performance and
Patient safety.
And uh
At the national level. I
returned home.
And I've retired.
And I've been asked to return to
practice, and I have to
apologize. I'm shaking because I
have Parkinson's. So it's partly
nerves and it's partly
Parkinson's.
But I'll continue.
I can't return to practice,
because I'm already passed the
3-year statute of limitations,
and I get asked almost weekly.
Could I please return to
practice on a limited basis. I
can't do that. But my patients
still ask for me.
And it's heartbreaking.
The other piece to this is that
I must spend
2 to 3 hours every week, trying
to help family, friends, others
find a doctor, and you've been
told about what that's like.
It's really hard.
The other piece is that people
do leave the state, those who
can for medical care. So when I
had to leave the state to get
medical care and checked into
the hotel on the campus. The
clerk at the hotel told me.
Every single person in the hotel
was from New Mexico.
That night
And that's a reflection of our
environment, so please do
consider this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Angelina
Villa Adams. I am a physician, a
native New Mexican, a fierce
advocate for my patients and the
patients of New Mexico, as well
as president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. Pardon me if I
get shaky. It's because of my
passion to care for patients. A
wise woman once said, Speak up,
even if your voice shakes.
I am here in support of Senate
Bill 176, which is about
patients. It's that simple. It
puts the patient first. If a
patient is harmed by medical
malpractice, this will ensure
they are covered for life. It
will ensure more goes to the
patient. It will create a system
where physicians and health care
clinicians can continue to
expand education and training to
maintain the safest and most up
to-date knowledge to help
patients.
This seems like something we
should all get behind.
This legislation will not fix
all the problems, but it is a
giant step to stabilize the
large wound, the medical
community has been trying to
close.
I must acknowledge it is harder
and harder to practice medicine
here every day. I personally
have 60 patients on my waitlist
and have no appointments and my
schedule is open till October
1st. When my medical assistant
told me this, I opened up 40
slots on my days off or on my
admin time, where I do prior
authorizations, call patients
with results, call other
physicians to try to beg to get
patients in.
Despite that, my list didn't get
smaller.
My story is not unique.
Two family physicians, married
couple, and gallop with 9000
patients are leaving the state
after 22 years. He's a native
New Mexican. The reason medical
malpractice and the current tax
situation. There are countless
stories from all corners of the
state.
No one will advocate more
vehemently for a patient than
their physician.
On behalf of the 2400 physicians
in this state that is shrinking
who spend every day taking care
of patients. I ask that you
wrote yes to this patient, to
this legislation for patients.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jim Tryon.
I, I'm a family practice doctor,
uh, past president of the State
Medical Society, uh, practiced
medicine for 42 years and I
retired a couple of years ago,
still see patients every week
because my patients still call
me because they can't find
doctors. My wife is a surgeon.
My son is an internal medicine
doctor at Albuquerque. My
daughter is a pulmonary critical
care doctor in Albuquerque, my
daughter-in-law is an
interventional cardiologist in
Albuquerque. This is a very
significant issue. We're all
very aware of it and the first
thing we wanna do is to thank
this bipartisan arrangement
between Senators Hickey and Wood
for bringing this very important
legislation forward. I won't go
any further because the data
that's been presented today is
accurate, and for the data
hounds on
Committee is easy to investigate
and to verify what's been said
already. That's not difficult,
but I'll give you one very brief
anecdote because it's personal
to me and I had a partner who
was a colorectal surgeon, well
trained in a residency in New
Mexico and Harvard. In his last
two years that he was in
practice here, he was sued
multiple times. He was
exonerated and every time there
was no sense of negligence, um,
he, he was so undone.
emotionally that he quit. He was
62 years old.
But then he went with physicians
Without Borders and spent
another several years practicing
in another country.
Thank you for your time.
You have to hold it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gabrielle
Adams. I'm president of
Southwest Gastroenterology, and
I'm asking for your support of
Senate Bill 176.
The critical healthcare shortage
in New Mexico is resulting in
poor health outcomes and
premature deaths. My practice
has been providing care to New
Mexicans for over 45 years, and
for the first time ever, we are
not accepting new office
referrals because we have over
2000 referrals waiting for
appointments and our next
opening is in August.
We are unable to recruit to our
practice in large part because
of changes stemming from the
2021 medical malpractice
amendment, which has resulted in
liability premiums in New Mexico
being twice what they are in the
rest of the country and
malpractice judgments against
physicians being twice the
national rate.
We have recently had 2
physicians decline employment
and they cited malpractice
concerns. We struggle to
maintain, to retain our
physicians in our practice, for
all the reasons that were
outlined so eloquently by my
colleague, Doctor Paulino Rivera
Torres, who sent you a letter.
Our practice is not unique, uh,
as you all are aware, uh,
women's specialists are
providing OB care at
Presbyterian this year.
A colleague informed me this
weekend that UNM Cancer Center
is no longer accepting referrals
that have GI cancers.
Uh, out of 9 Optum primary care
clinics, only one physician is
accepting patients in the
Albuquerque area.
Out of all Presbyterian family
medicine clinics in the
Albuquerque area only La
Esancias, uh is accepting new
patients.
Of all the Presbyterian internal
medicine clinics in Albuquerque,
only one physician is accepting
new patients of all loveless
primary care and internal
medicine clinics in Albuquerque,
and this is this week's data.
Ah, only one physician at La
Esancias is accepting patients.
All three Duke City Primary care
clinics in Albuquerque are not
accepting new patients. All
Sandoval Regional UNM Hospital,
primary care clinics, and UNM
primary care clinics are not
accepting patients as of this
week. Those of us who remain
here, we are exhausted and
demoralized.
We are physically unable to meet
the needs of our own patients
and meet the demands of the
state, and we can't access care
for our patients, cause this
shortage is across all
specialties. To add insult to
injury,
we have a target on our back
because of the hostile legal
system.
That allows baseless punitive
damages to be alleged.
Please support Senate Bill 176.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Anna Sasse, and I'm a
resident of Santa Fe, New
Mexico, not a medical resident,
I just regular resident. When
our family moved to New Mexico 5
years ago, the issues at the
heart of 176 were the points of
our hesitation about bringing
our family here.
In all other ways, we were
excited about moving for a good
job and the chance to enjoy the
many wonderful things about
living in this great state. Yet
we were very concerned about
getting good health care.
Particularly for our younger
child who has special needs.
It turns out our concerns were
spot on and very valid.
The lack of providers in New
Mexico is real, as is the stress
this causes. We are unable to
get our child with a disability,
the healthcare he needs in this
state. So we travel to Colorado
multiple times a year.
This works for preventive and
maintenance care, but as you
might imagine, this is a scary
situation to be in, in the case
of an emergency. We questioned
the sustainability of our
current setup, while at the same
time, we are very aware of the
incredible privilege of our
situation. Most New Mexico
residents do not have access to
out of state medical care.
As the mother of a child with
extra needs and therefore the
strongest patient advocate one
could be. I point to the
important fact that supporting
SB 176 is absolutely in the best
interest of patients. It is
pro-patient, supports the health
of our communities overall and
is good for our state. Further,
SB 176 does not prevent patients
from suing medical providers
who've caused injury or harm.
This bill does not take away or
limit patient.
rights in any way, we can still
hold doctors to a high standard
and accountable for the care
they deliver. Importantly, we
might be able to get those
doctors here in the first place.
SB 176 brings New Mexico more in
line with other states with
regard to medical malpractice
limits, allowances, and payouts.
The parameters this bill sets
are not outliers. They are
reasonable. They make logical
sense. They are good for all of
us. 176 ultimately allows
doctors and medical providers to
get the coverage they need so
they can provide the healthcare
we need in New Mexico. We should
make every effort to make New
Mexico.
a place that attracts and
retains providers for the
benefit of patients which at
some point or another is all of
us and our families and our
friends.
I urge you to take steps to
ensure that New Mexico is not a
state where only the healthy and
the wealthy can live.
Please vote in favor of SB 176.
For my son, for my family, for
all of us who live and work in
New Mexico and want to call it
home.
Thank you.
OK
OK, we had our 5 who are in
favor.
For those who are also in the
room, who would like to a show
of hands, who are also here for
in favor. If you'd like to raise
your hands, please do.
OK. Thank you.
I would go to those in
opposition and they get 5
persons who are here for in
opposition. If you would stand
here in the middle.
And of course, introduce
yourself and then please
approximately 2 minutes for each
statement.
And again, only 5 of you. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, senators. My
name is Alita Pisanosazo
Waing on echo I come in.
I'm from the pueblos of Acoma
and Laguna. I'm a lifelong New
Mexican, of course, being native
and a member of Laguna and
Acommo Pueblo.
I'm here to respectfully ask
that you vote no against Senate
Bill 176.
This bill doesn't.
This bill does nothing to make
health care safer for New Mexico
and instead further limits
injured patients right to seek
justice. I have personal
experience with this issue.
This bill raises my deceased
husband of 3 years was a victim
of medical malpractice. Members
of this committee, I, I feel
strongly that injured patients
and families that lose a loved
one to medical malpractice
should have access to justice in
order to hold wrongdoings,
wrongdoers accountable. As a
member of Acuma Laguna Pueblo. I
Have firsthand experience with
the healthcare inequities,
Native American people face.
Rural clinics.
IHS facilities and VA hospitals
already operate under
substantial malpractice
protection, yet they continue to
struggle with severe physician
shortages and all too often they
provide inadequate care. This
proves that caps and more
restrictions simply do not work.
Native American patients,
veterans, and rural residents
already face substantial
barriers to access legal
representation and justice.
Restriction attorneys
restricting attorney fees and
capping damages.
Will make it even harder for
these populations to hold
negligent providers accountable.
The impact of this bill if it
were to become law, would build
more barriers to Native American
patients seeking legal
representation and justice. It
would expand an already unjust
system that operates on Pueblo
and tribal lands to the rest of
the state. I urge this
legislative body to find real
solutions to address physicians
sort of physicians shortages and
make medical.
practice safer for the people,
for all the people of our state.
This bill is not a solution to
these issues. I respectfully ask
that you vote no on SB 176 Tawa.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, a Manliban unit
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, a Manliban unitche
as an attorney who represents
Native American clients and is a
proud member of the Navajo
Nation, I strongly oppose this
bill.
The measures that SB 176 contain
are sure to negatively impact
Native American communities by
only further impeding access to
the justice system and instead
protecting entities like
insurance companies and
corporate healthcare hospitals
that put profits ahead of
patients and taking punitive
damages away from already
devastated and struggling
families and giving it to those
who have caused the harm.
Furthermore, unique needs and
interests of travel.
communities should always be
taken into consideration, but
especially when it comes to
healthcare as Native Americans
continue to have some of the
poorest healthcare outcomes in
the country for a variety of
reasons.
I am a medical malpractice
attorney. I work on these cases
on behalf of my clients.
Bringing a case is very
expensive. Experts are required
to prove the elements of a case
and Native American families
cannot afford to pay for years
of representation against large
corporations. These families
rely on attorneys to bring their
cases and pay the costs.
Any legislation that could
worsen what is already a huge
systemic challenge should be
well vetted, studied, and
reviewed by the state tribes and
pueblos to ensure it will
improve the lives of native New
Mexicans. Thank you, yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jodie
Pino, and I, today I'm gonna
talk about my um baby girl
Maudie. I do apologize if I do
cry. This is her. Tomorrow she
would have been 4.
The best day of my life turned
out to be the worst when the
doctor in charge neglected not
only me but also my healthy baby
girl.
We went in expecting a normal
procedure to help with my
delivery. The doc did not
follow.
The proper protocol did not
listen to other staff, me, and
he also delayed care.
My baby died because of this,
because I had an uh emergency
C-section. I ended up back in
the hospital one week after at
the same exact hospital that I
had just delivered.
Since then I had to have a 2nd
surgery.
The Medical Corporation, my case
sought to hold accountable is a
$5 billion corporation. My
attorney is here and I'm so
happy we chose her. Lisa and her
staff worked tire tirelessly to
fight for us in all New
Mexicans. Attorney fee caps,
increase the profit to insurance
companies by limiting my ability
to get an attorney. On my case
there were 5 out of state
defense attorneys being paid by
the hour.
My attorney had to pay for
expert witnesses, including
medical experts to testify on my
case and to study the harm that
was done, that had cost her tens
of thousands of dollars in my
case lasted 3 years. My attorney
knew if a jury did not agree
with her, she would not get paid
for all those years of work.
Please oppose this bill.
It only serves
To line the pockets of insurance
companies and multi-million
dollar corporations. This bill
will affect every New Mexican's
quality of life. We as New
Mexicans deserve better. We
deserve quality doctors,
transparency. We also deserve
top-notch healthcare.
We as New Mexicans can only
fight with civil litigation and
malpractice cases by limit by
limiting what our lawyers get
paid, you limit our ability to
fight these for-profit
businesses by limiting punitive
damages, which is intended to
punish them to try and deter
others from doing the same.
You are, you excuse me.
You increase profits to those
businesses that are hurting and
killing New Mexicans. Also, the
fund is to, is too broad in, in
the scope and Bene's definition
of where the funds will be
going.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Committee. My name is Adrian
Vega. I'm a medical negligence
attorney. I fight for victims of
medical negligence so that they
have access to justice. I'm from
Grant, New Mexico. I fight for
victims like Cornelius Foster.
Mister Foster went in for what
he was told was a routine
surgery.
Now he's quadriplegic.
What he didn't know was that his
surgeon had been sued 19 times
for medical negligence. Like
Mister Foster, I have 3 former
patients that are all
quadriplegic from this surgeon.
To my right
A family and a young girl who
was born dead.
Dead because her hospital and
her healthcare providers failed
to read.
fetal heart tracings.
failed to act on them timely.
A family that's been devastated
as a result.
At the end of this row.
A mother with her oldest
daughter.
For 2 years she went to her.
providers, never missed an
appointment.
Well, they missed her cancer.
And now she has no voice.
Next to her
A mother and her son.
Mom was misdiagnosed at an
emergency department. She's lost
her leg.
Next to her
A mother and her daughter.
The circumstances of which are
confidential.
But are so egregious that if you
knew the facts.
It would shock this chamber to
its core.
And behind me, a young boy with
his father.
For 5 hours, this young boy
fought for his life on a table
waiting for a surgeon that was
nowhere to be found.
To remove a device for his heart
after it negligently migrated
into his aorta.
Suffered a spinal cord stroke.
Has no control over his bowel or
bladder.
And has a brain injury.
A young boy's life taken.
This bill does nothing to
protect New Mexicans.
It doesn't do anything to
protect the doctors.
So who does it protect?
It protects the insurance
companies.
And the out of state for-profit.
Corporations.
That the doctors are also a
victim of.
Please oppose SB 176.
My name is Kathy Love. Um, I was
among the group of people
representing hospitals, doctors,
patients, lawyer advocates,
nurses, um, who reached the
compromise in 2021 on HB 75 to
save the patient's compensation
fund from insolvency.
Senator Hickey gave you
statewide numbers for providers
leaving the state.
His numbers have nothing to do
with this medical malpractice
Act. This bill would only affect
providers in the patient
compensation fund. Um, I have
served on
The patient compensation fund
advisory board since its
inception. And there are
representatives of the
hospitals, doctors, patients,
and nurses on that board. Um,
the, the PCF advisory board sent
each of you, every member of the
legislature, a letter, a report
at the beginning of this
session.
And I know you've had a lot of
materials in front of you. Um,
in that report on page 2, it
shows a chart which shows that
in 2022, there were 5320
providers in the PCF.
And in 2024, there were 5,297, a
difference of only 23.
So that is what we were, we are
talking about here. We are
talking about this medical
malpractice Act and what that
demonstrates is that changes to
the meal Act will not affect the
provider issues that you've
heard about.
Um
The board also found that the
deficit that HB 75 was intended
to address doesn't cause, um,
it, it was caused by years of
failure to follow actuarial
analyses and recommendations on
surcharges. That deficit
mounted.
And the amendments required that
that deficit be paid off by the
providers. Now this legislature
has thankfully paid the doctor's
portion of the deficit.
Hospitals started paying their
share of the debt in 2022. Um,
that year is a very important
year, um, because that, that is
the same year.
Where we have information that
medical malpractice premiums
have skyrocketed, and what we
have discovered from the patient
compensation fund and the
third-party administrator, can I
just finish this? Um, is that we
know that that is because the
deficit has been added to what
is being reported to by the
insurance companies in terms of
their costs and so that is
giving a false impression of
malpractice, um, costs in New
Mexico.
Thank you. Thanks. Your time is
up. I apologize. Thanks. Thank
you.
OK, and then for those who are
in opposition, if you'd like to
raise your hand, please.
OK, thank you very much.
We'll go to Zoom.
And I do have, again, 5 in favor
and 5 in opposition.
We'll start with those in favor,
and I have Kathy.
I think it's Teso.
The test done
Yes, Kathy Teton, um,
Dear Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I am speaking in
support of House Bill 176. My
name is Kathy Testston and I
represent women's specialist of
New Mexico. We are the largest
OBGYN private practice in the
state.
Uh, I serve as the executive
director there.
Women's specialists of New
Mexico stopped delivering babies
at Presbyterian Hospital on
March 1st, 2025.
Because of our inability to
keep, retain, and recruit
physicians.
This decision affected over 200
patients who were slated to be
delivered by our physicians.
malpractice rates.
Have increased well over 100% in
the past 10 years.
In 2015, we paid $47,000 a year
for an OBGYN physician.
In 2025, we pay $106,000 to
insure the same position.
I appreciate your time and
attention to this important
issue.
Thank you. Gerry Harrison.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Jerry
Harrison. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Health
Resources. New Mexico Health
Resources recruits health
professionals to come to the
state and remain in the state.
In the 45 year history of New
Mexico health resources. We have
never seen the number of
vacancies among the health
professions that we see today.
Ordinarily we would at this time
of the year, we would see
Approximately 300 open positions
that employers have asked us to
fill.
Today we have 769.
Several 100 of those positions
that are open are for
physicians, but there's a ripple
effect when there aren't
physicians, there aren't jobs
for other health professionals
throughout the state.
This year,
We have contacted through our
outreach activities.
Approximately 2500 healthcare
providers to come to work in New
Mexico.
We have a requirement before we,
we push those uh people on to
employers.
That we receive a resume,
something very simple.
This year
We've only received 185 resumes.
We see
The people that we are asking to
come to the the state.
Looking at Colorado, looking at
Texas, looking at Arizona.
And not
Being able to find the positions
here that they desire.
I urge you to pass Senate Bill
176.
Next we have Anna Armiston.
Good evening. Can you all hear
me?
Yes
Wonderful. Thank you. Good
evening, chair and members of
the committee. Thank you very
much for allowing me the honor
of speaking here today in
support of SB 176. My name is
Anna Armistead Kennedy, and I
come before you to share my
experience as a patient with
chronic immune system
conditions. We feel briefly
about me, I'm 34 years old. I'm
a lawyer, although I'm not
practicing because of my health
issues. I'm married to a lawyer
and I'm originally from Las
Cruces. I returned to Southern
New Mexico almost 7 years ago
after graduating from law
school. During that time frame,
I've had.
For primary care doctors. 3 of
those 4 moved out of state, 1
moved to Texas and went to
Colorado.
Many urgent care visits filled
the gaps between these family
doctors.
Obviously it was physically and
mentally draining to have to
find so many new PCPs in such a
short window of time. I also
have 4 specialists now and all
but 1 are based out of El Paso.
This is a necessity for a
southern New Mexicans since we
just don't have specialists to
fill a gap, to fill the need of
southern New Mexico. I had
surgery in El Paso. My mom had
cancer surgery in El Paso.
That's our lifeline here.
And doctors in El Paso know that
we have a huge problem in New
Mexico. They always comment
about the number of New Mexico
patients they see, and that they
understand why doctors don't
want to practice here because
it's basically hostile, um, to
their goals. What motivated me
to actually come and testify and
hopefully help fix this issue
was a weeklong visit I had to
National Jewish Medical Center
in Denver in October of last
year.
National Jewish is a premier
immunologic and respiratory
medical facility.
Um, I won't go through all my
many conditions, but basically I
stayed in Denver for a week and
I had test run every day in
national Jewish, I saw 5
specialists.
Um, immunology, pulmonology,
gastroenterology, ENT, and
neurology.
And here's what killed me. Each
provider commented that more and
more New Mexico patients have
been coming to National Jewish
recently in the last few years.
Note that the last few years.
Some had heard New Mexico is
hostile to the practice of
medicine and felt bad for his
patients who have, have to come
out of state seeking care. Now,
side note, I have good
insurance. I'm very thankful I'm
allowed to go out of state for
care by my insurance company. I
know a lot are not that
fortunate.
Something snapped when I heard
that, and instead of accepting
emergency level doctor shortage
as a fact like gravity. I was
sad, upset, and I desperately
wanted better for New Mexico
patients.
It struck me that we have a huge
failure of imagination regarding
health care in this state, and
it's time to change the policy
and thus the narrative.
If we keep, if we keep doing
what we're doing, we'll just
have worse outcomes.
Oh yes, I apologize, but you've
already reached your time limit.
OK thank you. Thank you very
much.
Next, we have, I think it's
Eddie Matthew.
Yes.
I think I just talked to the
staff. It's Doctor Metzker
Andrew Metzker.
Is there a Doctor Metzger?
OK. Doctor Mesker, you have
approximately 2 minutes.
OK. Um, I'm a neurosurgeon and
uh I was in private practice in
Albuquerque for 22 years between
2001 and 2023, um, had a very
busy and thriving practice over
those years, uh, nearly 20 of
which were what in the, the
private practice that I started
in 2004 in Albuquerque, uh,
which employed a number of
individuals and had the
privilege of being able to start
some new things in New Mexico. I
established, directed the Gamma
Knife program, uh.
levels maybe some of you heard
of before and started the deep
brain stimulation program for
patients with Parkinson's
disease and essential tremor.
These are things that people
used to have to go out of state
for, and we also started uh one
of the first robotic spine
surgery programs uh at levels a
number of years ago, we were
actually kind of at the
forefront of that. Um, we love
living in New Mexico. My wife
grew up in Albuquerque. Her
father is a retired physician
that practice in New Mexico his
entire career, uh, Albuquerque
is a great place.
for us to raise our family. So I
had a high threshold to ever
consider leaving the state, you
know, unlike some other of my
colleagues who don't have as
much personal ties to the state,
but, uh, so despite some, you
know, challenges with lower
reimbursement and everything. I
really envisioned me practicing
my entire career and finishing
my career in New Mexico, but it
really reached the point in the
last couple of years where it
just made no sense to keep
practicing, and I wound up
leaving and joining uh the
baroneneurologics.
t itu de in in Phoenix, Arizona,
where I'm practicing now and
they've been for the last year
and a half. I, I want to point
out really that this decision
was in no small part due to the
current malpractice environment
in New Mexico. Uh, the risk of
being sued is higher than almost
anywhere else in the country.
The cost of malpractice
insurance is exorbitant and
higher than most states. I pay 5
times less for malpractice
insurance in Arizona that I did,
uh, in New Mexico and the use of
punitive damages
as a means to force physicians
to settle uh cases, um, it, it
is really um really caused quite
a lot of uh uh damage to the
system. So the idea, I guess
that that that uh the physician
deserves to be punished with
punitive damages they're not
covered by their malpractice
insurance and putting our own
personal assets at risk, really
creates a very hostile
environment for physicians to
practice and forces us to
You know, settle even baseless
claims, and uh this was never, I
think what punitive damages was
meant to be, uh, originally I
was told when I came in 2001,
that this was for, you know,
really egregious things and not
just something that should be
added to every malpractice case
as it is now. So, uh I think SB
176 has a lot of very, you know,
common sense reforms that
protects patients, insurances.
that, that they see uh the
compensation they deserve, uh,
when, uh, things go wrong and
complications happen and
somebody has, uh, needs for
ongoing medical care, but that's
not the system that you have in
place now, uh, what exists now
basically is uh profiteering for
plaintiffs' attorneys.
Doctor Mesker, I apologize, but
your time is up. So I appreciate
your, your comments.
And then we have one more, uh,
for those who are in favor, and
it's Caroline Scrugg, and again,
we're asking approximately 2
minutes.
OK. Um,
Yeah. Hi, um,
find my.
Um, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Caroline Scruggs. I'm a
professor at UNM and I was
diagnosed with cancer last year.
I've heard for years now about
how terrible New Mexico's
medical malpractice laws are for
medical professionals.
And the laws that are, these
laws are leading Presbyterian
and other doctors to leave for
neighboring states, and I
believe this as I received
letters in the mail that one
after the next of my primary
care providers had left, and I
was passed to the next available
provider in the press clinic.
Well, that was an annoyance when
I was diagnosed with cancer last
year, I got to see how truly
terrible the situation is.
With Presbyterian insurance and
a referral from my, I'm sorry,
I'm very emotional about this
topic and listening to everybody
else, um.
With Presbyterian Insurance and
a referral from my primary care
doctor. I called Presbyterian
numerous times over the course
of almost 4 weeks trying to get
an appointment for cancer
treatment without being
successful. Can you imagine how
stressful this would be for a
person with a new cancer
diagnosis. Every time being
told, oh, we're so busy, but
we'll flag your file and a nurse
navigator will call you back
tomorrow and get you set up.
At one point when the situation
here felt hopeless, I went to MD
Anderson in Houston, Texas to
get care, which I was privileged
to have the resources to do. I
don't know what someone without
those resources would have done
in my situation.
This has been one of the most
frustrating and scary periods of
my life. I don't know if the
folks here or their families
have had to seek care in New
Mexico for serious health
conditions, but I can tell you
that the lack of healthcare
professionals can make it
difficult, and knowing that
other states in our region don't
have laws like ours, and then
it's in this, it's this way in
New Mexico in order to enable
lawyers to keep making money
hand over fist is not
acceptable. I urge
to pass this bill to reform New
Mexico's medical malpractice
laws, what we have is not
working, and it's in your power
to do what's right for New
Mexicans. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you. Now, we'll go to
those in opposition online.
We'll begin with Dominique.
Dupont
Thank you. Um, chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Dominique Dupont, and I'm here
to urge you to vote no on Senate
Bill 176.
This bill hands more power to
insurance companies, making it
harder, not easier, for harmed
patients to access the care they
desperately need.
Families like mine already
battle insurance delays and
denials every step of the way.
SB 176 will make that worse by
eliminating lump sum settlements
and forcing patients into a
system where insurance companies
control their access to care.
12 years ago, my first born
daughter suffered a severe brain
injury at birth due to a
hospital's failure to follow
proper medication protocols
because we settled before
restrictive caps were
introduced. We received fair
compensation, allowing us to
provide her with lifelong around
the clock care. Without that, I
don't know what my family would
have done.
If Senate Bill 176 passes,
families like mine will be
trapped in a bureaucratic
nightmare where they must beg
insurers for every medical
expense, rather than having the
financial stability to plan for
long term care.
We all know how insurance
companies operate. They deny,
they delay, and they look for
ways to avoid pain. This bill
will let them control every
dollar, every medical decision,
every right for care.
In 2021, this legislature passed
a fair compromise. If you break
that agreement now, you are
choosing insurance companies
over harmed patients. My
daughter's
She is harmed for life because
of a hospital's failure.
But under Senate Bill 176,
families like mine will suffer
again and again just trying to
access the care that they need.
Please do not let this, do not
do this to New Mexican families
and vote no on Senate Bill 176.
Thank you.
Next we have
Brianna Baker.
fellow senators, members of the
committee. My name is Brianna
Baker. I'm speaking today in
opposition to SB 176, and I
respectfully urge you to vote
against this bill.
I was born and raised in
northern New Mexico in my early
twenties, my life was turned
upside down and forever changed
due to medical malpractice that
damaged my heart forever.
And since that time, I've had to
deal with another insurance
company that is known as the
patient's compensation fund.
This is an insurance company
that tries to deny my medical
care by not paying my medical
bills.
My heart was permanently damaged
due to multiple providers not
notifying me of a clotting
disorder and not treating me for
a heart attack that resulted
from this.
Disorder because of the
malpractice. I'm dependent on
lifelong medical care. I'm
unable to have children of my
own, and I lost my baby due to
this negligence. My case went to
trial in 2011 and a jury of my
peers found that 3 defendants
were negligent, but because my
case was kept under the medical
malpractice Act, the damages the
jury awarded were reduced to the
cap, and for the last 14 years,
the patient compensation fund
has been required to pay my
related medical bills. This
insurance approval system has
been difficult to say the least.
Many times I've had a plead with
the fund to pay my related
medical bills. I've had to ask
my doctors here in Virginia to
write letters to the fund in
order for the fund to approve
payments. The fund's
administrator has repeatedly
told me that I must have proof
of each and every bill that is
submitted for payment.
My life expectancy depends on
quality medical care. My medical
care depends on the fund paying
my providers. You can't imagine
the distress. I feel when I have
to argue with the fund to pay my
medical bills. You can imagine
the stress I feel when I read
that the legislator has had to
bail out the fund multiple times
for tens of millions of dollars
in order to keep the fun going.
This insurance approval system
does not work more injured New
Mexicans to this fund does
nothing but add another
insurance company to the process
that makes it more difficult for
us to get care. Please vote no
on Santa Bill 176. Thank you for
your time.
Next we have Felli Rael. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Felice Riel. I'm an
attorney in Albuquerque. I
focused my practice on
representing seniors and
disabled people.
I'm a member of the board of
directors of the senior Citizens
Law Office, a nonprofit that
provides no or low-cost legal
services to seniors in central
New Mexico.
It is no surprise to anyone in
this room that seniors consume
more medical care than the, a
younger person.
Statistics show that patients
over the age of 70 were more
likely to suffer severe injuries
and 2 times more likely to die
as a result of medical errors
compared to patients under age
60.
33% of patients over 70
And 50%
Of those over 85, leave the
hospital with increased levels
of disability than when they
came in.
Statistics also show that over 1
25% of hospitalized Medicare
beneficiaries suffered an
adverse adverse event or harm.
As a result of medical care.
Despite this, malpractice reform
in states like Texas has
disproportionately reduced
payments to the elderly.
Who caps.
Oh, to the elderly who are
generally on a fixed income and
arguably least able to afford
it. And when I say reform, I
mean things like caps.
Despite this, malpractice claims
for people aged 65+ constitute
only 10% of all malpractice
payouts.
This is important, and I want
you to pay attention because
capping attorney fees on medical
malpractice cases.
will cause the injured elderly
to become second-class citizens.
Plaintifflos will only be able
to afford to take the highest
paying cases.
Seniors, New Mexico seniors will
be excluded because they won't
be able to prove lost wages or
lost earning capacity.
And their lives are already
devalued because they do not
have the same number of years of
life expectancy as younger
people, according to the
mortality tools.
I encourage all members to
support the prior compromise and
to oppose Senate Bill 176. Thank
you so much.
Next we have Aita Chavez.
I says is no longer there, so
let's go to
Is Karen Delgado?
Still there?
I apologize. I botch everybody's
name, so my apologies.
Isa Chavez.
Madam Chair and committee
members, yeah, so let's see
Hopa. I'm Arta Chavez from EM
Native Vote. My father was
Everett F. Chavez, a 3-time
governor from Guihua Pueblo. He
worked here in the Roundhouse
alongside many of you,
advocating for the people. In
fact, Governor Luhong Grisham
declared February 1st ever F.
Chavez Day.
He was intelligent, respected,
and well educated. In late 2018,
he became sick, and a month
later, he was gone.
People have wondered what
happened. The truth is he was a
victim of medical malpractice.
Bad things happen to good
people. This bill is one of
those bad things. This is not a
bill for patients. I too am a
parent of a special needs child,
but I know this will not address
the shortage. It will hurt
patients and the families of
those who have already suffered
a tragic loss.
Limiting financial compensation
to lawyers fighting for
patients' rights will deter the
best lawyers from taking on
cases in New Mexico. Without
those lawyers, people will
continue to lose their lives,
because medical providers will
not be held accountable for
their actions. These lawyers are
the warriors helping families
seek justice.
Please stop protecting the
for-profit insurance companies,
their fees and caps are causing
this shortage. Regulate them and
the doctors will come, awarding
the state 75% of the claimant's
punitive damages, severely
limits the futures of the
patients and their families as
they adapt to their new normal.
It is frankly an insult to those
affected by such a life changing
event. Future medical care
should not be left up to the
patient compensation fund.
Respectfully, please vote no on
behalf of New Mexico, but yeah.
And is Karen Delgado?
online
Karen Delgado.
Arthur Bergson
Hi there. Um, this is Arthur
Bergson. I'm actually speaking
in favor, so, um, OK, sorry.
But, but we'll get 6 and
It's OK, Mr. Bergson. I, I
apologize.
Um
That is all I have on my list at
this point in time.
Is she? OK.
We'll give her another try. Miss
Delgado, Karen Delgado.
Yes, I'm here. Can you hear me?
yes.
Madame Chair, members have come
in. My name is Karen Delgado and
I'm here to talk about my baby
girl Aitana.
The midwife.
Lighted in her medical records
saying that she was in the
hospital. I all night with me
and I thought's dad when that
was not truth, ignoring my labor
and ignoring the condition of my
baby. I done died inside of me,
but a wonderful doctor brought
her back to life.
Unfortunately, Aitana, brain is
severely damaged because she was
deprived of oxygen. We are in
Austin, Texas right now doing um
her specialized therapy.
Because my lawyer was able to
get our case settled. The
defendants were under threat of
default judgment for discovery
of use, hiding information, and
covering up.
And lying and testimony.
To the judge when the case
settled. The medical corporation
in my case, sought to hold
accountable is the 5 billion
corporation. The idea that the
government instead of the
patient who it's very hurt.
We'll get the book, the damages.
It's ridiculous. My attorney is
here and I don't know what I
will do without her. She guided
me since my daughter was 3 days
old and stayed with me and all
this journey.
Attorney fees caps increase the
profit to the big corporations
who haven't, who even owns its
malpractice insurance companies
by limiting my family ability to
get an attorney on my case, they
were too out of state firms, and
one in state law firm for the
defense.
And all their attorneys being
paid by the hour by the big
corporations in the case, my
attorney had to pay for an
expert witness, including
medical experts to testify on my
case and study the harm that was
caused.
And done to my baby. That cost
her hundreds of hundreds of
dollars in my case lasted 3
years. My attorney knew that if
uh Jody did not agree with her,
she would not get paid for all
the years that she
Do all this work.
Police oppose this bill. It only
keeps people who cannot pay by
the hour from being able to hold
their
I'm responsible, that is wrong,
and I hope you vote against this
bill.
Thank you.
You. Thank
Thank you.
That ends our testimony for
today.
And as we have done in previous
hearings.
Uh, this has finished the public
comment.
So we will resume dialogue.
Amongst us as members.
With our sponsors on Friday.
Um, so there will be no more
public comment taken, um, on
Friday, so we'll just get back
into the conversation on the
belt.
Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate
everybody's patience today.
Thank you to everybody. It's
the, the way this legislature
works, sometimes you hurry up,
and you got to slow down.
So I hope everybody has a safe
trip and we'll continue the
conversation on Friday. Thank
you.
