February eighth meeting of the
Senate health and public affairs
committee.
And we we have a a lengthy
agenda before we get started I
just wanted to mention to
committee members.
Something we were talking about
before the meeting.
The floor session on Friday he
will probably end around two
Senator.
We're thanks as a result we will
go ahead and have a schedule
meeting on Friday afternoon
Wednesday afternoon.
It'll be a half hour after the
floor session.
Then we'll have another one on
Friday the the floor session on
Friday may or may not take place
does.
We'll meet again a half hour
after the floor session if we
don't have a four session on
Friday will just meet at our
regular one thirty start.
So members we're gonna start
today with the agenda as laid
out in them.
In the most recent email I have
wishes Senator Pirtle with your
daylight savings time bill one
or two.
Then we'll go to Senate well
actually what we take both of
yours right away Senator Pirtle
one two and one fifteen and then
we'll all your three.
Well we'll do all three of yours
right away one to one fifteen.
And one twenty five then we'll
go to Senator o'neill for his
to.
Then Senators tolls.
Senator.
Senator Lopez.
Chairman holds his bills for the
end of the.
Carryover ingenuous so will
remain.
We may
We may have to do that a couple
of those are going to take a lot
of discussion.
All right.
Senator Pirtle you have Senate
bill one of two.
Thank you Mr chair as groundhog
day again as it feels as we've
done this in your committee many
times and I appreciate you
having me up in in allowing me
to speak to the committee but
the reality is we have quite a
few members on the health
committee now and so many of
them have had not had the
pleasure of a hearing this piece
of legislation and having their
in boxes filled with people
regarding what time it should.
over time the most recently I
believe it's under the second
President Bush we went from six
months on standard time in six
months on daylight to eight
months on daylight saving time
and when this bill was first
introduced New Mexico is
actually the first state to get
through one the chamber
of Bill requesting to stay on
daylight saving time year round
daylight saving time is the
summer time all the time it's an
extra hour at the end of the day
which most people become
accustomed to they've they've
really enjoyed having it at the
end of the day.
And now we have fifteen states
that have passed this so we
would be state number sixteen F.
if this continues on at the will
of the committee but really what
brought this on was a real
grassroots effort this is one of
those movie it's that.
As a sponsor of the original
bill I did not realize that it
was going to take up legs of its
own and and really wouldn't let
me not introduce it time and
time again as I continue to get
email saying you know don't give
up on this we support you and it
started with a young lady a
mother of four or five children
who after I tried standard time
and didn't get it through one
committee said Hey why don't you
try year round daylight saving
time it's family time that we
really enjoy it's that extra
hour after work where we can
play in the park barbecue do
chores and and things like that
and then the health side of
things as as get studied more
and more as in CSL and all these
other groups really study it we
realize the negative impacts of
changing time twice a year
increase in heart heart attacks
productivity goes down
distraction goes through the
roof of mental health is
definitely affected in a
negative way and so this is
something as a state that we can
send to the fence.
And become state number sixteen
in support of daylight saving
time year round and with that Mr
chair stand with stand for
questions and I also have a
gentle and Scott Yates who is
here is definitely an expert in
this area and would be willing
to answer any questions.
Thank you Senator Pirtle did you
want to say something Mr Yates
before we go for a COVID to the
public.
nothing in particular thank you
very much for having me I I
actually got to drive down from
Denver try to testify a few
years ago and didn't get an
opportunity so I'm really
pleased that you know I'm sorry
for the circumstances but I'm
honored for the opportunity to
to be here with your and and I
don't want Senator Pirtle to be
to modest here he really was the
first in the nation to to to.
Get a bill actually through one
of the houses of the state
legislature and now it's he's
right about fifteen states have
passed it.
One of the short sure thing I
will say is that
you know this takes federal
enabling legislation and I've I
actually my email box spend jam
this morning with staffers from
members of both the house and
the Senate in Washington today
it it I have been working on
this issue for like set for
about seven years now and I can
say that this is the most energy
that we've had is this year I do
think that one of those issues
one of those bills going to get
through in this Congress in
Washington so you know it's it's
I think it's just a great
opportunity for New Mexico to be
part of the discussion before.
Really before decision comes
down from Washington in case of
the Legislature New Mexico
chance really make a decision
about what times anyone Landon
once we stop changing the clock
Tax Year but thank you very much
as the here and happy to answer
any questions at all.
Thank you Mr are you are you is
organizations.
I'm with the the leader of the
international movement known as
lock the clock which is also
just known as me in my block
it's a hobby that I do nights
and weekends and gets a little
busier around this time of year
legislature's.
Public comment and.
Trevor do we have any public
comment on this bill.
We have one for against this
which is Jerry protect up J. Mr
Shendo will start with you
speaking in opposition.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee the state of New
Mexico was invested here in the
Senate recent dust from base
hundreds of millions of dollars
hundreds the private sector's
invested about almost two
billion dollars we are the the
state's largest industrial base
we account for more than fifty
percent of the state's total
global exports to the world this
bill would be a if we were back
in in the United States doesn't
do so as a whole you essentially
put us on a different time zone
that all possible Texas and
waters Mexico we would lose the
bulk of our industrial base six
thousand employees we have down
here again about two billion
dollars private investment you
put us on a different time zone
and nobody would even want to
locate here plus site selection
consultants we depend on to
review the the Plainfield
Business field would utilize
that against us and market
softened and nobody want to come
to Santa Theresa anymore and
this is even during the pandemic
we've got almost a million
square feet under construction
of the space all these brand new
businesses we've recruited in
here and this bill would do
nothing but end up impinging on
our ability to keep that that
healthy pipeline coming in
creating jobs and creating
investment in New Mexico thank
you Mr chairman and I represent
the border industrial
association we have about a
hundred and thirty members in
our industrial base and we are
staunchly against this bill.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anyone else Trevor who
on his being on the bill for
against.
That was all that was a on the
list I wanted to speak for and
against okay let's go to the
committee then and we have
for the joiners funds the age.
If I could briefly and think
that Mr protectors point is so
very well taken and and just as
a point of information
did this would only happen in
New Mexico if there were several
enabling legislation and all of
the federal legislation is to
lock the clock to not have time
changes and so it's very likely
so wouldn't happen the New
Mexico without it also happened
in Texas at the same time and
also just so you know Texas is
some bills going through their
legislature of the first one of
which depicted the one that
seems the most traction is one
that would put of put it to a
vote of the people of if they
want to walk the clock in
permanent standard time or in
permanent daylight time and so
it's it's possible because Texas
is so far west in the central
time zone that they would
actually go.
Sticking to standard time so
that would mean essentially the
New Mexico and Texas would be in
the same time some which I think
would make it Mr check goes
members even happier because
there would be less.
Distance time wise and and less
confusion.
But Mr checkpoint is a very good
one and I actually agree with
some hundred percent.
We have a Senator sentence in
senators in the oval office.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Pirtle for bringing this
forward again I know many people
are interested in the time
change but I
quite a few.
Of my constituents
Sending me emails on either side
of the central mountains issue.
could you comment on that in
your bill.
And and thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for allowing
me to to clear this up this this
legislation No Way moves us into
a different time zone eight
months of the year we are on
mountain daylight saving time
and so this would essentially
just take the four months that
we go back to standard time we
would stay on mountain daylight
time of the rest of the year so
we're really only talking about
four months out of the twelfth
year eight months we we already
spend on this time we're not
moving time zones we're not
going anywhere we're we're
staying right where we are we're
just instead of falling back and
losing that hour we're gonna
keep that our at the end of the
day thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator and thank you
Mr chair for that clarification
that's all I have.
Senator Sedillo miss followed by
Senator years.
Thank you Mr chair in two
thousand nineteen I supported
this bill in the committee but
after reverse myself on the
floor and the reason was because
I've got so much of so many
emails from my constituents who
said that they would prefer
staying on the vertical axis
which is precisely the point
that that Mr project maybe about
being consistent with people who
with states on the but access
and not shifting and went at one
time or another and and then
they also I also got a lot of
emails saying whatever time we
go to let's stick with it and
not have the changing so but we
we're in a really interesting
place because once we get a bill
like this stay on daylight
savings and another that says
stay on mountain and we never
get anything done.
And I find them extremely
frustrating because nobody wants
the time change but I do think
it would be wiser if we were to
say with our states and the
countries on the on the vertical
axis on the I guess a lot of
longitudes and so for that
reason I'll have to vote against
this bill here.
Thank you senators will go then
just Senator Gaydos.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator pirtle
appreciate discussion actually
my first year when I was going
to vote no my wife reminded me
of the she still rules the house
of she's never liked the clock
changing but I was gonna ask you
so.
Currently Arizona is trying is
that what I understand to do the
same thing to lock it in.
And and Mr chair senator Arizona
was the only state in the lower
forty eight that whenever this
was put first twenty and and
there was the opportunity gold
standard year round that shows
the gold standard year round and
I and I must put it point out
that they're still the only
state that the does standard
year round in the lower forty
eight but now we have fifteen
states that have all voted to do
daylight saving time year round
and and so this would help keep
us the eight months that we
already spent on daylight saving
time we're trying to bring in
the four months behind this so
in in the point that
Senator Sedillo Lopez made that
if we went to standard time we
would only be aligned with
Colorado four months of the year
in alkaline eight months with
the bill that I'm proposing we
would potentially be aligned
with Colorado eight months of
the year and only out of line
four months of the year so you
know it begs the question which
is the real standard time but
but for us on the east side of
our time zone it makes more
sense to do daylight saving time
year round it would cause a lot
less confusion one thing to
point out if we went standard
and and California when daylight
saving we would basically be the
same time as as Sacramento so I
think it it it really poses an
interesting relationship between
states but there's a definite
movement of permanent daylight
saving time we've become
accustomed to that extra hour in
the evening you know I know that
When he was a representative
Senator Gonzales presented
standard time year round and I
actually received a lot of
feedback for his districts
saying we have all these soccer
teams and and if we went to
permit standard time there would
not be enough daylight after the
coach got off work to host
practice and so there's a lot of
concern with kids getting out
there and playing and having
that opportunity that's what
this is really about it's the
family time bill as former
senator of John sapien would say
and that's really the idea
behind it is those four months
if we lose that our just give it
to us back so we have that time
at the end of the day.
Thank you.
Email Senators yes Sir thank you
for that center and Mr chair so
Senator Pirtle my next question
is currently we're an hour
behind Texas how would this
reflect your we're to pass
a permanent a daylight savings.
So I'll give both scenario since
we we try to compare bowl again
it goes back to the eight months
four months so if we.
If we adopt what I'm proposing
eight months of the year will be
on daylight saving time and so
will they will be an hour behind
them and when they fall back
they would be the same time as
us now I composed comparison if
we did standard time year round
eight months of the year we
would be two hours behind Texas
our largest border and for
months one hour behind them so
would really throw off of the
trade and and knowing what time
that was and and the communities
especially along the border to
the south and to the east
working with our neighbor and so
to me that the permanent
daylight saving time keeps our
border in the times between the
two states closer and more
workable.
Mr Chairman etcetera I
appreciate that and those are
the questions I had I still
would tell you my wife is a
hundred percent in supporting
your bill thank you.
This.
Center for local.
The the el Paso region taxes
they're on the same.
Texas has two different time
zones right.
So Mr question how do you
address Mr Richard was concerned
because
Right.
So in in the earlier rounds on
this is is on the same time.
Zone we are if we change how
will that affect them.
And and Mr Mr chair I appreciate
that question so again it's just
that for months in the winter
time so right now we would be up
just be simply one hour ahead of
them so I don't think it would
cause widespread confusion I
mean especially in today's world
with cell phones and and
everything Arizona eight months
of the year is one hour behind
us and four months there the
same time and somehow Gallup and
and those communities are able
to to figure that out it may
take a little bit of time but
you know humans are are are
capable of creatures to figure
that out and so I don't think at
first it will be a little bit of
an interesting scenario but I
mean with with Legisla- just fix
the way they are today and with
computers and and everything
like they are you know I think
it'll be quite easy to navigate
that but it's really just that
for months that we're talking
about that we would be one hour
ahead of them or they would be
able to then again joined and do
the same that we're doing with
this lock the clock movement
that we're seeing federally.
Okay let's see what the
committees Senator Tallman.
Senator.
Yeah I'm sorry okay here I am.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
up Senator for bringing this
forward this is not a
clarification of.
If the federal legislation were
to be enacted.
Then would all the states have
to.
Follow that are they still have
an option.
And Mr chair of maybe Mr gates
would be willing that to answer
that is he's following that the
federal legislation a little bit
closer than I.
Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you Senators.
There are three bills right now
in DC the one that there are two
that are basically somewhere
that seem the most likely to
pass and those bills would
actually take away all of these
concerns because state just put
the entire country into
permanent what's in the central
permanent daylight saving time
and so that would the the only
exceptions would be for the
states that have already gone
into standard time before those
bills become law so Arizona
Hawaii Puerto Rico would all be
in there so that would address
the concern about the but which
is very good question to the
point of making sure that New
Mexico is consistent with the
neighbors to the north.
And also being the the lack of
the the question of confusion as
a legitimate one and it's why US
Congress enacted the uniform
time act of nineteen sixty six.
Because they didn't want all of
that confusion and and it and if
you want more to be about why we
change the first week in
November not last week in
November I can give you that if
you want about how the airlines
got involved but the short
answer is the most likely
outcome is that the entire
country will be moved into the
lead time except for the states
that want to exempt themselves
and no more clock changing.
Thank you very much chairman
members and senators.
You thank you Mr Senator and
thank you Mr Yates.
So.
Which.
Senator Pirtle those bills
supporting which at which of the
three options.
Mr chair and senator this is
daylight saving time year round
which is the national movement
we've had fifteen states do that
and still Congress is now
taking those states and and the
message that's being sent and
and pushing legislation at the
federal level to to do just that
so we would join in with them
and and be the sixteenth say
hopefully to push that along
with multiple other states that
that are more than likely gonna
pass similar legislation to to
what I'm proposing Mr chair and
senator.
So Senator that's the option
most likely to get enacted.
Mr chair senator correct the
daylight saving time is the most
popular among the people
over time that extra hour of
daylight is is what most people
really appreciate although we
have quite a few vocal standard
time people out there the the
real message is everybody is
pretty much is tired of changing
the call box but the majority of
people do support daylight
saving time year round.
Well personally I don't have a
problem
with Senator the changing and I.
For whatever reason I haven't
gotten any emails on this I
guess that maybe people don't
contact me because they know my
minds already made up.
I just try to help you out
So.
Thanks again for bringing this
forward thank you for your
presentation thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Senator
McKenna.
Our thank you chairman Ortiz Y.
Pino and thank you Senator
Pirtle Senator Pirtle went is
not yet a legislator I was
always cheering on this
legislation and
the reason the chief reason why
I am supporting it is because
it's quite clear I just read an
article from Scientific American
and if we would stop changing
our time there would be a
benefit to health and be less
accidents that in for itself is
evidence enough for me to
support legislation and all the
more so let's get the federal
done but I think I think it
speaks volumes when we can add
another state leading the
federal federal government know
that were on board to so thank
you Senator Pirtle thank you
chairman.
And thank you Mr Senator or Mr
chairman and senator at we
haven't been able to interact in
any committees our paths haven't
crossed but it's a pleasure
having you on board of the New
Mexico Senate.
Thank you we have rules against
lobbying senators follow the
debate is going on Senator.
I just had a quick question for
you I think everybody else's
answered questions we can build
a strange.
you says only take effect.
When the federal laws amended.
The amendment says that the
mystery aces discussing.
Where to go through we would
need to take any action right
and we just happen.
And and.
We're sorry.
Yes what is what is the point in
passing your bill.
It only takes from the federal
as changes in the federal laws
change we don't need to act.
And and Mr chair that's a that's
a great question when this
started the the legislation that
was being for put forth by
Senator Rubio out of Florida was
to allow states to either take
standard time or daylight saving
and the legislation that seems
to have the most
then is just to do daylight
saving time across the board for
everyone so there is that
confusion this would essentially
just say the state of New Mexico
would like to see that done and
and so that way they have
another state to add to their
list of past this
same legislation this would we
would be number sixteen and I
don't have it in front of me but
there's more than a handful that
it's in already introduced it
for this year's legislative
sessions in each state.
What will the committee.
Our motion will move to pass but
Senator moves just set.
I second is.
Any other any other questions
the secretary will call the
roll.
To Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Thank.
I don't believe he's on Senator
Ingle.
Yes to pass.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Senator Lopez.
So.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Congratulations Senator let's go
to your next bill as well.
Which is.
This is your day care notice
parents Senate bill one fifteen.
And thank you Mr chair members
of the committee
for allowing me to present to
you Senate bill one fifteen
essentially this arose out of
My my area I was contacted by a
family who they had a tragic.
Structure I believe each member
was given the the letter of the
email that was sent to me and
it's been coins arise Bill and
so this story comes from.
A little girl
was left with a sitter and
Senator was supposed to take
this this baby to daycare and
the the sitter simply forgot and
by the time
The mother was contacted it was
too late she the baby was left
in a hot car and and she passed
away.
to a two year old baby girl and
so the idea of this was to have
a way that if if we could have
the parents contacted you know
we could crack down on and
you know trafficking
kidnapping and just making sure
that that the kiddos are showing
up when they're supposed to and
if if they are in some of these
cards some so he simply forgot
maybe we could save a life and
so that's really where this
comes from and I'll stand for
questions.
You have is there anybody else
you have next for witnesses
Senator Pirtle.
I think there might have been of
a few people that would have
signed up.
In favor of it
but I'm not sure if they were
able to are not Mr Mr chair.
Trouble is very high school
making public comment on this.
I believe so because I didn't
have anyone sign up ahead of
time.
Mr hazel are you for or against
this measure and one.
I'm sorry and I have public
comment for a couple build fund
on the today helping out.
this bill I am again it because
I'm currently in the video here
and I actually with her up I
believe or not taking my funds
daycare when and I believe in
making my only with more years
old your I yeah I would do again
for pregnant or thank you thank
you and I have believed coming
to my home to do a welfare check
when the father didn't even
notify me I have your or the
four nobody wrote it in or order
that I'm supposed to take I
think the daycare so to me it's
kind of that would like correct
so that's why I am against this
bill and the fact that like my
daughter can go to well I don't
know why my thank you at the
home and learn with me and then
two days out of the week that I
do have them I would like to
spend those days with them and
I'm very confident in my A. B.
C. then my one two three to be
able to teach my friend what to
do and how to help has come the
girl who is well but that's
coming.
And I do have comment on another
issue the.
Okay well we'll get to that one
a little later thank.
So is there anybody else who
wants to make a comment on this.
No there's no one listed for
against okay let's go to the
committee then members of the
committee any questions.
Seeing is there any it was
senator Schmidt is.
Sorry I was Mr Tsipras
physically raising my hand and
didn't do the virtual hand I
just I just had a couple
questions for the Senator
Senator Pirtle is there is there
provision where the daycare
center call calls the parent and
you know leave the voicemail or
or there's no answer how would
that work.
In Mr chair and and senator let
me re familiarize myself with
that section I believe it's
just stated that the they'll
have a.
Way they prefer to be contacted.
Just as a school shall not find
noticed to a pair Act has
already provided an excuse.
And and I think if that's
language yes it's in the first
sentence of the underlying
language we're of the school
shall notify the parents of that
school age persons which persons
non arrival I think currently
it's done through either phone
calls or text but if that's
something that we need to
clarify and that's the will of
the committee I think that would
be friendly Mr chair and
senator.
Okay I just I just thought
You know usually and and the the
notification Mr center the.
Mr chairman
The sorts of things will have
maybe one one clarification
point to say you know if if they
don't answer then the daycare
center will documents that they
did their due diligence or
something like that so
anyway yeah otherwise I think
it's this is kind of.
Media just seems like a kind of
a consumer protection bill for
clients of daycare centers
where we're going to we're gonna
say Hey this is part of running
a daycare in New Mexico is is
we're gonna wanna be on board
with you in order to notify you
if you know.
To be here on a certain day and
you have to find an excuse we're
gonna have to participate in the
safety of that child this is
kind of the way that I see it
but perhaps a little
clarification on leaving a
voicemail whatever that.
Thanks Mr chairman Mr chair and
senator out of be happy to work
on that if it if it does
passed through the committee we
can work on tightening up that
language or even putting in you
know what what that would look
like but that is the crux of the
bill and Mr chair and and
senator that you know that first
forty eight hours if the kid
does go missing is is the most
crucial so if we can within
thirty minutes figure out that
there's an issue and issue the
amber alert you know there's a
higher chance of of the child
being found before they're able
to either get out of the state
or even
leave the country.
Thank you Senator Pirtle Senator
Sedillo Lopez followed by
Senator gamers.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair senator what happens
now.
Mr chair and senator as far as I
know
There's really not a specially
with with daycares there's not
really a requirement of of
contacting I do know within our
public schools that are required
to contact but there the
timeliness is not there the the
requirement of it happening a
little bit quicker than say at
the end of the day you get an
email or a text that your child
had missed every single class
all day so you've already lost
an entire day of of trying to
figure out what has happened to
your child and so this this just
puts a little bit more of a
strict
time frame to it that with
within one hour after the switch
person scheduled arrival time
the school shall notify the
parent
and so it just brings the
amendment makes a little tighter
I believe they had the entire
day before.
And
So this just brings it in and
and and tightens up that
language to a shorter time frame
Mr chair and senator Senator
Pirtle have you talked with the
folks at early childhood
education educational about
this.
and and Mr chair center they
have not reached out to me about
this
but I mean if if they wanted to
speak to it at length I'm I'm
more than well welcome to
they're welcome to do so my cell
phone is provided so if they if
they wanted to I would be more
than happy to to discuss it with
them further.
Thank you Mr chair I actually am
getting noticed that I have to
go over to judiciaire to present
a bill I will not be
Needs to be that is the part of
the overall regulations that
govern cover.
I have been called when my
grandson.
Didn't show up
You know and so I do we just say
oh yeah there's camping or
whatever so I I wasn't aware
that
Yeah I wasn't aware of what
happens but I apologize I I will
not be here divide likely not to
be here the vote for against
this bill I apologize about.
Thank you senator Senator
Gallegos.
Chairman Mr Chairman center I
can go ahead and talk long
enough that Senator deal can
come back.
Her.
She was asking.
Okay
actually quite a few my
questions were answered but I
did have a question for the
senator and and this actually
happened in Hobbs I appreciate
him taking a look at this a few
years back I had had one in the
house and it did not go through
because of penalties what are
the penalties for the day care
and and at that time let me just
give you a little background I
was not going to penalty for the
day care person is the penalty
for the person that was
operating a motor vehicle but I
was just wondering if what the
penalties were for the day care
if the notice is not given
within the one hour time frame.
In Mr chair and and senator I
think the penalty is is just the
liability of of not
following the statute and and
what that would look like in
that situation.
And thank you for that and the
and I'd seen that man's just
wondering if I missed it and and
that seems to have a better.
How come I I I personally liked
the bill that I've had a few
years back in at that time we're
talking about even I have an
affair in the front so you can
see there's a child in the
vehicle so just a parent would
remember whoever was guarding
but I just wondered because I
know a lot of these daycares are
you know small businesses I just
didn't want to be to over burden
on him but I like the idea that
they would call within the hour
in order just let the parents
know just verify what was going
on so with that are you don't
thank you thank you senator
Senator McKenna in some to you.
Senator.
That's what happens when you
have more than one mouse on your
desk okay.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Pirtle I'm chairman and
senator pirtle I am curious
and because I don't know the I
haven't studied the bill
extensively Senator Pirtle and
chairman is there language that
exists somewhat to address is
burned high schools concern.
And Mr chair and senator I
believe it's
Where it says I school shall not
provide notice to a parent the
parent has already provided an
excuse for the school age person
not attending school that day.
The parent of a school age
person shall provide the school
with their preferred method of
contact for these notices is the
is the last half of the last
portion of that new language so
if there is a situation where
the the parent was not going to
take of the child to the daycare
or school then that would be
communicated ahead of time Mr
chair and senator.
Thank you Senator and thank you
chairman a chairman may I ask
Miss burn Heysel to comment on
Senator pearls response.
Well.
I'm not sure she still are you
still in Missouri where the
other two years I'm here.
Senator Pirtle responds to deal
with your concern.
Yeah that doesn't make.
Get in trouble for our.
We're not taking a child from my
understanding a child.
Have to be if they're not like
well aid with me I thought with
thank.
Gardening.
The.
You should be penalized for
allies for.
You the trial.
You care you know.
So I'm sorry if I didn't answer
but yes I think it's very
important though.
Bill thank you children from
being there being left in cars
that's a good reason but
that are trying for their kids.
And
Trying to do the best they can.
Right we get in trouble for
because the other parent.
Calling the police staff that's
the only concern I had about it.
Very good miss miss burn Heysel
and chairman and senator you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator.
I'm I'm curious if day care
centers are somewhere in the
state have been surveyed about
this legislation and what their
feedback is thank you.
Mr was at a question I I
apologize.
I'll repeat chairman and senator
yeah I'm curious Senator if.
If you have asked day care
centers to examine the
legislation and if so what is
their feedback.
And Mr chair and senator as we
although their their main goal
is to ensure the health and
safety of the kiddos I know
there is a little bit of a
concern with how it will be
carried out but the reality is
it's the twenty first century
how much time does it take to to
write a text if you if you have
a student that that doesn't
arrive at the scheduled time and
within an hour sent out a text a
wellness check so I think it's
something that although it may
be a little bit of more work
for the day care it will
increase accountability to to
parents to ensure that that the
kiddos are going to day care and
if they're not been there some
type of excuse for communication
between the day care and and the
parent or legal guardian so I
think this will just improve
That communication although
there is going to be a new
requirement put on these
daycares and schools to do this
in a timely manner but I think
the the positives far outweigh
the negatives and this and this
legislation but there they have
expressed a little bit of
concern with that.
Thank you senator and there
thank you chairman that's all I
have.
Thank you senator I would I
would just note you might check
that they are on this bill.
Because it does raise some some
of those concerns.
With the early childhood
programs department saying.
They don't have any way of
monitoring this.
And then it does raise the issue
of.
Public schools having to notify
even high school age the parents
of high school age students with
their child is in our latest
research which could help fund
truancy but is.
Given the fact so many high
school students.
Are are true and
some of the burden suggested to
the schools to do this.
Is there was a little of the
committee on this bill.
Do pass.
Senator Gallegos passes there a
second.
Also Mr chair seconded by
Senator strategies any other
discussion or questions.
Secretary will call the roll.
This.
And Senate bill one one five
those.
Yes ma'am hi.
Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks now.
Yes.
Surtees the piano.
Then the it was found in the
bill.
I have.
For supporting.
To propose one excuse to excuse.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you senator for listed
your third bill now if we can.
And thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for for the committee
for for again allowing me to
bring up another
piece of legislation in front of
you I have Senate bill one
twenty five and this is related
to municipalities so Rossell is
kind of a
municipal make up it's it's been
this way I believe
Center also became became
incorporated municipality in
that's it's a ten member
city council and the way the
current ordinance or the current
legislation is written is is
that in order for a piece of
legislation to pass
Representative ordinance to pass
it would take six people in
favor if there was a I I hi well
if there's only eight people
president and it goes for for
the mayor cannot break the tie
even though they are operating
above a quorum and so this would
just bring them in part with you
know even our legislative body
that as long as you have the
majority of the council there if
it into that hi as we have the
the lieutenant governor to break
the tie they have the the more
break the tie and this would
allow both set that ended its
high if there's only eight
people present as opposed to ten
that that would also carry in
passing because.
And with that all stand for
questions.
Is there anybody here to speak
on this bill of Trevor do we
have anybody for instance.
No there's no one that signed up
for or against.
We have the Senators committees.
Thank you Mr chair and thank
senator pirtle what what this
says just a simple question with
would this affect of the
establishment of a quorum or or
is there any.
Her face their with establishing
a quorum for these bodies.
And Mr chair and senator dole it
all it does is is currently says
if a majority of all the members
of the governor governing body
vote in favor so for the city of
Russell regardless of the number
of people you had there so this
Rossella it would have six
people there in order for it to
pastor that meeting all six
would have to vote in favor
would have to be a unanimous
vote so this would just bring it
down to where four people could
pass it as opposed to requiring
all six present vote they would
still have to maintain a quorum
this just brings it down from
being all if a majority of all
the members of the governing
body and takes it to the
majority of the members of the
governing body present voting
favor of adopting so it just
brings it down basically to the
same standard as is all other
institutions including ours
thank you Mr okay thank you
thank you Mr.
Any other any other comments or
questions from the senators.
Thank you Mr chair so Senator
Pirtle
Yes that would and.
Is the vote by Los governments.
Established in.
Thank you or does each local
government get to determine.
There are rules of governance.
And and Mr chair and and and
senator I appreciate that
question this would not apply to
the home rural counties I don't
believe I I think that's a total
separate search section where
they they really put that out
but this would apply
to all non home rule
municipalities
so that
It would just be a majority of
the members present.
The.
Russell is a little bit
different just in the fact that
has so many members and I know
that creates an issue but this
is something even in communities
that have five city councillors
that if three were present it
would take a moment of unanimous
vote to to to accept an
ordinance so what we've seen in
the past is is people not
wanting to show more those types
of issues and so this would just
ensure participation by by city
councillors and and bring it to
our with most other institutions
that that vote in this way.
I thank you for that answer
Center Mr chair so has the
municipal league or the
association of counties weighed
in on this bill.
And Mr chair and senator I
appreciate that
My more was was supposed to
reach out and and try to find
where they are had not heard
back
you know what their feelings are
on it I don't think there's
issue with it as far as I know
if there was a major problem
with I'm pretty sure we would
have heard by now is there they
are usually very on top of these
issues but where is really again
affect just a few municipalities
in any significant way I I don't
know that
they've taken a stance as the
municipal league with regard to
to this section of law.
Thank you very much Senator
thank you Mr chair.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator for bringing
this fourth of the same question
Senator phonics I was wondering
if the new agency fully given
that.
Have been contacted for their
reaction to this.
So I would propose that if we
move this forward we do as a
condition at the center that
check with the school week.
Of the four moves on to the next
committee thank you Mr chair
thank yous Senator Pirtle thank
you senator clementa Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Pirtle Senator Pirtle
could you share with us one or
two examples that occurred that
has promoted this legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator so let's say in the city
of wrongful we we have ten
members and it's been used in
the past knowing that if all ten
showed up in ended in a five
five tie that the more within
break the tie so because of the
way it's written it would
require six yes is regardless of
how many people are present and
so there's been quite a bit of
of
mmhm but he played in the the
statute so that it doesn't end
in a tie so if it goes five for
because one of the nose was not
present in the more cannot weigh
in and break the tie and then
essentially passed the ordinance
and so it really takes the boys
away from the people you have a
more for a reason that's there
to break these type of and and
the the city councillor should
be participating
in whole to to ensure that that
the community that there
districts are being represented
but that is that's what's
occurring now so this would
then allow an ordinance to be
past five for if if there were
only nine members present
because that would constitute a
quorum.
Okay very good thank you for
that Senator Pirtle and
chairman.
And and I'm I'm curious Senator
is this an ongoing problem is it
is it a chronic problem or is it
happening infrequently.
For the city of Ross will we see
it quite often and as we all the
local politics are usually not
partisan in nature or at least
they're designed not to be but
it just results and and issues
not being resolved one way or
the other and so we elected
mayor to be the more we elect
city councilors the city council
and we basically had a
standstill because of such this
of this high bar requiring six
people to vote yes regardless of
how many are present so it
creates a really hard situation
for the the city to conduct
business in really results in in
an effective local government is
is what we have seen at the
local level.
Very good thank you Senator
Pirtle thank you chairman and I
do like senator Tom and
suggestion about getting an
opinion from the municipal
league thank you Senators.
And and Mr chair and senator I
will I will reach out and at
least receive a an official.
They're not weighing in or what
their opinion might be moving
forward and get back with the
committee.
All thank you at least make sure
that there are
present for the online for the
next committee hearing solution
we can express themselves in
their.
With the committee regarding
Senate bill one to five.
A common rules.
The just their second.
Do passed thank.
There is
a second Mr chair seconded by
Senator schmidti said the any
other debate discussion
questions.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senate bill one twenty five
centered guy it goes.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes two passed.
There's.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes thirteen in a yes.
Senator Pirtle years three three
today this committee.
Mr chair always a pleasure to be
in front of the Senate health
committee thank you.
The.
Senator o'neill for his to bill
Senate bill one fourteen and
then Senate bill one twenty
eight.
Thank you Mr chair and I would
echo Senator pearls COVID so
it's a pleasure to be in front
of the newly named ****
committee so hi let me present
Senate bill one fourteen
drafted in consultation with
both the corrections department
and our New Mexico parole board
this bill puts in statute
procedures for the state's
existing medical in geriatric
parole program ensuring that
inmates with serious medical
issues and elderly inmates have
a clear and rapid process to
have their applications for
early parole review outlines
this process that the
corrections Department should
follow it sets deadlines for
review of applications and
creates an appeals procedure for
inmates whose applications are
denied.
Most of the draft places in
statute procedures that are
already in place used by New
Mexico corrections department
this bill came out of much
discussion and collaboration and
also with the sentencing
commission and it specifically
its reform committee and it was
in dollars endorsed by the fall
sensing Commission now Mr
chairman hopefully my expert and
well known to all of you Douglas
carver is on this zoom and and
he can and he's here to answer
any questions that you might
have and with this we can go to
a public comment.
Thank you senator.
Do we have do you have it is
there anybody here from the
corrections department or the
parole board.
Mr curry did you want to say
something yes thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee good to be in front of
a rename Committee for the first
time this year I'll keep my
comments brief because I know
you're playing catch up on your
schedule of this bill was
drafted I'll just talk a little
about the process the sentencing
commission has reformed its
reform committee and that's the
committee to help and good
criminal justice ideas to the
attention of the legislature and
the judiciary perhaps they
formed a working group on this
issue bobbing geriatric medical
parole because attempts have
been made to reform these
processes for years when I was
working at council service I
drafted a bill for Senator on
the on this issue but it they've
always been caught up with
bigger and more controversial
before probation parole reform
ideas and some of the disk and
lost in and that mass of the
working group was formed with a
handful of us included Mr Abram
and I are from the parole board
chair of the parole board and
the secretary of corrections and
some of her staff went to the
reform committee they approved
it that went to the full
commission they approved it and
the Senator graciously agreed to
sponsor caravan bill for us
it looks a lot of new language
in the bill I wanted to let the
committee know that much of that
new language is coming from the
repealed section of information
Polak there's a little repeal
section at the end for some
reason over the years the
statutes involving medical
geriatric parole had been split
into two sections of the wall to
be imported amount of the
language over from
The existing law that's in that
repeal section to consolidate
one place in Spain some
processes the one thing that
Cost a fair bit of discussion at
the sensing Commission level
both in our reform committee and
in the
for commission and I wanted to
highlight this for the committee
is that the age of eligibility
for geriatric parole has been
moved from age sixty five to age
fifty five.
And that actually brings New
Mexico in line with most other
states who have a geriatric
parole provision in there
statute the national conference
of state legislatures has a
great website on this most
states hello the minimum age of
eligibility for director role to
start at fifty or fifty five New
Mexico was one of I believe
three or four outlined states
that had the ages high sixty
five.
so that provision because some
of the discussion and back and
forth thing about most of the
other provisions people were
quite happy with we did some
language streaks along the way
I'm so I just want to talk a bit
about process I can go into
details if necessary but Mr
chair exceed that secretary to
former Serra was joined as soon
and I'm sure what the here their
view on this issue.
Madam secretary did you want to
weigh in on Senate Bill.
One fourteen.
Mr chair thank you yes Mr chair
and members it was a really
great opportunity to work with
the New Mexico's sentencing
commission's Justice Reform
subcommittee we met literally
every every two weeks so every
other week for a good period of
time and this was one of the
items that we worked on we very
much appreciate Senator o'neill
caring this legislation and
essentially what this bill would
do is it solidifies in law a
process that is largely in place
in our agency but it also
clarifies definitions of
geriatric and terminally ill and
from our perspective it really
helps to ensure that only the
people that have legitimately
debilitating and chronic
illnesses as well as terminally
ill who do not present a danger
to the community or to
themselves would be considered
of for if they were approved.
They would be able to spend out
their last days and and time
with their family members and
they have the opportunity to
speak at this early.
So we are very much in support
from the agency of House Bill
I'm sorry Senate bill one
fourteen thank you for the
opportunity Mr chair.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr Kirby did you have
anything else you wanted to add.
that at this point Mr chair R.
can give a lot more details on
the process of the committees
interested but I was trying to
respect your time I know your
doctor bills on your agenda
I appreciate it thank you very
much the server do we have any
public comment on this bill.
We had to sign up for this bill
Jacqueline Lopez.
Soto Campos so the campus.
With the still.
I'm not seeing them.
Now.
Mr chair it's still showing
Senate bill one twenty five on
the screen.
Thank you you.
Well the committee that what is
the but after.
What is committee's interest in
this field.
Sure removing just.
Senator Stefanics.
Any any questions on this bill.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
I'm sorry one one four.
Senator varicose.
Pass.
Ingle.
Yes to pass.
Senator.
No.
Senator Lopez she's excuse.
Fabrics yes.
Yes.
I'm sorry I didn't hear center.
No ma'am.
Thank you.
There were two Sabina.
Yes.
Legislation senator Neil your
your bill moves ahead and Joe
will go then to your second bill
for the day.
Thank you Mr chair and members I
wanted to alert the membership
that in response to a lot of
these concerns valid concerns
raised by the O. H. it's not my
intention to bankrupt the state
in the process of enacting is
left legislation so with the
cooperation of this the building
at the our bill drafter as well
as the advocate behind this we
would like to bring in a
committee substitute with many
amendments addressing for
example the need for thirty
three counties to hire somebody
each county of setter it's that
it's not it's not our intention
so what I'd like to do if if the
chairman and the committee was
so inclined is to present the
bill in a general way there are
people that want to weigh in
including our distant advocate
in Minnesota Sarah Carlson who
is graciously joined us to
basically gave me the idea to
sponsor this bill but but I can
say right away and the way the
description it does that make
sense can we present the bell in
a general way and come back with
the committee so.
So that way you're your public
comment period can can take
place today in fact when we hear
the committee so we worked just
fine go ahead centric so Senate
bill one twenty eight and acts
the suicide prevention response
and treatment act
this bill provides definitions
and establishes specific
guidelines for suicide risk
assessments but does designated
quote suicide prevention
counselors who are available
twenty four seven of residential
facilities and and so forth
Senate bill one twenty eight
requires suicide prevention
training for psychiatric an
outpatient treatment facilities
as well as policies and
procedures regarding referrals
discharging at risk patients and
etcetera so Mr chairman of no
there's several of suicide
prevention bills are so suicide
related bills we all know it's a
real problem in our state it's
just something that we talk
about every year in the Senate
chamber what can we do you know
it's heartbreaking on so many
levels and I just have to say
that are just really appreciate
Sarah Carlson who will speak now
you know just contacting me from
Minnesota to see if would be
want to look at this issue so
Sir could you could you I way
and now are you on the zoom yes
I am thank you hi Sir hi.
Welcome go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the community center o'neill
thank you for giving me a chance
to talk today my name is Sarah
Carlson I am a college senior
majoring in political science
with a minor in women's studies
I am going to be graduating soon
with plans on going to law
school.
I'm impressed with this that
this I also have a disease known
as type two bipolar disorder I'm
saying together.
They pay my bills and I run a
victims rights.
Well provided for which I have
gone bills passed to multi state
however I found that the state
of my disease is worse of the
actual disease
about eight years ago may two
thousand thirteen I was feeling
suicidal due to problems in my
personal life medications are
working to me so my mom took me
to the hospital to save toward
hoping I could get help little
do we know help without the card
I can think about psych wards I
don't even know where to begin
however to get tell you about
the parts that affect this bill.
I was bored I receive no so
without help sleep I went to the
staff to tell them I was feeling
suicidal and the nurses and
doctors did nothing and walked
away from me leaving me to sit
by myself in my room feeling was
feelings of so much emotional
pain I wanted to die one point
a doctor once district Mandall
homeless situation even though I
was still feeling suicidal this
only added to my to without
feeling but a matter of the
staff was atrocious the doctors
talk down to me the nurses talk
to me like I was a child I did
the staff to even get a history
for me or talk to me they talk
to my parents I was not for not
to mention my biological father
the nurses and mostly Puiset
until the staff thinks about me
now we're true is that the staff
recognizes signs of abuse
they'll believe ten without
checking my site single staff
members seem to care if I lived
or died I left the bank were
traumatized that months later I
was having some feelings that
call the suicide hotline
received no suicidal Council the
only thing they told me to do
was to do something to distract
myself finally a little over a
year my my hospitalization I got
my life back I kept thinking
about what happened to me and
thanks for began asking
questions I was outraged to
learn that the reason why I did
not get the suicide rate in the
bank board because they're
supposed to without complicated
and thank wards anywhere in the
United States someone or some
one down the line decide that
too without counting was import
it is areas as well all I have
to do is admit someone with you
without for seventy two hours
given these groups that don't do
anything and disruption they say
that stabilizing so it's not
like is why they don't give any
advice or suicidal Copley
leaving someone in despair to
suffer that if it was okay.
You should go to therapists and
tells their press they're
suicidal therapist after
reported the patient goes to the
psych ward and receive those
without healthy what they call
stabilized I called the collect
and if the mental health
profession think that's adequate
treatment I'd hate to see what
in that the trick.
Looks like so with the help of
our medical emergencies acquire
immediate
medical treatment in the form of
two without healthy just like at
the site is a medical emergency
require.
Emergency that requires
immediate medical trip in the
form and the fact that directed
me if we did I did that doctors
were not allowed to perform an
appendectomy that people who
need them people would die the
same thing goes when you don't
have suicide calls late to do so
without patient however we
probate doctors from performing
an appendectomy is people.
Side you would be outrage and as
we should be that suicidal
copies not allowed to give the
patient the name of private
survivors I know now that
suicide is not the answer to
anything hello after.
Add to my activism of lying to
law school and going through
with all my dreams however the
anguish it would do the hospital
invited if we treated so it's.
Patients better and gave them
better care I wins comprehensive
bill.
The old trick okay this problem
at the legislators in eighteen
states of right to introduce of
the session.
Our medical emergencies just
like someone who can't read or
has a heart attack or pesticide
over with someone with the
fiscal not so much in state
house that they are given the
benefit emergency treatment help
save their lives people who are
suicidal deserve the same
respect mental health lives
matter.
Basically deserve to be treated
like what I do wake up one
morning to say that since two
thousand get tension I was
suicidal because my life is
falling apart I didn't see a way
out I was really sick.
Whether we're Democrats
Republicans should matter
suicide can affect anyone you.
With someone you love by
emergency.
Alright media danger you would
want them to have immediate
medical treatment to say their
lives here so our daughter who
is suicidal or will it go
without suicide accounts in the
result is that I think we're
better the.
That's a let's do without
patients suffer and die would
treatment to be given thank you
and I'm willing to take any
questions that you have.
Thank you Sir very much and and
with that Mr chair we can go for
public comment.
People who wanted to make a
public comment.
Yes we have three people who
wanted to speak for this bill
cared would lock.
You would please.
Let's go to let's go to the next
one.
for nocturnal.
New Mexico crisis and access
line the peer to peer warmind
the health care worker received
the money the Rio Grande gorge
bridge intercoms the and then
connect up to the five action
can online program and we are
accredited national suicide
prevention lifeline provider.
We do support this bill moving
forward but we would like to
work with Senator o'neill on
some of the language and
amendments in order to come
together as a way to provide
balance that could allow this to
successfully implement
throughout our state because
suicide prevention is very
important I believe in it I am
an advocate I'm a social worker
myself as well as a person with
lived experience in recovery
myself from my own mental health
concerns and I think that this
is just such an important topic
but I'd like to see the
legislation passed in a way that
allows for successful
implementation so is that we can
offer consistency throughout our
communities as well as offer the
opportunity for people to
implement this appropriately and
professionally which is one of
the reasons I love the program
that I do work at because we are
all professional mental health
a staff with bachelor's or
higher or while working on our
crisis line and certifications
through our state office of
recovering gauge mint on our
warm line so thank you for
presenting this and I I hope to
talk with Senator o'neill more
offline.
Thank you Wendy and before we go
to committee I just want to
emphasize you know this reminds
me of a bill that I sponsored
with senator guy a ghosts of
past which was called Erin's law
it is and now and with two to
help to really kind of emphasize
the importance of school
personnel to recognize the signs
of sexual abuse so it to me it's
similar in the sense of really
zeroed in on professionals to
really make sure that they know
how to recognize suicidal you
know real suicidal tendencies
that that you know in our
current system sometimes seventy
two hours to be admitted to a
psych ward with no suicide
accounts we you know that's just
what happens unfortunately is
people are released and they're
not really getting the right
treatment so at the same time I
don't want to you know the cost
of this bill as written is what
got my attention so I'm I really
hope to work with Wendy and D.
O. H. I've been in contact with
the O. H. I just kind of
streamlined how to how to
implement this in a successful
way and so therefore like will
come in next time without
without you know committee seven
and perhaps then we going to
committee discussion or however
you want to proceed Senator Mr
Chairman.
Thank you senator Neal and thank
you when you for your comments
and Sarah thank you also for
your presentation the members of
the Center Neil is now looking
for action today this is an
opportunity if you have some
suggestions for strengthening
the bill or questions about it.
To to to to do a little bit of
dialogue about it and want to
take a lot of time since we're
not going to act on it today but
we have two senators who like to
say something Senators
committees you go first.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Neil yeah just in the
spirit of if if we're planning
some revisions maybe just a few
comments hello maybe these are
things that have already been
discussed but one one is there
is a provision for you know
these counselors to be emergent
Lee you know dispatched and go
somewhere I'm just wondering
where Intel it is Telemeds gonna
have a roll here would what a
telehealth.
Sen consultation satisfy the
requirements of.
Of this bill so we may want to
address that to some degree
and then on page eight we're
talking about a a hot and E. R.
emergency room in the hospital
now the the language in the bill
says physician.
They health care providers says
physician and so on is that your
intense that it's this is only
going to apply for physicians or
what.
A nurse practitioner or PA that
may be working in an emergency
room you yeah for sure no that's
a good point and similarly.
Senator guy restaurants built
wasn't just for teachers it was
for school personnel so for sure
know that cats I appreciate
that.
Okay just a couple more in the
fines in the in the in the lower
section of the bill it seems
that there are fines outlined
for psychiatric hospitals and
outpatient treatment facilities
but is there not is there not
any sort of fines or penalties
for an emergency room at a
hospital okay that's in intent
okay.
And then maybe just two more
things the is far there's a
provision where it says the the
patient comes into the hospital
and then if they have a suicidal
ideation they've got to
you know go to the the psych
ward or whatever but but if if
the hospital doesn't have those
additional right right of that
deal with that situation okay
and then last point the law
enforcement academy.
the Law Enforcement Academy has
a certain amount of hours per I
think it's two year cycle I
can't remember if it's a year
earlier two year cycle and I
think we have in my opinion I
think we've we've kind of over
regulated and so we've we've
taken up all of the flexibility
of their their pie so to speak
and I'm not sure if if they have
the ability to fit in more more
prescribed a training because
what they don't have is they
don't have a slice of the pie
and it says you know Hey this is
four hours for you know whatever
is the the biggest need of of
the year.
Especially with mental health
and so I would just maybe
already looked into this but yes
make sure they have the
availability to provide that
that training for long.
Those are excellent excellent
thank you thank you that's very
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Schmidt is and
may have Senator Gallegos
followed by Senator tone.
Mr chairman center o'neill thank
you first offer throw me a bone
mentioning some very good
legislation those bipartisan
also like what you're doing here
I was just ask our fax last week
to be a on a board for
telehealth who's trying to deal
with this specifically.
Just to understand I hear Lea
County we've had three suicides
recently due to the COVID issue
but I just want to give some
stats and I I you probably know
this already this came out
yesterday talking about New
Mexico we've had five hundred
thirty six deaths by suicide and
this ranks as number one in the
nation in it's just really
Barker some to me.
Dr Scrase one time and told some
superintendents that his job was
COVID ratio not suicide ratio
and I think that they go hand in
hand what we when we listen to
these kids or even adults that
are having suicide tendencies we
need to take it very very
serious because we may not get a
second chance to talk to him so
I'm really interested saying how
of your redraft this how it
looks when you bring it back to
us but I just want to thank you
for always looking out for kids
and and find ways to protect
people so with that Mr Chairman
Cheryl you.
Thank you.
can I ask Senator can I follow
up the five hundred and thirty
six was that this past year like
what year was that this is this.
Mr Mr Mr
it shows New Mexico twenty
twenty okay because as the five
hundred thirty six and that's
the highest in the nation
probably percentage wise if
nothing all while okay what an
upgrade per hundred thousand
population is twenty four point
nine eight and it even gives a
in their discussion is.
When we find it really quick us
all does.
Is like one suicide every.
Sixteen minutes of sixteen hours
on the average one person dies
by suicide every sixteen hours.
Thank.
Huge
don't mind sending this to you
if you'd like that be great just
yes really good detail not good
detail but remember all of the
detail we need to realize how
serious it is to our state so
I'm thank you senator and I was
quick to point out that miss
Carlson after she called me up
led by I just order this is a
real issue in our state but
those are some stunning
statistics so thank you Senator.
Thank you I'll get to shortly
thank you okay are you thank you
senator senator dole.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing.
First this bill which addresses
a very important problem.
With respect to the F. I on the
bottom of page to the top of
page three it mentions that.
The two remaining counties so
most of Bernalillo were category
rises mental health storage
areas.
Finding suicide response
coordinators.
And to pair with the license
behavior health.
All others would be a major
challenge well as you know
senator.
Several years ago the voters
passed the Zachary Texas is
seventeen eighteen million
dollars right because this
problem a function of money
refund check is can't find
qualified people well that's
with we can pursue that but that
is a excellent point because
there should be the for at least
in those in in our in our county
there should be some funding
available but of course my
concern with reading the
analysis was no this was while
the fiscal aid impossible to
implement so that's what we're
gonna come back with with a
better plan how to make this
successful with thanks for
bringing that up and I can take
that up with the you know powers
that be.
No and those that with that
area.
Hello again thank you Senator
for.
Address addressing this very
critical issue and I think you
Mr chair thanks thank you
senator Tom.
So with that we're good if
you're thank you Senator o'neill
thanks for for engaging in this
dialogue on the issue and we
look forward to your services to
thank you Sir thank you.
So members will plan will go
noted Senator souls.
For Senate bill one sixteen
unleaded fuel sales in airports
and then we'll go to to my two
bills.
The psychology compact and the
non pharmacists use insignias.
And then we'll take a Senator
Tallman and senator mills bill
and senator loans.
So was good you Senator souls
for Senate bill one sixteen.
Thank you Mr chair up when we're
introducing legislation every
once a while you have a building
built like a report and you'll
notice is what the short is
built out there and it doesn't
really have a great hold for
where it ought to be heard
that's part of how it ended up
in your committee I'm sure
I didn't think this bill would
generate much interest but I
actually have had calls
newspapers are calls more point
around I've had calls from
pilots and as many of you know I
while small airplanes and my
little airplane runs best on
eighty octane unleaded fuel.
It used to have that regularly
available and no longer do the
only thing that is available to
me at an airport is a hundred
octane leaded fuel many of us
think that years ago we got rid
of leaded fuel out of our fuel
systems and it's plain not true.
Their point we still have and it
is the only fuel that's
available at airports is wedded
actually has worked well let me
in it that what we used to be
putting in cars as a result of
organised by expert and I are
going to stick mostly to the
health and safety aspects but we
there is information and data
that the lead content in soil
samples and other things around
point is higher than surrounding
airports lead is something that
is cumulative in the body but
among young children.
It's a real concern also read in
your airplane fuels trends the
owl spark plugs the only option
that many small airplane owners
like you were talking about just
an engineer points turbine
engines are tired a different
system but the only option that
I have is either to run the
hundred octane leaded fuel in my
airplane or I need to carry with
me up to the airport by stopping
at some gas stations have it
sometimes called recreational
fuel but ninety two octane
unleaded no alcohol fuel we
carried that out that would be
Ghimire point
as a result yup that's more
expensive that's more difficult
but we have problems with if I
travel I can't do that and I
have to them but let me deal
with my airplane I also have
problems with my spark plugs
potentially powering causing an
accident and as a result this
particular bill is to allow
airports to so I'm limited on
alcohol no alcohol fuel at the
airport most many experienced
operators when they buy fuel
from the big oil companies are
restricted to sell only their
fuel and they do not offer
unleaded fuel for smaller planes
like B. I have with me an expert
in this area red Honda is the
owner of a brown aviation
specialist in Los crucis is work
for the experimental aircraft
association he is an expert on
lots of things with airplanes
but particularly engines fuel
systems of how those function
Wirth has lots of other
information so you all an
opportunity to learn something
new I know when I first started
the legislature one of the
coolest things is I got to learn
about areas I knew nothing about
and so if you give us about five
minutes or so Mr Representative
honjin so in some of the other
pieces as to how we got here and
the dangers of lead.
Fuel in the fuel systems for
airplanes so if I could Mr
Rippon and have you unmuted and
and give a little more
background in history and
particularly the help and and
date and the safety aspect so
I'm but if you'll compared the
leaded fuel.
Please go ahead.
Good afternoon folks I
appreciate you taking the time
to hear about our challenges of
in in the beginning of aviation
around the time of the Wright
brothers.
There was no aviation fuel
everybody used auto fuel same
company same field when in the
model tier model a with an
airplane.
Of then rapidly as we get to
World War two there's some very
high performance military
airplanes out there P. fifty
one's corsairs these are plans
are terrible start charged in
super charged and they did
require a very high octane fuel
to be compatible with those
those supercharged engines are
in the.
Nineteen eighties of when I
first started flying you could
get several grades of fuel you
can get an eighty eighty seven
hundred octane a hundred twenty
even a hundred and thirty octane
fuel in the late eighties early
nineties of the industry
migrated away from autumn from
gasoline type fuels because all
the military airplanes for using
jet engines all airliners
returning to jets and they use a
kerosene based fuel call
jetpay so that meant that the
market contracted dramatically
of the response to the oil that
the refiners gave us was they
said we're going to give you a
one size fits all solution.
And even though the majority of
the airplanes in the United
States or certified on the
eighty to eighty seven octane
fuels that would be regular
unleaded the same thing that you
put in your car the there
weren't there's about twenty to
thirty percent of your plans out
there that do you still do
require higher octane fuel
simply because they're super
charged or are turbocharged so
they locked us all and in one
particular category and said
everybody gets to use hundred
octane fuel now the on the let
it verses on what let it issue
is it's very inexpensive for a
manufacturer of the fuel to
refiner the fuels such as
chevron Phillips sixty six to
simply add a tetra ethyl lead
which has been around for about
eighty years now and for them to
add that as an octane booster.
That's that's only use
unfortunately you know airplanes
consume a lot of fuel and so as
a result of having to run a
leaded
aviation fuel well we're
discharging all of that led into
the atmosphere when we fly
the stuff that's not discharged
in the atmosphere takes up the
pistons valves the of spark
plugs says a Senator souls was
speaking up and causes a a
tremendous amount of maintenance
headaches so of this this issue
was brought to the forefront in
California about a decade ago
and
They were finding all of my
considerations of.
Lead in the soil around airports
and airports are all around.
The cities in California and so
they
put a stop to it and they via a
lawsuit that was settled they
were able to not only let people
know that there was unleaded
fuel still being used and warned
them about that but it also gave
the of the suppliers at the
airports the option of using
unleaded fuels.
And that was something that they
were contractually not able to
do of the companies like chevron
and Phillips sixty only want you
to buy their aviation fuels of
we've had unleaded fuels in the
United States since the late
eighties early nineties we
haven't had lead in our fuels
for all those years so what
we're what we're asking for it's
it's it's sort of a preemptive.
Of a decision to.
Stop.
Dumping the lead into our
atmosphere and our soils.
And the unleaded fuels that
we're talking about are are
already available they're clean
they're safe they're lowcost and
they've been FAA legal.
Since nineteen eighty.
So if you have any questions any
technical questions or or
Anything that I can help you
with.
So Mr chair basically what this
is is this bill would not allow
oil company to have a contract
that says that unleaded fuel
cannot be sold their unleaded
fuel would be allowed in New
Mexico by any fixed base
operator they could not be
prevented from doing so so that
of the seventy percent of the
general aviation market the
comply on unleaded recreational
auto fuel ninety two octane
octane with no alcohol that
would be allowed to be sold
without preemption and with that
will stand for questions.
Anybody in the audience cover
that wants to speak on this for
or against.
We don't have anyone three
present this let's go to the
committee then.
I just.
The question about the way it's
framed as senator souls maybe
you can start off by I mean the
way your bill is framed as to
is.
The sale of fuel and therefore
shall not be prohibited.
But as I understand from you is
not being prohibited now by any.
The engine need or anything it's
just a companies are refusing to
carry into is that what's going
on.
Mr chair that's essentially
what's going on is the companies
that are providing fuel at the
airport will not allow anyone to
sell unleaded fuel at the
airport.
Therefore you know they we have
only led fuel available to us
because there is a preemption by
the big companies this bill
would prevent them from
preempting sale of other tools.
Who still runs the airports.
Of the airports are often run by
local
entities in Los crucis it's run
by the city of Los crucis that
grants an F. B. O. what fixed
based operator the ability to
run their that the space
operator one of the ones in Los
crucis I think cells built sixty
six and they are prevented by
the Phillips sixty six company
from selling unleaded auto gas
what we are hoping will happen
with this is that cities and
communities at airports we'll
put up self serve unleaded
ninety two octane no welcome
whole fuel available for the
general aviation market that
would greatly increase in this
system will talk about with
other communities but increase
general aviation increase
tourism in the New Mexico lots
of others we have a map that
shows all of where you can buy
this unleaded autumn fuel for
airplanes in New Mexico has not
at any of our airports well
small airport for their airplane
owners are looking for those
places to put the good fuel into
their plans so they're not
putting the leaded fuel in they
will go right over New Mexico to
go to other states where they do
have those options.
So I understood from your expert
witness Senator.
It be able the company until of
sixty six let's say.
That only will sell you leaded
fuel.
Because it's so cheap to
manufacture let it you'll
compare design that it says is
that the the issue.
No.
Not really what they what is
their I'm there leaded fuel
costs on the order of five to
six dollars per gallon.
They don't want any competition
and so they have exclusive
agreements with their expense
operators that they cannot sell
this other this other fuel cells
for about three dollars a gallon
sometimes about half of what
they're getting for it and they
are pre empting the local ones
from selling the unleaded fuel
that's better for airplanes and
is half to two thirds the cost
of what they're selling.
Senator souls and final question
using this the way you frame
this
cannot be prohibited will open
the door for for the and
letting.
Mr chair in the yes I think so
and again it's following what
happened with that lawsuit out
in California we're now we are
many reports that you can get
the the unleaded fuel for
aviation uses.
Okay.
Well let's go to the committee
then we have the I guess Senator
schmidti Senator gonna go
Senator synthetics Senator
Tallman.
Senator.
Keep your question this brief
and to the point please call us
yeah I just have one question
and this is a enforcement
You know it there's no penalty
or fine or anything have how how
would this be enforced.
Mr chair and and Senators metes
this would be a state law and so
if somebody were preventing the
fixed base operator from
offering the other fuel somebody
could bring a suit and it would
be enforced in the courts
because this will become law.
Okay so Mr Chairman etcetera so
this would be a I miss I'm
assuming it would be like just
the civil a civil infraction not
a criminal.
The how that would work.
Mr Chairman representative that
is my belief that this would not
be criminal to to do so but it
would be more on the civil side
okay thank you Senator and thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator schmidti Senator gave
us.
Thank you Mr Senator Mr Chairman
souls I was in your committee
earlier.
But I was gonna ask you just
real quick couple questions so
the unleaded at the airport
is has to be the ninety two
octane did you say no alcohol
like the ten percent off call
there in Santa Fe when I get up
there I pick it up at Sam's and
it's got ten percent ethanol in
their you is that what you're
saying you cannot have at the
airport is that correct.
Mr chair and senator almost all
airplanes there is a concern
about the alcohol content my
airplane has only a hundred
horsepower and once you get up
here to Santa Fe with the
altitude that our powers off and
drop down to somewhere around
seventy five percent of my
hundred horsepower and the the
alcohol is not as energy dense
as straight gasoline and so if I
lose another one or two percent
I can't why and in and out of
Santa Fe but I doubt defer to my
experts who can speak
specifically about alcohol in
aviation fuels.
Yes so what we're talking about
is the unleaded fuel that what
was typically available for the
last thirty or forty years only
recently they've started using
corn based ethanol as a
supplement for our fuels and it
does have a little bit less
energy density at
what the FAA has done.
Has been extensive testing on.
Regular unleaded fuels without
optional and they've determined
that there's no detrimental
effect to their place
performance safety reliability
and and right now currently
there are fifty eight.
Engine types and about a hundred
and thirty nine airframes that
are approved to use a regular.
Unleaded.
Although based fuel without.
The ethanol in it and we we
actually have several gas
stations that sell what we call
the pure gas or the or the of
the fuel without ethanol in it
here in the Los crucis area
that's true across the street
across the state and of that
it's also called marine fuel or
a recreational fuel so
power boaters fishermen
snowmobile
into CS they all ATV people they
all use of this recreational
fuel and it's it's available in
almost every state so this is
the same kind of fuel it's the
fuel that you use to buy.
Before they added the ethanol.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator an expert witness I
actually wondered about that
because my truck a pickup only
got about twenty five miles a
gallon when I get to Santa Fe I
dropped about twenty miles to
the gallon and I know we're
trying to stay green and and
keep things
Safer or less emissions but I
found it odd that uh would be
considering that for planes and
not for vehicles and I know you
know the the biodiesel is
another option not for planes
but for other vehicles it takes
some of the emissions out I just
a I just thought it was odd that
we don't have anything no we're
not going towards George
batteries for for planes or
anything like that the we're
still dependent on you are.
Okay well that's coming they
they don't have your planes that
are flying entirely on electric
but that's for another time okay
well and I appreciate that I
didn't know that something that
large could handle some the
capacity so but anyway that's
where I was going to just trying
to figure out because I've seen
it in my vehicle and I I just
wonder the value if I can get
twenty five miles a gallon on
the old stuff I'm getting twenty
miles a gallon now I don't know
the we're saving a lot because
I'm still having to buy more
fuel so anyway that's what my
question was I was really
worried about that at all piece
in keeping that ninety two
percent ninety two octane in
above so thank you know you
thank you senator Graham Senator
thanks followed by Senator
Tallman.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator for bringing this
forward so
my understanding is that some of
the older.
Small planes require a rich fuel
mix
and of the mixture of oil with
the gas and I have my father has
had planes in the course.
You he's quite dated it's ninety
he's ninety six so his plans for
old.
Of.
With this
Fuel requirement be relevant to
the age of the plane.
Mr chair I'd have to defer to my
experts Representative Han.
Your.
Thank you Senator that's a very
good question the up.
The there is a little bit of oil
consumption on all internal
combustion engines the larger
aircraft engines did burn a
little bit of oil
but that's that's really just a
function of the condition of the
engine as far as the rich in
lean issue that you you talked
about you probably if you flew
in a smaller plane you probably
remember your father actually
reaching or leaning the mixture
as she was flying in yes.
In the year in many of the
airplanes that we fly we still
have carburetors and we actually
we have the ability as we go up
in altitude the air fans out
just like when you go from say a
Los crucis up to the cloud
crossed you know you're a little
short of breath so the airplane
is a little short of breath and
it requires less fuel so we have
manual of make sure controls
that we use and that's something
that's taught of you know in all
your flight training.
What the.
Very modern airplanes have is
actually still injection systems
and and that make sure a leaning
function is automated with
computers just like it is in
your car today but yes the
manager plans to have
manual make sure controls and it
doesn't affect of the of the let
all of fuel doesn't affect that
at all as a matter of fact we
have found over the bout the
last thirty years that the
engines are actually running all
of a little bit stronger and
they're actually running a
little bit cooler and that's a
good thing an air cooled engine
so it's it's not a problem
whatsoever.
Thank you for that response
thank you center thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senators so Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator.
Quick question that except a
brief answer.
you mentioned California the oil
companies the.
Doing the same thing at all
throughout the United States
religious discrimination against
New Mexico.
Senator I'm not sure that I
could say whether they're up
purposely discriminating against
New Mexico that aviation fuel
market is fairly small as far as
their total business plan and
they just find it easier to not
have to compete when they're
selling whether to typically
fairly small amounts compared to
their auto fuel but again I
would defer to my experts
Representative Han.
That question Sir Tallman the of
it's it's basically I would
characterize it more of those
monopolistic practice of they're
forcing us into one product and
we don't really have the option
to use any other products so
it's like if you know the shoe
stores only gonna sell boots and
you can only buy it but you
can't get attention.
And we're saying gosh we got
like to have the option to buy
issues.
This is a nationwide policy it's
yeah it's it's typically
nationwide and the lawsuit in
two thousand and ten that was
settled in two thousand and
fourteen in California was
against twenty three refineries
twenty three petroleum producers
and it was settled in the favor
of the of the plaintiffs are to
be able to find these very low
lead feels unleaded fuels of
without any contract role of
prohibitions.
Well thank you thank you Mr
chair it's all I have thank you.
What is the will of the
committee regarding the Senate
bill one sixteen Thomas will
move to to pass.
Seconded by Senator Stefanics.
Any further debate or
discussion.
Seeing.
Kerry will call the roll.
On Senate bill one one six
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez still going on.
Thanks yes.
Senator Tallman yes and you know
yes.
Congratulations Centers souls
you.
You may still be able to buy one
living yes there were some day
good luck thank you and I hope
you all found this interesting
in that area that you didn't
have a whole lot of background
you know a little bit more about
using their play engine so thank
you.
Thank you Mr hunt for coming
thank you okay members of
Senator Tallman and ensuring the
gavel over to use the
metaphorical gatal and I will
President in the next two bills.
The psychology come.
Is the first one Senate bill one
nineteen.
Okay thank you Mr.
Mr chair that the next bill says
Senate bill.
One nineteen thank Callagy
interjection inter
jurisdictional compact.
I go ahead and Senator.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
The.
New Mexico Association
psychologists for several years
now has been seeking to have a
New Mexico join those states
that.
Created a compact among
themselves.
All the states surrounding New
Mexico belong to that compact
compact and a number of other
states also I think you've all
been provided with a map.
The.
This issue and
Gives you a chance to to see
just see the extent in which
this compact has grown when we
first heard this bill in New
Mexico is going to be easy.
For the state to join the
compact each year more cities
have joined Intel now expert
witness can can tell us exactly
how many more well over.
Fifteen states belong to the
compact would come does is it
makes it possible for
professionals.
To practice their profession
with a minimum of of the.
The barriers.
Across state lines that crossing
state lines can be physical that
is a.
A psychologist from Los crucis
who as of.
The number of patients in the
past so my travel to el Paso to
see those patients or the
patients from.
Texas may come here but
for.
The Lang or maybe telehealth
there are number of ways that
people can cross state lines but
it also means somebody from
Texas who's licensed in the
state of Texas who's a
psychologist there wanted to
also practice in New Mexico.
Being part of the compact makes
a much smoother transition to
get your license and to be
approved here in New Mexico.
That's the nature of the compact
and
We tried for several years to
get in the past year we've
passed nursing compact really
this year we pass the physical
therapist contact there are
several others that are awaiting
submitted this been developed to
try to make the availability of
these highly specialized
services the more widespread and
my ex for witnesses Dr David
Matthews psychologist here in
New Mexico.
Mr Chairman calling in members
of the committee our thank you
are.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino court
hearing this bill again
the last time we put out this
bill we were just talking about
the have been telehealth all
psychology
process right and of course
since then this Madam and we
have learned a lot from and you
all are worried a lot about how
to do online that's so for the
legislature are basically
everybody in New Mexico now is
large do online psychotherapy
and it works that's the that's
one of the good things we I I'm
supervising people at the the
counseling center at the wins
women's resource center at UNM
my background briefly I'm I'm I
I've been practices psychologist
for thirty five forty years ago
remember
and our university our work with
the I've been on the board like
downers and I also am on the
rules committee of the of the
four standards.
And
what we what we're finding is
that it's all psychology is very
attractive because a lot of what
we do is pop there B. we've got
competence Alliance
Representative in line so we now
are able to talk with people and
no one can interfere with our
session so we can maintain
confidentiality.
And I'm going to say that we are
never going to go back to all of
our sessions being and an office
there are so many advantages to
being able to do child
psychology so sometimes we will
want to have people come into
our office in my practice if I
were going to be seeing people
as I would want to see them for
a session or two.
Are in person and then I would
set up tell site.
To be able to continue to see
them and I know that phone
therapy is is pretty active so
this this bill reversing any
form of health technology which
could be by phone or by zoom or
any other methods we get
probably now strategies like
that the news these days.
As we know it works we know that
it increases access and there
right now of course we can do to
all psychology throughout the
state of New Mexico
So it increases rural access
what we can't do is do it it is
the market prostate lines and
one of my students provides a
really good example of this
about two years ago she
graduated thirty years ago the
University of New Mexico our PhD
we're back east and was working
on this problem all along the.
And she was seeing a person who
I think working with federal
government he retired and wanted
to Virginia.
so she could no longer seeing
under the district lobby a
person's license.
But he was in Virginia and so
she called me to see if I could
find burdens and software and
help her get license in Virginia
because the only way she could
legally speaking out in this
other state.
Was to be licensed in all
states.
I got another call from her last
week one is our nation our
credentials because you might
get an E. passport and passport
is the mechanism by which she
will be able to hello site and
region you with that particular
client and
the surrounding states Maryland
are and and be able to do that
did you tell site in that in
that way so what it does is that
what the bill does it's two
parts one of them is you can get
a license for temporary practice
rebound of the state and that is
limited to thirty days.
And if you happen to do if you
have to see somebody at ten
midnight until ten minutes after
midnight that counts is to date
sell any portion of the day that
you are seeing someone in the
state Townsend today once you
get thirty days you're gonna
longer practice in another
state.
They now you're seeing that
person in the state.
You can then we're tell
psychology in all states or it
hasn't system are recognizing
licensed people in another state
so my my student more former
student.
Was from the district of
Columbia which counts as far
home state.
And she was practice the and
that the person who left in the
state of Virginia so last
receiving states lines of the
bill is about
Receiving states and on state
programs for the individual
and the mechanism for this is
that a commissioners that out
there are now fifteen members
mission
and Trevor is it possible to
bring to me or you but at the
map because I think it's really
slow or if all you have in front
of you that's a picture.
Issue Russian psychotherapy is
also really good idea and
currently we don't have the
ability to discipline people in
other states if they were if
they were practicing
Yes I'm professional fashion so.
What happens with this is that
if a person is it is practicing
unethically.
The receiving state let's say a
person and receiving state hi at
complaints that they're bored
working ways mission mission
themselves.
Someone that Dan Matthews is
practicing this later on the
other states are coordinates
this border crossed the aids
through the commission.
and this but the state's
retaining.
There are there are regulation
authority it's very clear in the
bill that you are practicing
under the scope of practice in
the state here we go.
so you can you can see here that
New Mexico is surrounded and
And this is our workforce at
issue if you look at your FIR
and look at this map
there are states according to
the I. B. O. H. access
bureau all services in New
Mexico is limited thirty two
thirty three counties contain
all or part designated health
professional shortage areas for
mental health so you're you may
be familiar with that H. B. as a
designation group they're short
for mental health additionally
one point one million New Mexico
residents live in the county for
the entire entire county is
designated as a storage area for
mental health so if you look at
those counties that are that
around around the borders of New
Mexico they are going to have an
increased workforce
by just having access roots
shoot your child psychology
That's fine however I.
What
I think the Metcalfe says that
so much so the important thing
is the board still find the best
one in the states
The
Work provided one the board
decided examiners I received the
email this morning richer of
course I haven't heard
this at our last you do need
for Instagrammers meeting were
unanimously endorsed sidetracked
initially began with Paul and
your support.
I also have a letter from the
department of defense
their individual who are who
follows this these crime
legislation and
he says on behalf of the
borrower defense I am writing
support the policy changes press
the one nineteen SB one ninety.
Bill that addresses licensing
munitions back not service
members and their families
I talked this morning and that's
the you know as the best behind
not one house bill ninety.
as military families move the
state say they often set up
relations in one state thank you
continue to see they're saying
they're us in this state so not
your is very interested in the
house they're also military
psychologist who are able to
follow service members say say
so there are a lot of of
advantage is the best
One little aspect we're gonna
talk about this brought I'm sure
more in judiciary but.
The way this more to set up is
each state provides members of
the board to the commission that
that provides the regulations
and support and they have
qualified immunity under the
provisions of this of the
statute
I don't think that's what we're
looking for pursuing you can see
the individual psychologist you
can sue the board in the
receiving state reporting all
stated there if there's a
regulatory issue
cell there probably is not.
Problem with without unity
because
I have received
not only that longer I think
that's the basic outlines of
what this what this does and and
I I think it's an advantage
and I would.
Richard and Judy your Senator
Ortiz in on the injure thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman you are muted.
Mr chair you have any other
witnesses.
No we will stand for questions
or an audience COVID.
Okay is there anyone that and
the audience so wishing to speak
in
opposition to.
The Senate bill one nineteen.
Mr Chairman.
We can turn on and off and be
cold.
Are you in that position and
support.
Support of changes to this bill.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you.
Michael Doyle thank you
honorable chairman and committee
members thank you for the sun to
speak hi and I'm speaking.
Not so much in opposition or
good things bills can do but
contrary to what the doctor said
regarding immunity this in this
bill talks about protecting New
Mexico citizens and that is very
good there are some ways this
bill does not protect New Mexico
citizens and deprives them moms
some rights the first mainly
dealing with psychologists
themselves the bill contains on
page.
The five lines eighteen through
twenty four venue present
provision that would require
anyone who want to make a claim
against this committee you go to
the principal place of business
of that commission or where it's
located the main office it
doesn't have any venue within
the entire state of New Mexico
so what that would do is for
somebody.
Mexico to go to the commission's
place business that's not listed
in the bill implied it's Georgia
because there's venue and the
federal District Court in order
this could be easily fixed by
allowing then you within the
state of New Mexico the new one
New Mexico courts to have.
Jurisdiction as well.
Second there's qualified
immunity defense this is on page
thirty five twenty one twenty
two to twenty five in page
thirty six one content this is
this commission immunity for
anything except for intentional
willful.
Or one misconduct instead of the
regular standard of care
ordinary care that people have
to be responsible for entities
are to be reform spots will for
in their old negative phone
negligence finally on page forty
six one twenty one to twenty
four there separability of this
contact but
what happens is if New Mexico
courts provide any part of this
compact unconstitutional a
violation of the law the whole
contact goes down instead of
just the portion of the bill
that the courts provide
improper.
I need to fix would just say
that the courts could.
Sever the improper portion thank
you for the remainder of the
bill.
As I said I'm not opposed to the
the bill itself but parts of the
bill that can be changed in face
to make it better and find a
record for New Mexico thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr doll and the Mr
chair do you have a.
The comments.
Mr Chairman did you want us to
come in a to reach public
comment you want to wait until
they've all been.
thank you this morning he was
the only person that opposition
any other.
Persons in the audience in
opposition one.
I think you're correct Mr
chairman.
Hearing none of go ahead Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and doctor Matthews may want to
add significantly to what I say
but.
Sessions with internees in the
state about this issue and and.
You read over those of the
language.
That Mr Doyle and and other
attorneys objected to.
It clear that the compact and
self.
Thank you for which the venue
would be whatever the
headquarters of the compact is
not any any action that may be
taken against individuals
colleges.
Does is it acts like a broker.
Putting the psychologists in one
state.
Practice in another state it
doesn't it leads up to the roof
of the state to license and
psychologists in the first place
they still retain the authority
over that psychologist so if you
wanted to sue the board of the
New Mexico psychologists for
actions taken by in New Mexico
psychologist practicing
somewhere else you could sue
them here in New Mexico if you
want to sue the commission.
This and I'm not sure to what
extent that would have made all
the compact is doing is making
possible psychologists licensed
in one state to be able to
practice in another it's not
making any decisions about
whether the US colleges
preparation.
And and training and supervision
is an adequate to leave that up
to the individual states
and so
those sections that he objects
to really have to do with the
way the compact functions.
Then the individual practice of
a psychologist or individual
state board and maybe a doctor
Matthews could could add to my
comments.
Yes just give greatly the the
the ability to deregulate the
the practice through licensure
through an action against the
persons licenses and or or a
result person's license or to
send a psychologist is not
affected at all by this by this
not compact
compact down as what are
individual licensing boards
cannot use I think you're
compacts that actually do things
that could be done are across
the country by five point but no
site work can regulate
interstate commerce I think the
alternate need to the compact
would have to be federal
legislation or something like
that I I'm not a lawyer I don't
know about that
I do here lawyers and we got a
letter from about this issue
from a of a law firm of page
twelve Bergen words which
represents site at all I think
has begun mission that's been
sent out and we asked them about
some of these issues because we
were rather I'm up
let me read the operative part
is really short we think it
appropriate to add that if asked
by the commissions are paid
would be the amendments to the
venue and unity provisions of
the compact would be materially
inconsistent with the compact
would disqualify New Mexico for
membership in the national
average.
I'd say so yes there are
advantages to sidetrack as I
hope we have been able to
present them the the settlement
all kinds of issues I'm not
about building your community
because students to other places
that you don't probably need to
say that the commission and the
commission is an integral from
ofsted individual members are I
mean lawsuit because at work
Regis that this so
basically if you pass it with if
this bill were amended
then I'm gonna be back here in
two years if I.
I I'll be back here two years St
we now need to go back they got
both men's.
You're you're you're still muted
the Mr Chairman.
Use any of follow up comments on
Mr chair.
The document you said it very
well and I believe that I'm not
sure the committee got that
letter the referred to it but I
received a copy of I thought we
shared with the committee.
I don't believe I received that.
Is that something you want.
The.
You Secretary to share with
everyone.
Yes.
I believe Kim said she received
it but I.
Well we'll have a.
If it's you so desire will have
can I share with everyone.
Mr chair yes.
You can I don't know.
See you on.
She's on call Senator.
Question please.
Well it has to do and so a
letter to doctor Matthews read
from my side it might have been
shared with the committee
related but perhaps it was it is
so critical and you know.
Mr chair.
Yes.
That the handouts we received
the committee analysis on your
bill and we received two
handouts but they both were
exactly the same so probably the
letter didn't get sent.
Okay.
Thank you.
will proceed to.
The audience anyone in the
support of this bill wishing to
speak.
I guess.
Hearing will now turn to
comments from.
Thank you Mr Kaufman has.
Thank you Mr chairman
respectfully I apologize I I did
the raise hand function I
apologize not.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me this opportunity my
name is Max Kauffman mental
health attorney and advocate and
that Albuquerque also sit on the
board of I'm not in New Mexico
National Alliance on mental
illness I'm here on behalf of
ninety in support of this bill.
And I do think it's going to be
a great thing you know for New
Mexico want to diversify the
availability of specialists
access to services and rural
communities and especially
during a time like this during
the COVID however you're not me
would like to express a couple
concerns one you know number
does see the value of in person
tellement on health and we don't
want this to in some way to
manage that value however I do
recognize with Dr Mathew said
and perhaps this bill does
mitigate that to some extent by
you know limiting it to a thirty
calendar day you know of it of
in person at a telehealth so you
know I with that there's the
other concerns I think you may
be more the purview of doctor
Matthews in the board of the
sect all this examiners is that
you know when providers come to
the state to proprietors of the
first the first and are the
unique aspects of our state it's
culture it's Neil.
It was twenty back sorry yeah.
But trump's.
So it's you know when I take the
bar anyone takes part before you
practice in the state you have
to take a course with one day
class that contextualizes the
practice of law in the state and
it's very beneficial and that
may be you know something for
the board of psychologists to
address but not me does that
would be a tremendous benefit to
the implementation of this bill.
Yes.
For this bill thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Kaufman anyone else
wishing to speak in support of
a.
This bill.
I guess hearing on when I'll
turn to members of the committee
any members of the committee
wishing to speak.
I don't see.
Being.
I don't see any hands up.
Well sorry so Senators thanks go
ahead.
Mr chair when you're ready for a
motion I'll make a motion.
I'm
ready we have a motion I would
would you pass on Senate bill
one nineteen.
And I'll look I'll second that.
And the penny please call the
roll.
On Senate bill one nineteen
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Yes to pass.
Yes.
I can look read a little
Senator.
Yes X. yes.
Yes
you know yes.
We have to pass a.
Senator.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
now.
Your next bill say Senate bill
one twenty two.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this this is a very
simple ability to.
We address the.
Yes last year.
And I thought we'd gotten it all
the way through and then I
believe it was
there was talking be interned
the the issue here is that.
Currently in the in the statutes
the use of the
That little symbol which used to
be for pharmacists is limited
to.
The actual prescription drugs.
Dispensers pharmacies.
And.
Like many things like the barber
pole is become you know the
strike called legislative
barbershops its use in a lot of
different contexts to to to make
a point and in this case the R.
X. that has been used in
connection with.
A copy shop
that is part of the businesses
that the Gaddis family and
Albuquerque has had for many
years to rents pharmacy.
And they they were they were
told they couldn't use that
little are acceptable for their
coffee shop which is remedy
coffee shop.
And it's clear that nobody going
to the coffee shop is going to
believe that there.
Getting a prescription drugs of
any kind of a little less
caffeine is considered a drug
which I suppose in in in for
some of us in this become our
drug of choice but this is
simply an attempt at making
clear that that the the use of
that symbol.
It is not restricted to.
Pharmacists per se and
with that I have an expert
witness who is going to get us
to actually is the one who
brought this legislation to me
and I believe the of pharmacy
board is given the okay to this
but let her speak to that.
Okay thank you Mr chair and now
hear from the expert witness go
ahead.
Hello thank you chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Monique at us and I am Duran
central pharmacy in Albuquerque
and
as as the senator discussed this
insignia
refers to the the symbol R. acts
which has become a common usage
symbol for health and the R. X.
insignia has the ball to have
many different meetings and is
no longer representative of a
pharmacy it is been used to
describe health foods there
something called our explorer a
big national company
there's no pharmaceuticals in
that granola bar that I'm aware
of
it's been used to describe
nutrition supplements and
there's even walking trails in
Bernalillo county that are
called R. X. trails and I don't
think they're dispensing any
prescriptions on those trails
either and that is even the New
Mexico pharmacists Association
uses this symbol as part of
their logo and they don't
dispense drugs either so I'm
just asking for that insignia to
be removed thank you.
Thank you.
This does is anyone else any
other a escort witnesses Senator
you Mr chairman this is our only
expert witness on this okay
thank you Mr chair anyone
wishing to speak in opposition
of the.
Senate Bill.
One two two.
Hearing anyone wishing to speak
in favor of Senate bill one
twenty two.
The hearing when I'll turn to
members of the of the of the
committee anyone wishing to
speak in favor of this bill.
Mr Chairman there is somebody
with her hand raised over here.
On the screen.
Okay yes terra.
Thank you Jerry and everybody on
the committee I am
I like I said there's a few
bills that kind of pertaining to
my situation from obviously like
very concerned about something
what about art Act used in
medical cannabis
when those like you expect to a
pharmacist to be professional
follow the rules and if they're
using our X. in cannabis and not
being professional you would
want to hold them to the same
standards as a pharmacy
so yeah I like I am for this
bill because I think that like
not even cannabis if the federal
government doesn't want to
recognize
Cannabis as a medicine than
cannabis shouldn't electors
pharmacy this there then they
shouldn't be allowed to use that
as well and that's the only
thing I have to say.
Okay well thank you Mr more
highs you're welcome.
For your comments
the members of the committee
wishing to speak on behalf of
the Senate bill one twenty two.
Hearing none I.
Is.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair just one
quick question Senator
In the presentation I believe
you said that the board of
pharmacy is given this bill the
the thumbs up is that correct.
The status on that.
I'm I right now the the board of
pharmacy has to go by the
statute and they haven't
indicate they have given me
several extensions until this
could be changed I don't think
they've taken at an official
position on it but I am a
pharmacist I've also been the
president of the pharmacists
Association and I have never
heard any opposition to my
knowledge on this thank you.
Okay thank you senator.
Okay thank you any other
questions Senator.
the others senators wishing to
speak on behalf of Senate bill
one twenty two.
Okay hearing none of.
Please call the roll.
Motion
lotion.
Mr Chairman.
The house I'll second it so we
have a.
Motion and a second please call
the roll pending.
On Senate bill one twenty two
Senator goes.
Yes.
The.
Senator McKenna.
Yes it.
Yes.
At that in here in the past.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Pino.
Do we go back to the passes
and summers said that those.
I'd say yes.
Is run and senator would you
rate it I had said yes for the
third time I believe you said
yes on one record that Senator
Schmidt is yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
With one excused.
Mr chair.
You have to do pass thank you
very much.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for this.
Turn it over you present next
one Mexico as a line.
Okay so we'll go to your bill
and then we'll we'll finish up
today with Mrs Senator Lopez's
Bill.
go ahead Senator Senate bill one
twenty four.
Thank you Mr chair
please please present this bill
first off Mr.
Sure we have an amendment.
That everyone should have a copy
of is that correct.
Well if can we throw it up and
what I it's not a it's a very
simple amendment I can explain
it.
They're mostly technical in
nature.
I'm still looking through my
documents here.
There it it's up on the screen
now.
Yes there is.
So.
Mr a.
Chair we up.
The the pizza.
Fourteen day claim claim.
language in all the necessary
sections of the bill.
And also a page to line six and
Sir by an eligible provider
other than a pharmacy and I'm
like what Page three line
eighteen after the word by in
insert an eligible provider Mr
chair this does not so there's
is technical changes and doesn't
the.
Change the thrust.
For the of the of the bill.
Okay.
What Senator let us
Let's hold your your amendments
are just a second and give you a
chance to explain was bill
itself is about and then we'll
we'll entertain the the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair and on Senate
bill one twenty four
The following is to as you know
independent community pharmacies
are working very hard to find
health care support in all of
their communities.
And the pandemic has only
increased our financial and
operational stress like so many
small businesses Mr chair small
independent pharmacists are
struggling it's David versus
Goliath.
Its main street versus Wall
Street.
This proposal shortens.
The time frame.
From thirty days to fourteen
days is the length of time
required for health care plans
to reimburse pharmacy providers
or to inform them of a denial.
Fourteen day payment period more
is what health plans are
currently doing to be.
C. M. S. minute Medicare part D.
program requirements.
Being paid in two weeks will be
a significant benefit.
Two independent community
pharmacists.
This bill is really very
important independent community
pharmacies.
thank you very.
This is pretty straightforward
bill thank you for your time and
consideration of this bill.
and now Mr Mr chair we have a
couple of of steam.
And well qualified witnesses the
first one that will be actually
sidebars who is chair of the New
Mexico pharmacy business council
as well as the owner and
operator of to pharmacies one
that has taken one of Bloomfield
in the second.
Qualified witness is we go but
we guess who is the general
counsel for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council.
That concludes my remote.
We'll hear from the from the
witnesses thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Tom let's hear
first from actually say fourth.
She may be listening to the
webcast is throwing her a.
We we can't hear you.
I saw her name earlier.
I'm.
Is.
I think she may be listening to
the webcast.
Okay she's connecting.
We can.
Mr.
There you go are you there.
Yes do you have the webcast on.
Holidays I'm also at work in the
pharmacy so.
Budget everything here.
So sorry about that charities if
you know and members the
committee thank you so much for
hearing this built this is
probably gonna be the quickest
known simple bill that you have
on your desk today okay we are
simply asking that we be paid in
a fourteen day time frame to
match up with what others on
such a CMS for Medicare
standards already have sat on
this will help us immensely in
our cash flow that is our
biggest issue right now is cash
flow as you know we have people
that expect their medications we
pay for their medications in
advance my staff is put in an
enormous amount of hours this
last week we've already given
seven hundred doses of COVID
vaccine you can't even imagine
that over time that we've got
and I will tell you cash flow is
our biggest issue being paid up
front in that fourteen time
frame day time frame would help
us tremendously
so.
Thank you so much for your
support I apologize for my
background and everything what
we're working really hard to
service our communities and we
could really use this passing.
Thank you very much miss.
The next we have Mr Miguel
Rodriguez.
Good afternoon.
minorities Pino and members of
the committee my name's Miguel
Rodriguez counsel to the New
Mexico pharmacy business council
and I'm here to speak about
Senate bill one twenty four as
as said before it's very simple
bill the current at deadline
under New Mexico law for the
payment by health plans the.
Provider claims is thirty days
this would make a small
modification that would reduce
the amount of time to fourteen
days for the payment of
electronically submitted
pharmacy claims so it's very
narrow in scope and application
and pharmacy claims are slightly
different than most medical
claims in that they are
submitted typically
electronically and the health
plans typically affirmative we
educate them in other words
approve them at in the first
instance at the time patients
picking up their medicine at the
pharmacy so this will simply
reduce the time line for payment
to the pharmacies without
increasing the cost of the
health care itself I'm up here
as I'm available for any
questions that the chair or
committee may have thank you.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
this.
So Senator do you have anybody
else the who who.
Before we go to the public
comment you have anybody else.
Mr chair thank no I don't have
any but thanks for asking.
Let's do this let's deal with
your amendment right now before
I forget about it.
And
Could you bring that the
amendment back up again
Trevor.
Yes.
Thank you.
So and can we have a motion on
this amendment please
Representative.
of a do pass on the amendment.
Senator moved into their second.
The chairman so we have a motion
and a second is there any
discussion of this amendment.
Any questions on this is a
pending this is a point three I
think in your packet to be man
of received point to and then
maybe an email just before the
meeting began four point three
version of this.
Okay this is the one is on
display here then thank you.
Specialist one we want.
Mr chair.
Yes now I can see who's speaking
it centers of America others to
panic.
Okay Mister as just check and
see if we had time to have this
analyzed I have not gone I
apologize I was on the phone but
I just wondered if that's
something that just came out
where we the prior one the
version to analyze.
Senator.
Tell me what's the difference
between pointed to an point
three.
Your call this morning about
that was a.
Something as minor as a lot of
weird wasn't capitalized I
forget what the word was.
It was this you have ever petty.
It was is minor it was is minor
is a word needed to be
capitalized.
That was the only difference.
This Senator Gallegos said was
exactly the same as in the
earlier version that we
received.
It absolutely does not change
the substance.
And the yes.
Thank you for that answer Mr
Senator.
Thank you so this is there any
opposition within the committee
to adopting this amendment.
She will consider the bills then
Amanda and I will move to
committee discussion of the bill
itself.
Senator.
Out thank you Mr chair and thank
you senator Clemente center
renewable for bringing forward
I think small independent
pharmacies are very important
I've carried bills in the past
to support them and I'd like to
be able to have everybody
supported together thank you.
Thank you senator.
We will of the committee.
I do pass as amended and.
Senator guy in our.
Any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
real.
Senate bill one twenty four is
amended center guy goes for.
He said yes.
Senator.
Ingle Senator.
Yes to pass as amended thank
you.
Yes.
Your Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes thirty three panel yes.
Thank you Senator Tallman looks
like your your
For ensuring carried the day on
this today thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
No.
Senator Lopez in in can we get
her on.
She's a sponsor the final bill
for the day.
She's in Judiciary I can text or
an excuse to come.
That would be great thank you.
What we can take a five minute
break for waiting for Senator
Lopez to come I would appreciate
that thank you.
It is just holding place don't
turn up to the webcast refusing
to leave action in five minutes.
Senator Lopez welcome to the
committee.
Hello Mr chairman thank you so
much.
Are you ready.
People may have taken a little
bit break for awhile while we're
waiting for them to turn their
videos back on I just wanted to
remind the committee.
That we are going to try to have
the the committee meeting on
Wednesday following the floor
session.
So
it'll be a half hour after the
floor session whenever that
occurs so please be prepared for
that.
Senator penny just sent out an
initial with gender with the
five items on it for Wednesday
afternoon and given that we've
done so well today in the movie
the bills we might add one or
two more we'll see.
I
think that's a pretty good idea
actually.
Let's do that okay very good.
Okay Senator.
When we go ahead and get started
with Senate bill one twenty
seven.
Regarding family representation
and advocacy.
Okay if you'll excuse me just
one second Mr Chairman I
apologize for not the first of
course.
I apologize to make sure that
the doors closed so that it's a
little more quiet.
Okay thank you I'm good
afternoon this members of the
committee I am here in front of
you with
Senate bill one twenty seven and
what it's entitled of course it
is the family representation and
advocacy act.
Mr chairman members of the
committee just a short little
bit of history there is a task
force that was created by a
Senate Joint Memorial ten AM
back in twenty nineteen it was
tasked with recommending a new
structure and practice model for
providing high quality legal
representation for children and
families here in our state.
And the work of.
Is also Mr chairman one of the
members of the task force as was
Representative Gail Chasey of
the work of the task force ended
in a report that was.
Given to us earlier last summer
just seems not so long ago that
recommended the creation of an
office as an Adonis entity that
would allow for independent
decision making and oversight as
it related to family
representation in developing the
framework of the task force
engaged of course in a cost
benefit analysis we took some
time to to work through what
some of the issues that were
brought in front of us and here
we have the bill in front of you
and the committee Mr chairman.
And Yosemite issue supporters
that exist in our in our state
You know when we deal with
families children and families
new views neglect cases
there are different contractual
arrangements that are made
either through the AOC which is
the administrative office of the
courts and also to Mr chairman
there are contractual
arrangements that are made also
the local districts
Different judges have different
contracts so it was with the car
and light of this in different
parts of our state.
What our intent is of course is
to look as to how we can bring
all of these issues together.
We have quality representation
also Mr chairman members of the
committee in my opinion
accountability see what we truly
are doing a representing our
children and families.
You chairman I do have some
expert witnesses who are here
with me today if I may.
And ask them to also say a few
words.
The Senators some of the highest
powered expert witnesses I can
imagine so please let them
speak.
Okay I will Mr chairman of first
to start with a justice Vigil.
Thank you.
Afternoon.
C. Pino and members of the
committee my name is Barbara the
hello I am a member of the New
Mexico Supreme Court I stand
here before you in full support
of the family representation and
advocacy act Senate bill one
twenty seven.
This particular act would allow
for a structure to be
implemented in order to have the
highest quality of legal
representation in child welfare
cases for decades legal
representation has struggled due
to a lack of a centralized
office allowing for consistent
structural and accountability of
lawyers doing this work this
particular act would create an
independent office that would
enable of further oversight of
lawyers handling these cases and
as Senator Lopez mentioned this
is the result of two years of
work that was created by the
family representation Task Force
which was a legislatively
created task force which analyze
this issue over about an
eighteen year period the task
force issued a report in August
of twenty twenty and this
particular act is the offshoot
of that report that is
essentially recommended that an
independent office be created in
order to provide more oversight
more control and accountability
of lawyers representing
individuals in these cases.
And it would also allow for a
better way of managing
compensation as Senator Lopez
mentioned lawyers are paid on by
way of a contract individual
contracts around the state lows
K. contracts or administered
to the administration office of
the office of the courts as well
as individual district courts
and so there's a lack of
consistency there's a lack of
oversight there's a lack of
accountability if you will in
this league in these the in the
work of these lawyers so this
particular act would create a
family representation and
and this is the office that
would be independent of the
judiciary and that would allow
for more structure and
accountability and so with that
Mr chair TCP known members of
the committee I'll stand for any
question or would like to defer
to others of the the other
experts in support of this this
bill thank you Sir thank you
very much just just feel.
Mr chairman I also have as an
expert also judge Jennifer
Delaney.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee I am judge
Jennifer billing in the sixty
Fishel district I am also the
chair of the New Mexico Supreme
Court's family representation
Commission I was a foster parent
I am the act parents and I have
also served as an attorney for
parents use in children involved
in the child abuse neglect
system throughout my career I
want to thank Senator Lopez and
Senator justice farmer Vigil for
their time dedication and
thoughtfulness with regard to
all children's issues in the
state of New Mexico I would also
like to thank the family
representation task force
members in the family
representation commission
members who work diligently and
thoroughly and making
recommendations to you all with
regard to the creation of the
office of Family representation
and advocacy as this committee
is a where children and young
people come to foster care for
variety of reasons related to
abuse and neglect and families
become involved in the
children's court.
The New Mexico courts are
statutorily required to provide
legal representation to these
children and young people as
well as to parents guardians
guardians and custodians
involved minist administrative
office of the court has been
managing the representation of
children and parents since
nineteen ninety three there was
court appointed attorney program
with funds allocated by the New
Mexico legislature these of
course are different attorneys
then those attorneys that are
employed by the children youth
and families department which
you'll hear spoken up as
children's court attorneys to
provide this representation the
administrative office of the
courts contracts with over a
hundred internet that is the
point in time are engaged in
about fifteen hundred cases that
involve approximately twenty
four hundred children and twenty
hundred parents guardians or
custodians it is really and they
AOC as neither the staff or
resources to monitor these
contracts or to ensure quality
representation.
I knew problems.
Twenty years a number of efforts
have been launched to improve
performance primarily through
the children's quite improvement
commission well we've made some
gains it's not enough and we
have data that shows it's hard.
In two thousand thirteen the New
Mexico Supreme Court's
children's what improvement
commission conducted a study on
the quality of representation
and found that children's for
judges and clients around the
state had concerns about the
inadequacies in in equity in
representation throughout the
state in two thousand eighteen
the children's court improvement
commission in conjunction with
the administrative office of the
courts and the American Bar
Association center on children
and law conducted an assessment
of the quality of our education
for children and parents and
child abuse neglect cases I
believe the committee members
received a letter from the
director of legal representation
Mimi labor from the ABA Center
she's also with us here today
that assessment found the major
challenges with regard to high
quality representation include
inadequate oversight quarterly
retention lack of diversity in
cultural humility in act what
funding and most importantly.
Current location of the court
appointed attorney program
within the administrative office
of the courts yes concluded at
this location hinders
independent decision making an
oversight and strains the
administrative office of the
courts and the court appointed
attorney program resources the
assessment also recommended the
task force be formed to improve
the quality of representation
you are from Senator Lopez and
senior justice Miss Vigil about
the family representation Task
Force which issued its report in
July of twenty twenty and you
say you received a copy of that
report Senate bill one twenty
seven before us today adopts the
first recommendation of the task
force that the task force makes
the legislature you create the
office of Family representation
and advocacy with the structural
model pattern after the law was
the public defender if it
includes an oversight commission
and budgetary independence
Senate joint resolution that you
also sorry Senate joint
resolution eleven you will also
see this legislative session is
a constitutional amendment that
complements this bill seeking to
amend the constitution to place
this agency and the judiciary
with independence in a manner
similar to the creation of the
law office of the public
defender well the structural
model is based on the LAPD
create an independent agency and
the need to share a practice on
all will be based on evidence
based best practices of the
inter disciplinary legal team we
know the representation is
critical but we know that
outcomes can be vastly improved
with provided with the inter
disciplinary team legal
services.
Still trying will benefit from
teams consisting of lawyers
social workers navigators and
peer mentors New Mexico is way
ahead of the game with regard to
this we already have such a
model the family advocacy
program that will be adapted
into this new office there's
actually a federal five year
grants that the family advocacy
program has received in order to
accomplish this expansion.
We've covered and Catherine have
Lasky who are here today are
currently advocacy are I'm sorry
currently peer mentors with the
family advocacy program and they
will speak to you next I hope
that we leave here today with
your support this effort
understanding that it's
imperative that New Mexico
undertake the staff to provide
high quality we are presentation
to all children and parents in
New Mexico Senate bill one
twenty seven will make that a
reality working collaboratively
with CYFD and other stakeholders
we will create better long term
outcomes for children and their
families including reduce time
in foster care whether it be to
reunification guardianship or
adoption thank you members thank
you Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
I also have quit Hubbard please.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm here today to
speak on my story and also Tate
I support bill one twenty seven
I was here and with the child
with persistently my children my
children are removed due to my
addiction and criminal charges
and so when my children were
removed I I didn't understand
the system I didn't understand
what I was supposed to do House
opposed to do it I did not mean
my attorney before court it was
ten minutes of that day my shame
my guilt all these Miss
understanding that I dealt with
was the reason why I chose not
to fight for my kids I did not
having supports so with that
being said it was years before I
got back on track to even go
back in my head up to fight for
my kids.
Since that time I have regained
full custody of my children I am
now working at the New Mexico
family advocacy program as a
parent mentor coordinator with
this program it is that you to
do this right program working
with attorneys social workers
and parent mentors I have seen
how much of a benefit it has
been for parents to have a
support for parents to have
someone to say as you know to go
to their attorney and say can
you answer this question legally
to go to the social worker and
be able to ask question
clinically to go to their peer
mentor and just cry out and say
do you understand that type of
support is what parents need and
as you all know you've all heard
the economy it takes a village
to raise of thank you or a child
what this office could be that
bill is for that family having
all of that in one setting is
what a parent in the family
needs this organization the
office is not just representing
the mother the father or the
kids it'd be representing the
family as a whole.
I do believe that this Senate
bill one twenty seven is the
action office the action team
that our parents need here in
New Mexico I'm in full support
of Senate bill one twenty seven
and I hope that you choose to as
well.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I have
also have one more in that would
be Cathrynn kabel ski.
Hello my name is Katherine kabel
ski I am a parent mentor with
the New Mexico family advocacy
program.
I.
Have that position because I was
once I use my lived experience
to help others in this situation
as I was once a parent in the
system.
I'm in the beginning of my case
I was appointed an attorney and
shortly after I got appointed
another attorney now my attorney
for my district court level
staff was fabulous she worked
really really hard for me she
her name is Leslie Jones she is
the one that asked me to be
apartment during this program.
I'm.
We knew that my case will
probably go to appeal just
because of all of the years all
of the things that were going on
in my case my case was not an
easy case and I did not want to
relinquish my rights because I
didn't want for anyone to ever
tell my children that I just
gave up on them that I didn't
care or that I didn't try so I
tried the only way that I knew
how which was through the legal
system through the courts.
We knew that I would not win at
District Court so my attorney I
had already told me we were
going to have to appeal.
I was appointed an appellate
attorney who did not understand
children's court law he was very
versed in criminal law but with
children's court lot he didn't
have a good understanding of it
and I had inadequate legal
representation for the appellate
level and subsequently my rights
were terminated and I have not
seen my children since two
thousand fifteen.
It is not okay that because of
poverty I was not given an
attorney who knew what they were
doing.
And I didn't know.
I I didn't know another option I
thought he was all that I had so
he was who I was stuck with sh
and it proved to be a great
injustice not only to me but to
my children as well so I am here
in support of the Senate bill
one twenty seven and I hope you
all support this bill as well
thank you.
Thank you very much miss Leschi
LCS.
Senator Lopez anybody else.
Mr chairman that's all for right
now.
Okay we'll go to the audience
for public comment Trevor who do
we have.
We have against this bill but we
do have a list of people in
favor of the start with.
To try to keep moving this sing
along at ask each of the public
commenters to limit themselves
to mentor to and we'll start
with the the chair overnight
Ezzell header handout first
care.
I'm again the chairman and
members of the committee I'm
here to support the bill because
my I had make children taking
only.
Thank you and I would
This was followed to begin with
and I would have been aware of
the children code and I was not
aware because I went to culinary
well I think what a lot of so I
was not aware of the children
code at all I didn't know the
last year
I thought they give you take
care and
when I would ask them for help
with my children my children
were taken from me and I was not
given an attorney I was not
aware of my right I was I was
told I needed an attorney and so
I had to hire an attorney and at
that time I have no income I
would not I.
Sorry and
I am part of this bill because
I'm currently I'm still being
quite attorney we've spent like
nearly either around a hundred
thousand or more
in internet every time I would
call you when you can ask them
questions like why we're my kids
take in or the police would
refer me to my attorney and my
attorney when it if you're
taking money and what it respond
to why my kids were taken there
was no documentation about it
and now I'm in a legal practice
on the whole other level where I
have to Representative make up
as well and I didn't go to law
school for those type of log in
thank I think I think I should
be you know where you're I can
go to will to learn.
Thank.
If you're into the federal.
thank you.
Thank you very much to let
everybody else speak to some all
right.
Next we'll go to Pamela as far
as.
Hi Mr chairman of the committee
my name is hi I'm Suazo present
I'm a parent support Senate bill
one twenty seven this bill is
important to me because in my
case it was difficult to get in
contact with my attorney and I
was very unclear what was going
on in my case I feel like if you
have the proper space or trying
to not have as many cases maybe
Mr whatever have more chance to
speak with me about my case the
at the towards the end of my
case to perform a permanency
hearing he decided to just
withdraw representation so that
made things a little bit more
difficult and I frustrating for
me.
So I would ask the you guys
please support bills Senate bill
one twenty seven thank you.
Thank you Pamela the reading
guarantee here next.
Nine members of the committee my
name agree to guarantee and I
work for lobbyist you approved I
stand in support of Senate bill
one twenty seven we have the New
Mexico coalition sexual full
service providers.
Your time and your work in the
committee.
Thank you.
The.
You.
Chairman and members of the
committee and Delia director of
the renewal center for child and
family justice at the UNM School
of Law.
We end up trying remind everyone
on the committee that the
purpose of this bill and the
purpose of the child welfare
system is to help children and
families thrive and what we know
from looking at other states
that have a similar model to
what the model being proposed
today is that children are
removed far less frequently are
returned home much more quickly
and.
Chair much less frequently and
so the trauma of the child
welfare system the removal
itself is limited and that leads
to better outcomes all the way
around so if you just keep in
the forefront of your mind to
the well being and future
thriving of children and
families this is the model that
you should support thank you.
Thank you.
Then we have retired justice.
Are you still here retiring
justice.
Yes I'm here yes thank you your
next retired justice Petra
Jimenez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members the committee and
that special thank you to the
central office for helping us
out with this legislation
with the the Supreme Court and
with the Legislature we've been
working on this issue for twenty
years and I'm really excited
about the changes and and what
has been presented to you all I
think this will take care of the
to serious off policy that we
have and that is providing
quality representation and
that's all the live in a the
problem with the conflict with
this with the administrative
offices of course administering
these programs so I strongly
stand support and I ask for your
support as well.
Thank you very much yes then
Erica songes New Mexico can.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez and what New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care to
improve their transition to
adulthood we stand in support of
this bill and I work with these
young people coming out of
foster care and with other young
parents we see the impact of an
adequate representation
including young people remaining
in foster care for longer
periods of time than necessary
having numerous negative
consequences for children and
their families our families
deserve to have highly qualified
attorneys who are properly
trained have support staff and
receive the same compensation
thank you.
Thank you very.
Then we'll go into Mimi labor.
Thank you for allowing public
comment in support of the family
representation advocacy act
Senate bill one twenty seven to
create the independent office of
Family representation and
advocacy my name is Mimi labor
and I'm the director of legal
representation at the American
Bar Association center on
children in the law.
In our projects are uniformed by
two goals including legal
representation and improving the
legal systems that affect
children and families we based
our work in a number of ABA
policies including standards of
representation for lawyers who
are Representative all parties
in child welfare in a recent
family integrity policy that
emphasizes the importance of
children being raised by their
parents we believe that high
quality legal representation
like the type that is spreading
in New Mexico and will be part
of the office of Family
representation advocacy are key
to improving outcomes for
children and their families we
know from research that these
outcomes include keeping
children with their parents when
possible having them return home
quickly when they've been
removed and increasing the
number of children that are
placed with can when they're not
living with their parents we
also know that having a
centralized office overseeing
the work of legal teams leads to
consistent excellent practice in
states that have those offices
I'm honored to be a member of
the family representation
Commission and before that the
family representation Task Force
the work of these committees to
of the work New Mexico has been
doing in the lessons learned
from around the country
significant and exciting I'm
also happy that the New Mexico
family advocacy program the
interdisciplinary legal teams
services that others have
mentioned as part of the family
justice initiative an initiative
that I co lead as a
demonstration site there
implementing best practices
learning from peers and other
states serving your family as
well.
Is in the opportunity this
legislation provides and
creating the office of Family
representation advocacy will put
New Mexico in a small group of
states that are true leaders in
the field and when it will
ensure New Mexico's children and
parents will have due process
and the best out opportunities
possible thank you for the work
that you're all doing for your
families.
Thank you very much miss later
listen Davis.
Thank you Mr.
The committee I am also Davis a
youth leader with and can and an
aged out foster you.
I spent twelve years of my life
foster care before eighteen out
if I had proper representation I
believe I would have.
More stable experienced and
surviving the foster care
system.
I only spoke with my lawyer
fifteen minutes at a time before
most for hearings at the court
house while my mother was in the
area in the same vicinity wrote
discussing those what I wanted.
And
The last time if it was a
replacement lawyer who did not
know me or I just got that case
that morning when my lawyer did
not show up or which happens
often.
If I hadn't been able to of the
I have been able to advocate for
myself most of the time
thankfully because I had a
really good judge but not a good
lawyer
I ask you to support this bill
one twenty seven and maybe I
would have had to go to multiple
schools three to five times a
year different schools and the
maybe had more stable and I've
been in foster care for more
than twelve years.
Thank you.
Thank you very much as the blue
is.
Good afternoon thank you
chairman or chief you know and
thank you Senator Lopez for
supporting this bill my name is
Louise are checked and I am a
social worker with the New
Mexico family advocacy program I
have seen first hand how an
experienced team of an attorney
and social worker and a parent
mentor can make an absolute
positive difference in the lives
of the parents and the children
It's it's really of a great
thing to see when you first meet
the parents and they.
This bill lost and know where to
turn when you have that support
of an attorney that really cares
when you have a social worker
and apartment to that really
cares
and we we work with them we meet
with them as a team and we
support them in every way
possible to make sure that their
journey
Is is is what they need what is
it that they need at the end of
the outcome is in in our hopes
is reunification with their
children
these are great possibilities
for these parents if they have
the support that's needed I'm
asking for the committee to
please vote Senate bill one
twenty seven thank you thank you
Mr.
The jury members.
Thank you chairman participate
or members of the committee my
name is Georgia Varenberg I am
have been licensed to practice
law in New Mexico since nineteen
eighty four of for almost the
past decade I've been practicing
exclusively in child welfare.
I currently represent clients in
the collected you system in I
judicial districts across the
state.
Representative children as the
turning children age fourteen or
or guardian ad light up.
I have in the past and currently
Representative biological
parents foster parents
grandparents adoptive and
guardianship parties and other
relatives and fictive kin
seeking placement or contact
with children in custody.
I am also a former foster
parents and I am an adoptive
parent.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'd like to tell you
three experiences and just one
count one districts in which our
practice and that's the tenth
district which encompasses the
way and the Baca County.
I'm.
Five years ago I was contacted
by another attorney that a
guardian Adlai item was retiring
in two boys who were in the
system are out of the tax
district needed representation
the boys were currently located
in at the time we're located in
Albuquerque as website so that
made sense because it was
convenient for me to visit with
and Representative clients.
Well as often happens in these
cases of those two clients have
since been moved many times of
is.
Let's move to Arkansas to Texas
back to New Mexico out of state
to Texas again and are now both
placed in Utah
I represent these boys on a non
contract basis
they both have high mental
health needs you can imagine the
placement of possibilities they
face their now sixteen and
seventeen years old.
And legally that I am what they
have.
The next case I'd like to tell
you about a happened a couple
years after I'd been working
with those boys to carry and the
judge out there that I would
travel to do from Kerry at
practice out there asked I was
contacted by court staff in by
children youth and families
lawyers to consider representing
a young father who was facing
having has who had had his child
removed from his primary
custody.
so I agreed to represent that
young man as it turns out he had
been through not only ex parte
removal of these children
without without a lawyer he had
been through the ten day
probable cost custody hearing
without a lawyer and he had also
been through the trial on the
petition.
On the good luck to these
petition without a lawyer CYFD
had a lawyer the children had a
lawyer with the father had no
lawyer during all those
proceedings I represented him.
I'd like to fast forward now
where am I again involved in the
case and to compare right where
there is a child who was brought
into custody at the age of
fourteen so she should have
having internet at that time
this is she's been in in the
case about a year now she's
fifteen and her attorney who was
assigned to her has yet to
referred to himself as for you
the charity continues to say is
a guardian ad light of these are
two completely different models
of representation in New Mexico
and statutorily this fifteen
year old is entitled to leave
the turn she's not been informed
of such.
Chairman participate or members
of the committee these are just
three.
Samples of what happens when
there is not.
Adequate representation for
children and families in New
Mexico I urge you all to support
SB one twenty seven MPs voted to
pass thank you.
Thank you very much Mr bird and
finally we have Karen would like
representing the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee Karen with a lot
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we want to thank the
sponsor Senator Lopez and all of
the other
Task Force and judicial
advocates for this work we
strongly support the
collaborative this this bill
including the collaborative
teams that include social
workers attorneys and peer
support specialists we would
also like for the sponsor
consider an appropriation
to support compensation
Appropriation for legal support
and other administrative costs
including recruitment once again
we stand strong support of this
bill and we think the sponsor
for bring.
Thank you Karen.
That
Luna did you want to say
anything on behalf of CYFD.
Mr chair I know that entering
the new was having some trouble
with her audio.
So that we thank you
okay well let's go then to the
members of the committee.
One reason able to get on a
little later I would like to
hear was you introduce position
is but we'll start with the
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chairman Sir Lopez thank you
for this bill I do have a few
questions and and I think I've
brought this up to the committee
before I've got two daughters
one works for Costa in one also
for CYFD and.
In this bill if I understand it
right
the way this is going you would
have built tourney's of for the
parents and for the child in the
same office is that is that I
understand this.
Mr Chairman if I could for a
judge to Laney.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez and Senator grey ghost I'm
we have received an ethics
advisory opinion from the New
Mexico state R. as to how we
could ensure that the proper
firewalls were put into place so
that parents and children had
conflicting positions with
regard to the case you would not
have those attorneys having
access to one another's
information and you would ensure
ensure that they were that there
was not a conflict with regard
to representation so this is
something we have talked about
and that we will work on going
forward to make sure all of the
systems are in place so that the
conflicting positions are
protected and donate anyway feel
like this single office
representing them will cause a
conflict additionally the
proposal for the office
currently now is all contractors
the proposal going forward would
be to have some contractors and
some employees similar to what
you see in a law office the
public defender and so that is
another way in which we would
work with different positions
within a case for the families.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and senator and Justice of that
goes to my next question that
but if you're in a regional
manager position
I live intent as they brought up
earlier in Lee County and
the wait CYFD has it here you
have one manager multiple staff
I guess my concern or
consideration I appreciate the
contract help but if you have to
attorneys reporting the same
person I think that might be the
point of I appreciate the idea
the far wall but me as a person
if I'm talking to two different
individuals I don't know how I
can keep of disseminating
information from one to the
other even without
malice it's just part of fact of
life that the sometimes that
stuff goes through but.
So I appreciate you guys are at
least looking into that I did
have another question madam
chair and so Mr chairman and
senator Lopez what does this do
or is it separate from the
guardian Adlai item I know that
we've got a lower to steal here
in our area and I just wondered
if it takes her out of the
process for is this a turning
totally separate than argument
line.
Mr Chairman if I could judge the
lady.
Mr Chairman Senator Lopez
Senator Gallegos so this office
would employs some guardian and
items and would have contracts
with other guardian of items in
the task force report that was
issued in July of twenty twenty
it proposed having five
different regions that are the
same as the CYFD regions and
potentially five different
physical office locations as a
we expanded are able to get to
that point but the reality is in
many of the rural areas they
will continue to be contractors
who have these positions that
currently have them now and the
goal is for them to have
additional support training and
Well and it is I'm additional
support and training to help
keep them in this position so
that we don't have the turnover
that we currently see with
regard to contractors.
Thank you for that Mr Senator
Lopez and a judge to Laney I
guess so.
In a and I appreciate that I I
do.
I just have a little bit harbor
there but I I just I didn't know
that you guys got some really
good people the looking at this
did you guys use the M. advocacy
there and burn Leo is part of
the discussion on this course is
just
the judicial caught sight of
this discussion.
That Mr Chairman a judge delay
any.
Mr Chairman center Lopez Senator
game goes there was an
application process when the
task force was originally formed
and only I I am not aware of
what attorneys did or did not
apply for the task forces it was
the Supreme Court that appointed
the positions to the task force
that was not an advocacy
attorney who sat on our task
force but every single task
force meeting we've had have
been open meetings we've invited
public comment via email or in
each meeting we have opened it
up to the anyone who wanted to
speak and we have cents had in
this past couple weeks have some
conversations with advocacy
eating can so while they were
not seated in the position of
task force member or now
commission we do understand the
importance of involving them in
these conversations and ensuring
that their voices heard.
Thank you Mr Senator Lopez in
your honor.
Just sort of follow up question
I guess to to give me a better
feel for this and and I
understand I've worked on some
of the bills for can fit kinship
to be able to have them be part
of the the discussion up.
The overall view that from what
I understand is review not
reuniting the family is that
correct.
Mr chair Senator Lopez senator
Gaydos yes under the children's
code additionally every single
case that is file the goal of
the court is reunification up
until the time in which the
court orders a different
permanency plan based on the
evidence presented to us.
Thank you for that Mr Senator
Lopez in your honor and that
brings me to my problem I I know
I guess I I I want our kids not
to be left out of the discussion
totally I I understand the
reunification I appreciate that
but recently we had the Romanian
family and I'm sure you've heard
about it's been all over the
state where we allowed the
parents have supervised custody
they took their kids and fled
the state we didn't do anything
about it we waited till the
daughter came up in the hospital
with her or pull socket damaged
and now she's blind for life I I
would just you would consider
that the child be the primary.
I'm very concerned not a
secondary I think it needs to be
in the child's best interest
that the parents and I was
grateful that we had parents
talk earlier on in in the.
Conversation that they have
changed their lives to be able
to get their kids back in they
did not know the process I did
not know that they have to have
the opportunity for an attorney
but it's just one of those
things is and all I'll sit back
and listen the rest of the
discussion I guess I would just
ask that you guys make sure that
the child's best interest is
primary not secondary and with
that I yield thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman your muted.
You Senator
Steve this is the other marines
Luna from CYFD is with this and
would you like to comment on
this legislation now.
Thank you and members of the
committee on my audio is
terrible I'm sorry about it I
just have been the hardest time
with it today but I do want to
say that CYFD was actively
involved in the task force we
absolutely believe that our
parents deserve high quality
representation
as a state agency we are not
prepared yet to make have a
position but we do support they
body representation for our our
parents this is.
For all the reasons that
everybody spoke to thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Anybody else on the committee
with questions or the.
We want to make a motion.
Good your back Senator Sedillo
Lopez I saw I saw you that I
didn't and now into your your.
Your turn to ask questions our
thank you I got kicked off I
apologize is this really
illustrates broadband access the
and of plugging it.
but what I would like to ask and
if you if you answered this I
apologize because I was getting
kicked off.
Is it correct that the money
that is now allocated for all of
the contracts around the state
will be the seed money that will
be used to create this law for I
did I just needed that
clarification and I'm sure you
said it I just didn't hear it.
No.
As far as I know some of those
Senator Lopez and you want to
answer that are you would have
one year experience.
I'm Mr chairman if that judge
Elaine you would like to.
Answer please.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Lopez
Senator Sedillo Lopez I'm yes
what is intended is that there
is no us yes no appropriation
act this time with regard to the
office the office will work
extremely close with the
administrative office of the
courts in developing the policy
and all of the plans going
forward to ensure that this
office is success down the line
you will see an interim director
or executive director of this
office coming in asking for
increased
for increased budget to ensure
quality high quality
representation but today we are
not asking for an additional
procreation everything remains
the amount as requested in the
budget by the courts.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
just personally welcome everyone
and so it's so great I hadn't
seen that does video or or judge
you menace in a long time so
it's just so great to see them I
think that this is a fantastic
idea I am so excited that the
task force came up with with
this idea what happens when you
when you have a what we're
dealing with a particular issue
like children's issues is the
quality of representation is
just going to be enhanced and of
course they will also work with
the contract attorneys that
you'll need because of the
conflicts of interest and the
data shows that when attorneys
are involved in these difficult
difficult cases the outcomes are
better for families I'm and we
know that we seem to very very
sad outcomes and this is just
going to be a game changer and
I'm so thrilled that this our
task force came up with this
proposal I can hardly vote I can
hardly wait I just And
apologizes for the question but
I was wondering because the bill
doesn't have any financing so I
I was curious about that and I
and I believe that you there
will be also be some
efficiencies because I think
these contracts when you live
when you give a contract out and
that person is just isolated
sometimes it takes a long time
for them to get up to speed and
when you have a firm I think
you're going to have a lot of
efficiencies so it's just gonna
be great to see this develop and
I'm thrilled about this thank
you.
Mr Chairman your muted.
Thank you Sir Senator Sedillo
Lopez wanted to follow up on
your question though because the
FIR also mention this that is
how realistic is and Senator and
in your experience to expected
there might be federal money to
jail for this.
Senator Lopez you are muted but
I'm gonna.
It over to me so Mr chair.
So current the well in the last
two years the federal government
has really come to the
recognition that high quality
representation of parents and
children in these cases is is
imperative and so in doing so
they changed the regulations
with regard to some of the title
forty money and so now currently
the administrative office of the
courts has a contract with CYFD
or an MO you with CYFD to be
able to draw down title forty
monies to to help match
portions of the court appointed
program and would continue with
this office and so one of the
beautiful things is that as the
executive director and oversight
commission come and ask you all
for additional funds there will
be federal matching dollars to
go with that which will greatly
help increasing quality
representation here in New
Mexico and so it is it is
nationwide that the
understanding of high quality
representation and what that
does for families and children
is is imperative.
Thank you judge them thank you
senator for bringing this bill
forward I just wanted to come
into in a mention this in the
committee before but that was
pretty.
Deeply affected by the books
that I read just for the
session.
There was a Pulitzer Prize
winning book called vintage.
The detailed the true life
stories of the number of
families in Milwaukee and what
struck me among other things was
just how many times.
For families threatened with
eviction.
Yes please.
Trying to hang on to even slim
housing.
Threatened with being referred
to child welfare if they fight
against landlords in the use of
the child welfare system as a as
a message for oppressing.
The poor just strikes me as
being the best routes and really
a horrible precedent so I'd love
to have legal representation for
the families in the committee
would later headed to.
This is a great step forward I
think Senator Lopez Senator
Gallegos did you raise your hand
to make a motion.
Mr I just had one more question
consideration from of the the
test is to Laney
Mr Representative Senator Lopez
and judge twenty and understand
that Albuquerque's got that we
have this because see he can
cause us would they be a large
part of this or would this be
separate from them.
Mr chair Senate Senator Gallegos
I'm.
Act currently Pegasus represents
a very limited number of
children within the business
like system they used to have a
larger contract but more often
now they're representing
guardians in kinship
guardianship cases which would
not fall under this off.
and however the children that
are currently represented by
advocate speaking well hopefully
those two hundred by the time
we're running will be either be
reunified have permanent
guardianship or adoption but
their contract to represent
those children and youth is part
of what we are talking about and
that's what continued
conversations with advocacy and
the understanding that not all
parties will be employed by this
office that will have a hybrid
model where you have contract
attorneys and employed attorneys
that at some point for everybody
to understand that going forward
the goal is not to shut anybody
out of the system to take those
players who are fantastic doing
their job and give them the
support that they've needed for
years and those that are not
fantastic see if we can raise
them up with support and if not
find other ways to find that
high quality representation that
the the administrative office of
the courts is just not able to
do under the current structure.
Mr chair Senator Lopez and your
honor judge Delaney you've
changed my mind you call the
call my problems I I was going
to ask you about a test pilot
because I was wanting this more
out in regional areas because we
don't have those advocacy and
Pegasus but if they're going to
have less of a play in this also
then I could see were statewide
we would need this but I
appreciate all your answers and
everything you've done for
children so with that Mr I
promise this time I will yield.
Mr Chairman your muted.
So we have two more members of
the committee with hence the
we're going to make a motion or
you can ask questions and
Senator Tallman questions or
motion.
I was gonna make a motion by
Senator.
And that let him go.
Senator Schmedes question or you
want to make a motion yes just
one question Mr chair.
Go ahead.
US based on the prior discussion
of who.
The the current the state
contracts now for most of the
services in New Mexico.
Mr Chairman judge.
I thank you chair Senator Lopez
Senator CD's currently the
administrative office of the
court is the one who manages the
one hundred plus contracts that
independent agencies or
attorneys have across the state
and while you could we could get
to the information as to who
each of those contractors are
and I can tell you that advocacy
in Albuquerque represents a very
large portion of the children in
the Albuquerque area I can't
easily answer your question
because there are such a large
number of contractors across the
state.
Okay the will but that helps
that actually helps me
and so Mr Mr chairman and and
just aligning over.
So so so these contracts it if
this bill passes
so those contracts will
eventually go away or or does it
have really nothing to do with
that.
And Mr chair and senator CD's
what what happened in under the
transition plan that the family
representation Commission is
working on and will work towards
with the interim director the
contracts would be transferred
from the administrative office
of the courts to this office and
then that interim director who
would and the executive director
after that once the oversight
commission comes into effect
would determine exactly what we
need in terms of staffing each
of the offices and what would
continue forward with the
contractors and then would send
out RFPs currently everybody who
has a contract has to do has to
respond to an RFP I think I want
to say it's every four years but
but I apologize if that is not
the correct time period and so
everybody has to reapply every
four years anyway and so
applications would be
reconsidered or considered as
they are now with the help of
ensuring that everyone who is
providing high quality
representation across the street
the state continues to do that
but because the quality of
representation is really vastly
different across the state it
would be up to the interim
director working with the
administrative office of the
courts to determine the best way
to.
For parents were going to vote
and sizzle okay great thank you
very answer thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chair I have another question
the second a second round
question.
Senator Sedillo question.
Yes I was so floored by getting
kicked out I forgot these
questions one is and and
actually reminded me when you
talk about the victim will these
attorneys be able to provide
more holistic services the
families such as at such as when
the family of it's an eviction
notice or foreclosure notice of
those kinds of things that would
that would really increase the
effectiveness.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
the the hope is long term that
this office will be able to deal
with some of the ancillary
issues we know that the fiction
and lack of access to benefits
and not have access to social
security our our big issues that
these families deal with as as
well as we are hoping to be able
to develop some attorneys that
are experts with regard to the
Indian child welfare act
currently our goal is first and
foremost high quality
representation directly with
these cases under the children's
co but the goal is to provide as
he wholistic it a service as
possible to ensure that we have
all done our best for these
families.
I I just wanted to comment when
we tried we did this at the
clinic community lawyering is
what we call it to try to to do
these holistic services and the
outcomes for families was just
amazing and excellent what we
found though is we weren't able
to handle as many cases of
because we just had so many
limited resources but I I
thought it was worth it because
a lot of times we prevented
families from going into
disaster of situations as
opposed to you know just
sometimes the the children issue
is a symptom of many other
issues and if you can deal with
those that would be great and
then this is
We we dealt with the issue of
whether attorneys whether we
would require attorneys who
would advised parents before
they voluntarily signed away
their rights.
And the committee passed that I
don't know whether it's going to
actually make it what what are
your thoughts about that.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez I
I had the luxury of listening to
the argument with regard to
Senate bill ninety seven on
Friday and this is something
very big that the commission has
talked about and that the
representation Task Force.
There are a lot of sense well
maybe not so simple I need to
sort sample but not so difficult
ways in order to deal with
representation such as having a
parent hotline where parents can
call in with CYFD is at the
point where they say we have to
make a decision you need to
voluntarily place your child
with us or we're potentially
going to file a case so there
are some easy fixes that this
office would be tasked with in
order to ensure that those
parents knew what their rights
were and could maybe that that
on the spot decision that is
required when we're dealing in
these situations so it
definitely is something that
this office would take on it is
very important to ensure that
parents understand what their
rights are and if they truly are
voluntarily placing with the
department that is excellent
because a lot of times if the
parent understood at that moment
with the implications work you
could avoid a lot of future
cases
it because at least in my
experience I I saw.
When when Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
talks about using a child
welfare to course individuals I
I saw that and there were no
reason there's no grounds for
taking the children away get
that threat was made and and pay
and children gave up their
parents and has you know what I
mean gave up their children and
as you know once that happens
it's so
It's such a long and difficult
process to get them back for
many of these these parents so
I'm I'm delighted to hear
absolute delighted with that Mr
chair when you're ready for.
Mr Chairman I apologize Mister
chairman but just as the Hill I
think also wanted to answer if
we could allow her to say a few
words to.
Thank you yes absolutely just.
Thank you Mr chair and and
members of the committee I just
want to clarify
In response to
Representative CEO of Lopez's
question that.
There is no guarantee that that
this office would have the
funding necessary to represent.
All I'm sorry Senator that that
we would have enough funding to
Representative.
Everyone who needed services on
the voluntary placement.
Area so I don't want to to say
anything that we can not comply
with certainly what chief judge
Delaney mentioned is our goal
would be to eventually provide
legal services for such
individuals however we do not
have the funding today to be
able to say yes we're going to
take that on full scale so I
just want to make sure that
there's not any expectations
that we would be able to do that
in this office but thank you
very much for the question and
just wanted to clarify that
while this is the goal and and
to represent families and all
these other areas such as
housing and health care and
education we've got to start
small and we've got to start
within the funding that we are
able to to to utilize just
wanted to make sure
take care of that answered
Senator and it's good to see you
nice to see you on in in in the
legislature thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
This is the Hill I I really
appreciate that and and I
understand that I just think
that the quality of
representation when it's
wholistic and with a lot of with
a law firm you will have
different specialists and
perhaps
Be able to to do that because so
many of our legal services
contracts exclude certain kinds
of cases and exclusion often
really hurts families so I
really appreciate that and Mr
chair when you're ready for
motion I would be honored to
make the motion.
Tom is hoping to make it but
I'll let you second Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
applaud Senator Lopez for
bringing forth this law
it's a terrific idea that has
the potential to improve.
The quality of legal
representation of children and
families.
In matters of abuse and neglect
thank you bye highs so move.
Senator.
Two passed Mr chair I thank you
seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any other discussion or
debate or questions from the
committee.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
On one twenty seven Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Yes to pass.
Yes.
Yes for the next yes Senator
chairman yes Sir to Plano yes
this.
Congratulations Senator and
thank you just as.
Current and former and judges
current and former future thank
you all for further for
intending and and comments and
thank you to the public for
making such powerful statements.
In this members of the committee
thank you.
Members of the committee we will
adjourn for the day we we finish
the agenda.
Then the we have a of a slightly
extended agenda we've added some
bills to the whimsy agenda so
that we have plenty of work
ahead of us and we will meet
following the floor session on
Wednesday.
Unless it goes into the wee
hours of the night but I don't
think that's the case of the
will will will be able to get
started one half hour after the
floor session on Wednesday thank
you all thanks for your your
persistence in your diligence
and the great questions and
comments to million.
I thank you many in all your
hard work I thank you everyone.
