present.
Right? We have a quorum present,
and we have a quorum with all of
its present.
And um I am first on the list
this evening, so I will have the
committee over to my vice
chairs, Senator Hickey.
And we'll begin with Senate Bill
269.
Good evening, uh, Senators,
Madam Chair, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee.
Um, I sit here in front of you
with Senate Bill 269 entitled
Cannabis Testing of Certain
Employees.
Um, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, what this bill is
proposing is to amenddolin and
errant compassionate use act.
Concerning the use of medical,
um, the medical use of cannabis.
Um, providing that an employee
shall not be considered impaired
by cannabis solely because of
the presence of cannabis.
Anti-prohibit random drug
testing for cannabis.
And Mr. Chair, um, I do have an
expert witness here who I think
can uh go much more in depth,
um.
For a brief explanation and then
Um, after that, we'll stand for
questions and Mr. Chair, my
expert witness is uh Neel
Tippman.
Thank you.
Mel, welcome. Mr. Chair, thank
you. I appreciate being here,
Mr. Chair and committee members.
My name is Miguel Timman. Um, I
am the president of IFF Local
244 and the vice president and
the PFFA we represent
professional firefighters all
over the state of New Mexico.
Uh, this bill came to us from
our members, um, a large group
of our members and a specific
group, uh, of our veterans that
Um, are, are complaining to us
that they are going to their VA
doctors and they're getting
prescribed uh alternatives to
some of the um
More addictive medications and
they can't take it. They can't
take cannabis, medical cannabis
because it is a no tolerance,
um, in every department except
for Burnley County right now.
Um, Burnet County is the only
department that has recently
changed their, their substance
abuse policy.
Uh that's 300 firefighters out
of the 2000. So what we're
trying to do is um protect more
and this isn't just about
firefighters. This is just where
where it came from. This is
about any other workers that
might be deemed safety
sensitive, um, and by counties
or cities all over the state.
That um
the reason the firefighters
brought it is we are
Much more, um,
prone to certain ailments where
medical cannabis can help.
Uh, like anxiety, depression,
PTSD, uh, and the biggest one is
sleep deprivation and um
bad sleeping habits. That's
because we work shift work, we
worked 48 hours on, sometimes we
don't sleep for 48 hours, we're
expected to go home and operate
normally if you've ever not
sleep for 48 hours, it's, it's
impossible to not act normal.
Um, so one of the biggest things
that
Doctors are prescribing our, our
members as medical cannabis.
For this reason, and they can't
take it. Uh, another big reason
is pain management. We have a
very physically demanding job.
We have common injuries, we have
non-common injuries, we have
soft tissue injuries and our
firefighters are getting
prescribed alternatives like CBD
bombs and oils and, and they're
scared.
Uh, to take them, they're scared
to rub them on their bodies
because they don't want adverse
employment action to occur to
them and, and rightfully so,
nobody, uh, every firefighter
values their pension. Um, they
value their service to their
community. Um, so they, so they
don't use it, um.
We have had firefighters.
Resign because of this. We've
had firefighters retire because
of this. Um, and we were asking
the state legislator to consider
the fact that um,
Any member lawfully should be
able to use a medicine on their
days off.
Uh, one of the biggest reasons
this, this is has challenges
over the years because of the
definition of impairment. You
can't, you can't, it's hard to
define impairment and most
counties and municipalities use
a urinalysis.
They're just just uh identifies
Camber noise in your system,
which can be stored in your post
tissue and the fats of your, of
your body for, for many, many
days, up to 30 days depending on
use. Um,
So, merely identifying that it's
in your system doesn't define
internment. Uh, what we, what we
hope to achieve through the
Department of
state as well is to provide
regulations on how to bolster
the identification of impairment
through um post accident, which
is the biggest, uh, the probably
the biggest risk of the city or
county might take on, um, but
also real suspicion. Um, this is
going to help, uh, um, each
department.
have a a more responsible way to
have a testing policy, which,
like I said before, Burnley
County is just going through the
process of doing this currently.
So that's our hope. We want to
mitigate and limit the amount of
times um employments get adverse
employment action, uh, in our
opinion, unconstitutionally as a
urinalysis defining impairment
and then terminate somebody's
should be considered
unconstitutional and providing
much more reasonable and um
responsible method to test.
Um
Cardholders, people that are
using medicinal cannabis on
their days off, um, for ailments
that, that they have because of
the job.
So, uh, that's our stance. We
urge your support and uh staff
for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Do you
have any other comments?
Um
All those who are wanting to
support the bill. Can you raise
your hands?
OK, we have 2 people. If you
would come forward, please,
state your name and keep it to.
2 minutes or less. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor, AFL-CIO. We stand in
strong solidarity with our uh
with our life savers uh are
amazing first responders are
firefighters who put their lives
on the line on a daily basis,
uh, risk injury, risk, um,
mental, uh, mental hardship. Uh,
the very least that we could do
is
help provide the necessary care
to help them, uh, do a job that
is so vital for our community.
And so for that reason, we think
the sponsor and urge your
support.
Evening,
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name's Jeremy Renda. I am a uh
member of the IS Local 4366
Santa Fe County Professional
firefighters. I'm a 25 year uh
fire service veteran. I'm the
longest serving fire officer in
Santa Fe County. I am in full
support of this measure, um, for
all the reasons that President
Titman mentioned andlaud Burney
Li County.
For having the leadership to
have some sane policy regarding
testing. Um, our members are
suffering from
A wide variety of ailments that
they've come uh to acquire from
the job and metal medical
cannabis is known to help with
all of these symp sorry,
symptoms. So, um, at this point,
all of us are having our jobs
threatened for what is legal.
Protected behavior for everybody
else in this state. There are
employment protections for all
kinds of workers and, and
firefighters are an example of
people who could use it the
most. We suffered from PTSD,
anxiety, sleep depression,
alcohol abuse, and some of us
have succumbed to those.
The symptoms and taking their
own lives, my own brothers, and
I just, I want to give them
every tool tool in the toolbox
to, to help them.
And
It makes no sense why others can
be protected, and yet.
We are having our jobs
threatened for what is, again,
legal behavior
using your prescription from a
doctor and
You know, this is an issue of
privacy too, I think that uh our
Republican members can
appreciate that we don't want
the government.
interfering so deeply into our
personal lives and we, we, we
share the same goal
everyone here. None of us want
to see impairment in the
workplace. Let's test for it
accurately and
At the same time, allow people
to use their own prescribed
medications. I really appreciate
you all for uh taking a look at
this and urge your full support
of this bill. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, sir. Do we have
anyone in?
Online, no. Anyone in opposition
in the audience online
opposition.
And will not move to committee
for questions.
I moved for DuPac.
We have a due pass, but I have,
and we have a second.
No, I'm sorry. I have a
question, sorry.
Um
Yeah
OK, we have, we have a second
one now open for questions.
Thank you.
Senator Gallegos.
Thank Miss chair and thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, just a few
questions, um.
The gentleman here was talking
about
Uh, others being protected.
What other cannabis uses are
being protected.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um.
In the line in our compassion
Act, their protections for, for
all workers, there's a carve out
for uh student sensitive
workers, um, it is very, very
gray. It's basically states that
if you are, if you can injure
somebody in the course of your
job, you you can be determined
safety sensitive. So therefore,
the counties and the cities can
pretty much say my animal
workers, my um
However, to safety sensitive,
and there is no tolerance. So
there's, there are protections
in the Lenin A Compassion Act,
which is why this is an
amendment to the line.
Thanks to them as chairman.
gentleman in
In, in the same conversation the
was fireflies talked about no
impairment.
On the jobs that I took and then
test accurately.
What is the test we're using?
We will test accurately.
Just turn.
Uh, that is also a great
question, um, Mr. Sheriff and
senators, um.
Currently, the the definite the
best practice that we have found
uh to define impairment is
something called the DRE or a
drug recognition expert. And
this is uh this is used by law
enforcement and they do a
physical assessment of your gait
of your um odor of your eyes and
um they're highly trained.
Um, this is what we proposed to
the county the first time. The
problem with this is there's
only so many trained in the
state, so, um, it's, it's not a
viable option to procure that.
The second best thing that we
found through research is
something called a saliva test
and the DOT standards to define
impairment in a saliva test is
0.4 mg per nanogram, um, sorry,
nanogram per milligram. Um, so
in the county policy, actually
in the county MOU for for
firefighters. Uh, that is the
first option and
if um if the firefighter wants
to use a blood test, they can do
that at their own cost and that
is 10 nano for.
Nanograms per milliliter
apologies.
So there are different um
methods and this is why in, in
the uh in the statute, there's
room for um
best practices based off of
current technology because in 5
years that'll change and we want
to urge every county, every
city, every employer to use the
best practices available at the
time, which is why the
department of workforce
Solutions in conjunction with
the state will, will provide
that.
That direction
I think for Mrman turn,
gentleman, so.
If you're asking the cities and
counties to use the best
possible.
Does that relate to the public
if
If
I've got truck.
They have CDMs.
If they get pulled over.
And there's a thought that they
may be impaired.
Um, does this same type of
best practices go to the public,
or is this just city county
employees.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, there's, there's different,
uh, literature in the, in the
legislation that is if federal
funding is
A threat, uh, then it doesn't
apply to them.
From our research, this is uh
this applies to DOT CDL license
holders, and this applies to law
enforcement who must carry in
the, in the capacity of their of
their work.
Um, other than that,
The DOT has a carve out for
firefighters and this would
cover most of their employees.
Thank for that Miss Chan, my
turn, and so in.
As I'm not a firefighter, and
they've got some big trucks.
Uh, do they, are they required
to have CDL?
Their units was termed.
Mr. Sheriff Senator, actually
no, they are not required to
have a CDO. Firefighters have
what's called a, a class E or
which is an exempt.
Uh, from CDL, which is why they
would not be um
There would not be threats to
lose federal funding because of
cannabis is still a federal
Schedule One drug.
Only DOT CDL drivers and law
enforcement have to carry.
Thank them and turn, Mr. Minor,
uh, then my next question has to
do with um
Um
in an accident, let's say a
Fire truck
As next
Uh, we as, as public, if, if one
of my trucks were to have an
accident.
I automatically take them for a
drug test.
Uh, does the city and counties
do that? Mr.
Mr. Shane, that is correct. When
there's an accident with a fire
truck, they um are firefighters
going for an immediate test. So
through, through the policies
that would be um supported by
the state.
That would be
Today, best practices would be
to be a DRE as cheek swab or a
blood test.
What we're saying is, is your
analysis in a random test is
unconstitutional based on it
does not define impairment, but
we want to find the best
possible way to define
impairment to protect not only
employee employee, but the
employer as well for risk from,
from accidents. So if it a
firefighter were to get in an
accident, it would immediately
go to uh downtown to or wherever
they're testing uh processes and
get a cheek swab or a blood test
based off of what process he's
that employer adopts.
Thank you for that money, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, and
gentlemen, so if your employee
in your truck does have an
accident, hurts him, kills them.
Then who's responsibility for
liability, the employee.
For the senior County.
Uh, Mr. Char and Senator.
the, the employer would have the
liability. And if, if I believe
I'm not a lawyer, but I think if
there was a positive test, there
would probably be some avenue
for uh still as well.
Thanks for that, Mr. Man, and
the reason I ask that, uh,
In our world
my world.
If one of my guys
As re can hurt someone.
It is my liability, so typically
what happens at work.
Tuesday morning, my insurance
company.
Osman says we've got 117
employees.
They give me a random drug test.
And I contact my employees say,
and you come in, they go get
checked. They're good, they go
to work if they don't, when we
try to find alternates for.
But
Mister Mans what happened with
CDL drivers. I've had guys that
I'm calling.
Dispatched to other locations.
They come park their trucks.
And quit
As long as they don't have a
drug test.
They don't lose their CDL.
But I still have the liability.
And I'm wondering, Miss manager
and gentlemen.
What does, and I know the size
in the room, uh, what does our
state insurance, think about
your idea. Have you had any
discussions with them?
But.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
have not had direct
conversations with insurance. We
have had these conversations
about liability and risk with
the county of Burn Leo through
our process of uh of changing
their policy, um, from what
we've learned, there is, is
minimal risk, there is risk risk
with everything, um.
But we don't believe that the uh
the burden should be on the
employee when the, and going
back to the random test, there
would still be random tests. We
just wouldn't test for cannabis
because we can't define
impairment through cannabis. So
random tests wouldn't be going
away, just cannabis random test.
Miss Chan, Madam chair and
gentleman now, I'm confused
because earlier we talked about
Uh, uh, testing accuracy.
And the best practices of the
DRE.
That doesn't check for cannabis.
And turns for miser.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, DREs
do tests for multiple substances
including cannabis.
Including
OK, and, and I apologize, Mr
Madam Chair and gentlemen, I, I
guess I just thought I'd heard.
We don't test for cannabis.
And so I thought that DE didn't
qualify that. Uh, I think I'm
gonna yield just to give time
for others, but.
I do have more questions if we
have time or any other concerns
come up with that.
Thanks Mr. Thank you, man.
Thank you. Do we have anyone?
Yes, Senator or not.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Senator for bringing the
bill forward. Um, I was reading
through the bell and on page
one, line 15, where it says
that.
The bill requires the Department
of Health and the workforce
solutions, uh, to develop
guidelines for employers. I was
wondering if you could expand on
that if I, they, uh, there's
been communication with the
departments and how long this
process would take if it, it
passed.
Mr. Chair, Secretary, the
Secretary for Workforce
Solutions is here and if we
could also allow her to.
Answer some of the the question
being asked by Senator No.
Uh thank you. Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Nava. So
yes, we have been working um
with the folks on this bill, uh,
you know, we do a lot of
guidance for employers, so it
was a really natural fit for us.
We have to give guidance on wage
and hour laws on uh healthy
workplaces Act on um a variety
of different um things that come
through our office for
compliance and so we have a good
network and process for doing
that. It really doesn't take us
much time to to stand up that um
new types of training and then
We already provide the annual
posters that employers have to
put up for things like minimum
wage, and so this would just
roll right into that same
process.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
I do have a follow-up question,
uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Senator,
on page 2 under line, line 23,
section D, where it says
defining cannabis impairment as
a responsibility of the
employer.
How will this be assessed or
generated?
Could you repeat the the page
and yes, it's page 2, 23,
section B.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and Senator.
based on the definition or the
uh language defining cannabis
impairment is the responsibility
of the employer, the Department
of Health shall assist the
workforce solutions department
developing cannabis impairment
guidelines that are based on the
most reliable research.
Um, the way that I interpret
this is that it is still the the
responsibility of the employer,
but with the direction of
workforce solutions.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, so
then the employer would have the
discretion to do the final
definition.
Mr. Cha, um, and senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
San Presidio Lopez.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Of course, I think that um all
firefighters should have access
to
Whatever they need for their
health, and so this carve out, I
was trying to understand
the act but pulling the act to
understand.
Um
What is going on and it does
allow
Employees to determine that a
Um, that something is sensitive
enough to
To do this,
Um, I, I was just trying to
think it through, um,
So if somebody
is impaired or, OK, if, if
somebody is impaired.
We're drinking alcohol.
How, how does it work in the
fire department, fire department
it's a firefighter were to be
impaired because of alcohol. How
does that work?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
alcohol uses a breathalyzer to
define impairment, um, DOT is
0.04, some departments use 0.02.
Some use 0.04, which is the DOT,
um.
There are randoms.
where you go and you, it's part
of the random as you blow into a
breathalyzer, also post accident
as racial suspicion just like
there would be in this, in this
instance.
So they have to have a
reasonable suspicion before they
require you to do the
breathalyzer.
You know, alcohol is, is, uh,
it's not a medicine, so it's a
little different in that regard.
Um, they do have alcohol part of
the randoms.
as well as post-acident as well
as regional suspicion.
Because with alcohol you could
probably smell the breath or, or
see signs of, of impairment. um,
and so a reasonable suspicion
might be.
Um, in a fire, I'm just trying
to think this through in a
firefighter context.
that she sees someone and
they're not, they seem
sleeping.
And they seem, their eyes are
red.
So then the chief could say,
You know, um, I
Does the chief, is the chief
already aware about the card and
the registry card.
Before that happens.
Mrs Senator, um, this, this
would affect fire departments
all over the state and the chief
in Albuquerque is aware of
Cannabis cardholders requesting
the use of their card.
If that's the question, I'm not
sure what the question is. I
guess I'm thinking through just
as a practical step by step
thing. So somebody appears to
Have some effects and, and if I
were the chief and I didn't
know.
That they had a card.
Well, I guess it would be the
opposite. So,
The chief says, hm.
Something's going on and then
the firefighter says, I have a
medical cannabis card.
And then the chief says, well,
that's fine, but I think you're
impaired.
Would the chief just send them
home with the, what would
happen?
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think I
understand your question now.
Um, so by no, by no means are we
advocating for use on duty. This
is, this is 100% off duty, um,
and there's even standards in in
one of the uh the websites that
was in the, in the, in the, in
the bill, um, stating that 10 to
12 hours prior to uh prior to
going to duty would be.
responsible for stopping use.
Alcohol I think is much less I
think it's only like 6 hours,
um, but a recent suspicion
whether it's the fire chief in a
smaller department or in a
larger department like
Albuquerque would be a fire
officer, lieutenant, or captain
that identifies this person
isn't acting right. This person
has bloodshot eyes, this person
is stumbling, you know, on, on,
on behalf of public safety here
to say we are going to now do a
regional suspicion test, they
would take that, that apparatus
out of service and they would
drive down to the testing, um.
in Albuquerque, for instance, it
would be in our city hall where
we have our, our testing and
they would go through uh
resource suspicion testing
process.
And that's uh madam chair or Mr.
Chair, sorry.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and
that would be um
Grounds for what if they, if
they
Because
I don't know enough of how long
it stays in the system.
And so
But let's just say, OK, the, the
I have red eyes and it looks
bad, and then the, the, the
cheat and I present my card, the
registry card, and then the, my
supervisor says,
Um, when's the last time you
imbibed
And
And then I say it was more than
10 hours.
Then there's a test.
If it is
And the tests show that it was
more than 10 hours?
Mr. Chair, um, senator.
the most reliable test for
detecting um
Proximity to last use is the
cheek swab test.
And that's up to 10 hours.
So to, to answer your question,
if an employee got a reasonable
suspicion test and they did she
swab that was over the limit,
which is 4. They would be
subject to adverse employment
action. So it would depend on
the, the um the contract, it
would depend on the collective
bargaining agreement between
that labor organization in that
county or city, um, and
More than likely it'd be
termination because we do not
tolerate uh substance abuse of
any kind while on duty.
I guess, but my problem is, is
it's not abuses, is it, if it's
pursuant to
You know, the cards, I thought
it was one year, but it says the
card shall expire every 2 years.
That means there has to be a
visit to a doctor and the
prescription for it.
So it, it doesn't feel to me
like it's abuse.
But the regulation, I guess,
and, and the regulations and
training would be up to um
Is it like uh
Department of Health, so this is
the workforce solution.
Department. So it's between the
workforce solutions, not even
spoke. The Department of Health
shall assist workforce solutions
in developing.
guidelines, so they will
Tell us what in general of in in
The impairment looks like.
And then there still could be um
an adverse action, even though
it might might not be misused.
Because the rule is you can't do
it more than 10 hours.
Mr. Chair, um, and Senator,
there, there will be multiple
rules be put in place. One of
them would be the 10 hours, but
the more important one would be
the definition of impairment,
which would be helped by the
Department of Work for Workforce
Solutions, um, that definition,
whether you will um want to talk
about whether it's abuse or not,
we cannot condone impairment.
at all. So, uh, yeah, we would
not and I like this bill because
it does not condone impairment.
And we're not really dealing
with misuse.
We're dealing with you.
And this is, but my
understanding this is only for
medical cannabis.
So they will have had to get a
card from the registry.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
This is, this is part of the
line air Capassion Act that only
identifies um medical use. OK.
All right, because that, that
confused me because to me,
medical use means that you need
it.
And then impairment is something
quite different.
Um, and so what this does, as I
understand it, and I'm just
trying to clarify this uh
This prevents against impairment
on the job, but then permits
medical use.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, it
permits medical use on your time
off the job, which for
firefighters is 4 days off.
Um, and they would be able to
use up to whatever they decide
is the, is the threshold of
hours before up to that time.
By no means is it say that we're
condoning or allowing use while
on the job.
Cause it is a little confusing,
um, the way, the way it's
written, um, random shall not.
Um
I'm, I'm gonna go ahead and vote
for it. I have a feeling that
judiciary will try to make this
a little clearer.
Um, because, and, and I, I'm not
gonna try to guess what they'll
do to it, but it is a little
confusing.
I think it would be better to
separate out use.
from impairment and use is
permitted.
As long as there's no
impairment, and then, of course,
the regulations will be
developed and I'm glad that the
Department of Health will be
involved in in helping figure
that out.
Um, and I also know that in
different individuals have
different tolerances.
And different impairment levels,
and I, I understand you're
saying 10 hours.
It's just kind of a bright line,
um, and that makes sense. So I,
I support the bill, but I, I
think
You know, makes sense, but the,
the
The difference between
impairment and youth was not
clear to me in this bill, the
way it's written.
And it could just be I'm tired,
I don't know, but it took me a
while to try to separate that
out and I appreciate that, um,
and I'm gonna vote for the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Do we have any other?
Yes, Senator Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair,
And um
Appreciate you being here, sir.
So
Let's, let's chat about um just
a few things here so you can
help me kind of understand what,
what we're really talking about.
Um.
So you're, you're, um, Mr.
Chair, and, and so, you're
telling me that PTSD is a major
issue for firefighters that fair
to say.
Mr. Chair and Senator.
PTSD is a major issue for far.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
I'm sorry, what was your last
name again, sir?
Mr. Char, Senator Titman, T A T
T M A N N.
T A T T.
TI
CT
And.
T T I T T M A N N.
OK.
Nick, right?
Mr. Sheriff Senator Miguel,
there's another nick on this one
too, sorry. OK, so Mr. Chair,
um, Miguel.
What type of
Mental health.
Services to firefighters
currently. Do they have
counseling?
Mr. Chair, Senator, it's a great
question, um, in my 21 years as
a firefighter, I've been very
involved in um
The organizing and the execution
of as many possible resources
for behavioral and mental health
of firefighters. It has been a
stigma that has been, uh, we've
been slowly breaking the wall
down. So we have actually in
Albuquerque, we were the first
local to provide copays, um, we
negotiated money so we could pay
for our members' copays. So talk
therapy is 11 way. talk therapy
therapy.
It is, is 11 way, peer support
is another thing that we have
developed over the years. We
have uh 65 3 supporters in
Albuquerque all trained, um.
To
A base standard and then we also
have critical incident stress
debriefing, trained firefighters
as well. So when there's an
incident with like a mass
casualty or or juveniles,
there's a standard protocol of,
of delivering those services to
the firefighters, um, we have
found that firefighters are much
more likely to
Um
Look to another firefighter for
help, then exterior uh people.
Like it's a very unique uh
culture where
We have to work side by side
with each other and we trust
each other and, and sometimes we
don't trust other people as
myself we have 65 ports in
Albuquerque, other departments
like uh Santa Fe County, Santa
Fe City, Las Cruces, also have a
very robust peer support team
that is able to um
Listening to another firefighter
and refer them to whatever needs
to, whatever mitigation needs to
happen, uh, you name it, whether
it's marriage counseling,
substance abuse, PTSD, anxiety,
depression, suicide, suicidal
thoughts. We have firefighters
trying to peer support that can
now refer that firefighter to
get the help that we need. And
by no means are we, are we
saying that, that medical
cannabis is the fix all. It's
not, it's just one more tool in
the toolbox that we can give
firefighters uh to address all
those things that I mentioned
before.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Is what, what is the, do you
know what the most commonly
prescribed.
Non-addictive medication would
be for firefighters suffering
from.
PTSD, depression, anxiety or
anxiety.
Mr. Chair, Senator, most
non-addictive, I think that that
key phrase non-addictive, I, I
would not know that.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, Miguel, it's
Research shows that it's Zoloft
and Paxil.
To do that.
Uh, do any, Mr. Chair, do any,
uh, and Miguel to any
firefighters, are they?
Obviously there's HIPAA
information, but do you know of
any firefighters that are
currently taking those
medications because the results
have been very successful.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I would,
I would not know someone's
personal, but we're not
advocating for uh someone to not
take the advice of their medical
director of medical
professionals if that's what
they're telling them is gonna be
good.
Um, we just want one more tool
in the toolbox. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
sir. So I think that's
important. Those are current
drugs out there with a uh
You know, the science is showing
that those work extremely well.
For the issues that you talked
about.
And
When we talk about impairment.
That's kind of a a key thing
here.
In this, uh, bill.
Because it's really some
Very subjective standards, Mr.
Chair and Miguel on impairment.
I think you would agree to that,
right? It's not like
You can't just suspect somebody
of
You know, having red eyes,
listening to
Um
I don't know, um.
Grateful Dead or Pink Floyd and
like, hey, you're on something
cause you're listening to that
and your eyes are red.
But it's very subjective. Would
you, would you agree?
Mr. Chair Senator, I wouldn't
know enough to call it
subjective or objective testing
process. So, Mr. Chair, Miguel,
some of the signs and symptoms.
can include
Of medical marijuana.
A sense of euphoria or feeling
high.
You would agree with that
A heightened sense of visual
auditory or taste perception.
Increased blood pressure and
heart rate, red eyes, dry mouth,
decreased coordination, that's
kind of a
Important for firefighters at
the coordination piece anyway,
you don't want decreased
coordination.
Um, Mr. Chair Miguel, difficulty
concentrating or remembering, we
want our firefighters to be
laser focused.
Uh, increased appetite.
Slowed reaction time, that's
something, uh, we definitely
don't want firefighters to have.
Paranoid thinking.
Decreased mental sharpness.
Or performance at school, at
work, or reduced number of
friends and interest. Uh, Mr.
Chair Miguel, those are all
symptoms
Um
Of medical marijuana use. So
let's, let's talk about the
liability of those.
You said, um, and I quote here,
uh, Mr. Chairman McGill, you
said liability risk is
Is uh on the employee is what
you said, is that correct?
Mr.
and Senator, um,
Liability rested on the employee
and the employer. I think I did
say the employee, but it's,
yeah, it's not like firefighters
don't have risk.
Mr. Chairman Miguel, actually,
if there is an accident.
Something happens wrong.
Firefighter who is on medical
marijuana because you don't know
exactly when he or she took it.
And that firefighter responds to
an accident.
Fire
some other crisis.
And that firefighter has
decreased coordination.
Difficulty concentrating.
Slow reaction time.
Paranoid thinking, decreased
mental sharpness.
And that firefighter ended up
making a mistake and that
firefighter ends up getting
tested, um, Mr. Chair and
Miguel.
Is, is the legal liability on
that employee and or the county
or the city.
Mr. Cha and Senator, um,
following those characteristics
you, you mentioned were
Just to be clear, where you
define as impairment. So once
again, we are not condoning
impairment at work and if
somebody were impaired, whether
it was
Cannabis, alcohol.
Um, another prescription drug.
They would be liable and that
employer would be liable.
Exactly, uh, Mr. Chair McGill an
employer would be liable and the
employee, quite frankly, would
probably get fired.
And I would also argue, Mr.
Chair Miguel, that if you're
taking medical marijuana.
A day
Before this happens.
There's no way that employee can
prove when he took that medical
marijuana.
If an incident happens where
he's tested, and he tests
positive for that.
The, the lawyers are gonna jump
all over that in the family of
the victim's family.
is definitely gonna be taking
some legal action.
Against
The fire department.
If the city or the county.
They're gonna do that.
So
The liability is a huge risk
here.
Uh, in Sandoval County, I, I
gave those guys a call, Mr.
Chair Miguel.
And there's a couple of things
that they're worried about.
Number one, insurance rates will
go up for the county.
Um
The other issue, when they look
at this bill is
I think Senator Nava brought it
up and
And uh that's, that's one thing
is how do you random drug
testing an employee that show
not include testing for
cannabis.
So
How do you, how do you test for
this? What's, what's the
standard?
That's, that's the issue.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, as
described before, the standard.
set by the Department of
Workforce Solutions in
combination with the Department
of Health would be.
Um, best practices. I can tell
you from what we've researched
and what we have, uh,
Bargained with Burnley County.
That is going to be the spot at
4.
any blood test at 10.
To define impairment.
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chair, Miguel
again defining cannabis
impairment being the
responsibility of the employer
makes things increasingly
challenging across, I would say
in, in your case,
The Albuquerque Fire Department
could have differences in the
Burco fire department, could
they not?
Mr. Chair, Senator,
theoretically, as long as
they're um
adhering to the, the guidelines
set forth by the state.
Yes.
Exactly.
So
Mr. Chair, Miguel, um, tell me
about any type of federal
grants, money that we could lose
from the feds based on
Uh, passing this bill and having
medical marijuana as the law of
the state of New Mexico for
firefighters across the state.
Mr. Cher and Senator from our
research, there would be no
reduction in federal grant
money.
There has been none in
Pennsylvania, New York, Arizona,
and other states that this has
happened. We're very close
coordination with our IFF
brothers across the country that
have done this. There's been 0
federal dollars taken from them.
OK.
Chairmanal like, there's a new
sheriff in town in DC and things
things are changed, so I, I
don't know if that would be the
case or not because they're
looking at
Um, lots of things across.
Run to the states based on
the state goes up against the
feds.
Um, lastly,
Mr. Chair, Miguel.
Let's, let's talk about
How we would be treating people
differently. Um, uh, excuse me,
I'm, I'm gonna intervene here
for a moment. Um,
they're like uh does good
questions, but lastly, I would
like you to ask one last
question. Um, my, I've got two
bills coming up and I'm gonna
cram in a semester's worth of
medical school teaching for the
panel on coronary artery disease
and, uh,
So, um,
I, I'd like you to kind of get
to the point and uh we'd like to
finish up here so we can get
through my bills and some other
bills tonight. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
looking forward to the med
school intro tonight.
Um
Lastly, you know, there are many
different um
Limitations in county and city
governments where
Uh, certain people aren't
allowed to have medical
marijuana.
For instance, in public works in
Sandoval County, heavy equipment
operators.
Uh, some of them might be
veterans like myself who also
suffers from PTSD coming back
from Afghanistan.
They are not covered by this.
Uh, there's, uh, the police are
not covered by this.
And the police, Mr. Chair and
Miguel, they are in a combat
role every single day out there.
But yet we're not talking about
them. So we're really just
distinguishing between
Different
A job.
Job skills to do this as well as
And I don't think we're looking
at
Well, I, I'll leave more for,
for later if we have time, but
this, this is gonna be a very
difficult bill in judiciary to
get passed and I think you're
going to see a lot of uh
municipalities and counties say,
uh, no, because of the, the
liabilities on the against the
taxpayer. So thank you Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Miguel.
Thank you, Senator Black. Uh,
anybody else? I have some quick
questions.
observations.
Anybody
Uh
Actually, uh, we were just in
the
judiciary, I think it was.
losing track yesterday and um
Got a 8 to 1 vote to proceed
with uh
Um
So I, uh, as a treatment for
PTSD and so forth, and so, and,
and they were, they, they, we
had 3 lawyers with 3 different
opinions, uh, taking an hour to
uh get to his one opinion and it
was well worth it, but it did
pass 8 to 1, so actually I think
that that this could go well in
in judiciary. I just a few
points in which I'm gonna
disagree with some of your or
make some observations about
your medical observations. Um,
the
ef fi ca c y of SSRI's range
anywhere from 25 to 60%,
depending upon the study. They
are not extremely good for the
treatment of.
depression, particularly severe
depression.
And in fact, uh, soyin is now
moving forward in a phase 3
trial if the FDA for soyin use
or refractive depression to
almost any other treatment.
Um, we really aren't doing that
great in this country with our
chemical approach to depression
other than this potential
advent.
Um
And um I'm, I'm, I'm not trying
to
I, I just wanna point you went
through a whole bunch of signs
and symptoms, and I said, wow,
that just described PTSD.
Um, that you said would be there
if, if there was marijuana and
so, um, I mean this is to help,
help treat that.
But anyway, I, I appreciate your
It's good to have skepticism and
all this. There are new
frontiers coming along and uh I,
myself, I think this has great
promise as we carefully move
forward with it, and um, you
know, we, we talk about
veterans, as you know, and their
PTSD and they
OK.
Anyway, it, it, it, our
firefighters and, and, uh
Please, about 33% have PT is
serious.
or South. This is, I think an
extremely important bill too.
But
right, so that's my say and
hearing.
that there was no one else would
question. I'm open to emotion.
Oh, you already did. I'm sorry,
I forgot.
Yeah, so, uh, that's what you
were saying, yes, so I would
like to call for the vote. Thank
you Senator Block.
No. Senator boon.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos.
Some I'd like to explain my
vote.
And I know, yes.
Pinto.
Center Center city of Lopez,
yes.
Senator Hickey. Senator Lopez,
yeah.
Thank you, my hearing is getting
old. Um, 63 the uh bill passes
and that we have a vote
explanation.
Thank you
and uh I've worked with
telecommunicators on PTSBL right
now.
I understand what they're going
through. My caution to you is
that I, um, 2 of 5 boys, lost 3
brothers.
This drug
And I know the impairment that
it does.
I would not do to your mom, but
that did my mom.
with that are you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Guy Elison,
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you, everyone, and I'll be
in trading places.
OK, Senator, um,
We are here to present, said a
bill 278.
Coronary artery calcium
screening and insurance.
Thank you, Madam chair and
colleagues, and we are passing
out a uh kind of a, if you
remember cliff notes from the
old days, primer and coronary
artery disease and um I
hopefully have online my expert.
Uh, Doctor David Shay, the
former head of endocrinology at
UNM, uh, one of the people who
invented the insulin pump, uh,
in the individual who is one of
the most highly published people
and
Diabetes and then doing that
became very involved in coronary
artery disease because that is a
uh
complication of diabetes and the
whole pathogenesis and you are
probably through your life have
heard that you should eat
vegetables and, and not a lot of
red meat and so on and so forth,
and that still holds today, but
Um
I'm gonna be talking about a
compound that is made in the
liver.
It's called low density
lipoprotein, and I won't get too
much into the detail and what we
have learned about it over the
last 20 years has been
phenomenal.
And uh low density lipoprotein.
Uh, is a part of cholesterol and
we were all big in the HDL for a
long time and, and then we
realized that low density
lipoprotein that actually
invades the coronary artery
wall.
And when it does, and people who
are susceptible to that invasion
which is probably most of us.
Um, it sets up an inflammatory
reaction and when the
inflammatory reaction heals.
It leaves behind calcium, and
that happens everywhere in the
body and it's that's that
inflammation and calcium.
And if you look on the paper,
uh, the second piece, this paper
here.
You can see uh atheroma area of
plaque that's been laid down and
that is basically the
inflammation over and over and
over and over and over again.
And as that continues to happen,
the artery gets narrower and
narrower, and unfortunately.
You can get one as you get a
very narrow artery, cardiac.
Ah
Cardiac artery, the
Uh, you can have this happen on
the surface and it's kind of
like a pimple popping on the
surface that then leads to a
series of events that react to
the information, close off the
artery. That's the heart attack.
And unfortunately,
About half of us, um, who.
Are having coronary artery
disease, we don't know it, and
that's called sudden death
syndrome.
And let me give you some
statistics on coronary artery
disease and sudden death because
some of the health plan or some
of the appraisals of missed a
lot of the cost-benefit ratio.
And um
But let me tell you about
what's, what's happening in the
US.
$600 billion is spent annually.
And coronary artery disease.
600,000 deaths in the US
annually from coronary artery
disease. That's more than all
cancers combined and a lot of
other stuff thrown in. Um, it's
about 20% of all health care
spending in the US.
So
Um, how does that translate to
New Mexico.
3400 coronary artery death.
every year.
3400
Half of those are in women.
It's not just a male.
situation
And half of those end up.
In sudden death.
In in New Mexico, we spent 23
billion.
on health care.
Uh, in the estimates that I was
able to put together totally 23
billion on health care in New
Mexico.
Uh, about in 23.
Close to 5 billion of that.
was spent on
Treatment of coronary artery
disease, and when you say say
treating, think of Ans enough.
People ending up with a heart
attack and surviving and going
into the hospital.
People getting stents, we don't
do that so much anymore. People
getting bypass operations.
And it's $5 billion.
That we're spending in New
Mexico close to it.
this disease.
That
There is a solution.
As medicine has advanced.
over the particularly the last
20 years, we have been able to
come down to the simple fact.
That with
One screening test.
And not all the other
catheterizations and all the
other stuff, the ultrasounds and
nuclear scans and all this huge
amount of money being spent.
If we
check people for a calcium scan
of the heart which takes.
5 minutes.
Pass the radiologist probably.
There's the radio or the the
The clinical group or the
hospital probably actually cost
them about 30 bucks.
They charge and Medicaid pays
110. I don't know why, but the
way we have our commercial
health plans set up.
is that this is a high
Uh
Complex radiologic procedure and
in almost every house plant.
It's a minimum $250 deductible.
For high end
Uh
Uh, radiology.
And so people are paying $250
out of pocket in a lot of places
to do it.
Um, and what I'm ultimately
proposing is that with this they
pay nothing out of pocket.
Because the ability to eliminate
this disease to eliminate $5
billion a year in expense in New
Mexico.
is here
It is easily done, and I can't
go through as I said, the
semester's worth of literature
and so forth and how this has
evolved over time.
But
If we can detect.
And everyone over 50.
And for, for some of you, I
mean, in this room as I look
around the people.
They're probably 58 people in
here who can die if they don't
get a a a screening because you
don't really know if you need it
or not because
Those who have it, which is
maybe 70, 80% of the population,
this LDL that causes the
inflammation in the coronary
artery.
Um
A number of us, if we don't get
screened.
Wilt thou that happen to my
mentor in medicine who had just
bicycled across America.
is out bicycling in.
Cambridge Island.
With his wife and friends, he
was 67 years old, not for some
walk.
and dropped them.
This is what he had sudden
death.
didn't have any symptoms.
That's what the scary part of
this is.
So
Um
And
It, it, uh, I, I'm, I'm, if
nothing else, if this pill
doesn't even pass.
If you're 50.
Male or female.
Yeah, a calcium scan, and we
hope to make it not cost you
anything.
Because if you can eliminate $5
billion of health plans are
gonna save so much money.
So incredible amount of money,
and it's not, and you can
actually those who have, if
you've seen this picture here.
The one on the left.
Is pre-treatment and the one on
the right is post treatment.
It actually reduces.
Coronary artery disease, the
treatment with the LDL.
And the treatment of LDL, you
know how much it costs?
60 cents a day.
Resubostatin.
res do
Um ineliasuvastatin is creates
an antibody that stops the liver
production of LDL.
And the Zetia blocks the
absorption of LDL in the gut
because when it comes out, it
goes into the bile down in the
gut, so it helps block the
absorption. Those two cost 60
cents a day.
That's it.
Some people will need to go on
because they either have a side
effect, which is rare from the
LDL or they can't on 40 mg get
it down below 50, the LDL in the
blood may need to go to an
injectable every 2 weeks, uh,
called PCSK9 inhibitors, um, and
we have a new drug now called
Incliseron that is every 6
months and in a few years, we
will have a drug. It's just like
the flu. You take it once a
year.
And it will keep the LDL.
Below 50
So
The,
um, in medicine, and, and I got
a bunch of papers here to go
through all this. It takes 17
years on average for a
breakthrough.
to get adopted by the medical
community.
And we're in the middle of that
process we're kind of early into
it this simple approach.
Now, I'm, I'm not trying to be
cynical here, but
Um, I, I know that I, I
personally know they have
cardiology at the Cleveland
Clinic, Doctor Nissen, and he
goes, Oh, calcium scanning, and
there's somebody in here said
there's uh oh false positives.
There are no false positives in
calcium scan. It's kind of like
saying, getting a chest x-ray
and say,
Oh, their ribs president, but
that's false positive.
sees the calcium. It's there.
And if you've got it, you've got
the information.
Um
My calcium score when I
I don't have any risk factors.
I'm fine. I do all these things,
but
Doctor Shade convinced me to get
it, and I stopped by the heart
hospital for 150 bucks. My
calcium score was 2200.
And the higher it is, the higher
the risk.
So once you get the test once,
that's it. You don't go back and
do it again.
You just know that you have it,
but you will need to be on this
medication.
For the rest of your life, and
it starts really in earnest
after.
Age 50.
So
What I am proposing in this
bill, and there are some
amendments that I will take to
the next committee from OSI some
clarifications that they point
out here, um, in terms of the
technical coverage issues and
the different types of of health
plans.
Um,
And, and we will work those in.
But essentially my bill would
make this no copay, and again to
uh the AC, the HCA I have spent
a lot of time helping them to
learn how to negotiate prices.
they can negotiate a price of a
calcium scan down to 50 bucks or
less or get some, get some
volume discounts at some places.
Um
So this, this.
Filled with essentially make it
free.
So that all of us can go to any
hospital, anywhere, any
radiology group, and we're
actually doing a pilot with
pharmacists and
In rural areas that they can
order the scan, they can get the
blood work, they can do the
medication, because the
medication is so simple and has
so few side effects.
Um
If we did this, we would save
the lives potentially.
Of
3400 people.
A year in New Mexico.
Who were at risk when they're
over age 50, and there are a few
with strong family history. So
that is, that is my proposal,
uh, Doctor Shay, are you on the
line?
They're, they're saying no. um.
Maybe he's just into the
visiting part, but that's OK.
Trust me, he's, I mean, he is
one of the
Leading researchers in this area
in the country and particularly
in diabetes. So with that, uh,
I, uh, I don't have a whole lot
of people here. I, I wish I
could. I have some people who I
in casual conversation, said
this with. They went and got a
scan.
And they come and say, my God,
you saved my life. One of them,
unfortunately, the cardiologist,
the scan was done, the
cardiologist got him into the
cath lab, saw a proximal 90%
occlusion of the uh one of the
main arteries and he got
bypassed the next day, but it
saved his life.
I mean, he probably would have
died from that. So this is life
saving. It's so simple. It's so
cheap.
In the health plans will save so
much money.
And I mean it's minimal what
they're paying, so thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Is there
anyone in the audience in favor
of Senate Bill 278?
If you'd like to stand and
Identify yourself and take a
couple of minutes to make your
statement, please.
Um, Chan and members of the
committee, I'm a state employee,
but I'm not on the clock right
now, so I can speak as a
constituent.
Um,
I've been through this process.
I paid $250 and got a calcium
score done and um it gave me,
yeah, insight into what I should
be doing to better my health. So
I'm in support of this. It was
even
For a while ago, it was not even
available in New Mexico. So I'm
glad it's available and you can
go through the testing process
and get to know what you need to
do better in terms of lifestyle
modification to
Minimize your risks. Thank you.
Anyone else in support?
Anyone in opposition?
Is there anyone online?
Either in support or opposition.
everybody?
Is it Friday night?
Yeah, it's Friday night, OK,
just ask the question.
With that, we'll go to questions
or comments from committee
members. Senatorero Lopez.
Thank you. I was going to uh
just move for a due pass, but
then I realized, you said um
that you would address the
issues that OSI and um
That they were raised in the
FIR. Yes. And we can count on
that, um, because there's sort
of significant. She's here and
she'll make me. OK. All right.
Well, now I can't move a do pass
cause I spoke, so.
But I support this.
Madam Chair.
There's a motion for a due pass
from Senator Charlie.
With a second from Senator Navi.
They were still like questions
from committee members.
OK.
Want to ask one question?
you.
It's
Oh, OK, yes.
And kind of
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator. I did have a few
questions, so, uh, I looked up,
I recently, well, it's almost
been a year ago.
lipid panel.
They calculated my number of 52
for LDL.
That's done without this calcium
check. How does that work in
comparison to calcium check.
Thank you, Senator Galos for
that question, and you are queen
for the day, and the old
parliaments, I mean, there are
people who have very little
normal, it needs to be around 50
or below and you're one of the
handful of people who were there
unless you are you on
medication, Mr. Senator, Madam
Chair, excuse me.
Chair and senator, I don't think
so.
Uh, you, you get to be king and
queen for the day, Senator
Gallego and Madam Chair, and one
of the handful, so I
congratulate you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
sooner then I just got 2
questions for you then, um,
Recently
Um
Actually, after a colonoscopy.
The doctor noticed on the bottom
side.
Of my
A heartbeat
I did not have the bottom piece.
And they sent me to a
The heart doctor.
So, uh, when, when we got all
through his thousands of
dollars.
But the heart doctor determined
that one of the
Has
When I adhered right.
Even though it cost me thousands
of dollars, and I'm just
wondering, Mr. Chairman and
chairman,
uh, senator is
The testing that you're talking
about.
Is it done
a chemical check.
How does that work? Because I
think that the
Um
I think what they call it when
they put all the pads on you,
uh, EKG, EKG, the inefficiency
of the technician cost me.
thousands of dollars. I was just
wondering the difference between
your version of how to get that.
calculation done?
Or how does that work?
chair and senator, um, I could
play doctor tonight, but I'm
just gonna give you the very
brief version of that.
Um
We, we do EKGs to look for some
other abnormalities in the heart
or rhythm, and as you get older,
your rhythm can get into atrial
fibrillation and so forth. So it
has a role in terms of the most,
uh, as, as, uh, yeah, um, it,
it, it, it, it, it definitely
has a role but basically in
terms of this disease, which is
costing us so much money. Um, if
nothing else was happening at
50, you could just say, doc.
signed me up for a calcium scan
and draw my blood, and you one
of the few lucky people that has
such a low, uh, LDL naturally.
And um
Uh, so I, you know, I can't tell
you if they, how much you spend
and whatever that I'm I'm happy
to go offline and give you a
very informal opinion, opinion.
I think that Miss Madam Chair, a
last question though.
And it is if we pass this bill.
Here in New Mexico
Um
When I found out that I didn't
have the bottom part, they
rushed me not through my wife
drove me, but they rushed me to
love me.
Or
That are.
So in the thoughts of this, if I
go out of state for this test.
The dollar amounts.
Totally change
With this bill only give me the
opportunity in state center, um.
Madam Chair and senator.
Um
I believe it's only him.
and I, I'll look to the OSI for,
I mean, there's lots of
technical nuances around that
that I could get into the all
the ifs ands or buts. There's a
possibility that it could
because it's in that work out of
state.
Um, but our ability to enforce
that, I don't think is doable.
It
It would depend on the network
and the type of coverage. So
I'd, I'd be happy to give you
health insurance 10 1 again
hotline.
and how to buy in that
situation.
Well, thank you for that, Mr
Meeren fears already give me one
on one on that because we've got
issues of other people crossing
state line and being paid or
charged extremely high costs,
and they slaves behind you to
resolved that, so I appreciate
that those are all the questions
I had. I guess I feel pretty
good about my
Low LDL. Thank you.
Oh, thank you, Senator Gallegos,
Senator Black.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, uh, Doctor Hickey.
I'll call you Doctor Hickey on
this one for a little bit before
I ask you a question about the
Senator Hickey, um.
First of all, I, I've never
heard of this calcium test, so.
You just scared the bejesus out
of me, quite frankly. Good.
So, thank you for that after the
session. I know where I gotta
go. West Hospital Rio Rancho get
checked.
Just in case.
Um
So speaking of that, Madam
Chair, uh, Doc, how, how do you,
how do they scan for that? You
said they take your blood and
what else did they do?
Madam Chair and Senator Buck,
uh, you.
When I got mine, it was 15
minutes, door to door. I walked
in, put down my $150 and went
into the room. It took about 3
minutes to do the test because
they only do a small scan of the
heart here. You get more
radiation in daily exposure than
you get from the CT scan of your
heart, and then you go get your
blood drawn on a a uh uh a lipid
profile and, and that they'll
find the LDL and then you
proceed from there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
doc. Yeah, I've been exposed to
radiation for a long time with
my previous career.
Um
Blowing a little bit.
Real quick on this, you said
something that caught my ear.
You said make, make it free.
Oh
What did you mean by that?
Madam chair and senator by that,
uh, uh, as, as I've done in
behavioral health medications
and visits because we have such
an issue, a big barrier to a lot
of people is the cost of these
tests. I can't eliminate the
cost on the blood test, but we
can eliminate the, the code
sharing on the
Um
Calcium scanning, there is a
cost. It's, it's about $35 and
the negotiated well you can get
down to 50, and the health plan
does pay that. The health plan
is paid back.
So many times, but I mean
literally once you find this and
you start to get it down.
They aren't going to have to pay
for your myocardial infarction
that you survive and go to the
hospital, that's $500 to
$100,000 and maybe end up being
bypassed. That's $250,000.
That's how we get to this 5
billion number, so that's saving
them on that. OK, thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator. So,
You know, on, on the bill here.
Um
In section 1, I want to make
sure I understand the the
wording here.
It's a group health coverage,
including any form of
self-insurance offered, issued,
or renewed under the
healthcareurchasing Act.
shall provide coverage.
Are, are we forcing people to
By that coverage with this bill.
No, uh, Madam Chair and center,
we are not forcing people to
have this test. We are requiring
a health plan to work under the
precepts of this bill, which is
they cannot charge a copay to a
patient for getting this test.
OK. But, but the test is up to
the patient.
Got it, got it. Thank you,
ma'am. I'm sure, thanks, uh,
Senator.
So
If we're not gonna be, if we're
Did you say, I'm sorry, did you
say we're eliminating the copay.
Yes, Madam Chair Senator.
So we're eliminating the copay,
madam Chair, and Senator, um,
who's picking up that cost? Is
that going back down to the, to
the consumer.
No, that, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, that cost is being
picked up by the health plan.
Uh, this bill only applies to
commercial.
Uh, fully insured health plans,
which is about 12.5% of the
healthcare market in Mexico.
So
Madam Chair, Senator, so for a
guy like me with Tricare.
And and um
There's
How does, how does that work
with my plan then?
the military.
Active duty or retirees that
have either like your Prime,
Tricare Standard, Tricare for
Life.
Uh, that's a federal plan we
have no, uh, we have no
Control over Tricare, Medicare.
etc. So, Madam Sheriff Senator,
would you have any control or
effects or influence with Blue
Cross Blue Shield or
Uh, any private companies that
are operating in New Mexico.
This applies to the commercial
health plants in the state. They
come in several different forms,
which is why it repeats over and
over again, um, but yes, the
Presbyterian Blue Cross, uh,
United, basically, if you're
licensed as a fully insured
health plan, the Office of the
Superintendent has authority,
and they're able to apply this
no copay authority. OK, thank
you. So, Madam Chair, Senator,
one of the things that um
folks from Presbyterian told me
is that um
This, this would increase.
Um
Premiums on people because you
got to spread it around.
Whether that's true or not,
that's the information that
they.
They were concerned about, so
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
I understand why you, I, I
totally understand why you want
to do this.
But you're essentially forcing
companies to provide this
coverage.
And or
Forcing them not to charge on a
copay, that, is that fair to
say?
Uh, in terms to say that a man
chair and senators that they
cannot charge the copay, but
actually Presbyterian when I
worked on no behavioral cost
sharing, they were smart enough
to figure out they were saving
so much money in chronic
disease, that this was a real
winner and they supported the
bill. So I don't, you said you
talked to someone at
Presbyterian. I'm not sure who
you talk to. I used to know most
of the people over there, but um
that's uh I mean if if they
thought this through and it
would, I mean, the effect would
come back that year.
If they could get everyone if
they.
that the so much savings.
That they could put into profit.
Are you getting this test and
getting the procedure and
getting your LDL under control.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So,
What, what's the biggest issue
that you have in the FIR that
you wanna.
The biggest issue in the FIR is
clearing up what plants this
does not, uh, speak to the, the
health plans did look at this,
not dynamically scoring it, but
only cost scoring.
Again, but they don't with the,
they, they don't do and we don't
do an RFIRs, we don't do dynamic
scoring is look at the savings
that are generated by doing it.
And the savings vastly
outstripped.
cost of the loss of the copay.
of chair Senator, is that,
that's something that can be
Um
Remedy before the next committee
or before it gets to the floor.
Yeah
Madam Chair and senator, the,
uh clearly defining a high
deductible plans does not apply
until the deductible met, yes,
that will be fixed.
The, uh, I, I can go and meet
with the CEO of Press or
Loveless or Loveless is not the
helpline business. Blue Cross, I
used to work for Blue Cross of
New York,
ran half uh for New York State,
and I, I can educate them and I
can sit down and do the math
with their actuaries and they'll
hopefully see how much this is
going to save them, but I can't
force him to do that.
And, um, Madam Chair, doc,
where, where's this one go next?
Does it go to finance or
business tax?
Madam Chair and Senator Business
and tax. OK.
And lastly, Madam chair and
Senator, what, what amendments
are you looking at, um, doing
for the bill.
You mentioned you had, you had
several amendments. What were
for this bill, it's clearing up
the high deductible health plan
and small health plans and some
technical uh uh OSI regulation
stuff that we've done in these
other bills, um, and my other
bill, uh, there are some other
amendments that, I mean, these
two go together.
And um and that's where the
other amendments would go.
So Madam Chair and Senator, if
there's so much, so much like
large.
Large amount of savings for the
hospitals. How come they're not
here with you advocating.
Well, um,
It's a little bit like White and
really something rob banks
because that's where the money
is.
Money is in cardiology.
I mean, that the, the, the
Cleveland Clinic.
did not endorse calcium scanning
because that's probably 70% of
their revenue.
So there is a pushback.
So.
But and slowly cardiologists
kind of coming around to it. I
mean, imagine if we really
did this, we would eliminate.
A lot of the need for cardiology
and hospitalizations and since
we're pretty much on a fee for
service business.
It's not great for business.
But we have so much other
demand, it would really help
them out. All right. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
no other questions?
You could call the role play.
In her block. Uh to explain my
vote.
As
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos
And I know, yes.
And
And center city of Lopez, yes.
Hickey.
And boom.
Yes.
And I love this.
Yes.
And to explain his vote, Senator
Blu, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, I, I really
I'd really like to see the the
The amendments in the bill and
see what the farce is after you
have those amendments in the
bill when it gets through to the
Senate to make a
better informed decision because
right now, we, we really can't
do that. So I definitely
appreciate uh everything you're
doing to try to save lives here,
uh, a lot because
You scared me tonight.
And um
You know, a couple of weeks, I'm
gonna be heading in there to.
It's a little scan in the blood,
so thank you, doctor. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
by a vote of 8 to 1, you have a
due pass recommendations under.
Thank you very much
and 443, right? I can make very
short, madam chair. Basically,
this takes away the cost sharing
for Resuvostatin, um, and the
cost sharing is pretty much
minimal for that drug, and, uh,
Zetia, um, and it would also
take away if a, if a patient has
a complication with these.
Statin drugs and, and block
uptake blocker, um, and they
moved down to uh the more
expensive injectable drugs
because they couldn't get the
LDL below 50 or there were side
effects, but again, this takes
away the barrier to the
treatment, uh, diagnosing is one
thing treating is what needs to
follow through. So this bill
would eliminate the copay, but
before it goes to the next
committee, we will clear up the
same issues around.
The health plans with a high
deductible, we'll do that with
the OSI and I also will put in a
uh provision that um the uh
The second line drugs can only,
uh, I mean, it can be used, but
they don't really need to be
prior auth.
Um, the when, uh, the statins
at, at maximum amount of can't
get the LDL below 50 because we
know that is what
Absolutely cleanly works, um,
and, uh, again, if there's a if
there are, there's a small group
of people who can get a
myositis, that's muscle
inflammation from the statins.
So this basically takes away the
barrier for getting the drugs.
But again, it's, it's a, it's by
and large a very small amount.
And with that
the mill.
Thank you, Senator. We kind of
went out of process, but,
um, the chair will move a, a do
not pass on Senate Bill 443.
But for purposes of discussion,
they do pass on Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute.
Senate Bill 443.
Thank
Senator Hickey will 2.
Yeah.
And again, this is for purposes
of discussion.
that you've already presented
the committee substitute.
So with that, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in support of uh the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 443.
And if you'd like to stand and
say a few words.
that
The microphone and
Identify yourself in your
statement, please and thank you.
Sure, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Viera
Akiva. I'm the life and how
division director with the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance. We have been working
with Senator Hickey uh to
improve the language on this
bill and um we
uh the new amendments which will
save money and save lives and we
urge a passage of this bill.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in opposition
here in the room?
Is there anyone online?
Either
either support or opposition.
Thank you.
So with that, we go to questions
or comments from committee
members.
regarding
And turn and center. I just want
to ask.
Really quickly, so, um, as
you're prohibiting cause in
for this clashsterol lowering
drug.
I use, I looked up.
I use a CBS.
Uh, Caremark.
That's not in state.
But I still get the same
treatment.
I use that, or do I need to
in-state pharmacy.
Anderson.
Man chair and I hate to ask this
delicate question, but are you
over 65 on Medicare?
Mature and ener.
Wow.
Well then, yes, I, I, I, again,
we can talk offline. I can tell
you if you're in a fully insured
plan, however you are, then yes,
that would be covered.
Aitman turned center September
9th, I will be, but
Currently I'm not. Give me a
break. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions?
See and the entertain and do
pass motion, Senator Hickey.
With the second,
the second from.
Senator.
And if you could call the role,
please.
And blood.
Senator Charlie, yes,
Senor Gallegos.
I remember.
Yes.
Pinto.
The
center city Lopez, yes,
and her Hickey.
Yes. Senator Lopez.
Yes.
So by a vote of 9 to 0, you have
to do pass recommendation.
Thank you. Yes, you're going on
to tax committee with this bill
also yes yes.
Thank you.
for Charlie, Senate Bill 258.
Charlie, just before you start,
we do have an amendment, but it
wasn't signed. Is this your
amendment?
OK.
If you'd like to present your
bill first and then we'll go to
the amendment afterwards.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And good evening everyone.
I'm presenting Senate Bill 258,
which ensures that New Mexico's
students receive comprehensive
medically accurate human
sexuality education as a part of
their health curriculum,
beginning in the 2027, 2028
school year.
This bill is about equipping
young people with knowledge so
they can make informed,
reasonable decisions about their
health, their safety, and their
futures.
But just as important, it
respects the rights of parents
by including a clear opt-out
provision giving families the
choice to decide what is best
for their child.
Senate Bill 258 also prioritizes
local decision making, ensuring
that school districts and
charter schools retain the
flexibility to design a
curriculum that aligns with
their community's values.
As long as it meets the core
educational standards.
This approach balances the need
for students to receive.
Critical health education, while
allowing school.
Local control over how it's
delivered.
Comprehensive human sexuality
education has been shown to
reduce risky behaviors.
Improve health outcomes and
support the development of
healthy relationships.
By ensuring that students have
access to this education while
still allowing parents and local
leaders to make those key
decisions.
This bill offers a reasonable,
balanced approach to a vital
issue.
And as a parent of a high school
student myself, I know.
How challenging it is to
compete.
With the abundance of
information regardless of
accuracy on the internet and
social media today.
I want to to ensure that my
child
And their friends have access to
medically accurate.
Sexual health education.
Um
Because, let's face it, there
are just some questions and
conversations. I know my child
might be more comfortable not
having with me.
And if and when that happens, I
want to know there is a trusted
and responsible adult in the
school system who will provide
medically accurate information.
Um, and with that.
Do you want me to introduce my
experts before we go into the
amendment? OK.
Good evening.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is.
Doctor Elizabeth Dixon, and I'm
faculty at the University of New
Mexico, College of Population
Health.
I am a public health nurse with
over 20 years of experience
working in community and
schools.
And for the last 7 years of
researcher and educator.
In my role as a researcher. I
have conducted or been involved
in research supporting
school-based sexual health
education in New Mexico.
I published multiple
peer-reviewed academic journal
manuscripts and have been
awarded research funding to
better understand
How sexual health education is
taught, and the bear used to
teaching.
In school settings. I'd like to
share 3 key points with you
regarding SB 258.
sexual health education that
meets the description in this
legislation.
Has been shown to have a
positive, significant impact on
young people's health.
It can decrease rates of
unintended pregnancy, rates of
sexually transmitted infections
and rates of depression and
anxiety.
It can increase protective
behaviors such as the correct
use of condoms.
And birth control.
Abstinence from and delay of
sexual activity.
It can increase safety in
relationships by teaching about
healthy communication.
And it can improve safety in
schools by reducing bullying and
violence.
This legislation supports our
teachers by updating and
clarifying what is required in
the health education course
required for graduation.
From our research, we know that
not everyone teaching sex ed in
school, understands what needs
to be taught.
Nor have they been trained to
teach sex education. Because of
this, many of them use
fear-based approaches.
When talking about sexual
health, and many are not aware
of the statute requirements,
requirements such as assuring
parents and guardians have the
right to opt their student out.
This legislation will update and
clarify those statute
requirements while maintaining
local autonomy.
And control of which teaching
materials and curriculum is
appropriate for their community.
Finally this legislation
supports students.
We know from our research.
But despite current statute, not
all students receive sex
education.
And those that do often describe
feeling shame and fear in their
class.
Most students are not taught
this information at home, nor do
they have someone at home they
feel comfortable talking to.
By clarifying what sex health.
sexual health content needs to
be taught.
Students can receive the
information they need and want
in school.
Thank you for your time, and I
look forward to your questions.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez. I'm the executive
director of Equality New Mexico,
um, and in the interest of time,
I am just happy to also answer
any questions.
Thank you.
Um, so with that senator, for
purposes of discussion.
I will move
Amendment number 1.
The Senate Bill 258, and that is
0.231533.1.
I will move that and with a
second from Senator Hickey.
And would you like to explain
your amendment, please?
Uh, yes, Madam Chair, this
amendment
Simply
Um
Allows for us to not change
graduation requirements as they
are right now, um, ensuring that
this can be taken 15 can be
taken in middle school or one
half could be taken in high
school, which is current law.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in support of the
amendment?
If anybody would like to come to
the middle, introduce yourself,
or if you're just raising your
hand.
Crazy man, OK.
Is there anyone in opposition?
and is there anyone online for
the amendment?
And up in support or in
opposition?
Tiger.
OK. Questions or comments from
committee on the amendment.
I think there's no opposition.
You could just show a cell
voting.
In the affirmative, that's a
A night
a vote on the amendment.
So without you having amended
bill, Senator, with that, um,
we'll go to the audience for the
amended bill.
Is there anyone here in support
of the amended bill.
And if you'd like anyone who'd
like to come forward or several
of you, so I'd like to ask for 5
people at least to come forward.
Please identify yourself and a
short 2 minute statement.
Thank you.
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Isa Villan Naranjo.
I'm a legislative fellow with
Equality New Mexico, and we're
here in strong support of SB
258. No matter which side of the
aisle you're on, it's crucial to
acknowledge how this bill will
protect the adolescents of our
state by teaching them about
healthy relationships, genuine
consent, and sexual violence
prevention. By giving the youth
accurate information, we allow
them the mental tools to
understand what abuse is and the
verbal tools to possibly say
something about it to a trusted
adult. This is one of the best
ways we can protect the future
adults of our state. This would
help.
me identify that I was being
abused by a parent and would
have reinforced to me that even
if said by that parent, it
wasn't OK or my fault and should
have been reported. It does this
while still allowing parents the
autonomy to opt their student
out if they disagree with the
curriculum, while ensuring the
youth who do go through it will
get life saving,
non-stigmatized, medically
accurate information about
themselves, for the youth of our
state, we urge a due pass.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee. I appreciate the time
to speak today. My name is
Cassandra Acosta.
I am a native New Mexican, a
nurse, and a graduate student,
um, studying public health at
the University of New Mexico. So
my support for Bill 258 stems
from the perspective of a
previous New Mexico public
education student, a nurse who
has worked with young people for
10 years, and as a graduate
student who is interested in
improving the health of New
Mexico's young people. This bill
would would be a stride forward
to improving the health and
well-being of New Mexico young
people, school environments, and
ensure we provide support in
critical skills so that our
young people
people can flourish into amazing
adults and the future of New
Mexico. I urge the passage of
this bill. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor and
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Coalition of
Sexual Assault Programs, which
is the statewide organization
supporting prevention and
intervention services throughout
the state.
SB 258 provides youth with vital
information they need and
deserve encourages the positive
sense of identity and inspires
community investment, which are
all protective factors in the
prevention of sexual violence.
Comprehensive sexual health
education is not just about
preventing harm. It's also about
creating cultural change that
better cares for all our valued
community members by equipping
young people with the tools to
navigate relationships and make
informed decisions.
We are increasing protective
factors, changing community
norms and giving all young
people in New Mexico the
opportunity to gain skills that
will help them navigate
relationships throughout their
lives. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Rachel Ray
and I'm with Bold Futures, an
organization by and for women
and people of color in New
Mexico. Growing up as a queer
non-binary person on the asexual
spectrum. I did not have access
to evidence-based inclusive sex
ed that included information
relevant to me. What I was
taught instead was steeped in
shame, stigma, and fear. This
disconnected me from my own body
and left me vulnerable even as
an adult to misinformation and
coercion in relationships.
At the age of 30, I'm still
making up for what I was not
taught, and I know I'm not the
only one.
Atold futures, we know that full
autonomy and dignity for folks
of all ages is only possible
when we are given the
information that we need to make
truly informed decisions about
our bodies and our lives.
Young people and their families
deserve access to age
appropriate evidence-based
information about body safety,
health, and sexuality that truly
equips youth for success and the
thriving futures they deserve.
We urge it to pass.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the American
Civil Liberties Union of New
Mexico, and we are in strong
support of SB 258. This bill is
about ensuring that all students
across New Mexico have the tools
they need to navigate
adolescence and adulthood with
confidence and care,
comprehensive sexual health
education in schools equip
students with the age
appropriate and inclusive tools
they need to be safe and to
support responsible decision
making about their well-being.
Access to medically accurate,
evidence-based information is
essential for young people to
make informed and responsible
decisions that will shape their
lives far beyond the classroom.
Research shows that when young
people have access to this
education, they make safer,
smarter, and healthier choices.
It also helps students to build
relationships rooted in mutual
respect and communication, we
urge the committee to support
this bill and affirm the right
of every student to receive the
knowledge and education they
deserve. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition here in the audience?
none. I do have a list uh from
Zoom.
And we'll start first with uh
Chris.
Michaelis
Yes. My name is Chris Micelli.
I'm a former clinical social
worker, former board chair of
Girls Inc of Santa Fe, who has
been in the business of helping
girls learn healthy sexuality
and boundaries since in the last
70 years, we are in strong
support of this bill.
Had there been uh an earlier
hearing for this bill, then
members of our
Girls would be here except it's
a school night. So we urge your
support because absent healthy
sexuality instruction in the
schools, it's left to
Pears to social media, which is,
as we all know, very dangerous
and to others who have
misinformation or might lead
people in the wrong direction.
So we are in strong support of
this bill, and we encourage you
to pass it. Thank you.
Thank you.
drink
Hayley
Bailey, you're still muted.
We'll go on to the next one and
then try back Hay.
I think it's Leila Casada.
Hi, sorry about that. Good
evening, Madam Chairwoman and
members of the committee. My
name is Leela Quezada as a part
of Girls Inc. I've been trying
to get any type of comprehensive
sex education passed for New
Mexico students since I was in
the 9th grade.
I am now a sophomore in college.
Let that sink in. It's been over
5 years.
I may have been failed, but I
will not let the next generation
of New Mexicans go through the
same thing as I did,
comprehensive sex education is
life saving for students and
prepares them for the real
world. The current curriculum is
lacking the information that
students need most.
Speaking from my experience as a
student who did receive sex
education in a New Mexico high
school.
But this bill will change that.
It is absolutely vital to bring
this spill to New Mexico
schools. I ask you to please
pass Senate Bill 258. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go back. Haley.
Hailey Drake
OK. Thank you, Haley. We'll go
on to those in opposition.
Renee Russ.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Rene Ross, and I'm
the superintendent of Clovis
Municipal Schools. Today I'm
speaking in opposition to Senate
Bill 258, and I'm speaking on
behalf of the Clovisd municipal
School Board of Education, and a
large group of parents and
community members from Clovis
who have concerns over this bill
and other similar laws that have
preceded it.
I understand the intent that of
this bill is to create
flexibility in high school
graduation requirements and
recognize the value of educating
students on important health
topics. However, certain aspects
of human sexuality education are
best introduced based on a
student's maturity level and a
family's values. Parents should
not have to worry that their
children will be prematurely
exposed to sensitive topics such
as abortion or gender identity
through mandated curriculum.
Strong school family
partnerships are essential to
student success and trust is
eroded when certain ideological
content enters the classroom.
The imposition of such content
creates turmoil within the
educational setting and
distracts from our core mission,
ensuring that students achieve
proficiency in reading, writing,
math and science while
developing into well rounded
individuals with strong
character.
A more appropriate approach
might be an opt-in model
allowing families to decide when
and how these discussions take
place. Also, the rulemaking
process could lead to unintended
implementation beyond the bill's
original intent. I urge you to
refrain from imposing
gender-related ideologies on our
public schools and instead focus
on restoring the trust and
confidence that parents
rightfully expect from the
education system and to continue
the good work that has been
started in an effort to improve
instructional.
outcomes in reading and math.
Thank you.
Thank you, Laurie.
please.
Yes, good evening, Madam
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Laurie
Kirkendall. I'm speaking in
opposition to set a bill 258. I
am with Beacon Health Education
Resources, hold a masters in
public health, and I'm a
national consultant on health
and sex education originally
from northern New Mexico.
Comprehensive sex education
normalizes youth sexual
activity, minimizes its
physical, emotional, and
relational risks and overstates
the effectiveness of
contraception in reducing them.
The New Mexico Department of
Health 2021 STD report stated
that it's most urgent concern is
the dramatically rising rates of
congenital syphilis among New
Mexico babies. According to the
CDC, condoms will not protect
against syphilis. As an
alternative approach is the
public health and primary
prevention approach of sexual
sexual risk avoidance, also
called optimal health education.
The far majority of New Mexico
youth are not sexually active
and should be supported in their
decisions. Optimal health
education protects the current
and future health of all
students. I have a number of
detailed concerns with this bill
and the areas of consent,
contraception, and the teaching
of sexual orientation and gender
identity.
The proposed language upholds
the priority of objectivity, and
yet several topics contradict
that. I am mostly concerned that
many parents would not be in
support of the controversial
topics included as they often
contradict family values. While
the bill mentions parent right
to opt out, I would ask that you
add required parent notification
and permission and full
transparency of all materials
along with encouraging parent
education. This bill's analysis
includes
s t ud ies that overstate the
effectiveness of comprehensive
sex ed and use weak or
misleading research. I recommend
this committee amend this bill
to require the public health
approach of optimal health
education. I'm happy to provide
further background and health
support to these critical
issues. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Jody Hendrix.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I am Jodi
Hendricks, executive director of
New Mexico Family Action
Movement, and I urge you to
reject Senate Bill 258 as a
massive government overreach.
Then a Bill 258 mandates state
controlled comprehensive sex
education, which is proven
ineffective at reducing teen
pregnancies and STDs. 7 major
research reviews show that
comprehensive sex education
fails to improve long-term
outcomes.
and in some cases increases
risky behavior. So as Laurie had
said, instead of forcing this uh
radical activist-driven material
into every classroom. New Mexico
should prioritize sexual risk
avoidance education, also known
as optimal health education, a
science-based health focused
approach that actually protects
students.
Comprehensive sexed encourages
sexual experimentation,
normalizes STDs, and minimizes
contraception failure rates,
sexual risk avoidance education
promotes abstinence, teaches
risk avoidance, and includes
parental involvement, because
parents, not bureaucrats, to
decide what their children are
taught about sex, but a parent's
opportunity to opt out is often
confusing and lacks transparency
and proper timing. So why not
have an opt-in requirement
instead. The require
experiments that SB 258 places
on curriculum does undermine and
limit local control. SB 258 also
forces taxpayers to fund
activist ideologies and really
does impose a one size fits all
agenda on local communities. So
I urge you today to please
reject Senate Bill 258 and stand
for parental rights, local
control, and the true well-being
of New Mexico's children. Thank
you.
Thank you.
So with that, we go to questions
or comments from committee
members.
said the
the motion for a do pass from
Senator Silvia Lopez, with the
2nd from Senator Hickey.
still open for questions or
comments, Senator Gallegos.
I'll start out. I'm not afraid.
Um, I do have quite a few
questions cause I think uh I
actually think that we heard the
other night with
The president's dialogue on
this.
Has to change federally, but I
do have some questions, so, um,
you have we heard superintendent
schools in Clovis.
Uh, I've been my chair and
center. I've been on school
board for 23 years. I've never
seen such an ugly mandate to
come before us, but I'm
wondering, do you have?
The school board support you
have talking about local
control. Uh, you have your own
daughter. Do you have any
support?
from your local community, not
these community, but your local
communities that are willing to
stand behind you on this bill.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
Yes.
Zuni, um, school board is
actually in support of this bill
from my district.
Thank you for that, Madam
Senator. Um, there again, uh, I
believe a local control, um,
I was trying to find out.
Earlier I looked at um
He knocked out if if you'll go
to page 1792.
Of your bill
Hampshire and Senator, can you
explain to me?
What this portion does because
it says direction of students,
parents, can you explain to me
this portion of Bill.
Which is item A.
For
and well, I apologize.
Uh, item one going from 16 to
17.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
this is the opt out.
Uh, provision.
offered to parents that is
currently in statute now.
To Mount Cha and Senator, what
are the options?
With the parents, what happens?
A 2 child or the parent.
on the parrot pops out.
Anderson,
Madam Chan Senator, I'm actually
gonna let our expert talk about
what this looks like.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator.
When parents, it is currently
and has been in the statute for
many years.
It is the responsibility of the
school district.
Uh, or the school to notify
parents when content related to
sexual health is being taught.
And if the parents object, this
allows it to be in their control
whether or not they want their
student to be in the classroom.
They can choose to remove their
centers since the school has
The authority, do you have?
Opt out option for the teachers
and or the district ontario
Center.
Expert witness
Uh, Madam Chan senator, there is
no opt-out option for teachers
or school districts.
So Madame Chair and senator and
were witnesses. That's why I say
this is a really
Of the mandate, so what you're
saying, man, Chainner is once
this is in statute.
teachers, the staff.
District, the school board.
has no choice, is that what I
understand, and children's
center.
Madam Chair and senator once
this becomes law.
What it will require is that
schools who receive state
funding offer comprehensive, um,
Human sexuality and to talk
about the specifics of what
local control looks like. I once
again, I'm gonna turn. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator
Currently the standards and
benchmarks in statutes require.
sexual health education to be
taught.
What this legislation does is it
clarifies that content, so this
isn't.
Mandating anything new, it
clarifies the content which is
already required to be taught.
by school districts and by
teachers and center and
were witness we have in in
schools, a health class, we
already do this. Why do we need
this bill except to skew it.
Further to the left. Uh, I'm
just trying to get down to the
basics, we're
targeting one specific.
Issue.
And I'm trying to figure out how
it's better for all students.
That certain students.
And as a districtman turnedin I
take offensive this because
that's our job as school board
members and decide what's good
for our district.
Not for the state of one segment
of population of what's good for
our students as a whole in that
district, so can you explain to
me why if we already do have
plans.
by this bill
His valuable needs me.
sir.
Absolutely, madam chair and
senator, and I'm actually gonna
turn it over to my other expert
witness to answer this one.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Senator Gallegos, um,
Really great questions and a
couple of key points. The first
point is that we brought this
legislation forward because we
believe that
Regardless of the feelings of
individual school board members
in individual school districts,
the young people of New Mexico
deserve equitable access to life
saving information that is
presented in comprehensive
sexuality education classes, no
matter what district they live
in. The data has consistently
shown.
Over decades that
Healthier and safer lives,
better health outcomes when they
have access to this information,
uh.
Parents are able to opt their
young folks out. Parents are
able to act to the opt the
children out.
Of this legislation of this
curriculum.
Knowing that individual families
may make a decision that they
want that young person to
experience this education in
their church or in their home or
in that, you know, whatever
setting they feel is correct.
But there are thousands of
students in every school
district and the other students
in that district deserve access
to the same information that
students in Albuquerque or Santa
Fe or another part of the
district they're receiving.
The man turned soon I
guess I an expert when I say
really care less about the
thousands. Our district is 728.
Yes.
In my district
I care about those children, and
I think this over exceeds the
state's authority on how to
Manage my dish as a school board
member.
I'm elected by my community.
to do with the very best
possibly you can.
Our students, and I think this
is a huge overreach.
The superintendent schools in in
Clovis but didn't believe this
needs being.
laid out in the way of doing,
and I, I know we won't get an
agreement on that, so I, I need
to go back, uh, go to the next
point, um.
No cost. Can you go to?
Page 18, line 1 presenter.
And Senator, it says no cost to
the school district.
It we currently have.
In place policies, procedures,
and staff.
That are using health right now.
Which is science-based and
adequate.
How are these mandates not?
going to cost our district.
concerned, sir.
Madam Chair and Senator, there
are organizations trusted
organizations, um, across New
Mexico right now who are
qualified to provide this
information at no cost, and I
don't know if either one of you
want to talk about maybe a
little bit of those
organizations and what, what we
provide.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Gaos, um, as, uh, as the senator
said, there are a number of
organizations ranging from
religious institutions, um, to
curriculum development
institutions, um, across the
state and across the country
that provide this type of
curriculum, uh, many of them
provide teachers who will come
into a classroom and teach the,
the curriculum specifically some
of them provide uh teach the
teacher training, so instruction
on how to.
deliver the curriculum, um, and
so, uh, you know, we, we believe
that this can happen at no cost
to the district because there
are a multitude of organizations
out there who want to make that
happen.
Me turning center.
I appreciate it. I would ask,
could you get me that?
Lisp from
New Mexico, as he said across
the nation.
As your trust level.
My trust level or all obviously
all.
I, I don't perceive what you
perceive, but I would like to
get to know how I would.
trust and do this
Uh, tax free or it's no cost to
the schools. I'll, I'll turn and
center I'll be expecting that,
uh, relatively quick as I
understand this beyond a fast
pace to get to the floor. I'd
like to be able to explain.
Honestly and openly,
who those are and what they do.
And how we get a hold of them,
uh, but I'll go on the next, uh,
Question I have for you is
actually on page 21 line 19.
And in there.
Madam Chair and senator.
Uh, you talked about district
and charter schools.
You have supported charter
schools.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
haven't identified any charter
schools.
and sinner and just going back
historically, you always talk
about
Have we approached your Native
American friends.
You know, in, in, in your
debates, you're always saying,
have you talked to us?
Why are you not talking to us?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, I,
I take that back in a, I'm
sorry, I actually had a
conversation with the New
charter school, New Mexico Media
Arts Academy about this and they
were in full support.
Oh, and I understand that um
Amyville High School also has
supported this bill.
Which manitarian, excuse me,
which was that last one? Amy
Beal. It's a charter school in
Albuquerque.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Senator, and I appreciate
that you did reach out to.
To charges, uh.
I know there's a lot more in.
In the state, um.
Then I'd like to go to
Standards, which is on page 22.
And it starts up, um,
course lined with academic
performance standards.
Can you explain to me what
standards and where the basis
are for these standards and what
are ultimate.
Optimal
Outcomes are
Anderson
Yeah, uh, Madam Chan, Senator,
I'm actually gonna hand it over
to our expert.
Doctor Dixon. Thank you, um,
Madam Chair and Senator.
current standards and benchmarks
listed in statute for the New
Mexico.
Um, schools are based on
national health education.
Standards to be taught to be
taught in variety of authentic
will stop you. This is new
language in your bill.
If it's already in codified
statute.
Why do you have this in this
section?
And germin.
Underlying this new language.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
this, this reflects the
standards and benchmarks that
exist in a regulatory policy
currently that are being added
into statute. It is new language
and statute, but is not new
language for New Mexico. It
currently exists within
regulatory framework and all of
the, all of the information for
this regulatory framework as
Doctor Dixon was saying comes
from national best practices and
standards, and also I would say
that many of the definitions, if
you're looking at.
7.
I never know the section,
subsection, whatever, but if
you're looking at line 7 moving
all the way through into page
23.
Almost every one of those terms
that is defined there is already
defined somewhere else in state
law.
Well thank you for that, madam
chair and senator and
Extra witnesses, I, I guess I
just
I don't understand why we're
changing if we've got it
somewhere else in statute where
I were highlighting again, uh, I
do have, um,
Adam Senator, one more point on
that, um, it is because they
have since been updated. The
National Health, excuse me,
Madam Chair and Senator, the
National Health Education.
Standards have been updated
since the original standards and
benchmarks were.
The chair and senator, that's
not what you'd said earlier. You
said this is currently.
In statute.
So
You're saying now we're updating
to the
Federal mandates, is that what
it is, for federal.
That you
No, excuse me, Madam chair and
Senator, no, that was not what I
was saying. I apologize for the
confusion.
The standards and benchmarks
currently in statute.
Sorry, currently in code.
Mm
Um
Refle reflected what, what New
Mexico had put into um language
at that time. These, this
language here is based on
updated national health
education.
Uh, standards for professional
standards that are expected to
be taught in health education.
The center and extra witness
then as the National Health.
Standards change will be back
next year.
Mending this pills at what I
anticipate win.
So
gently.
Madam Chair, and senator that is
not a possible I, I can't answer
that question.
turn center I I.
I can't, so we'll be back, um.
if I may, you did mention a few
questions, so you're already
getting close to that number. So
if you could please, maybe a
couple more.
Please
The other senators can also ask
some questions. Thank you and I
appreciate it when we get.
Really?
Really bad bill.
I think I get
A few more questions, but Madam
Charon Senator, I'll, I'll just
get, I'll try to sum this up.
Um
Earlier has talked about and
chair and senator.
An expert witness optimal
health.
Education options.
Have you researched and do you
understand any of those options?
Why are we not using them terms?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, I am familiar with
the term optimal health
education similar to its uh
sexual risk avoidance.
Similar to abstinence only.
Um, this is a, uh,
approach, the sexual health
education that unfortunately, I
disagree with the comments made
earlier, um, that is not
evidence supported.
Um, and can be harmful.
The students mental and
physical.
I do not have the health
outcomes that were.
Described earlier.
Madam Chair, I yield a in
reading the bill.
and in the day and not to go to
these questions, I
I do presume we'll be back, but
uh thank you for your time and
your.
And
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions from committee
members.
block
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and panel.
Um
You know, there's been a lot you
guys talked a lot about local
control, which I really like.
Um, why not have this.
Why can't we just have this as
an elective instead of as a
requirement where the local
districts can decide whether
they want to do this.
Uh, have this mandated down
their throats or just say we as
a community, we're gonna provide
this as an elective.
Uh, Madam Chan, Senator, this is
already a requirement.
Um, it's clarifying the content
of that request.
OK, thank you. Um,
Madam chair, so
So real Ranchos come back and
said,
We like what we got.
We don't wanna, we don't need
anything else. We're happy with
what we got. We know what's
better for our kids than, than
you people in Santa Fe. Are you
telling me that?
Rio Rancho Public School, one of
the, I think they're the 3rd
largest.
In the state, Madam Chair,
panel, they're not allowed to
keep what they have, they have
to do this.
Madam chair and senator, um, the
schools will work through a
process with the public
education department.
establish that curriculum.
Um, and so long as it meets the
standards through PED, um, Rio
Rancho High School.
Love, um, school district, any
school district throughout the
state will be able to use their
curriculum.
Well,
So, let me ask you this way that
Madam Chair and panel, if Rio
Rancho comes back and says, we
don't want to do this.
What we like what we got. Leave
us alone. What do you tell them?
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
While I don't anticipate, um,
As one of any school coming back
and and saying that they don't.
Want to, to, becau because this
already exists.
That already exist.
It's clarifying the content.
So Senator, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, I, I would disagree
because this, this is now called
comprehensive, so it's totally
different than what they have
now. So again,
It's real ranch or any other
school district in the state,
Madam Chair and panel says we
like what we got.
We don't want to follow this. We
don't want to do the
comprehensive.
Human sexuality education.
Are we gonna force them to
comply with what this bill is,
and if you're saying what you
just said.
Then why do they even have to do
it? Because you said, well,
they're already doing it anyway,
so what was the point of this
bill?
Madam Senator, once again this
clarifies the content within
that curriculum.
OK, um,
Madam Chair.
Panel, let's talk about the
content.
Make it a little
Sensitive in here.
Comprehensive human sexuality
education, that's brand new in
the bill.
Tell me what that is. Well, let
me, let me just
Ask you a couple different
topics.
Would that be
Anatomy and physiology.
Madam Chair and Senator, it
would include anatomy and
physiology.
Uh, I'm just guessing here
because the comprehensive
Human sexuality.
It doesn't say what it is in
here, so I'm just gonna take a
guess, Madam Chair and panel.
Uh, we're talk about puberty.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, it
would, and also is worth noting
that, uh, to my knowledge, every
school district in the state
already covers those topics. OK,
I'm, I'm just asking. I want to
make sure I understand this
because it's comprehensive now.
Uh, Madam Chair, would to talk
about in the panel, talk about
masturbation.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
believe so. Um
yeah.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, panel to
talk about.
Obviously, menstruation,
sexually transmitted infections.
We'll talk about that.
Madam Chair and Senator, yes.
Um, would it also talk about,
Madam Chair, the panel would to
talk about.
Sexual activity in detail.
Madam and Senator.
I think in detail is a pretty
broad phrase what I would say is
that the intention of teaching
comprehensive human sexuality
education is to provide young
people with the adequate and
accurate information for how to
protect themselves, how to
engage in this world in a
healthy and safe manner, um, and
so this these conversations
would include and already
include districts across the
state,
information about sexuality and
um and the
relationships that young people
may engage in when they get
older or, you know, as they're
going through high school. The
reason I ask, Madam Chair and
panel is, uh, my youngest
graduate in 2020 from Rio Rancho
High School. We, we had to go
through this and look at the.
So
Just curious if it's changed,
um, Madam Chair and panel, are
we talking about?
Um, heterosexual sex?
Is that a topic here?
In the comprehensive.
human sexuality education.
Madame Chair and Senator, we're
talking about.
Providing young people with
adequate and accurate
information about how to
negotiate healthy relationships,
about how to engage in those
relationships about how to
protect themselves and about how
to maintain their mental and
physical health while engaging
in those relationships.
Um, so I mean I can I I sure and
I mean I can get to some, you
know, very detailed discussion
which I don't want to get into,
but you're giving me just broad
answers that aren't answers.
You're just saying just to
protect yourself and all that
and healthy relationships.
But again, I would imagine.
If we're talking about
comprehensive sexual education.
Um, we're talking about a bunch
of different types of sexual
relationships.
Um, so
With Madam Chair and panel when,
what, what's the, are you
showing videos, are you showing
pictures, uh, what, what are you
showing here?
Madam Chair and senator.
The content that would be taught
in terms of teaching materials
and curriculum would be up to
the decision.
Of the local school district.
As long as it meant this.
Met these criteria.
So if there were videos or
whatever freakingum they chose
to use, it would be up to them.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Doc, what you just said then,
What, what is, what is real,
what is Rio Rancho doing right
now that doesn't comply with
this. Let me ask it that way.
Madam Chair and Senator.
That is the essence of the
problem is we don't know because
it's different everywhere and
you just look like some
standardization of the.
But
Madam Chair, Senator, you're,
you're, you're not talking about
any detail at all in the bill.
All you're saying is,
Comprehensive human sexuality
education that meets department
academic content and performance
standards and establishes the
foundation, right, and I think
middle school as well. So tell
me.
Tell me what that is.
Tell me what schools right now
are not complying with this
comprehensive.
Human sexuality education.
Uh, Madam Chan the senator, this
isn't about schools not oh.
Complaining. This is about
standardizing curriculum.
Well, I, I would disagree, Madam
Chair, Senator, because it is
about schools not comply because
you're requiring them to comply
with
The state standard.
So, again, what
What school districts are not
meeting the standard to comply
with what you want to teach our
children.
Again, Madam Char, this is not
about schools complying. This is
about standardizing curriculum.
OK. Again, Madam Chair, and
panel.
So you're looking at
standardized, you, you, you
mentioned earlier local control.
And now you're saying
standardized. There's no way you
can have
Local control standardized
comprehensive human sexuality
education.
You can't do it.
It's impossible to do that. So
you're gonna come down or Santa
Fe is gonna come down on the
school districts and saying,
hey, give me your sex ed
curriculum.
And I'm gonna tell you, I'm PED
and I'm gonna tell you what
you're missing. Is, is that
essentially what we're doing?
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, um,
standardizing the curriculum and
local control are not mutually
exclusive.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, yeah,
they, they are.
Um, because
If Eunice wants to do.
This Rio Rancho wants to do
this.
That's not standardized.
It just isn't.
So
Again, and, and this doesn't
even show us or tell us what the
lesson plans are. And one of the
other things in here.
It says, let me read this. I
mean we can go on page 4 to 5
real quick.
The use of the following
instructors for comprehensive
human sexuality education of
school nurses. I, Madam Chair,
panel, I, I like that.
or science teachers, OK.
Athletic department personnel, I
don't know if we're talking
about the football coach or
what, I mean, I, I don't know
what the football coach is gonna
tell us about human
comprehensive human sexuality.
And any qualified private
person.
I mean, what, what is that?
So
And qualified, what is a
qualified private person.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for asking that question
because it came up in education
as well, um, a qualified private
person would be established by
the school, um, and
They would, um.
Ideally be from one of these
organizations who teaches.
Um, this curriculum.
Madam Chair, Senator, ideally.
Ideally,
Or is it required?
Madam Chair and senator.
It is not, I mean, it's any
qualified person.
Would be identified by the
school.
And the qualified person would
have
Access
2
Approved curriculum.
From PED.
Madam Chair, Senator panel.
Would I be qualified?
Would I be qualified to go into
middle school or high school
and, and teach comprehensive
human sexuality education.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, it
would be um.
Up to the school and PED. Those
are the entities that would vet
the qualified person. OK. So,
Madam Chair, Senator, up to the
schools in PED. So what if the
schools say yes.
And PED says no to the qualified
person.
Madam Chair and senator.
That is a decision that the
school and PED were well, Madam
Chair, Senator, what if they
don't? What if they, what, what
if Eunice says I want David
Gallegos to teach this in PED
says no.
And then they just keep going
back and forth.
So there's no, there's no sta,
there's no stand, you're
talking, Madam Chair and
senator, you're talking about
standardization before, but yet
there's no standardization on
the qualified private person.
That doesn't make any sense.
Because you're really, the bill
is putting
Putting the school district in a
really bad position.
For a liability standpoint.
And parents as well are when we
talk about this any private
person, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator, are we?
Are we, um
The parents have to approve that
person, to the school board have
to approve that person?
Madam chair and Senator, the
Well, Parents don't, um,
Weigh in on which teachers are
hired, who is teaching the
curriculum of math, of science,
and this would work in that same
way. It would be the decision of
the school, uh, and PED.
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
agree with that, but any
qualified private person.
That is the school just
Putting an RFP out and saying,
hey, we need somebody who knows
something about comprehensive
human sexuality, please apply to
the school.
Um, I would imagine there's some
reasonableness in that with the
background check.
But if I just say, hey.
I'm a retired Air Force officer.
Nuclear weapons guy, uh, nuclear
operations expert.
I've had a little experience
growing up.
I mean, this is what this is, I,
I don't understand how we can
sit there and say, why would we
want to call a private person,
amen, and we don't even have
standards. And by the way, if
one person in the district likes
them, but the state doesn't like
them or vice versa.
It doesn't, it doesn't make any
sense, and the bill doesn't even
show.
What the lesson plan is.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
you're telling me about
standards in a comprehensive
Standard, but there isn't one
here. Can you show me actually,
Madam Chair, real quick, and
Senator, we're in here does it
show the comprehensive standard.
Because I see on page 5, number
2, starting at 7, life skills
talking about.
You know, uh, doing CPR
training, how to identify
someone having a heart attack,
that's
So we, we talked about details
there, but when it comes to the
sexual stuff, we don't talk
about details.
Uh, Madam Senator, it begins on
page 20 with the most
substantive.
Um
Ares beginning on page 22, which
is the actual content and the
details I believe that you're
speaking with Senator Block,
Madam Chair.
OK, OK. So, Madam chair,
Senator, those are
Definitions
So those are definitions.
And they are abstinence.
Age appropriate consent,
evidence-based information,
gender, gender identity.
Gender stereotype, healthy
relationship, medically accurate
text.
So there's 10 definitions.
So that's the comprehensive
standard where a school district
like Rio Rancho, they can come
in here and
They can just pull these 10
definitions saying abstinence
means this all the way down to
number 10, sex means this, and
they've complied.
Madam Chair and Senator Block,
so, uh, those definitions are
substantive definitions, and
then if you continue, just a
little bit on page 23, under
section C, you will see the
standards include medically
accurate information about
methods to prevent unintended
pregnancy and sexually
transmitted infections,
including human immunodeficiency
virus and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. The
correct and consistent use of
abstinence, contraception,
condoms or barriers and other
prevention methods. Pregnancy
outcome options, including.
Right, the link between human
papilloma papillomavirus and
cancer, etc. those standards
continue beginning on the bottom
of page 23, all the way down.
To page 25.
Uh, yeah, by line 19.
Yeah.
So
But again, Rio Rancho is doing.
Most of this that they say,
Madam Sheridan, sir, there.
They're good. A lot of these
school districts are happy with
what they got.
So if
If a school district doesn't
want to teach.
Um
say they don't want to teach for
whatever reason, right, wrong or
indifferent. They don't want to
talk about with their middle
school kids.
Intersects
Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender stuff, or the use of
gender stereotypes.
Are they gonna be penalized? Is
PD gonna come down and penalize
those schools out of and
Senator, the intention here is
not to penalize the school
district, but I would point out
that Rio Rancho schools by
by what we know about LGBTQ
people and populations, there
are gay, lesbian, bisexual,
transgender, and intersex
students at Rio Rancho in that
school district. That is also
true of a district that has a
couple 100 students in their
high school.
What we are saying with this
legislation is that young people
in all 33 counties of New Mexico
deserve access to life-saving
medically accurate information.
And that that information ought
to see them and keep them whole
and healthy.
the extent of that course.
And that the district in which
you grow up should not determine
whether or not you are taught to
love yourself, to respect
yourself, to understand sexual
assault and sexual violence, or
to understand how to protect
yourself from unintended
pregnancies or sexually
transmitted infections.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Senator Block, if I may, again,
we do have other senators who'd
like to ask questions, so
please and I'll tie it up with
this, Madam Chair. The district
that the kids grow up in that
the parents are at, have their
own.
Values, whether we agree with
them or not, no matter where
they live, whether they live.
Uh, you know, on the bayous of
Louisiana and the tribal in the
pueblos in New Mexico.
They should have control of what
they want their kids to learn in
the school districts based on
the school board members that
are elected are the ones that
should be in control of telling
kids.
What they want their children to
learn.
This has some huge holes in it
with liability with private
people that we don't, you guys
can't even tell me what, what,
what the hell that is.
Of coming into the classroom.
That, that's a huge issue. I, I
don't know where this is going
next, but um the way that is and
what my school district telling
me it's bad for them cause they
don't wanna.
They don't want to do it.
Um, I'm gonna pass. So, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Nova.
In Madam Chair. Uh, thank you,
Senator, for bringing the bill
forward. I have a few questions,
um,
So your bill, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and Senator.
The bill allows for parents to
excuse their students from the
course. Is that correct?
Madam Chair and Senator Nova,
yes.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, thank
you. Uh, I'm looking at the FIR
as well and I noted that it says
that the American Academy of
Pediatrics strongly supports
comprehensive sexual education,
so does the Department of
Health, and so does the public
education department. Have you
all engaged with any of those uh
institutions or agencies.
Madam chair and Senator, yes, we
have.
Um, we
Department of Health as well as
PED both have.
Explicit public facing language
and their support for this.
particular approach, um.
To teaching sexuality help?
In schools and um in terms of
the professional organizations,
the national.
Professional organizations, uh,
American Academy of Pediatrics,
National Association of school
nurses.
National Association of School
Health Professionals, they all
have for decades.
Um,
Reported this approach to
sexuality education.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Um, I also was wondering, Madam
Chair and Senator and experts.
What is the correlation between
education
and unintended pregnancies and
sex education and sexual
violence.
And if is there any correlation?
The access to comprehensive
approach to sexuality education
likes being proposed in this
legislation has demonstrated.
A
Having a positive impact on
decreasing um sexual risk
behaviors, which can lead to a
decrease in unintended pregnancy
as well as sexually transmitted
in.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, um, and as I
was doing my research as well, I
also found that the National
Association of School uh nurses
notes that students with
disabilities are often excused
from human sexuality education
and that they experience a
higher incidence of sexual abuse
and exploitation. So I wanted to
make sure that I know that and
that I share that with our
colleagues, um, because I think
what you're bringing forward is
an opportunity for our students
to have access to information
that perhaps they might not have
back home. I sure
I can tell you that. I mean, I
remember being in middle school,
wasn't that long ago, uh, Madam
Chair and senator and my parents
were, I don't come from a
culture where we speak about
these things at home, um, and
learning about it at school is
important and I think doing it
through a lens of respect and
consciousness. I know we all
have different values, uh, but I
think it's important for us to
have that awareness and that
knowledge, um, and to have the
option for parents to opt out.
So I thank you for the bill and
uh thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
just want to make a brief
comment.
Thank you for bringing this
forward and the
comprehensiveness of it, um, as
many of you know, uh, I have an
LGBTQ.
Tran's daughter
And
I, uh, have
learned a lot in that journey.
And I really particularly now
with the anti-DEI craziness
coming out of Washington, I fear
for her life thankfully she's in
New York City, but getting
people educated that they don't
have to have these fears is so
important along with all the
practical piece, so I thank you
for bringing this bill.
Helps me sleep a little better.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Seno Lopez.
Thank you. Thank you for
bringing forward this bill, um.
I love that it talks, you know,
that it's about accurate.
Information, um, because so many
kids learn such false
information and, and I think it
does lead to bullying, to teen
pregnancies, to STDs, to so many
problems. So I, I just really um
support this bill. I did have a
question and now I can kind of
see why why you did it. um, why
you allow parents to opt out and
then have the kid get a credit.
We're doing nothing. That seemed
weird to me. Um,
Um, where is our page? So if the
school does not have, where is
it?
Yeah, if the school does not
have
I'm sorry, I, I, uh
is starting now, I can't find
it.
Um
parents canopt out, and then if
the school doesn't have a
So.
What I did
Did I read it right? Um.
Adam and Senator page 17 line 3.
Thank you.
It's funny, I had everything
started except that, um, if the
school district does not provide
alternative health education
topics in lieu of this portion
of health education, the excused
students shall still earn the
one half credit?
I
I just had never heard of that
seems really odd to me that they
would earn a half credit for
doing nothing.
Uh, so I just wondered what's
that about, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Senator Sio
Lopez, um,
So yeah, the, so the first thing
is that the individual student
shouldn't be penalized because
the district or the school isn't
offering a health.
Uh, education credit without
the, without the sexuality
education portion, right? So we
don't want the sto, we didn't
want the student to be penalized
because their parents opt them
out, and the half credit is a
graduation requirement.
Ultimately, what, what, what,
how this shows up in practice
and, and multiple teachers and
and district administrative
folks have told us is that this
portion of the health education
class is, you know, it's a week
or two long part of the, you
know, the human sexuality piece
is a weaker.
too long, and for that week or
so of time, the student has
opted out of there and they're
in another classroom. They may
get some extra writing practice
if they're not such a great
writer, they get to go with the
math tutor or hang out in the
library or whatever, and they go
back to the health education
class when the other life saving
skills, the other information
that's required in the health
education class is being taught
CPR, um, all of those sorts of
sorts of things, right? Um, if a
district were to
If a district were to take a
whole semester and sprinkle, uh,
human sexuality education
alongside CPR, alongside, uh,
you know, all of the other
things and, and, um, and, you
know, not have that time period
for the student to be opted out,
the student will be opted out of
the whole class and not
penalized, but that's not from
what we understand, that's not
what's happening across the
state.
So they're really just stepping
out of the class for a week or
so.
Um, yeah, it just seems that the
that um
The
The burning.
Up to 15% credit for doing
nothing, just rubs me the wrong
way.
Um
But after listening to part of
this discussion, I realized
Um
Yes, of course, the students
should not be penalized for
what, for the parents' choice.
Um, but it seems like they
should be taking something.
But I, I guess there might be
schools that don't have an
alternative.
I don't know. I, I, I don't like
that. I'm still gonna support
the bill, of course. I just
thought it was odd and um I'm
happy to vote for this bill. I
think uh more kids should have
better education. I'm not even
talking about what a hideous
education I had about this, um,
so I, I really appreciate you
bringing the bill. Thank you.
chair.
Senator Hickey, uh, I moved for
a new pass.
OK.
There's some motion for it to
pass.
With the second from Senator
Nava.
we already had 10, never mind.
Henderson Dio Lopez was a motion
for a due pass with the second
from Senator Hickey.
Short-term memory loss.
If you could call the roll
please.
Center of love.
No.
Senator Boone.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos
I know, yes, and I can go.
Scott Center Cio Lopez.
Yes, Senator Hickey, yes, and I
love this.
Yes.
By a boat of 6 to 3, you have a
Du pass recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you, Mr. Schack is over. It is
snowing outside, so please be
safe going home.
We'll see you on Sunday at one
o'clock.
