And the chairman will be is
running late.
So I'm filling in.
He's a little more smoother and
Chris since he is no more
experience than I do but so
we'll try and
Make this work we have a quorum.
And
We have rather like the agenda
with some significant to
legislation.
One of the most significant
being the first one Senate bill
seven rural health care delivery
fund sponsored by Senator
Stefanics so.
Without further ado
Thank you away thank you Mr
chair and I'd like to note that
I have asked that Senate bill
fifty one be held because we are
also including that topic in a
different bill so I'm not asking
for it to be tabled just to be
held back and we will get to of
that topic at another time so
Mister chair members of the
committee Senate bill seven is a
bill from the governor's office
and this is related to rural
health care providers it
establishes a fund of two
hundred million dollars to
assist hospitals inpatient and
outpatient services in rural
communities and it's for all
physical and behavioral health
that might have been initiated
over the past year that Madam
has operating losses health care
facility that's licensed by the
department of health.
By inpatient outpatient physical
or behavioral health with
services in the county of a
population of a hundred thousand
or less would be needed to
qualify health care facilities
and providers that are newly
constructed or existing better
opening or expanding a health
care services so or healthcare
service so there would need to
be proof that there was an
operating loss and the
department of Human Services
would be responsible for that in
the fund today with me as my
experts is W. secretary Kerry
army ho from the Human Services
department secretary Scrase
senses regards and Mr Troy Clark
who is the executive director of
the New Mexico hospital
association so if you please I'm
gonna pass it to my to experts
for their comments.
Thank you Senator good afternoon
hi Mr chair members of the
committee I think to start by
thanking Senator phonics for
bringing this important bill out
in front of you all state Senate
bill seven represents a creative
solution to a persistent problem
here in New Mexico one that I
know you're all familiar with
which is an ongoing shortage of
providers in our rural areas and
the consistent struggles of our
rural provider network to keep
their doors open to continue
providing services to New
Mexicans we know that in many
New Mexico communities access to
care community friends between
life and death are good health
and poor health and
unfortunately a lack of access
often means that New Mexicans
forgo the services they need to
lead healthier lives as senator
semantics mentioned US Senate
bill seven appropriates two
hundred million to create a
recent rural health care
delivery provide the Human
Services department would
administer the funding creating
new grant program for rural
providers or struggling with
their operating losses incurred
in providing care and where
recognize revenue such as
reimbursement from Medicaid
Medicare and other payers is not
sufficient other requests to be
mailed made available to newly
constructed rural health care
facilities and to to rural
providers who are trying to
bring up a new service in their
communities in New Mexico we're
currently experiencing critical
shortages of all health care
providers types in rural areas
eleven of New Mexicos counties
are considered Kobe desert's
meaning that there's no
obstetric care no midwife and no
alternative place to have a baby
our current our state currently
maintains only seventeen point
seven hospital beds per ten
thousand residents which is well
below the national average
regained New Mexico forty fifth
in the country in terms of
access to hospital care seven
New Mexico counties do not have
any access to hospital services.
Most of our rural providers are
operating at a loss and
struggling to keep their doors
open and can't even consider
expanding new services such as
behavioral health or reinstating
lost services such as obstetric
care.
The combination of high fixed
costs and lower patient volume
is exacerbated during the
initial years of operation which
is why the bill focuses on the
first five years for providers
work on expanding put patient
volume and move toward
sustainability.
Nationally we've seen the rapid
closure of a floral hospitals
due to this problem and we think
that Senate bill seven offers a
creative solution federal rules
that govern the extent to which
Medicaid can pay providers for
uncompensated care have been
substantially pulled back since
the implementation of the
affordable Care Act in two
thousand fourteen which is why
standard Medicaid revenue is
insufficient to solve this
problem we also recognize that
rural hospitals and other
providers can service economic
anchors in their communities
providing jobs and connecting
people to critical resources
emergency rooms often serve as
the first and repeated point of
entry for individuals with
serious mental illness and
substance use disorders meaning
that there's a substantial need
for outpatient behavioral health
expansion in our rural
communities on Senate bill seven
will allow us to address the
ongoing need for providers
throughout the state by helping
support not only new hospitals
and facilities but also new and
expanded services for physical
and behavioral health where we
have significant shortages and
with that US senator and Mister
chair I will I see if my
colleague Mister Clark stated.
Mr chair thank you Kerry and
committee members again I'm Troy
Clark present CEO The New Mexico
Hospital sensation and pleased
to be here today seeing many of
you again
Kerry covered most of the items
that I'll share with you but
I'll reiterate you've been
hearing from me or throughout
the pandemic of the financial
difficulties of our hospitals
especially our rural hospitals
the ability to invest in
expanding or growing services to
increase access to members of
their community is just not
there they've been living off
their savings that they would
normally used to start up the
car fund the start up costs of
these programs the most two
notable Kerry mentioned
behavioral health and prenatal
or maternal health areas.
Those are in such desperate need
in our communities in our rural
areas that the inability to have
savings because they've been
depleted throughout the pandemic
federal facilities will greatly
be augmented by Senate bill
seven with providing the ability
to offset those losses there by
encouraging our rural
communities to begin to add
services that are desperately
needed to help them and I would
really stress strongly I think
the opportunity for outpatient
behavioral health services in
our rural communities where they
do not exist would be of great
help to our emergency room to
see these patients over and over
with the inability to do any
more than to stabilize them in
the media period and not really
get to the root cause of solving
the problems that caused him to
have to return to the E. are
quite often as frequently as
every week so what that'll stand
for questions thank you.
So Mister chair we also have in
the audience miss Gina the
blessing who is the health
policy adviser for the governor
and the governor's office did
bring forward this bill I want
to apologize in advance if we go
to pass two forty five Dr Hickey
has offered to sit in for me
because I must leave at that
time so we're ready for
supporters opposition your
questions thank you so much.
Okay.
Secretary.
Support.
Gentleman in the back.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
on the health policy director of
Mexico primary care.
We spent four.
A hundred.
The publications of the the
trying to communities around the
state and eighty percent of them
are in rural areas certainly
there is is.
Workforce in facilities.
And we are also faced with the
proposition that
you will serve.
Some people may begin to lose
their Medicaid coverage.
Exacerbate.
For page and keeping track of
those problems I mean.
Okay a.
The.
One in the backseat.
Really high priority issue
keeping signers structure we've
been talking about a lot we very
much appreciate the collaborate.
See that there's two important
components we start thinking
about all kinds of pieces
there's a first component of
covering operating losses which
is.
We really look forward to
continued conversations that
we're gonna have to that this
bill to think about start up
costs as we actually build new
practices that something that
might not conversation for today
but we look forward to having
that conversation in the future
and we very much support the
bill and think that more for all
health care is to be critically
important information.
Thank you.
late in the second row.
And my name is Dr these.
At family medicine training
program as I just want to tell
you the story.
Impact the people of New Mexico
at the last minute I got to
fulfill my life.
Medical clinic for a month at I.
at had a great time bye at one
week.
Texas tech service not only all
of the skiers who have been have
live like fifty year land
injuries that are succeeded by
E. Vigil
but also the Sappey testing you
will actually drive all the way
up to the canyon to get.
House and one day we got a call
over the radio.
Little baby next door in a hotel
we ran over and for those of you
who don't know a code blue means
the heart stopped or the late.
I looked over the.
That very them monitor and we
got the.
AP could guide to sleep about an
hour ago and his dad found him.
We at the same.
Nine one one.
CPR on the.
Forty five minutes and and use
the monitor to track heart rate
and I'm sorry to say that that
baby didn't make it thank.
Yes after forty five minutes
that nine one one actually got
at the canyon to respond to that
call.
Now yes again alley is a huge
part of New Mexico's commerce
and they're working to expand
their facilities and that means
that mobile medical has to move
down the mountain they need to
actually at the end of their
structure and building new
structures further down the
mountain the ski slope at the
very edge of the ski slope
and they're taking that
opportunity to rebuild it bigger
and better.
However they operate I didn't
even each year to pay their
employees well and in fact last
year they came over thirty five
thousand dollars which they use
to buy that same monitor that we
use to follow that baby's heart
rate during the code.
And this.
Truly.
And he is at.
Services are expansive to to
more than just.
Thank you.
Thank you.
next so we'll have the secretary
of madam secretary.
twenty thirty we're going to
have.
Country going out into these
rural and remote areas of these
hospitals and the.
We don't have enough hospitals.
and not giving you the.
New Mexico
I don't want to be.
Continue.
Thank you.
When the.
Association and we.
Governor's office for bringing
this bill is sorely needed I
have a a nurse practitioner who
is from Las Vegas as simple.
Going back.
And that costs money so I would.
From the medical society that
is.
Start.
But we have nurse practitioners
especially.
The state in their small.
This kind of the systems
particularly during the COVID
would I have been very helpful.
we stand and support.
Thank you ladies.
Dr Valory Wangler I am the
executive director.
And we're living this reality
right now so we started in
August of twenty twenty two and
run.
The.
Volunteering their time so that
the server patients been
extraordinarily since day one we
recognize that there's a real of
furniture that was that our
communities I just got committee
members we are there was that we
have to make sure that.
This bill would be really fully
instrumental to.
To be able to.
We've got the one provider to
have you with us the capacity
over the course of the last six
months similar their patients
lives.
Really really quickly and.
Go.
I want to do is echo that I
think that.
At the heart of medicine.
Are you from the hassle
Services.
Clinics that primary.
started offering prenatal care
with that service no longer up.
I move forward to continue to.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments
my life.
The committee Martians
registered lobbyists for the
cross the shield and.
And we.
To improve we'll find and thank
thank you for your comments of.
Way to the back.
Have you.
Counties and.
Is absolutely music to our ears
if you are familiar with you
can't eat it is in the north
corner of New Mexico it is in
fact very remote and system they
could have their hospitals the
increased insurance.
with.
Thank you for your comment
anyone else a wishing to speak
in favor of Senate bill seven.
Hearing none will return to the.
Members of this committee for
students who.
Now.
Of this first up we have as
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
thank you Mr chair I am thrilled
with this bill
as I've told this story before
because of lack of health care
my grandmother died on the way
to the hospital in Albuquerque
in the ambulance.
So this is just an absolutely
wonderful bills I have a couple
of of questions just and
suggestions I got confused
reading on page two.
Of starting and be.
It seems to me with the intent
is to provide any hospital not
just newly constructed hospitals
right.
Or is it the so roll may apply
to depart for grant to defray so
that's any any rural hospitals
the in the first sentence and
then the second sentence.
Of with two newly constructed
rural health hospital and then
it has all those conditions and
I got confused because it first
asserting the conditions applied
to and.
To the first sentence to and so
I would just suggest breaking
out of.
Where the department may award
into a good to see if that's the
intent of that if that's click
if that would make it more
clear.
Mr chair Senator I'm gonna of
direct that to W. secretary Kurt
carrier me hope.
Hi Mr chair Senator the
intention of the bill as it's
written is for making the grants
available to newly constructed
world facilities and to
facilities are top providers not
facility providers but to rural
providers were trying to expand
to a new service so I think if
you if you split it out to if
you the sentence the second
sentence if you've just put a C.
in front of it because then the
conditions one two three four
I can put a would only apply to
see and then you would get the
confusion about whether applies
to to be the providers to see
what I'm trying to say.
I do okay because I got confused
give reading it and I thought
I'm not probably the only one
that would get confused so
Mister chairman Senator we
consider that a friendly
amendment just of read number.
If you want to do that for you
could do it on the way to
Judiciary either whatever I'm
not insisting you do it now I
just wanted to point it out
because I thought might just go
on to finance okay then I
suggest we do it now we need to
with the.
Okay then if it's six and now
okay so then my of my motion is
to invent the bill on page two
so on on line nine two inserts
see a paragraph and then see
period of the for the
department.
And after residents.
And then three number there
after and then remember there
after.
So that would be do I just think
it be it make it easier to read
that's all and then we one more
time Mr chair confirm that
that's okay.
Yes yes yes we're fine with
that.
Thank you sure I think quite
catch that exactly on page two
line nine.
After residents.
Period insert C. period.
There is starting a new program
and then start well before C.
started new paragraph.
That way it's clear that the
conditions only apply to see and
not to the next the previous
sentence remember there after
and remember there after.
I just think you clarify
differently amendment us thank
you so.
On that point Mr chairman.
The well.
So the money from the fund could
be used for any facility.
Not facility any facility.
Any rural health care provider
rural health care facility if
they have operating losses to
defray those foresee.
For construction of a new or an
expansion facility is that the
way it would read now.
My understanding of the bill.
Senate hearing services or
expansion of services Mr chair
my understanding of the building
yes is that yes that's correct
that's what we were so that even
a federally qualified health
center let's say running into
uncovering deficit for some
reason this year
could apply for their operating
losses.
Not for construction but it that
somebody else who wants to build
a new hospital or expanding
existing one could apply for of
construction.
And then it's up to you guys
it'll be up to you to decide who
gets the money could you to blow
up two hundred million and when
you're easy Mr chair that's
that's correct the Human
Services department will have to
issue criteria and we would
really be prioritizing looking
at unmet needs in the community
because we do that.
So Mister chair to couldn't to
confirm again it's also for
services a new services and on
the pop bottom of page two
number four it identifies that
the department that the
department the rural health care
provider or rural health care
facility facility provides and
it would cost data as set up by
the department.
Mr chair I I realize now thank
you thank you for that doing
that does kind of screw up with
on page three subsection on line
I.
Subsection I.
You probably intend that to in
to apply to.
Both.
In the case of a rural health
care provider.
The legislative committee to
period because otherwise you run
intended to make donation plus
I. anti donation clause problems
but you don't need this is why I
got confused on page two
requests are for one year.
And for no more than the first
five years of operation is newly
constructed.
I knew that didn't apply to the
first sentence but then I you
wanted to apply to everything
else so.
So maybe you will also want to
remember that we're gonna let Mr
Clark respond to that.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and Madam
senator in committee it's
actually supple of points for
and I need to apply to both that
that that covers the cost and
requirements of efforts in
auditing of the expenditures
along with over five
apply table would now apply to
both be and see if we creates a.
So I think we need to fix that
too.
So I'm sorry it turned out to be
a bigger a bigger thing because
you do but I think you would
have problems before because
then you would have something
applying to newly constructed
hospitals applying to to be so I
I think if you put
Maybe subsection do.
But before for.
Yep that'll fix it.
That would also fix it and then
we number and the number of
remember the four and five to
one and two under under do.
Mr chair.
I have no objection to so Mister
chair if we can put that in but
if there's other amendments then
we might need to go away and
come back another day and then
made me to make a rhyme here.
But if we keep going with more
amendments will be happy to come
back with a cleanup thing so
less than what what for what we
just did revert or trying to do.
I think senator.
She she would like to insert do
on page two line twenty four a
little probably be
Representative and then the so
then.
Subsection four below it.
What apply to to the no the
because there's no there's no
sentence for do that we need to
write a sentence for days so
this may be a little bit more
because we need to write a
sentence.
That explains that this applies
to both.
You could just to do one the two
going to.
Yeah but then you do one and two
but then you need to explain
that this provision applies to
both B. and C. while undersea
right now one two three only
apply to see but then do you
want to apply to be and see.
So that is so I think it should
be something like.
The facilities described in B.
and C..
Must also.
Why would the following
conditions and limitations or
something the following
conditions.
At the facilities and services
yes so we will take advice that
within preparing an amendment so
I'd like to hear all the minutes
of people would like that's at
and I don't care if you just
want to do it on the way to
finance
in have finance do it but it
might be on a I I want to do
here I think her Mr chairman
that I think that the thing to
do would be to go ahead and hear
any other amendments have a full
discussion of the bill and then.
Clean it up and come back on a
Friday for action first thing
Friday we'll get it either okay.
That so thank you that was the
confusion I have when I read it
but then I just had a question
and that has it has to do with
I.
It seems like a very mild
requirement to give support to a
private entity for just
operating.
And a lot of times when the
state gives money to a private
entity there's a condition of
you must serve uninsured
patients are you most kind of
condition and I just wondered if
that was intentional that that
you really are just he just
wanted to keep going and if that
so I'll defer it just seems like
not much of a recommendation for
the use of public money to just
operate but in rural communities
maybe that's true I I don't know
I just like little discussion
about that.
So Mister chair I will refer to
for this to my experts.
Go ahead but Mr chair Senator I
think I understand what you're
saying I think that the.
There could be very low volume
in the first few years in terms
of patients center in terms of
payer mix and so as a provider
is really trying to work on that
sustainability
Rebels keep that language
general although you know I
think badly to hear what Mr
Clark has to say about it I
think there is some intentional
language there because there
just may not be patient volume
I'm in those first few years.
Mr chair Committee then Senator
I think it's some we had a look
at including language I think
the perspective was most of the
facilities whether they be FQHCs
are hospitals RT do that.
Pardon me
but look at that language in
case it is a new facility that
is not under one those
requirements would be
appropriate to make sure is
included in that.
It just struck me but I I'm not
I just wanted to understand a
little bit better is is just to
make sure maintained that they
they existed if that's true it's
a good enough purpose for me I
just hadn't seen that before
that we would give money to a
private entity just to exist so
Mr chair we will this.
Concept as we review this bill
okay and then my the next
question I had is how would you
prioritize between different
hospitals I mean at the for the
first years there's a lot of
money probably would have to
prioritize but then later years
with the department be drafting
rules to to do I.
Yes Mr chair US senator we would
be drafting rules I'm I think
that the agency would really be
looking at data and unmet need
provider shortages in the
communities we are you're
correct I mean the the there
could be more applicants than
funds and so we would really
have to be prioritizing that
based on the needs of those
communities and the needs of New
Mexico hello it then I think we
ought to have when you when you
guys go back might consider
doing an authorization for
rulemaking because I didn't see
that and that'll you know just
clarify that there will be
rulemaking and.
And then there will be a
question about whether
department has authority for
rulemaking and then my final
question is just the just
another sort of thought did you
our loan is did you ever
consider loans as part of this
or no it's it this is just
requests and you don't want to
mess with loans
Mr chair Senator when you went
to rural entity already has
operating losses and they take
on a loan it creates even more
of a burden and so they might be
more willing to stop the service
rather than to go for a loan
many people in rural areas as
well as rural businesses have
the mentality of we have to make
and we're not going to carry
debt so I think that is the
purpose here is to stand up our
rural communities thank you and
and Mr chair that makes a really
good point because you're
looking at history operating
losses and covering operating
losses so you don't want to take
a loan for past losses I was
just thinking of the expansion
part was the only part I was
thinking about so that that
might be an edge an option if
there is an ambitious hospital
that wanted to expand services
an anticipated making money but
I'll just focus on the point and
I was going to ask about this in
other connection but this does
bring this up Mr chairman we
already have in the state
finance authority don't we of
loan program for hospital
construction so I think so
this last okay thank you I
really appreciate this bill I'm
very very supportive in my my
intention is just to make it
better thank you.
Thank you senator next up we
have Senator Hickey.
Coming.
No for questions.
Thank you it didn't work out of
the room yet.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair I I don't see
it in here but I just want to
get clarity and assume that this
is not the case they're not
matching funds and met funds for
this.
Mr chair I'm gonna ask the
deputy secretary to answer that
Mr chair Senator Hickey the only
portion that we are able to
match is the administrative
portion of the three fifty yes
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator I next up we
have Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
I do have a couple questions and
you guys are making some
changes.
page two it says services to New
Mexico residents this line eight
nine.
So let's let's take tells for
example.
What a facility have to go
through and say oh we provided
all this to Texas residents and
that is different that is not
included in their operating
losses and they are going to
have to sift through all these
patients and only do operating
losses for New Mexico residents.
Mr chair Senator as the bill is
