For senator Neil right.
And Senator Hemphill is two
sixty two
which is we're going to be on
our appropriation calendar she
said she got that funded junior
money and does not need us any
longer assistance is no longer
required.
So is catching that one too.
And then we are going to start
with the grid we have three
three bills of the the the
appropriation calendar we do try
to get those out of the way so
Senator Rodriguez Campos and
Ingle hopefully will be here
fast we can get them out of the
way and then we'll go right away
to the to the big need to the
Senator Lopez is built carried
over the rebuttable presumption.
We'll start with that one.
So as soon as we get our Sanchez
who will do the grid and get
started.
This is.
So two sixty to scratch yes.
We've got a quorum we can use
all we need is a sponsor.
No no no we're waiting for a
drug test or or a compass
needle.
Mexico has the potential to be a
total of the juvenile justice.
In the.
Judiciary this is but but
yes this language we have
experts Senator Lopez is here
okay okay good but maybe I may
be like standing up quickly
leaving okay I just randomly
for.
These.
Asian American Pacific Islander.
We got all these treats I have
no idea.
The vote of yes or even with a.
I wonder if it's close the those
really hot wings Rodriguez is
going to she's coming okay good
we're still checking.
Okay great.
I just hope.
Let's start with you Senator put
through the first one here.
No.
Okay we have are we on.
Okay will welcome to the meeting
of the.
Senate health and public affairs
committee and we'll start with
our appropriations grid and
we've already dropped one bill
from that grid.
Two sixty two will not be heard
today she doesn't need the money
anymore.
But Senator pope you and Senator
Ingle are sponsoring.
The MLK commission funding.
So do you want to say something
about that.
Thank you Mr chair I do not have
the bill in front of me okay I
hope I signed on to it well it's
pretty simple let me let me just
of the.
It's two hundred thousand
dollars appropriated from the
general fund to the Martin
Luther king junior commission.
For expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty four.
For salaries contract through
the resources as needed to carry
out the duties of the
commission.
Anne unexpended or unencumbered
balance remaining at the end of
the year will reverse.
Right so something about the
commission jointly like so this
part I do know about I just
think the commission does such
important work around the state
it's important to teach the mess
message of Dr Martin Luther king
junior you know to understand
what can I ask you to use the
hand might cause with a mask on
it's really hard because.
So I I I signed on and I just
want to advocate for this
funding Mr chair committee
members
the teaching in the message from
Dr Martin Luther king junior is
important to not just African
American members of our
community but the state in its
entirety that message
you know I I'm getting up there
I'm gonna turn fifty in a couple
years believe it or not but we
have young folks that still need
to learn that message to still
understand that learn those
teachings and what he was about
and this extra funding would
allow the staff and allow the
the commission to do the work
they still need more funding to
make sure that that happens so I
just want to advocate for that
thank you senator let's go to
the audience anybody in the
audience here want to raise your
hand if you support this
measure.
Anybody opposed to it.
Members of the committee.
Motion for a due pass from
Senator so the Lopez in the
second from Senator Tallman any
discussion on that at all.
Seeing none will secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes centers
meeting yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes
Senator to the piano yes so you
have a due process your
eloquence most of First Lady
ladies so center thanks for
putting it on the spot thanks
Senator.
Senator Rodriguez will do you
next and then Senator Campos.
Chairman members of the
committee
I appreciate this Senate bill
two nine one back in finance
here had just shut the **** up.
We
were being bombed by the soon
are you being bombed.
All right that's not a problem
Senator this morning we were
bombed in committee isn't.
With nasty words into really.
In countries.
No in the in rural.
It was this is in people New.
There are about ninety people in
this room experiencing this.
So Senator Rodriguez tell us
about the money for the domestic
violence victims and animals
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I've got Jessica
Johnson here director of the
animal protection New Mexico
with me for at any technical
questions this is a bill Mr
chairman that I sponsored is
almost every year and it has to
do with providing funding for
domestic violence victims it
goes to CYFD the difference
between this bill and any other
bill that we do for domestic
violence victims is that this
provides funding a comprehensive
system for families to be able
to run to shelters when they're
getting abused and not leave
their pets behind because that's
one of the problems they don't
leave because they're afraid
their pants are going to die or
get abused and so many families
that thousands of them here stay
at home and continue to get
their abuse so I has sponsored
legislation a few years ago and
I'll be short Mr chairman to to
sponsor up a fund to provide
assistance for families and
their animals and so it's there
but we hardly ever funded some
trying to get some funding
appropriated for that since the
problem has been exacerbated
over the years thank you senator
the money goes to the CYFD yeah
and they how do they have they
just give it out as part of the
contract with all the violence
shelters Mr Chairman yes that
that's what they do they issue
it to different shelters and now
they have a system to the cares
program that we establish thank
you for supporting me a few
years ago they have a system
where they can have their
animals the shelter also and
secure them insure the families
are taking care of together yes
thank do you want to say
anything miss Johnson sure at
thank you Mr chairman committee
members Jessica Johnson with
animal protection voters and our
affiliated I on C. three
organization animal protection
New Mexico operates this care
program the companion animal
rest.
You effort if this program that
provides assistance to domestic
violence survivors escaping
abuse to provide
emergency veterinary care and
temporary safe housing for these
animals
while they are seeking safety
and getting back on their feet
and then we help reunite them
with their animals
It the numbers of calls in
animals that we're helping
people that were helping has
increased over time before the
COVID at pandemic in twenty
nineteen we saw the highest
numbers that we had ever seen
and then at this point the
numbers have has gone even
higher than pre pandemic levels
so costs are higher and we would
appreciate additional funding.
Thank you is there anyone in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Anybody in opposition to it.
Thank you very online on this
one.
One.
Okay.
We're gonna take commented.
You might pass you estimate
there in support members of the
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I just wanted to thank you
Senator for all of your work on
this when I would unless it
committed the ideal we started
getting some of these funds and
it made such a difference for
families because it was the the
animal the path the the
companion animal that was really
keeping keeping families from
doing what they needed to do to
address the violence so I stress
standing strong support and when
you're ready I would be happy
making a depressed motion and
after the second.
So there is one person there in
support net dean.
Thank you any other comments
from the committee Senator
Sedillo office.
I up and moved to pass Mr chair
seconded by Senator McKenna.
Any other debate or discussion
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Thoman center to the
penal yes.
So you have Senator thank you
members the committee thank you
thank you Mr.
Senator Campos with the case of
a dress senior dignity Fund.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the
committee in essence of what
this bill does is it seeks an
appropriation to the Q. Q.
service senior dignity Fund and
the total amount would be forty
million dollars one of the big
issues that we continue to deal
with is how do we get if you
will the necessary services to
our elderly population and those
particularly with disabilities
of those that are requiring if
you will transportation that
have the food insecurities that
have if you will some of the
physical and behavioral health
issues that require case
management and of course care
giving and along with that what
we're doing and if this bill was
to make it out of this committee
it would be going to Senate
finance next and what we'll do
is everything possible to try to
fill in if you will the
additional resources that that
are necessary again I I
reiterate this is a nonrecurring
measure it is not tied into the
recurring aspects of what some
of the other bills maybe would
in tail and so along with that I
would just add that this is
something that was named and
then started to continue if you
will in the memory of a key
piece of it who is a
representative and a long
standing advocate when it came
to the elderly and of course the
needs of those that really can't
help themselves and so with that
Mister chair members of the
committee I I am available for
questions the mid before we go
to the ISIS real quick this fund
already exists for your creating
Mr chair the the fund already
exists but what this does is it
expands if you will the ability
in the use of the resources and
and it's an aging and long term
services Mr chairman and members
of the committee here correct
yes okay let's let's check with
the audience and is there anyone
here in support of this big
bill.
Anybody opposed to it.
Two two and support it names
what the net dean is in support
of this one too.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
This.
No forwarding address.
The members of the committee.
Senator Gallegos Mr chair
Senator just a question so
ceremonial she's talking about
earlier on the floor that
there's very little room as a
budget comes over this is been
looked at in house bill two or
or or even in the desert coming
bill in the house it's been
looked at Mr chairman of course
a Senator guy goes you're
correct first of all this will
be part of the House
Appropriations and well the
general appropriations act at
all so there are resources and
their coming across it looks
like there's about thirteen
million in recurring in Kip
capacity but again what we're
seeking is on going Rick a
nonrecurring resources so within
that if this bill was to make it
out of this committee we would
like to go and see if there
additional dollars that could be
added to the general
appropriations act.
That's all I have Mister chair I
just want to make sure that
there were up to the selectors
thank thank you senator I think
it's important to do this really
able to get it funded this year
or not you know building for
next year but I I was contacted
by constituent recently an
elderly woman.
She's on the waiver.
She called the department of
senior affairs for help with.
I don't know fixing a broken
railing or something the that
the thing that seniors are
nearly can get done.
And she was told you're on the
waiver you have Medicaid here
you're in a managed care program
we don't do that for you.
I just thought that was very
peculiar so.
You know it and I met when I saw
the aging long term services
secretary the other day I want
to ask you about that.
So so Mister chairman members of
the committee and and again my
apologies I know that there
inundated with a with additional
are pieces of legislation and so
right now they're not not here
with us but in that I'll bring
it to the secretary's attention
so that we can ensure that we're
dealing with those aspects I
have I've had several
conversations with the secretary
in regards to the services and
again what we're trying to do is
to ensure that the services that
we do provide are going to be
provided statewide so that so
that's another initiative as we
move forward but again the
resources are necessary
otherwise again we fall short in
providing those services
particularly to any of our aging
population in the smaller
communities thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator I'm
that brought it up because I'm
hoping somebody it aging.
For the department of senior
affairs or managed care is
listening thank you members of
the committee which which on
this bill.
The motion from Senator Sedillo
Lopez and a second from Senator
McKenna for a do pass.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Congratulations you have a due
pass armies eight are eight to
zero vote Mr chairman members
the committee thank you very
much for your consideration
thank you know we'll go to
Senator Lopez and her expert
witness.
For Senate bill one twenty
three.
The rebuttable presumption
against release.
This is.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee of
first I'd like to share with you
that Representative Meredith
Dixon was here but she had to
leave because House
Appropriations and finances
meeting with some stuff so they
have to go take care of
business.
That way we get our finance
building get to do our magic
with it later.
so anyway of course she is what
my co sponsor Mr chairman
members of the committee from
the house.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm gonna say just a
few words
of of introduction and I'll let
both of my expert witnesses
who'd like to say a few words
and then after that we'll go to
comments as you proceed with
your committee Mr chair.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and we're sitting here
in front of you with the bill
that actually was in front of
you last time last session and I
remember we had a discussion
then also.
But essentially what this bill
is proposing to do is increase
it creates a perception subject
to rebuttal by the defendant
that the prosecution has proven
by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant is likely to
pose a threat to the safety of
others if we look released
pending trial and that no
release conditions were
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think we've heard
this and for those who are able
to attend a presentation the
Senate Judiciary and we had a
presentation listening to
to the concerns that were raised
and I know Mr chair members of
the committee there's a
concerned when we talk about the
issue of constitution
constitution elegy I can't even
talk today my apologies.
Mr chairman I think there is
something within the system that
needs to change and I believe
that the bill that we have in
front is simple and does offer a
solution to the issue that is
existing.
And I would just you offer
something that came up personal
as you all know what happened
the incident at my home on the
January third of the person who
was arrested did go in front of
of course the judge but there's
a certain of piece of you know
how should I say
The Arnold pool.
That was utilized and is
utilized by other judges in the
system as part of a but I called
a grading a gradient as to how
and if this person does find
of.
R. eight a potential harm to the
community.
If they are released on there
any up what we call the R. O. R.
release a reconnaissance.
I'm with the person who was shot
at our home
and it's not just shooting
bullets actually entered my
daughter's room and then then
into mine if they had just
relied on.
The Arnold pool Mr Pena would
have been released.
That was a recommendation.
I am glad that the judge did
option course with the are you
in from the DA's office right
prosecution
that was it here too so that he
does remain.
in jail until trial.
But there been some other
incidents Mr chair members of
the committee I think we're all
pretty to of
Those persons who were released
into the community actually cut
off an ankle bracelet in there
who knows where they're at at
this point and still pose a
threat to our community.
So with that Mr chair I will
turn this over to our district
attorney from Bernalillo county
Mr Brigman and then of course Mr
Baker is also here to add to the
conversation great thank you
senator Mr Bregman welcome
Mr chairman senators thank you
very much.
Pleasure and an honor to be in
front of this committee I am the
district attorney for Bernalillo
county which includes of course
Albuquerque New Mexico I have
practiced in the area of
criminal law for thirty years as
a prosecutor and a defense
attorney and I've also practice
in the area of constitutional
rights for most of my career.
The first thing I want you all
to know is that with every fiber
of my body I I absolutely
believe in support the concept
that every person who is charged
with a crime is presumed to be
innocent at all stages of
criminal proceedings until and
unless he is convicted he or she
is convicted in a court of law
today however I'm here to assure
you share with you my
perspective on what I believe is
necessary to improve the
criminal justice system
especially as it pertains to
Albuquerque New Mexico and
Bernalillo county and
specifically pre trial detention
the pre trial detention system
in Albuquerque when it comes to
the most serious crime is
broken.
It's broke plain and simple
I am grateful Mr chairman to
have this opportunity and I want
you all to know that I fully
support this legislation the
concept of establishing a
rebuttable presumption when a
defendant is likely to pose a
threat to the safeties of others
pending trial and when no
conditions of release will
reasonably protect the safety.
the safety of the people in the
community.
A useful comparison is found
specifically in the federal
system which is codified and to
provide an in eighteen USC
thirty one forty two I'm not
suggesting anything more.
But to have a similar process in
our state courts as we do in our
federal courts when it comes to
the most serious of crimes in
pre trial detention.
It just so happens Mr chairman
and and senator is that I was
recently in front of the
Judiciary Committee I guess
about three weeks ago and I gave
an example of that situation of
someone who was convicted of
murder.
Years ago did their time cut out
and then was charged with first
degree murder again.
That individual we've course
father pretrial detention motion
against making sure that that
person remains in custody
pending trial with the same
presumption is anybody that he
is innocent till proven guilty
however because of that past
criminal behavior and because of
the new charging the seriousness
of that chart I told Judiciary
Committee that we fought our pre
trial detention motion that
individual was.
The patrol attention which was
the night that individuals
released I had to wait a couple
days until there was an ankle
monitor bracelet for him to wear
I testify that from the
Judiciary Committee and told
them where on earth in this
country or where in this country
at least would someone who's
already been convicted of murder
once and charged a second time
with first degree murder would
be let out on to pre trial
detention how would that be
acceptable no place in this
country except for Albuquerque
New Mexico with that happen
right now because that's where
it happened and guess what.
Eventually after I left the
judiciary but a week later the
Supreme Court overturned that
decision by the District Court
to release him on the Supreme
Court decision was out for an
hour and a half and that person
cut their ankle bracelet ankle
GPS off and is in the wind let's
be clear about wanting to when
we talk about ankle bracelets
and GPS that provides absolutely
no safety to the community it
doesn't prohibit anybody from
shooting or taken the life of
someone else it doesn't do
anything as far as real time
tracking all the pre trial
services will tell you they have
an idea where they're at it is
not real time since this person
is now in the when we've spent
countless resources of course in
law enforcement trying to track
this person down what is the
example of a pre trial system
that's not working this
rebuttable presumption does
exactly what is necessary it
gives the defendant the
opportunity even that defended
that I just described for
example to give evidence to a
quarter to a judge and say this
is why can be released but quite
frankly when the crime is so
serious of murder or rape or
armed robbery.
And they have the kind of
history they do we need to have
the opportunity that that the
court says wait a minute that
that is so significant just like
the federal court.
That you are going to be
detained unless you can rebut
that presumption I support this
one hundred percent I know the
community based on my
understanding of the community
of Albuquerque Bernalillo county
absolutely support us make a
difference this legislature this
time this year I hope the and
I'm.
I'm not blaming anybody I'm
asking for help.
I'm asking for help to do our
job this is part of that
solution and let me just say one
last thing about the
constitutionality claim that's
been raised a lot when it comes
to this bill and.
A lot of lawyers or the several
lawyers on this committee a lot
of lawyers.
have different opinions
reasonable lawyers can have
different opinions on issues
that is absolutely appropriate
but at the same time.
That's what we have a Supreme
Court for.
To make the decision on whether
or not things are constitutional
let's try let's try and get this
to the finish line and if it's
unconstitutional the let us know
but I can tell you this the one
of the last things I'll say
about this.
One of the arguments made is
that this is changing that the
presumption of innocence for
people who are detained that is
not at all the case I can tell
you that I can I don't think
there's a constitutional scholar
in the country that would argue
that the federal system.
It anyway changes the
presumption of innocence of
everybody that goes that system
what it does do is it recognizes
when it comes to this state
article two section for the New
Mexico constitution all persons
are born equally in free of it
goes on this language and then
says of acquiring possessing
protecting property and of
seeking and obtaining safety and
happiness and that is what I'm
asking this committee to
consider when debating this bill
is the safety of those people in
Albuquerque home and in Berlin
county so thank you for the
opportunity I'm happy to answer
any questions you may have Mr
chairman thank you we'll go to
your their expert witness Mr
bacon's.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Benjamin Baker and I am a
proud New Mexico law enforcement
public servant I am a native New
Mexican and a graduate of
capital I school in the
university of New Mexico and I
come to you today to offer
perspective I didn't mention
that I'm aware because I am not
I'm here to offer you a
perspective that is shared by
the constituency that I
represent in the New Mexico law
enforcement community
I've spent a career that has
been I've had the privilege of
being able to serve investigate
chargin testify in every
judicial district within our
great state it's been a
privilege to learn about all the
corners and I bring to you the
perspective that exists from
having served in large
metropolitan communities such as
Albuquerque and in small rural
communities with significantly
less and the resource department
and more scarcity and an ability
to protect our citizens the
frequent and regular currents
that I have experienced a
crossed kitchen tables in New
Mexico homes New Mexico crime
victims are having a difficult
time reconciling why the person
that they believe has victimized
a member of their family in a
violent crime is free to go
about their business and till
their day in court.
I have in my in my own
experience as well as the
constituents here
Representative.
Have had a difficult time
helping them reconcile how to
make that right now pre they're
having a difficult time
understanding the subtleties and
the constitutional issues that
have been raised and as I
mentioned I am absolutely not
here to debate those
specifically delicious but what
I want to share with you with
our shared constituency is
concerned about the ability to
keep New Mexicans safe when a
person has demonstrated a
propensity a proclivity to use
violence within their community
and the state is able to
demonstrate that that instance
has occurred we have no
disagreement at all with the
standards we support the court's
ability to continue to use its
discretion related to whether or
not the state has met its
burdens which we take seriously
and think are important but we
strongly support commonsense
legislation I'd like to thank
the sponsors of this bill for
the purposes of helping us keep
New Mexican victims safe stand
for questions humbly and look
forward to serving this
committee during its important
work thank anything else senator
let's go to the audience and and
get a feel here how many people
here are in support of this bill
I.
Okay we can hear from all three
of you how many are in in the
audience opposed to this bill.
what what we when we take just a
few F. two other people online
who are in support so we'll say
I I in support the three here
the two online and I in the
audience so let's start with
those in support of please come
up and use the Mike at it will
pick you up otherwise.
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Eric Martinez I'm speaking on
behalf of Mister Steve Chavez of
S. C. three international Mr
Chavez is the chair of the anti
crime committee for the
Albuquerque's bottle chamber of
commerce and he's also the chair
of the governor's up business
Advisory Council against crime
we we support this legislation
and we understand loopholes that
are going on in here on on both
sides but I I think this is a
really good start to get this
conversation going and and and
to move things for because crime
is an issue especially in
Albuquerque it's a big issue and
I know I I know there's
different debates here in there
about things and and the whole
constitutionality of things and
would ask for support of these
years is is to kind of figure
this out and and have the
members understand that this is
a starting point right to to to
progress in prime form then move
on the Senate Judiciary
Committee to where these that
committee can kind of framework
exactly what's going on on both
sides that we can we can come to
some type of consensus of
bipartisan we to make sure off
of legislation of this case
moving forward then thank you
thank your next.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is James
Grayson I'm the chief deputy
Attorney General's office and
the attorney general's office
stands in strong strong support
of this bill and thanks Senator
Lopez for sponsoring the bill.
as district attorney Bregman
mentioned a change is needed our
system is currently broken what
this bill does is it provides
judges with information
information that is critical we
have had in in our system in the
last ten months we have had two
cases in which an individual was
charged with multiple homicides
either because of the
individuals previously convicted
of homicide or because they were
alleged to have committed
multiple homicides that are
currently pending both of those
individuals released were
released and both of those
individuals had their the
decision to release them
reversed by the New Mexico
Supreme Court summarily.
That can only happen.
A breakdown in the system like
that can only happen if judges
lack information.
And what this bill does is it
gives them the same information
that federal judges have based
on the federal statute that
district attorney pregnant
cited.
In New Mexico right now we have
federal judges every day.
Relying on rebuttable
presumptions.
To make decisions about pre
trial detention and pre trial
release.
And they do so in in accordance
with the could the United States
constitution.
This bill would similarly be
consistent within the United
States constitution as
recognized by justice Bryer in
United States versus just a
which is at seven fifty seven
have second three seventy eight
and that decision came out in
nineteen nineteen eighty five so
federal judges have been relying
on rebuttable presumptions for
nearly forty years and again
that is consistent with the
United States constitution thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee thank you Mr Grayson.
Good afternoon good afternoon Mr
chair members of the committee
my name's of the four men this
special counsel to the Attorney
General and so as you heard
attorney general's offices in
strong support of this bill what
I want to share with you is
perspective about why this is
needed from the public's trust
perspective our communities
across New Mexico experienced
crime at five at far right
greater range than what we what
we determine what what actually
enters the criminal justice
system so and the reason for
that is there the reporting of
crime is a small fraction of
what actually occurs in the
community and the solving of
crimes a small proportion of
what actually gets brought into
the court of justice system Sir
communities are experiencing
crime at rates that are that
that far outpace what we end up
seeing in the criminal justice
system so when you hear from
your constituents that crime is
an issue it is they're
experiencing it they may not be
reporting at the levels of the
at high levels for example
violent crime nationally as
reported about forty percent of
the time and violent crime is
solved about forty five percent
of the time so a hundred crimes
experience in the community
hundred violent crimes and
expansion community ends up
being about twenty crimes that
are known to the criminal
justice system so our public is
experiencing it this is
important to reestablish the
public's trust and for those of
us who are interested in
criminal justice reform it has
to be this the public trust has
to be there in order for there
to be room to do other things
like diversion and treatment the
public us to believe that we
will treat the most years
individuals more serious
repeated dangers individuals
seriously and and thank the
sponsor for bring this forward I
think do pregnant and the other
expert witness for tiki leading
to parts of this bill thank you
so much.
Thank you.
then let's go to the to the of
in support to the wrong line and
the first one is Dale as far
south.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Dale stars and I'm speaking
to you is the public safety
chair for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
I'm also the founder and CEO of
as far as a digital advertising
located in downtown Albuquerque.
As we all know in was
articulated earlier every day in
our state filings criminals
commit serious crimes if they
happen to get arrested they
usually face no immediate
consequences in the Albuquerque
area prosecutors moved to detain
defendants in just sixteen
percent the felony case not very
many and yet even among the most
serious cases judges release
half of them pre trial.
Over a quarter of the time I
just I just justice system turns
criminals right back to our
streets they ignore court
hearings warrants pile up and
justice is delayed the trial
does happen it could easily be a
year and a half away in the
meantime twice a day police
arrest somebody who has been
released pre trial for
committing a new crime that is
twice a day and in many cases
they arrested that they are
arrested for New violent crimes
and note those are just the ones
that are being caught many more
committing crime after crime
they just haven't been caught
yet.
The policy of pre trial release
is creating new victims in our
state every single day.
Without question this is a
system that is broken and it is
the responsibility of the
legislature to fix that that
starts with the depreciated the
gravity of the charges filed
against the person and if it's a
serious or violent crime
presuming that the person is
dangerous enough not to be
released back to our community.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you mistress Parsa next is
net dean.
Thank you Mr chair
Members of the committee I stand
in support of this bill.
One of the challenges that is
faced by many people with
disabilities and many people who
have been survivors of domestic
violence and other issues is
that they can end up not
surviving in order protection
may be declined or the duration
of that order of protection may
be reduced motions to the courts
are often not accepted and I
need to ask the question how
much is enough.
The violence precipitates
violence and past behavior can
be a very strong predictor of
future behavior thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee thank you at all right
now we'll go to those who oppose
the bill would you raise your
hand we yeah we've had these
past out to.
Who wants to speak please line
up and it will take five.
Domingo.
Mr chair that you have to hold
the button down real soon thank
you.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for this opportunity I'm not
actually speaking against the
bill but I want to share some
data from studies that my
colleagues at UNM and I have
done my name is Chris more I
work at the Santa Fe institute
and I think that these are worth
waiting as you consider bills
Lexus
so we did a study of fifteen
thousand felony defendants all
over the court who were released
over the course of a four year
period between twenty seventeen
to twenty twenty one.
So these defendants were
released either because the DA
brought a motion to detain and
the judge did not rule in favor
of that motion we're because the
DA did not bring a motion to
detain.
So are I did not want to load
the committee with numbers so I
restricted myself to to put
shorts on that page five more
copies here if people want to
see them so on the left you see
the results that we have from of
that pool of fifteen thousand
defendants and what we have what
we know about these defendants
is we know what charge they were
originally arrested for we know
whether they succeeded in
attending all the court hearings
and we also know whether they
were re arrested during that pre
trial release period and if so
for what.
So
based on this about eighty two
percent or not rearrested for
anything as you've heard and as
other committees have heard from
the DA in the AG's office about
one in five are re arrested for
something eighteen twenty
percent.
On the pie chart there you see
that broken up into a couple
different groups.
So about thirteen percent are
requests for nonviolent charge
and then a total of forty five
percent to re arrested for a
violent charge three percent of
those are for felonies and two
percent are for misdemeanors or
petty misdemeanors.
R. I want to point out that
among those violent felonies
those three arrests most of
those are for fourth degree
felonies I'm not in any way
trying to minimize the effect of
a fourth degree violent family
on its on their victims and the
victims' families.
But it turns out that rearrest
pre trial for first or second
degree felonies is really quite
rare about one out of a thousand
for first degree in about one
percent for second degree.
So what we would all like to do
is somehow zero in on that five
percent with the three percent
we want to somehow zero in on
those most dangerous defendants
and let the rest out on some
sort of pre trial supervision I
think that's what the DA tries
to do when they choose which
defendants to bring a motion on
this with the judges try to do
with their rule on those motions
and in my mind it's what this
bill is trying to do.
So that this bill has a bunch of
parts some of them are very
specific like first degree
homicide first and second degree
child trafficking first degree
child abuse and so on it also
has some wider nets so there's a
set of offenses that are called
serious violent offenses in
statute and so to illustrate the
effect of those wider nets we
have the pie chart on the right.
So out of our fifteen thousand
release defendants about two
thousand or about one seventh of
from that's what they were in
for so those two thousand
defendants would be identified
by this bill as worthy of
detention.
The funny thing is and this
surprised me when we did the
study you would think that
focusing on those defendants who
are arrested for serious vinyl
Defense would really blow up
those it would really magnify
those wedges of the chart of
people who are being re arrested
for violent felonies.
In fact it doesn't very much the
fraction of those defendants who
were re arrested for a violent
felony because from three
percent to four for of violent
misdemeanors from two percent to
three.
Are there nonviolent offenses
are actually somewhat less
likely to be arrested and the
fraction of them who are not re
arrest you for anything is
eighty six percent.
So what I'm trying to say here
is that it's not easy to figure
out how to legislatively defined
a group of defendants that are
significantly more just a
dangerous than typical
defendants and I think that's
why the DA and the judge have a
hard you know they have a hard
job to try to figure out who to
focus on with with pretrial
detention motions.
So no I'm not a policymaker okay
that's above my pay grade that's
your job to figure out
constitutional issues aside
which I'm not qualified to speak
to what level of risk would
justify detention.
So if god came down and said
that I have a four percent
chance of being of of committing
a violent felony in the next few
months would you detain me will
so if so then you would detain
all of those defendants on the
right.
And that would include that
would prevent some crime but it
would also contain lots and lots
of people and I know that you
all want to detain you don't
want to detain people
necessarily.
For one thing it's expensive it
costs over a hundred dollars per
day per inmate and for another
thing there are human stories
behind those unnecessary
detentions as well I cannot
compare them to the effect of
being the victim of a violent
crime but people who are
detained for months or a year
can't take care of their kids
they typically their job they
lose their housing and that has
an effect on them and their
families as well so you don't
want to detain more people than
you need to.
So I'm just asking you as policy
makers to think about what that
risk threshold is if it's three
percent you should detain all
filled the defendants and no one
is proposing that if it's four
percent yes detain everyone
accused of of of a service fault
Defense so that's your job as
policy makers but all I would
say is that as you move in
through this bill.
From the very specific charges
left like first degree homicide
and then as you move to the
later paragraphs it starts to
cast a wider net like these
serious violent offenses.
As you start to cast nets which
will affect hundreds or
thousands of defendants I think
it does become.
Leave question of how many false
positives and how many false
negatives are you going to have
and what is the total effective
that going to be thank you for
letting me go on so long
thanks for the opportunity thank
you Mr Moore thank you for the
charts the next.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Kim
Chavez Cook come with the law
offices of the public defender
and we do oppose this
legislation I have a colleague
on zoom who's going to address
some of the facts on the ground
perspective and so I want to
focus more on the
constitutionality I understand
this is not the Judiciary
Committee so I will try to keep
it as straightforward as
possible I think the starting
place is to say there were there
were some comments for about
differences of opinion about the
constitutionality of this bill
and I want to be clear that I'm
not giving my personal opinion
the Supreme Court of New Mexico
has already held in a published
opinion that came out between
last session and the session
that to allow the states to rely
solely on the nature and
circumstances of the charge
defense not only to prove that
the defendant poses a future
threat but also to prove that no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person would all but
eliminate article two section
thirteen and the corresponding
constitutional burden of the
state that is already the law I
am not expressing an opinion
when I say there is a very very
high risk that this bill is on
its face on constitutional that
is not to speak to the policy
that is not to belittle the
concerns of our community around
public safety but we need to
find a solution that does not
violate our state constitution
and I want to emphasize that the
federal law that has upheld
Federal presumptions does not
depend on article two section
thirteen of the state
constitution that law that
federal law has nothing to do
with whether it is
constitutional in the state of
New Mexico I also wanted to
briefly remarked that Supreme
Court reversals of people being
released it's not evidence that
the system is broken that is
evidence that the system is
working the judiciary is doing
its job and it is handling
things as it should be and I
would ask you to oppose this
legislation and let us all work
together to provide an actual
effective solution to our
problems thank you thank you Mr
of us cook.
Yes ma'am.
thank you chairman committee of
the whole button to.
Thank you chairman committee di
and the cash I have so much
admiration for Senator Lopez but
I respectfully ask you to oppose
SB one twenty three not only is
a probably unconstitutional the
current law on the
constitutional guidance are
working in most areas of the
state Bernalillo county is the
only area that seems to be
having an issue with pre trial
release according to expert
testimony heard in House
Judiciary Committee presentation
of little couple weeks ago and
Bernalillo county the basis for
the public safety assessment
tool great people the highest
risk the DA file detention
motions and only twenty percent
of those cases just one in five
eighty percent of the motions
that were filed were granted for
the vast majority of people who
are graded the highest risk
detention motions were not filed
so I understand there's some
particular cases but in general
it seems like the problem with
pre trial detention doesn't
appear to be the fault of the
tools that are currently in
place it's working everywhere
else in the state the fix should
be done within the context of
the existing law and the
constitution thank you.
Thank you Mr and finally Barron.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee.
My name is Barron Jones I am the
ACLU of New Mexico senior policy
strategist the ACLU of New
Mexico is a proud member of the
New Mexico safe coalition.
And we stand in opposition
respectfully to this bill the
New Mexico safe coalition grades
every piece of nearly every
piece of COVID legal system
legislation on a ruby to judge
whether or not it actually does
what it does does it keep the
community safe is April
political fiscally responsible
and evidence based and we gave
this particular proposal and
just because we don't see that
it will achieve the goals
outlined in the bill and for
those reasons we acts you all to
vote no.
Thank you very to keep the
please.
Yes.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
lactam plus Policy co director
with gold futures we work with
individuals who are formerly and
currently incarcerated and we
respectfully oppose SB one
twenty three the fundamental
level we do not believe that we
should be violating people's
constitutional rights by the
money then release
this would disproportionately
affect communities of color we
know that what this looks like
in our communities as people
being held for long periods of
time waiting to see if they do a
even decides to file charges and
so for those reasons we know
that our families would lose
jobs would lose income maybe
even their children and so for
those reasons we ask that you
please vote no thank you thank
you and then we have one we're
gonna hear one person who's in
favor of of Rikki Lee Chavez.
Your noon Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
legislative coordinator for the
New Mexico crumble defense
lawyers association I apologize
that I needed to
peering soon thank you for
having this option I do have a
couple sick kiddos
we appreciate immensely
respected Sanchez and our
efforts to improve the lives of
New Mexicans and public safety
however the concerns we have
with this bill bring us here
today and asked us to propose
first we believe that SB one
twenty three violates
constitutional language and
roads due process protections as
gone into detail by our
colleague Kim Chavez Cook we
also believe that SB one twenty
three will increase jail
populations at a time when
staffing shortages make
correctional facilities
increasingly dangerous
especially in the Bernalillo
county area SB one twenty three
incentivizes prosecutors to use
their discretion to increasingly
charged enumerated crimes
instead of participate in the
pre trial detention system
currently in place by creating a
specific list of crimes that
would deem an individual too
dangerous for pre trial release
busy prosecutors are
incentivized to charge those
crimes more often with no need
to justify protect child
detention.
Also no data or evidence
demonstrates that Senate bill
one twenty three would improve
public safety or significantly
lower crime rates are in
impacted communities the passage
and implementation of Senate
bill one twenty three what
exasperated critical shortage of
public defense attorneys in New
Mexico a study released last
year by the American Bar
Association concluded that New
Mexico faces a critical shortage
of public defense attorneys the
study further concluded that the
state would need an additional
six hundred and two full time
attorneys sixty seven percent
deficiency to meet the standard
of recently effective assistance
of counsel lastly we believe
that Senate bill one twenty
three allows policy makers and
public safety officials to shift
away from the more important
policy of addressing the root
causes of violent crimes and
increases in generational
shortfalls in the criminal legal
system thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for
hearing our concerns good thank
you Mr then I understand there's
one other person was to speak
and in favor of the bill.
Go ahead there's a Mike Richter
please use it.
Sorry about that members of the
committee chair I am trying to
juggle between judiciary on
another bill I'm testifying my
name is Nicole Chavis I am the
founder of robbed New Mexico we
are survivors of homicide I lost
my son Jaden who was only
seventeen when he was killed
seven years ago he then murdered
somebody else six months after
murdering my son I also have a
dear friend by the name of angel
whose son was murdered while the
offender was on GPS release and
Bernalillo county from another
violent crime I think that this
bill would help us truly focused
on the most violent offenders
we're not talking about the
nonviolent drug charges we're
not talking about any of those
offenses but the most violent
offenses where people are
continuing to re offend because
they are not held behind bars so
I truly truly am in favor of
this as well as many members of
my my group and not the New
Mexico crusaders for justice as
well who could not be online
today thank you thank you.
Okay members of the committee
will go to you now.
Senator by this is person
Sedillo Lopez and we'll go take
it from there Senator Maestas
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez the a break then
Mr Baker Preciado appreciate the
presentations right now I'm just
give a quick history I mean Mr
chairman hope not to for folks
but the
You know money bill was outlawed
on November sixth two thousand
fourteen and and state versus
state B. Braun.
Where the late of Charles Daniel
suffering court justice wrote
that that you cannot use money
bail to hold an individual.
And so that was a sea change
from the realities that we had
when when the DA pregnant was a
assistant DA and I was assistant
DA shortly after that as we we
used money to hold people so
everyone who got arrested that
before would would appear before
a federal court judge whether
was Jay walking a murder and you
read the complaints and you knew
who you wanted to hold you knew
who you wanted to hold and so
are the low level offenders got
like five thousand other bonds
the middle of offenders got you
know twenty thirty thousand
dollar bonds and the ones who
wanted to hold got a cash bond
fifty thousand cash only hundred
thousand cash only you know
million dollars cash only we
knew full well that person
couldn't raise the money.
What.
And those hearings took like
five minutes and those decisions
were made based on just.
Leadership and knowledge of of
of of human behavior based on
the credibility of the of the
evidence as articulated in the
complaint and and the court and
the arguments made by the by the
prosecution and the delay but it
was primarily made by the judges
the judges made the call on you
could influence on the margin.
So anyway when that happened
With that happened that that
created a weird space and so the
Supreme Court created the ad hoc
pre trial release committee
which was chaired by your metal
who is the as you know the
professor emeritus and former
colleague of.
Of a Senator Sedillo Lopez so he
chaired the pre trial release
of.
Committee I was actually on that
committee as a lawyer and
through the course of two
thousand fifteen that the only
conclusion we come up with this
we need to change the
constitution to allow preventive
detention.
Which was unheard of New Mexico
we we were trained as lawyers
were trained from day one
everyone is entitled to a bond
everyone is entitled to bail.
So it struck me as odd when when
they kind of yes sign ME to
provide some Sanchez and pass it
in the in the upcoming thirty
day session in two thousand
sixteen and I thought it was
impossible but we did it under
the leadership of senator Peter
Wirth.
Senate joint resolution one was
introduced and passed in a
thirty day session so the
legislature put on its case and
and and and went into action and
of course the voters voted in in
November once the secretary of
state approval you know a
certified the election results
boom the constitution was
changed and judges could hold
people without bail
But.
But for some reason the thought
process that went into all the
people before did it.
Correlate to the thought process
after and and and the judging
one of the first hearing says Mr
DA this prosecutor call your
first witness.
That that that was a momentous.
Horrible error by the courts in
somehow thinking that there's a
different set of procedural
rules.
Before and after the
constitutional amendment it
lawyers.
You know proffer to the court
based on documents what not they
can they can talk about the
allegations they can talk about
the credibility the evidence
that they had at that time and
but for some reason everything
changed everything changed
So anyway the after the
constitution was passed the
adult Committee was reformed and
they put a.
A representative on the
committee thank Nate gentry they
put a Senator on the committee
Daniel levy Soto I remain on the
committee and we came up with
recommendations to the court to
come up with this procedural
rules that that we're do you
know by on not do but they were
going to be published July first
twenty twenty seventeen so so
July first twenty seventeen was
kind of a kick off date and I
think it was after that date
that the judge says call your
first witness but in one of the
meetings are one of the later
meetings we talked about
preventive we talk about
presumption.
We talked about a presumption in
the committee and I think there
was a proposal I'm gonna try to
get with the professor and see
if the if the documents archive
but there was a proposal.
That murders that those accused
of of homicide those accused of
rape and maybe one other
horrible crime that there would
be a presumption on on those
people charged with those
particular crimes that boat lost
by one.
Actually voted in favor of the
presumption it lost by one vote
and that could have been a sea
change as well what a way to
make a long story short
It's leadership its leadership
they have the full authority to
hold anyone they they deem
appropriate to hold you know
within reason and the courts
would back him the courts the
court of appeals in the Supreme
Court will back them up but for
some reason instead of just
determining who should be held
and who should be held and
listening to the the lawyers and
and and making a decision.
The judge sits there and and.
And wants to be full hardly
persuaded by the DA with regards
to who should be held at who she
who should be held it's weird
it's a weird disconnect in my
opinion
that I can't quite put my finger
on but folks are deemed
dangerous Mr chairman.
And the second prong of the kind
of the cost to amendment and the
words of the constitution rather
the second prong is and we just
get this right but basically.
Will any means of a pre trial
release ensure the safety of of
any member or individual in the
community and that's where the
problem lies because you can
argue that to the to your blue
in the face and the answer is.
The answer is no or you could
always get to the conclusion
that reasonable means will
protect the community I mean and
so there's no
So it it's taken a long time for
the judges to figure this out I
think there there there were
almost there but I am horribly
disappointed in the second
judicial district criminal bench
for taking five years in what
should a taken maybe five
months.
so.
And so I up I'm of the opinion
of it that of the legislature
does not write criminal
procedure so I don't I don't
think I'll be able to support
this bill but I think every
every committee that this bill
passes in every conversation
that that is had as a result of
it I think nudges are.
Not just our fellow week for
branch of government to to move
in a more responsible direction
but in my opinion the problem
isn't.
Pre trial release the problem is
pre trial services the folks
that are released are not
supervised an active manner we
try release system one is not
hasn't been developed by the
course after five years that's a
problem but to it it's a very
passive system very passive
system and it's it's just we
don't want to be like probation
parole probation parole like
we're trying to ratchet down
that that culture but the pre
trial services culture needs to
be a lot more up proactive as
well but lastly Mr chairman
The up.
I think I think that the courts
are almost there
But I forgot it's gonna say with
regards to that but it's
It's just amazing that that the
judges are having this
intellectual in exercise instead
of just.
Applying a little more guts and
leadership and intuitive nous
with in holding from a
defendant's because people
associate people think the you
fight crime by arresting someone
and putting them in jail and
that's why this is so like the
gentleman said from the date
from the AG's office.
Mr Mendez this is so hard for
people to wrap their arms around
in the lacked confidence in the
whole system that that in and of
itself is by a reasonable for
this but but
But but we don't fight crime
by catching people doing the job
we fight crime by convicting
them.
And and the violent offender
sending him to prison.
And that's that's what I've been
trying to tell folks in this
building for years is you can
write all the tough love bills
you want if we have to get the
resources to the dust on the
officers to convict people
because post sentencing
punishment is the way to hold
people accountable and ensure
swift and certain justice but
anyway I could go on and on but
thank you Mr chairman thank you
what do a pregnant Senator Lopez
and just coming on your last
point I don't follow the select
I'm not an attorney and a photo
of the solar closely but I do
know that in the last couple of
weeks of at least two murder
trials where the person who is.
The judge by the prosecutor to
be guilty of first degree murder
was found innocent budget by
juries and released.
And so I mean the ability to
predict who's going to get
convicted.
I think goes way beyond what the
prosecutors thinker even with
the judge may say and holding
somebody awaiting trial if after
all of that they go to trial in
the released by the jury so it
it it this is not something that
we're going to solve with with
with with just giving the
ability to hold people that's
not gonna solve the crime
problem.
But lastly Mr chairman that
there's three problems as I see
it this is third on the list one
is pre trial services is way too
passive needs to be a lot more
aggressive to is the denial of
grand juries to prosecutors for
the courts to deny the
prosecutors access to the grand
jury process in Bernalillo
county it is completely
irresponsible that there needs
to be at least city of our size
with this many allegations
yearly there needs to be at
least sixty five hundred
indictments a year I think last
year was it was lower than
twenty five hundred that that is
a broken system in my opinion
but this is his third on my list
but thank you thank you senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the history from
From Senator by it my Estes
because of I was looking at it
from the outside you know
sitting is a law professor not
not having the intimate details
about what was going on.
And
so my perspective is a little
bit.
I don't know I'll start with the
practical and and how it works I
am I had the opportunity to sit
in on assume of these kinds of
hearings and my of.
What I was doing was.
Trying to to see if what the
prosecutor said would lead me to
decide that the person.
Couldn't be made safe for the
community or or what and what
was really interesting is has my
father would call them the
Mickey Mouse things the drug
position things the judge the
judge released found that an
ankle bracelet would work and
whatever not and I agree with
with what the judge was doing
and then there was one case
involving.
A child abuse case.
And the individual had.
Potential access to the child if
they were released.
And the the judge didn't release
the judge said.
That that the judge was worried
about potential intimidation of
the child and therefore the
judge decided not to release and
there and of course that would
not make the community safer
right if if the judge was if
this individual is going to be
Intimidating the child so I was
very impressed with contract I'm
not throwing the judges down
under the bus I'm saying wow I
think it worked that morning
that I sat through these these
cases.
And that's what we want to do is
we want to ensure that something
that happened you'll recall
no Mr chair and I will just say
that our our expert witness will
recall the DA the day clinic and
also when we would go down and
do.
trial arraignments.
And sometimes when we go down to
do pre trial arrangements we
would find people who would been
there for months and the
sentence for the crime wasn't
even a few months we found
somebody once their who'd been
there awful here for I think is
reserve resisting arrest which
was ultimately dismissed so it
was it is that's what we want to
prevent is people who are being
held in appropriately wrongly
held.
I believe that our system is
worse if we convict innocent
people and if we hold innocent
people that is what is worst
about our system.
So as you know we had a similar
bill and I voted against it
because of my.
My perspective and also the
constitutional issues.
So Mr chair I'm gonna try
something different because I
think last time people just
turned off to me trying to
explain the constitution and and
whatever we try something
different and that is asking
questions.
Mr chair
Senator could you have you
witness explain how rebuttable
presumption works.
Yes Mr Chairman I have to go
through the chair into the
Senate was Mr chairman Senators
the process certain certain the
the basically the law the
revoked for rebuttable
presumption says that the nature
of the crime is so serious by
itself that that there are
certain crimes that someone and
it's exactly what it's it's very
similar I don't know as much
difference that to the to the
federal one which is contained
in eighteen.
UFC thirty one forty two and
specifically in that instance
there are certain there's a
presumption that that there is
no safe conditions that you can
release that person back out
into the community however the
defendant can rebut that
presumption that there are no
safe conditions for the
community to let this person
back at a large and based on the
crime and and let me just say
one last thing I I hope I
explained that.
I I what I'm hearing though is
that I think everybody.
I mean I start with the very
basic premise of this senator
and Mr chairman.
With a history of violent
offenses where there's been a
convictions of violent offenses
for example in there again
accused of violent offenses how
can we let that person out in
the community and ensure the
safety of the community.
So I hope I answered your
question I thank you for that Mr
chair that's exactly right but
that question goes to the judge
in the judge's exercise of the
judge's discretion of whether
this person should be.
I has a judge probably wouldn't
let him order out.
You know it would be an unusual
maybe I don't know would be very
unusual murder that I would
think would be safe in the
community but.
That's just my bias and I and
judges going to these things
with their own bias but the
issue here and I always Mr chair
I always start with everything
that I do in this in this body
is what is the problem we're
trying to solve.
And what is the relationship
between the legislation we're
trying to pass to the problem
we're trying to solve.
And the problem we're trying to
solve here is community safety.
And this.
About relief defendants shows
there's not very much
relationship between.
Release defendants and community
safety that the relationship is
actually quite tenuous so that
makes me.
Concerned about the about the
legislation just on that basis I
I hate to vote for bills that
are are not related to what
they're trying to solve of with
very little relationship if any
and this data is extremely
telling that most people of the
released a felony defendants
don't re offend
and it most people there's no
real rest in the vast majority
of cases it's those cases that
we entrust our judges to make
the decision about.
And sometimes it's from the gut
sometimes it's from evidence
some people use the Arnold pool
I don't think that there's any
one magic way to do it but the
judges you know and I and I know
judges who say they want to look
them in the eye and they hate
the fact that they're doing on
screen now because they want to
look the person in the eye and
make a judgment can they can
they trust this individual or
not.
That's up to the judge it's not
up to us to decide whether an
individual should be released or
not and that's what we trust the
judges to do we may not agree
with them but we empower them
and and trust them to do that.
And to address your question or
issue of the constitutionality
of this.
When we pass a criminal
procedure rules does it have to
comply with the U. S.
constitution.
Mr chair Senator.
This is when we pass
the U. S. absolutely yes does it
also have to comply with the New
Mexico constitution absolutely
and to answer the phone to fully
answer that question I've got
and like I said the beginning
reasonable minds can differ I've
got eighty prosecutors in my
office the believe it does pass
constitutional muster so you
know we could all of this record
didn't yes Mr that Senator
petition this court is not Mr
Chairman maybe you could maybe
you could because that was in it
to me one of the crucial issues
that was raised chairman money
thank you for your needs of our
I do not believe Mr chairman Sir
I do not believe that the
Supreme Court.
They did not rule on the
constitutionality of rebuttable
presumption specifically I don't
agree with that at all this bill
I this bill does that has not
been constitutionally decided
specifically on the issue at
hand so I I don't think I would
never come up here and say you
know what that the Supreme Court
just ruled this exact idea was
unconstitutional last year it's
to come up your time tell you to
do it that's not the case they
didn't rule on this specific
issue whatsoever I don't I don't
agree with that way ruler well
they they they ruled on the
constitution they did they
describe the constitution and
the provisions and for example
they've had three separate cases
in a row talking about what was
proven what wasn't proven and
hearings torrez hadal there's
one between a forget the name of
right now with the supreme court
very clearly said in those
instances the DA's office did
not specifically prove certain
elements of the second to that
they didn't give any evidence
that they did not rule in any
way shape or form on rebuttable
presumption that is not an
accurate statement in my opinion
and obviously we have lawyers
that disagree with each other
but there's plenty of lawyers
that will I will tell you that
would say that this is
constitutional and that's why I
would ask that this bill given
the it could be given the
opportunity and just because
some people and I'm not
suggesting there were there
there ill intent or the wrong or
anything but lawyers have
disagreements all the time about
what's constitutional that's
what we argued for the Supreme
Court that's that happens I'm
suggesting to you I don't
believe it's on Custer's it was
not to say they they could say
that the issue with that issue
specifically rebuttable
presumption was not from the
spring court you know if it
would fit this it would help if
we had the Supreme Court but the
Supreme Court said before us and
Mr chair and and we could do
that if you wanted to I know
that this Judiciary Committee
did a did a lot of analysis on
that it is probably a little bit
beyond the scope of this
committee but what I will say
is.
That the Supreme Court one of
the things we try to teach in
law school with how to predict
what would happen based on the
Supreme Court cases not
necessarily that you that the
court has to decide this
particular case this way that's
actually of the Mexican approach
to to.
Two with DCS is that had to be
decided that way that's not what
we do in a calm look into what
we do is we try to predict and
what the Supreme Court has just
been doing is outlining the
parameters of the constitutional
provision that was championed by
one of their members
Charlie Daniels Justice Charlie
Daniels champion this and
advocated for this because he
believed that too many poor
people were shut out of bail.
That was the point that he was
trying to do and so.
My analysis is I think that the
the that the Supreme Court is
unlikely to a poll this and I
think if the Supreme Court the
point somehow did it would be
very disappointing to the intent
of the amendment has articulated
by justice Daniels.
So I I understand the problem
but I have to say I've been
impressed with how district
attorneys have handled this I
understand the politics of being
a district attorney is rough I
get that that.
And I know that people want to
look like they're tough on crime
but the bottom line is.
There is nothing that shows that
this constitute this statute is
actually going to make us safer
then what's happening now so
with that I don't and I'm not
going to like I said you you
make you answer the question.
This provision has to comply
with the state constitution in
the state constitution is pretty
clear
The language but it's it's in my
view it's pretty clear by clear
and convincing evidence that no
release conditions were recently
protect reasonably protect the
safety of any other person or
the community there's a lot of
wiggle room there for the judges
to look at the situation and I
believe need to trust the
judicial branch which is which
we have done and I apologize for
going on Mr chair but I am
passionate about this and as you
know I I didn't support the last
attempt to do this and I'm not
going to support this when I I'm
sorry with all due respect thank
you senator Senator Schmedes
you're next thank you Mr chair
and senator the experts
I I think I want to maybe try to
shift the.
the conversational bit you know
I I believe that we are you know
we're a separate branch of
government if we get too
obsessed with is it
constitutional law we're we're
trying to be the judicial branch
we're not debating the merits of
the bill are are are are jobs
legislative branches to what is
our legislative intent was the
problem what we would like to do
we sent to the courts and we let
them decide and I think if we
take that approach we may all be
better off and we rely on each
other right as a community
legislative branch and judicial
branch to tackle this problem so
But I would like to ask just and
I I will certainly accept brief
answers here but I do someone
had mentioned that this is going
to give judges more information.
can you all please explain how
this bill is going to provide
judges with more information.
I don't.
No who said I don't think that
was part of my remarks it was
going to give it was somebody
else
Calgary frame Mr chair Senator
eight is this bill going to
provide judges with more
information.
I don't know that I find I don't
know who's with but I I don't
necessarily know that provides
more information but it gives a
starting spot for the judges
based on the crime based on that
that there's a presumption and
it's it's it's almost identical
to the federal system this are
operated every single day now
obviously a lot of this is this
common common sense for judges
and looking at the overall
picture and I would suggest this
as senator Estes mentioned about
the history of this Mr chairman
very clearly that this vote was
what there was one vote away on
the committee to bring this
forward I don't remember there
being a constitutional argument
then however to ensure question
information we always want
judges to have information so
anything more that we can give
them is fine.
SO Mr center and mistreatment
can you please walk me through
from the moment you could
because you can file a motion
for pre trial detention you know
I think anytime you want to
right now right so we're not
we're not messing with that
we're not disturbing that are
affecting of this bill can you
walk us through from the time
you your office chooses to pre
filed to to file for pre trial
hearing.
Until the time of that hearing
that time frame from when you
when you file to the hearing how
would this bill affect that time
frame.
I don't know that this bill
affects that time frame
specifically it just it changes
the.
But very quickly some arrest
warrants issued someone gets
arrested.
based on the nature of what we
follow pre trial detention
motion based on the original
criminal complaint that's filed
we then have if their stay in
custody perhaps ten days to
indict or do a preliminary
hearing bring formal charges
during that time when their
first right the day after they
are arrested
we are file a pre trial
detention motion which is
usually heard.
And I'm not exactly some I'm
thinking about four five days
later okay
we have a case management or
that's only in Bernalillo county
right now
CMO's which requires us to do
certain things at a time frame
often times these things are a
little bit developing these kind
of murder cases you're still do
an investigation you don't have
necessarily all because it's
such a short period of time
frame you don't have all the
necessary stuff that they want
to a judge to completely tell
them that that's not necessarily
the fault of law enforcement I'm
not suggesting it is but it's
the nature of the business right
you want to rest the person if
you have enough for probable
cause to believe that they
committed the crime but there's
still continued the evidence
being gathered.
The problem is is sometimes when
you when you do it in this short
of a time frame that we have
because if you don't indict
within ten days.
The charge is going to go away
if they're still in custody.
So you have to work very
condensed period of time that's
why this presumption gives us
the opportunity because of the
nature of the offense because of
the seriousness of the offense
and perhaps because the history
of prior convictions for this
kind of offense that presumes
that the person to stay in and
that's what helps I hope so
Mister center Mr chairman so so
this bill you you're telling me
that this bill is going to
mainly change things once you
get to a pre trial hearing yes
this bill changes the pre trial
detention motion standard for
the judges in the framework for
which to make a decision yes Mr
chair Senator does this affect
the does this bill affect the
judge's decision to grant a
hearing.
No they're going to okay Mister
chair Mister chair etcetera
so I understand this is this is
shifting the burden of of of of
production once we get the
hearing I I understand that I
have a couple you know comments
I was thinking of so
I I at a hundred percent agree
with you that.
The Supreme Court has not said
that presumptions are
unconstitutional I don't think
there's anyone that can really
make an intellectually honest
argument that that has been the
case what they have ruled on
obviously they have you know I
think the Amir K. comes to mind
they ruled that we we not we
essentially no longer have
presumptions we sat presumptions
in capital cases.
But we no longer have definitely
so what they roled in Amir is we
no longer have capital cases
they don't exist therefore we
don't really have presumptions
anymore so we have had
presumptions in New Mexico.
This is not a new thing and I I
hope everyone understands that I
also think that no one's going
to tell an article three judge
that their entire framework
impaired I'm of doing things is
completely bogus and for some
reason New Mexico's an out liar
and I said this in my pre trial
bill New Mexico is an outlaw
because we did with cash bail.
And we did away with the death
penalty and so the us and then
we have a Supreme Court decision
that says no more nor
presumption because number
federal crimes so we're we're
truly an out liar for our
jurisdiction and and so but I I
I agree with what what a lot of
the Center masses said that
I believe that it seems that
that a rule change in the
judiciary could potentially fix
this problem but I also believe
the legislative fix as possible
to I really do which is why I'm
kind of
going on about this
I I have one other line of
questioning Mr Mr center.
I I'm kind of in favor of of
taking an approach of.
People that are released through
the released our are they
released on bail and they re
commit a crime you start to
tighten things and the the
rebuttable presumptions come in
at that point this bill really
is looking at.
Just the nature of the charges I
think and I so I absolutely
support putting in a rebuttal
presumption I don't know if I
you know just look at this bill
was on the floor I I don't know
if I could really support
because it's only based on the
charges that are frame and I
think the state versus a mere.
Honestly I think we could make a
pretty strong case that
Stepherson here says you cannot
just presume based on charges
alone so what I'm interested in
is is getting these hearings
going I like that there is a
presumption in place but I
in in the by the way I think for
everyone over there stands is
that the clear commencing
standard does not change with
this bill it if we're ever gonna
hold someone pre trial it is
because the judge has said there
is clear and convincing evidence
or danger so.
You know I I think that's that
that's good in a presumption
does not change that evidentiary
standard whatsoever.
but I I do I do have a little
bit of heartburn that we're just
you know we're we're presuming
just because of the nature of
the charge
So so I I think I could go go on
about it we've we've had some
time this committee to talk
about pre trial detention I
think I've shared my thoughts
with this committee and so they
know what what my thoughts are
but I I would love it if if some
changes could be made and if you
guys are open to that too for
for example you know this would
apply in a more stringent
standard for some kind of tiered
response to a person was just
released they were arrested for
felony.
And now they're picked up in
their charge with with rape or
something I mean you you you
can't just keep releasing these
people are are you can just
release them on a on a bond even
you have to I think get a little
more strict if we're going to be
serious about providing a safe.
Immunity for you know for for
public safety so I think that's
that's come I thought someone to
listen to the rest of the the
rest of the the debate but but
certainly you know to to try to
order some this up no one has
said that a presumption itself
is unconstitutional but if we're
only going to base it on a
charge I we need to look at that
in your case and I there there
could be a concern there I think
some modification.
Necessary.
Thank you senator Senator
Gallegos you're next thank you
Mr I think our doctor that is
also sidelined is turning into
my questions because I was gonna
argue over the point of the
constitutionality but I think
that in listening to them I
agree with him that that's not
an issue here that's for another
day another time but that really
Mr was my whole one question
because what I've heard and
public from the public was
because some constitutional and
I I just I appreciate the
dialogue you have with them I
think it's solve my problem so
with that are you.
Okay Senator Tallman you're
you're on the list.
Thanks thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for bringing
this forward.
Seven.
Question of.
For the
District attorney.
Is so what makes you think
Mr just secretary is this of
bills constitutional.
I thought I've I've already
addressed so I jobs are the
results it's not your address
that will move on the next
question.
Well I.
It's we know what's
constitutional the federal level
so that any talk about the state
level it has.
This.
I'm sorry Mr chairman I'm sorry
Mister Mister chairman Senator
we we know it's constitutional
on the.
The the federal level because
they do Mister chairman Senator
we know that there's been no
decision saying that it is
unconstitutional I believe it is
something that is
straightforward and is
consistent with the constitution
so that's why I believe it's
constitutional.
Thank you for that answer it
just to follow up that the to
the.
This the difference of opinion
has to do with what did the
Supreme Court say that's why I
was asking it would be nice to
have that have that in New.
But I'm sure the Judiciary
Committee will if it gets out
here the Judiciary Committee was
certainly evident in.
Thank you Mr chairman one
additional question what.
Criteria.
Do you or would you use to
determine whether someone is to
be released on that.
so.
Like it's like it's already I
think should be done number one
obviously that the nature of the
the charge that's that's
something to be considered if
it's if it's Mr chairman if it
is J. walking that's very
different than if if it's
someone who kids violently
someone else or rape someone.
I believe our straight someone
the also the other aspects that
I think judges should always
look at when it comes to whether
or not somebody should be
releases their history their
history on appearing in court
there are respect for actual
court orders in the past their
actual history when it comes to
convictions of violent felonies
when it comes to their could to
the to the number of times that
that people have been convicted
of violent felonies and are
still being charged with the new
violent funny I think I mean I
think that's everybody's got a
little common sense they're like
what we doing right so so all
the things that they look at now
we're obviously things that they
would continue to look at and
this does not take this this
legislation doesn't take
discretion away from any judge
they still have to find.
makes certain findings so that
that that's that's not what this
takes away it doesn't take away
the discretion of the court and
I'm not suggesting that we
should do that I'm not someone
who supports I revere judges I'm
not someone who supports taking
their discretion way but I do I
am so supporting something like
this concept as opposed to
recommending the story I told
you at the beginning of this Mr
chairman where we have a concern
with convicted is convicted
someone of the work in that
charge with the new one and we
believe that there's conditions
release that they can be
released upon that can still
provide safety for the community
that I have a little problem
with.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chair for you before you make a
motion on the I want to ask a
few questions.
If you finish with your
questions here get ready make a
motion so let me ask a few
questions
So let's go back to that story
that you started with if this
bill had passed and was made law
and and.
The judge might still very well
of release that if you found
that the that the defendant had
properly reported that there
could be a way so let's remember
on that story what was done it
because it's factual.
The court ruled that he should
be released but waiting until
the ankle monitor was going to
be put on for example like that
somehow was going to provide
some safety to the community
with that so so the rebuttable
Mr chairman to the rebuttable
presumption would not set look
at the article tool which
suggested R. O. R. and rely on
that as much as in this case in
this case I'm talking about the
oral pool suggested with our
with our our with conditions
with with conditions I can make
rigs okay so in this particular
case the judge would start the
spot symbol based on the nature
that charge based on this
individual's criminal history
you can route but you could try
to about this defended.
That's that's what would happen
I can't get into specific judges
brain about what they're going
to make on this issue on a
particular case but that is a
different starting spot than
what was going on in this
instance.
It seems to me that that a lot
of the the data that we've heard
from at least the studies in
Burnley this in if that was the
other question I have is this is
this only in Bernalillo county
that we have this problem.
I mean all the stories on TV
about Bernalillo county.
I cannot speak I I I'm not
educated enough well enough on
the other counties at this point
to to make comment on what's
going on in other judicial
districts I know what's going on
in Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county I'm sorry no Mr Chairman.
I mean I think I think what we
have is almost.
Is almost a symbolic action here
this was is what this bill
represents because the judges
still going to have to take.
Whatever you as a prosecutor
convince him of.
It's just you're saying he
starts a little closer to your
point of views and David date he
does under the current system.
But a lot of the data we heard
from from the the previous
district attorney's performance
was that they didn't even ask
for the the pre trial detention
in a large number of cases and
when they did they were able to
convince the judge in in another
percentage so wasn't it I mean
it it doesn't look necessarily
like the system was broken but
that maybe the district attorney
wasn't as effective at his job
as he could have been exposed I
I know you can't say anything
about your produce except that
promise you that well that's the
that's certainly the information
that that that people on the
Judiciary Committee you're going
to bring up you Mr chairman we
have some fantastic prosecutor
well that that this which
doesn't affect the doesn't
affect cover COVID prosecutor
they are but if they didn't
convince the judge the problem
doesn't necessarily mean that
the that that the system is
broken Mister chairman Senator
mesta said this is almost
impossible standard the way it's
it's being played out public
district attorney's office but
they still couldn't they still
wanted but thirty five forty
percent of the cases they still
won it's not about sixty point
seven percent fifty point seven
yes
so over half the time the other
able to persuade the judge that
this guy needs to be held that's
Mr chairman respectfully that's
not much that's that's not much
comfort and set for the people
that do end up being coming
victims of without much comfort
for somebody who didn't commit
the crime and you got held long
enough because they they did win
and then when he finally got to
trial three months later he was
released but in the meantime he
lost his job he lost his houses
kids were taken away and his
wife is left.
So I mean it's not like.
There are many victims when a
crime is committed and not all
of them were the ones that
appear on TV and demand that we
get tougher on crime some of
them were the ones that sat in
jail for six months and lost
everything and got released and
and who's there crying for them.
If you if you want to continue
to respond I'm happy to.
Many of the people that actually
are convicted of crimes and were
detained during that time the
fact that they were detained
prevented them from continuing
there may have been the City of
Albuquerque committing
additional crimes and hurting
people and creating more victims
in the City of Albuquerque and
and I am here to tell you that
my job is is not only to
prosecute crime to do everything
I can to make our community
safer this is one of the things
that will do it that how is it
making the community safer if
people who are didn't commit a
crime were found innocent.
Were found innocent upon release
now have no job and have to find
some way of sustaining
themselves so then they turn to
crime we're selling drugs or or
or you know Wirth I think they
don't Mr Chairman what I'm
suggesting to you is that the
district attorney's office with
the kind of volume that we have
right now and in any in any
district attorney's office is
going to lose cases from time to
time that is not a reflection
that this system is necessarily
working overall when it comes to
is working when when people that
are not found guilty obviously
are released at that time
however based on certain
circumstances the violent nature
of the crime whether or not they
support the leader found guilty
or not a crime the safety of the
community I think when it comes
to a previous history of
committing the exact same kind
of violent crimes in which they
were convicted of the safety of
the community when they're
charged again should come into
play and I think we there's a
balancing act of course but we
have to start considering the
safety of the community just as
the constitution of the state of
New Mexico demands that we do.
I can't argue with the safety of
the community I'm just saying
you're using one or two cases
that you've described to us as
an example that the system is
broken I had a needs to be
changed at the end of what I say
it right now excuse me at least
let me ask a question for and
when I say there's one or two
people in the last few months
that have been released after
having spent months in jail
awaiting trial for capital
offenses and then they came
before a jury and the jury said
we can't convict him based on
what the prosecution said to us
we cannot convict the.
That's why isn't that proof that
the system is broken Mr chairman
that shows that the system works
because that and loosely when
they when they if they're found
not guilty in their not guilty
it shows the system works that's
right but that doesn't mean that
people should not be pre trial
to date there are certain people
that nobody can honestly say
should be let out pre trial
based on the nature of their
charges and based on their
history even if their leader
proven innocent even if the
leader proven innocent if the
car ready let me check here's a
perfect example of what I've
been talking about it's it's so
clear this is the third topic
talking about today he's already
convicted of murder he's on fees
charged with first degree
violent murder and your office
didn't persuade a judge to hold
in the Los we proceed to the
Supreme Court of the state
because they overturn the
District Court.
but there's no point in arguing
is saying that that I think
you're you're you're you're
you're solution here is not
going to sit make the community
safer it really isn't and I
respect your opinion I
respectfully disagree okay thank
you Mr chairman Mr chair on that
point then one more question
for.
Okay who's getting ready to make
a motion okay go ahead well Mr
chairman I'm just wondering
talking about the safety of the
community as a search committee
should brought up the three tier
is it this goes forward would
you guys consider looking at
that as force of an amendment to
the bill as you get to Judiciary
Mr chairman I I can't speak for
the sponsor I can speak for
myself so I want to do anything
that'll help bring more safe
it's if things I'm not set in
stone on anything in particular
other than trying to make a
difference to me and and this is
one where so yes I I'm available
but I'll defer to the Spanish
chairman etcetera etcetera I
think this is a hard discussion
it only gets worse as you go to
Judiciary so I would say that
red flag that now have those
discussions so as you get to
Judiciary state here the topics
that we had in **** and and you
know here's where we're at I
just think that there are some
possibilities to get this to
work needs to be New Mexico just
here in the discussion right
here there's a lot of.
A motion to it and we need to
get beyond the motion to the
reality of what's right for the
people and truly about
Bernalillo I think it does
affect the rest of the state but
it happens so often in
Bernalillo because of the number
so with that all yield.
Thank you senator Tom.
Thank you Mr chair I move to
pass no rec.
Yeah we have any for any
discussion of the of the motion
we have a due pass without a
recommendation.
Passing basically we're kicking
the can down the the if we pass
this.
Kicking the can down the road to
to Judiciary and letting them.
We'll have to lawyers they have
I I think.
The.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos is.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Look at no move to explain.
Senator McKenna no.
Senator smitteez yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no explain
motive of senator Clemente yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
No.
Three yes on that motion right
now and for no the motion fails
to explain his votes Senator
Maestas thank you I just
delegate delicate didn't I just
don't think legislature Mexico
procedure but I think it be a
great idea for Judiciary to hash
this out with with the local do
you Senator Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
This this is I've been
consistent.
Just the.
But.
Alternative motion.
The non debatable motion to
table secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Guerreros.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senate committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Two three so that one does
passed by four three vote
Senator Schmedes to explain his
phone they Mr etcetera with
judiciary does have a
The trial bill that has been
referred to them and so I'd
welcome anyone to look at that
welcome anyone to.
Sign on to that bill and and be
part of the discussion happy to
work with the ACLU on that
because I believe that bill
actually results in fewer
consolidated please and fewer of
referrals over the federal
system actually think it's a win
win so happy to look at that
with people thank you.
Thank you senator smitteez thank
you Senator Lopez thank you Mr
Chairman and Mr I think this is
a very that's no reflection on
you there's just that's right
the great thing of skin has to.
Okay let's go then to Senator
souls with no aviation fuel with
let's another controversial
issue money.
No.
I have no.
If you could if you could be
quiet on your way out we
appreciate because we have we
have a long agenda stilettos.
Senate bill two thirty eight.
Mr chair and I think I was a
from this committee about two
weeks ago with another bill.
On the concern with leading
aviation fuels this is probably
one of the shortest bills you'll
deal with the entire legislative
session it says in please note
the date twenty twenty eight
five years out would prevent the
sale of leaded aviation fuel in
New Mexico this is been a long
simmering within the aviation
community when they got rid of
some of the unleaded fuels
most people remember IT was back
in the seventies when we got
leaded fuel out of our.
Automobile gasoline.
Asian fuel has five times the
lead that that fuel did in order
to boost the octane levels up to
a hundred octane
that works out and I might add
numbers last time but.
Over the course of the year the
amount of aviation fuel which
three hundred twenty one point
five.
Tons of lead is released into
our atmosphere yearly
New Mexico probably uses about a
hundred of the total fuel but
still that's three point two
tonnes of lead released into New
Mexicos atmosphere as a result
of aviation fuel by twenty
thirty in New Mexico that would
be over twenty tons of lead into
New Mexicos atmosphere if we
followed what the federal
guidelines there are currently
up situations thank you I've got
copies of the the things from
AOPA and such.
There are some things happening
at the federal level to begin to
move away from leaded fuels it's
been over it's been thirty to
forty years and there has been
no impetus to move this forward
because there were no deadlines
there was no reason to what most
people don't even realize we're
still dumping so much late into
the atmosphere the EPA is
determined there are no safe
levels of lead to be an input
into the atmosphere and will
shortly be coming out with and I
wrote it down here if I'm
finding my notes
The C. they're coming out with a
report that may actually speed
up the deadline beyond or sooner
than what I've got here we don't
know yet but it's very skating
the the preliminary report they
put out about aviation fuels
there are two current aviation
fuels that have been approved
for use in piston engines swift
fuels has a line for unleaded
fuel ninety four octane unleaded
fuel that suffices for about
seventy five percent of the
piston engine fleet and group
Gimme fuels have both the ninety
octane unleaded in the hundred
octane unleaded fuel that has
already been approved of
Phillips is in VP racing are
working on fuel alternatives the
problem is there's no real push
to do anything about it most
people don't realize the lead is
there and so there's no public
outcry about it
they're already Santa Clara
county California has already
banned leaded fuels
New Mexico could become a leader
L. stop talking I've got more
information people want to know
more about it we make it
question so let's see anybody
here in the audience in support
of this bill yes.
Yes yes the committee come up
and use the Mike please this you
know hold on yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Douglas Mikel John I'm a
registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico.
For the reasons articulated by
the sponsor to we thank for
bringing this bill and
particularly because of the
adverse effects of lead in the
atmosphere on small children
like my grand children
although they're not the primary
motive for CV and Ms position
we've urged very strongly that
you support this bill thank you
very much thank you Mr Michael
John we have two people oppose
anybody in the audience supposed
we have to people and zoom of
the pose they also are the ones
that sent us letters so I'm
gonna ask you to be very brief
in your opposition please Mr
Hadley.
Right.
Are you there yes yes I'm sorry
I was trying to you.
Of so Mr chairman and committee
members yes Brinsley are you
have one letter of yes yeah we
received your letter Sir thank
you so I will reiterate that
would serve more positioned to
we are Senate Bill I would
address that we do have
and we a group the news industry
leaders that have established a
deadline for integrating
unleaded aviation fuel
as well we have a group
reservation industry leaders
that are proposed to.
eliminate all this from missions
and all of you since your by
twenty something and I apologize
to the American airport but we
urge the committee to reject
this bill
this in Montfort's in the
letters thank you just one quick
question did you say by twenty
thirty six.
With the system.
For all mediation to those other
ones just feel for mediation
feel regal or
for additional they have a goal
of twenty thirty so I twenty
thirty okay thank you Sir and
then we have the time Chandler
who also sent us a letter.
All rights are and child with
the new button as well yes thank
you for having us allowing us to
testify online especially
chairman I appreciate the
opportunity and that's mine Tom
channel with the aircraft owners
and pilots association we're the
nation's largest aviation
organization including over
twenty six hundred members are
residing and find in the state
of New Mexico including the
sponsor Senator souls and we
appreciate that the to talk
about this that Service rules is
that been a champion for general
aviation issues across New
Mexico so it's a little odd to
be coming in and with an
opposition to one of its bills
and we do so very respectfully
and it's strictly due to the
Just concerned about the time
frame to be able to eliminate
the lead
as you mentioned there's a at
some fuels are then established
and approved by the FAA and the
biggest when this year was with
again we feel which was
certified for every aircraft in
the general aviation fleet
through a supplemental type
certificate process
and that was a huge step in the
process however there's still a
lot to be done.
Mr Deputy mentioned there's a
coalition called the eagle which
is eliminate aviation gas
leading missions it's made up of
representatives of the aviation
industry the refining industry
in the FAA to work on the
remaining challenges you got a
refining process
distribution and their ability
to supply the ingredients in the
new field formulations and
ensuring the supply of current
fuels during the transition
period so that those don't
disappear before we can get the
unleaded fuels distributed
across the entire country so
there's quite a a process still
involved and that's why that
group is put a of bill date Ms
Mr Hadley mentioned of twenty
thirty as an implementation that
for the unleaded fuels
and as Mr souls also essentials
mentioned that Santa Clara
county in California have the
not a head and outlaw this
within their county
and whether airports and
unfortunately that is already
directly led to one accident and
another missed feeling of an
aircraft there because their
couples unable to refuel with
the proper feel it needed so
they pressed on take off again
and went to another nearby
airport but did make it out of
fuel and this is exactly the
concern we have and you can
imagine that problem be
dramatically increased an entire
state didn't have that fuel
available just because you at
this point out law that and the
and the suitable field was not
yet available at the twenty
twenty eight time frame we're
confident we're going to get the
solution done we just take the
hamstring along the way with
that I had a date like this hang
on and so again Preciado
opportunistic thank you Mr chair
Mister Chandler yes thank you
Senator any other comments are
we ready to go just a couple of
comments and and for
clarification the first element
talked.
Out by twenty fifty the the
their goal is to be zero
emissions
that's not talking about eight
yeah that's looking even further
forward of carbon dioxide and
other types of things the eagle
program which is eliminating
aviation gas lead emissions is
what eagle stands for they have
a goal of twenty thirty the FAA
and various groups have had a
goal of getting rid of leaded
fuel and gas in aviation gas
that went back to two thousand
it didn't happen because there
was no initiative to start to
move this forward we also talked
about that a couple of accidents
that were out at the Santa Clara
airport and blamed it on the
fuel the fact is the pilot
landed with less fuel than they
should have and instead of
dealing with that in bringing
fuel in with five gallon
containers took off to try to
make it to another one that was
pilot error pilots are taught
not to land with less than half
an hour's worth of fuel and if
you do in would lesson that it's
stupid to take off and do it
again to blame that on the fact
that there was not a fuel
available of his kind is like
for me to go to an airport that
has no fueling and then blamed
the airport for the fact that
there was no gas available to me
The goal is twenty thirty this
yeah we've be impact or going
full speed ahead they're already
fuels that are approved this may
be a moot point if they actually
get it done faster as they hope
the EPA may set a goal prior to
my twenty twenty eight because
the the leading is dangerous I
would challenge any of you to
tell your children to go out and
you'll start handling this
leaded fuel for the the fuel
that you will the lead you would
absorb thank Senator okay it
members the committee a
discussion questions Senator
Gallegos thank you Mr Senator
just a few questions so I
understood the twenty fifty goal
any of the twenty thirty but if
the federal committee twenty
thirty are we proposing twenty
twenty eight now.
Mr chair and and senator the
budget of set a goal of twenty
thirty they've had prior goals
that they haven't come close to
doing and because there's
opposition and and I've been
receiving pull it up here.
I looked up a particular article
the FAA is chosen the path of
delay holding up the approval of
lead free alternative fuels for
no stated reason this was an
article that came out recently
on this whole thing with that
congressional subcommittee
chaired by a ro Khanna
democratic California was press
disappointed that neither the
FAA nor the environmental
protection agency decide to
testify in person about this
very issue up they have chosen
to the lake they have not put
into place the type certificates
on a timely manner they've known
about this for thirty or forty
years and it made no progress on
it until now when places like
California and others are
starting to scramble as the EPA
is come out with stronger lead
requirements going maybe we
ought to do this.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
center then.
As far as an alternative just
thinking through the piston
engines once it this is enacted
they will be able to fly here
correct in New Mexico do we have
anything for them to use that's
coming in the next few years Mr
chair Senator Mister chairman
Senator in Santa Clara airport
they already are contracting my
understanding from an article
that I was just reading while I
was waiting there already
contracting with swift I can't
remember whether was with fuels
are Gimme fuels are ones that
have already been set up that
those are being made available
they are certainly it's a wide
problem across the country but
the fuels are gonna be more
available and less people start
putting the tools to use and so
there's a bit of a chicken and
an egg that yeah we need to do
to make it more widespread they
are available on contract for
FBOs it used to do this but if
there isn't a looming deadline
FBOs are not going to change
until they're being required to
do so.
Thanks for that Mr answer my
last question then it has NMDOT
the aviation division talked
about this I just wonder what
it's going to do the small the
Jalur report for you fly into
you come for the rocks you
program I don't know they have
the opportunity to do so things
like the larger airport so I
just hope Mister chairman
Senator it was couple years ago
when I flew into gel and they
had don't have aviation fuel
available there people are
flying to Dallas to get it
elsewhere so there are plans
have fuel there is not feeling
services available at Jalan
least not when I landed okay Mr
chair so they drill for gas and
just yeah but you get aviation
fuel there but its specialty US
officials.
Mr chair Senator and and I don't
know if even the Lee County one
just not understanding the rush
to the to date I'm wondering if
any of the smaller ones if
you've had any conversation with
them as far as what it'll do for
the in the past through fees
that they get for the the fuel
if it'll affect him financially
you know I just wonder how we're
gonna if we're gonna have to fix
the DOT aviation department to
help try to fix some of these
issues statewide Mr answer Mr
chairman and senator
what this is is it would require
FBOs to change over to a
different fuel.
Until the required to do so
there's no financial incentive
for them to do so and it's not
going to happen.
This is providing a deadline
where you will or you're not
gonna be able to sell fuels and
so I would hope that several of
them start contacting swift
fuels and various others to
start that transition now in New
Mexico could be a leader where
people would be able to get
these unleaded fuels and and
helps move it forward in other
places it's not going to happen
unless there's a looming
deadline for them to do so.
What that o'neill thank you
thank you senator anybody
Senator Sedillo proposed six
very Senator Thomas and then
Senator Sedillo thank you Mr
thank you the center's opening
as forward as you say.
Of this we we would be the the
first state to do this.
Mr chair and senator to my
knowledge there are no states
yet that have put a deadline and
then again this is five years
out so it's a substantial amount
of time to do so I believe
California is looking at it and
Santa Clara county in California
has already put in a total ban.
Thank you for that answer one
other quick question Mr chair.
it says in the fire that.
The New Mexico dot Senate states
admin position engine aircraft
operation appeals to their
Christian Mexico what's your.
Reaction to that Mr chair and
senator and and again stop me if
I'm telling you more than you
want to know
Approximately seventy five
percent of the general aviation
fleet which are and I'm talking
about the piston powered ones
not the ones that run on jet
fuel which are turbo turbine
engines plus we seventy five
percent of the fleet can run on
the fuels that are currently
available sweet through swift
and others the hundred low lead
I'm limited one which is due to
be released this year will
supply the rest of the fleet.
Scaling it out across the
country becomes the big
challenge and there are two
other companies as I mentioned
Phillips and VP racing fuels
that are in the process of
getting certified all of the we
can run on the Oakes.
Thank you for that answer that's
all I have is Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you Mr mayor
Mike mmhm thank you Mr chair.
We don't get kicked out of a
opioid for this bill that.
You are not the most popular
men.
And.
Mr chair this reminded me of
have the nineties I think this
is my cell I was in the air
quality control board and we
have all these no per nights
because we had the Albuquerque
brown cloud and so we kept
getting more more stringent
because we're trying to get rid
of the cloud and the solution
was actually technology EPA
certified wood burning stoves
and wood burning fireplaces and
it was the regulations that
pushed them to do it I honestly
I've read all this and I don't
know enough about the industry
to the judge but I'm gonna vote
for it just because I remember
that sometimes legislation spurs
innovation.
If you have questions you want
to make a motion passed a motion
for a due pass from Senator
McKenna seconded from Tallman.
Any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Guerreros.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees
notes from the.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator to the building of
the test and to explain is both
Senator Schmedes thank you Mr
center I appreciate Senator
Lopez is thought I I think
that's is certainly spot on I I
still a concern for medical
aircraft evacuation aircraft
organ transplant all these kinds
of folks and so it's kind of
like you know hopefully they may
get on board with this but
I I might urge little caution
about a hard stop on this if if
from an infrastructure level we
we medically can't keep up we
don't have the equipment so they
may want to have a check on that
of some kind of an exception for
medical feedback people and
stuff like that thank you Mr
thank you Senators me so Senator
souls by a five to three vote
you have a due pass with Senator
Hickey still tied up in a
committee somewhere I think Mr
worries thank you all if anyone
wants to this issue
Representative LA Cruz we're up
to use of Sir.
Senate bill two forty bill
o'neill and Representative our
through the Looking.
Thank you Mr chairman are afraid
that the the bill that Center or
perform Neal and I are
presenting this not gonna be as
exciting and Senator Lopez's
Bill earlier.
Mr chairman members of boards
pleasure to be here with you
this afternoon or this evening
this particular bill SB two
forty removes an onerous audit
requirement presently placed on
small government support
organizations I E. eight
Non profits and so I'd like to
read the synopsis free free
Senate bill two forty changes
the threshold from two hundred
fifty thousand of gross annual
income a year to seven hundred
fifty thousand of total expenses
a year for tax exempt
organizations that are required
to provide proof of an adequate
accounting system and an annual
audit prior to soliciting or
receiving donations
organizations under the
threshold provide financial
statements in the form of
balance sheets.
Mr chairman members one of the
difficult things for non profits
I one C. threes is that the
struggle mightily to raise funds
every single year particularly
small five one C. threes like
your your local friends of the
library now granted the bigger
ones they struggle as well but
that threshold is much higher
for them because because the
vote by the nature of their size
you just raise more funds so by
raising this which hasn't been
done in many years from two
hundred fifty thousand and also
expenditures of five hundred
thousand it will aid them
greatly because as you're aware
audits are not cheap these are
formalized a two part is
probably around three thirty
thousand dollars and can climb
from there this will aid them
tremendously Mister chair I
stand for questions thank you
anybody in the audience in
support of this of Mr correct
yes use the might thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee Leri Farrand
registered lobbyists for the new
New Mexico society of CPA's
we've actually worked on this
issue in the past set with
there's been different
iterations we appreciate working
with the sponsors and the
advocates and also the attorney
general's office because the
change that was made was check
going from from cut revenue
collected to expenditures which
with the new Attorney General
thought that that was probably a
better way to to to keep an eye
out for fraud in a potential
abuse because we always want to
protect the nonprofits and their
board members that are members
of of those nonprofits in this
statute had not been updated
since I believe the nineties and
so we think it's time we had a
collaborative approach to on the
best way to address this issue
and so we think this is a good
piece of legislation in order to
do pass thank you Mr chairman
thank you very anybody else want
to speak in support of this
measure.
Is there anyone in a PO in
opposition to anybody at all
online.
Yes.
Madam speaker.
Who is there in support.
John Chavis.
Okay.
Thank you
judge.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is John Chavis
I'm a CPA in private practice
and
mo also serve on several boards
nonprofit boards that would be
helped by this legislation
Representative actually worked
on it for a few years some of
the organizations that are in
support of this of we're not
here today but asked me to speak
with the Albuquerque community
foundation and their present
Royster and United Way of
central numeric New Mexico and
their present running got me
over the last few years what we
work on this of over to a G.
administrations the the new one
with the with AG Raul Torres
just briefly but alas
administration of the AG's
office there is been found from
that office that there has been
no problem with fraud in not
that nonprofits at this level
and that's a good thing and one
reason that day I think this
Mexico Society and others have
decided to to support this
legislation of the other thing
is that of the pandemic is you
know still around but it it is
far as nonprofits are concerned
it's still getting them our.
Difficult to raise funds and
this will alleviate some of the
overhead that they that they
might have
Also
just of a man piece of
information two years ago this
committee passage yes this
legislation in unanimously
actually went through all
committees unanimously the
Senate for unanimously
the house committees unanimously
but it didn't get to the house
floor because of the Covid
legislation there's a lot of
support by non profits at that
time in different legislature's
at that time of one of the
reasons was because a.
New Mexico is one of only all
the five states around New
Mexico is do not even have
require prompt audits and non
process at all and that the only
twenty six states do so we are
in support of and the nonprofits
that I've talked to our support
of this we think it brings it it
does bring it in line with the
federal legislation which is
also seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars and that that
has also been seven and fifty
thousand for over a decade so it
does bring it up to that that
parts of once again we stand
support ask for your support
thank you Mr Chavis and and I
realize you were scheduled to be
the expert witness but you I
think you shared your
information thank you and then
finally we have set for
an efficient also speaking in
support.
Yes good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and we
stand in strong support of seven
Senate bill two forty.
Audits are extremely expensive
and it places an undue burden on
small non profits to have to
fulfill this audit requirement
raising the threshold and
bringing it in line with the
federal requirements just make
sense and means that more
dollars will go towards serving
our communities so please
support Senate bill two forty
thank you support.
Members of the committee.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative for being here
and presenting this bill
this peaks much this bill
protect the peaks my interest
because I am part of a non
profit
and we don't have the threshold
of two hundred fifty thousand K.
and so I'm sensitive to.
Administrative costs and how
they can add up and how we need
to stretch those dollars that
said how do the supporters.
Intend to do quote on quote in
house audits for instance.
in lieu of paying an external
company to do an audit thank you
Mr chairman of and Senator
McKenna most nonprofits even
even small non profits tend to
have someone that helps with
finances and so there will still
be required to submit financial
reports and that that that will
change and also one of things
are left on apologize for that
Mr Mr Chairman is that the
Attorney General still always
has the latitude if there are
questions at any time to still
require a formal audit.
Very good thank you chairman
thank you Representative good I
think that gives me some
insurance and the work of the
public that are watching us this
evening thank you.
Senator Ingle.
the the and.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez discussion did you have to
see you you re gonna something
Mr I did but Center ask question
is more interested in if there
was an issue the age you can
still requests so I'm good with
that thank.
Any other discussion secretary
will call the roll Senator
Guerreros yes ma'am Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle yes Senator
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator smitteez Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Five seven to zero vote with the
two people absent you have to do
the best thank you
Representative this is something
Mr chairman yes so as you're
aware Senator o'neill was the
lead sponsor of the bill and he
fell ill so he was not able to
be here so I want to thank you
Mr chairman of the committee
this is my first committee.
Presentation so thank you all
thank you.
You you did it like a veteran
there is no way of telling thank
you.
Senator pope after Senator pope
we will then go to Senators
Lopez and so the a little bit.
Senate bill two forty four.
Mr chair I will try to be quick
and show you show us Senator
souls how to do it you know like
I do on my bills Senate bill two
forty four.
And what we're trying to do here
Mr Chairman is right now license
federally licensed childcare
providers on military
installations are already
covered by the state and so what
we want to allow is to have
those same federally licensed
childcare providers to be able
to do childcare within homes
within the state and so to allow
for that and that's what this
bill does
once again this is part of the
legislation that I bring forward
that comes from the DOD in the
military one source and how we
get rated as a state as far as a
report card on how we take care
of our our military and our
military dependents here in the
state with that Mr chairman
committee members I'm ready for
any questions that let's go to
the audience anybody in the
audience in support of this.
Anybody online in support.
Anybody opposed here.
Analy nobody there is members of
the committee.
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
chairman Senator pope I move a
do pass.
Question Senator Gallegos a
question.
Mr chairman Senator Lopez I like
the ideas just wondering because
in Clovis a lot of the military
people aren't on face and as
they move into town is it family
members only for a lot of the
daycare type things to prove.
Of services as wondering if it's
more.
If it's broader than just
military.
Mr chair Senator it's broader in
the sense that if their license
to be at on base federally and
the state waves that we are just
expanding that to the home
daycare so they would be able to
probably find day care to the
outside communicate this off
base but as far as a licensure
would only be for those military
dependents that are licensed
licensed so I I get I don't
answer questions eight but they
would be able to fight child
care to those care center and I
appreciate that because and I
don't have they don't serve
Clovis but I know it's hard for
teachers and others to find day
care and so broadening that to
beyond just military excuse us
point of rest communities so it
appreciate the bill specifically
says they can't right now.
Right this section does not
apply to family child care
providers who also provide child
care services to children not
affiliated with the branch of
the U. S. department of defense
did not mean that they can't Mr
chair Senator
on this.
So so let me rephrase that this
is not they would be able to go
work at a child care center and
find that but they would be able
to do the home health care so
yeah I mean they would bill to
do the home child care from
their home it only to department
of defense families.
Correct I think that's right yes
so I misspoke so I apologize so
it's only for those numbers
because what we're looking at
here is the issue of military
dependents coming in and the
base child care facility is full
and so this is another
alternative for them to get the
child care so I I apologize I
misspoke on it Mr chair Senator
a clarification on that patient.
Any other discussion.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes center
to the piano yes.
Three of six to zero vote with
the three eight absent to have a
defense and thank you Mr.
The Senators Sergio Lopez and
Lopez.
Sounds like a band or is it look
this Lopez and city of exactly
it's van yeah.
What kind of music that a bill
two two nine we have a seven.
The committee substitute yes.
Thanks.
This.
Take off
More for the next few days.
Please go ahead that somebody
you need to make a motion
actually want to start by making
the motion.
Do not pass this.
Mr chair I move a do not pass on
Senate bill two twenty nine and
a do pass on Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twenty nine for discussion
purposes thank you senator
seconded by Senator McKenna and
Senator Lopez you an explained
that this bill is all about I
thank you Mr chairman and both
Senator Sedillo Lopez they're
doing a tag team so I'm just
going to say of
a short introductory.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee what the bills what we
have in front of us is what we
are calling special immigrant
juvenile classification act.
And I'm just going to give a
little short snippet the
immigration and nationality act
otherwise called I. in a defines
a special immigrant juvenile as
an unmarried child under the age
of twenty one who has been
declared dependent on a juvenile
court or who has been placed in
the custody be in the custody of
an agent or individual because
one or both of the child's
parents are not able to care for
the child due to abuse neglect
abandonment or a similar basis
under the state law.
And with that Mr chair what I'll
do is I'll give this over to
Senator Sedillo Lopez for
additional and then we do also
have our expert witness with
this who is Jessica Martinez.
Thank thank you Mr chair I think
that
Senator Lopez did a good job of
it of explaining it and I'll
just try to kind of give a
context I think it's really
important to it will be very
very important to many New
Mexicans to expand the
eligibility to special Juve for
jet special juvenile immigrant
status to the maximum that we
can expand it for our for our
Children because.
The nationally or federally
they're allowed to age of twenty
one and because of New Mexicos
specific law for example
they they have to be under
eighteen or nineteen in some
circumstances so I I think that
this bill will just benefits so
many people and I'm really
thrilled and excited and I want
to turn it over to our expert is
Jessica Martinez who is with the
New Mexico immigrant lost at Law
Center and has process many of
the special immigrant
Juvenile status
The petitions and and really has
worked hard on making sure that
this bill has a perfect seamless
interaction with the federal law
so it so it really comes in at
the right place right thank you
this Martinez Mr chair members
of the committee thank you for
your attention Senate bill two
two nine is a really straight
forward straightforward bill
essentially what we are doing is
aligning with the federal
statute under the limitations of
our state law it only goes up to
the age of eighteen and under
federal law we can go up to the
age of twenty one so long as our
law reflects that and right now
this is sense of urgency because
as as a as an attorney for New
Mexico Law Center and as
speaking to many members of the
of the community and speaking to
other attorneys across the state
we are finding that a lot of
immigrant children that come to
us I've already missed that
deadline there are eighteen and
nineteen year olds that come to
us to speak to see if they have
any pathway to the any type of
pathway to legal status and when
they come to us they are coming
because is that oil I would like
to be part of the work force or
I have aspirations to go to
college and then when we do the
analysis we find that
unfortunately due to an age
limit in our state law we cannot
help them and this is more often
times their only form of relief
and what's said to me as as an
attorney I have to say that they
don't meet the qualifications
because of an age limit when no
we all know as attorneys that
they do qualify under federal
law and that is that that is the
this heartening part of of our
limitations we have this already
under the children's code under
the children called there's a
remedy that goes beyond the age
of eighteen we would also be
nearing that within our state
law as well because chapter
forty needs to come into
alignment because we do not have
that remedy to go up beyond the
age of eighteen we have had
cases.
Of immigrant youth for context
these are immigrant youth who
have been abused abandoned
neglected by one or both parents
and that there is no opportunity
for viability with our parent or
parents and because of that the
they are extremely a lot of
these immigrant youth are
extremely vulnerable they have
come from countries as on many
of them have come as on a on a
company of minors across the
border by themselves are fleeing
violence fleeing instability
leading extreme part poverty
falling unstable governments
they have a sense of urgency to
feel safe to feel secure and
this is that pathway for them
addition to that there are many
immigrant youth in the state of
New Mexico that sometimes don't
even know that they are
undocumented until they're
already eighteen when they're
trying to apply and they come to
us like we don't know we run
documented and unfortunately
they're eighteen at this point
in longer qualified but they
need all those requisites
unfortunately our limits that
there are so many cases of
immigrant youth who have faced
homelessness housing instability
all of the you know other
factual criteria that would meet
the qualifications but they do
not have the path we do to our
limitation there are so if the
list goes on and on but they all
have in common is they meet the
criteria for special immigrant
juvenile status but
unfortunately right now the
eighteen to twenty one year old
gap is not being met as is
falling between the cracks
because our state law does not
reflect the federal law and it
is unfortunate because it's a
special immigrant juvenile
status is a pathway to residency
permanent legal residency and
citizenship so this law if
passed would not only aligned
with the federal statute but it
will create generational impact
in change for immigrant children
that qualify to have this form
of humanitarian immigration
relief and ultimately it will
affect their well being and
overall physical and then.
We'll health in the positive and
that can be done through this
change thank you for your time
thank you very much anything
else Senators let's go to the
audience if you could raise your
hand those are here to support
this bill.
The.
Okay is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill.
we're not going to take time to
hear from everybody that if you
had two or three that you want
to just to say a few words.
There's a couple of zoom also
want to testify yes on here and
present more so the US from so
also pueblo need open on the for
New Mexico Dream Team Jessica so
lease Jessica Aguirre from Santa
Fe dreamers project.
The very here Marcella Marcela
is not that anybody else come on
a.
if they don't get to all the but
the question people.
Tension.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jessica police I am a
campaign organizer with the New
Mexico Dream Team a stand here
supporting SB two twenty nine.
Special immigrant juvenile
classification act opens and
brings a lot of opportunities to
are undocumented youth.
Excuse me.
the form of classification act
brings the assurance of
residency and citizenship New
Mexico is home to an estimated
sixty thousand undocumented
immigrants as I do what offer a
big chunk of the population
greater opportunities to thrive
in New Mexico thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee thank you very much
Jessica next.
Good evening at chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jessica again I and I am an
attorney with the Jessica is
here.
And I'm an attorney with Santa
Fe dreamers project our
organization in this test the
claim encouraging you to move
this bill forward if only
because at for reasons mentioned
by miss Martinez this bill would
open up this kind of gap and
ensure that immigrant children
who would otherwise be qualified
can get legal status that they
could otherwise get it is always
terribly heartbreaking to
encounter an individual who
would have otherwise been
eligible and to have that
conversation of unfortunately
you could have had you come to
us six months earlier three
months earlier and you've made
this retroactive right so the
the these heartbreaking.
Tales could be rectified by this
going back okay absolutely and
moreover when we think about
these immigrant youth you know
often times legal status
outcomes with work authorization
you know just one story from our
firm in particular you know
being able to hand a sixteen
year old work authorization card
you know at the peak of teenage
done and be able to say you can
now legally work and be free and
to help your family and giving
that opportunity to somebody and
otherwise also giving that
opportunity to other individuals
who would be eligible.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kirk the
law and the partnerships
coordinator with New Mexico
immigrant law center I'm also
first generation Chinese
American and a second generation
Mexican American in both my
personal and professional
experiences I've seen the impact
that lack of legal status can
have undocumented persons I've
had the privilege to converse
with immigrant youth especially
those in rural communities in
New Mexico that want to start
living their lives and carving
out a space for themselves in
society these are teenagers who
begin looking for guidance right
around the high school
graduation and right around that
cusp of eighteen years old and
would become heartbroken to
discover that they're missing
these crucial immigration
deadlines of animals he
continually listens to and
speaks with these communities we
speak with kids want to further
their education who want to
start a career and want to
contribute to New Mexican
society unfortunately they
cannot continue to pursue their
dreams and goals without special
immigrant juvenile status a
status that would have been
obtained if New Mexico followed
the president's of twelve other
states and merry the federal
statute of an agent that line of
twenty one years old.
For many undocumented children
special immigrant juvenile
status is their only form of
immigration relief I give you an
example of an undocumented youth
that we consulted with who came
to us one week after her
eighteenth birthday and she had
no other form of relief
available to her and her relief
as pending the passage of this
bill that is why I urge you all
to support SB two two nine and
offer these individuals the
missing eighteen to twenty one
year old demographic a chance to
start living their own lives
thank you thank you Carl.
And last in the audience.
This naked we did we thought we
had thank you for waiting
chairman members of the
committee my name is Mesilla yes
I am executive director so also
for the New Mexico we're
statewide immigrant base that
when workers rights organization
and we organize thousands of
mixed status immigrant families
in eight counties seven of which
are in rural communities what we
know from our twenty five years
of experience is that there
continues to be a dearth of low
cost no cost legal services in
private immigration attorneys in
many of the rural communities we
serve it's a real problem for
families
and children who could
potentially apply for special
immigrant juvenile status or
other forms of immigration
relief not be able to access
legal services or information
about their rights to this
relief means that they have
diminished access to justice and
the legal avenues that could
really change their lives and
the cure I think your thumb left
the button so you have to repeat
it all over.
Hello can you hear me now we can
hear so expanding I'm the court
jurisdiction to twenty one for
for these cases would provide an
extra cushion in some cases a
lifeline to immigrant youth who
typically reach out for legal
advice after they graduate from
high school or when they're a
little bit older I and under the
current limitations of the law
many immigrant children in these
commute rural communities are
aging out and losing this
opportunity for legal relief
that's why we strongly support
as an organization this bill hi
we are very grateful to these
Sanchez and to the New Mexico
immigrant law center for working
with them to to help make this
possible thank you myself then
there's two people online so
we'll start with Teague Gonzalez
from the immigrant law center.
I thank you Mr chair my name is
T. Gonzalez for the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty so we
thirty eight this.
We thank the sponsors for this
bill we stand and support
because young people should have
the same opportunity in life no
matter their circumstances we
stand in support of the
legislation because it creates a
path of opportunity for youth
who would otherwise be excluded
due to their immigration status
this bill makes a common sense
change to our law that aligns
with federal law to support the
health and wellness of young
people.
Used to obtain S. I. J. status
can access health care and other
federally funded programs that
support their health and well
being providing full access to
S. I. G. Soto maximizes the use
of these federal funds Senator
assist SIG status eligible use
in accessing Medicaid benefits
and we have seen the life
changing impact that obtaining
the status has on use expanding
their opportunities into
adulthood thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee thank
you to and then finally Ingrid
or the yes.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee hello my name is in
the other line yes I am an
educator in the south valley I
am a special education teacher
an internship coordinator I am I
recipient of S. H. A. S. I
received my immigration status
in twenty sixteen when I was
about to turn eighteen so I am
here to support as B. two two
one nine because it changed my
life I wouldn't have been able
to
follow my dreams and become an
educator if it wasn't for me
being able to have an
immigration status through just
HA yes and I think that every
single one of my students who
are undocumented and have the
opportunity to apply for this
and many other young people
should have the opportunity to
apply for and give back to the
community that they belong in
and so thank you so much for
your time good and we do have
one other of for non over the
Dream Team.
Thank you Senator chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Amanda bond that and I am an
organizer with the New Mexico
Dream Team I cannot emphasize
enough how much SP two two nine
could have benefited me my older
sister and many many of our
youth membership New Mexico has
coached school chapters in
seventeen schools in Albuquerque
for in Santa Fe we go so far as
to less crucis and chapters and
those chapters are in middle
school and high schools and at
least one of those at least one
year from every school chapter
could qualify for this program
unfortunately as I J. S. is a
federal program that many
immigrants undocumented you do
not know much about I found out
about the S. I. G. S. program
when I was trying to apply for
daca many young immigrants fail
to meet the age requirement for
S. I. G. S. I missed that for
only two months I was eighteen
and two months at the time of
the S. I. G. S. it's a great
program that could have changed
my life for the better
drastically let's get that
opportunity to others by passing
this bill thank you chairman and
committee members thank you very
much for non the members of the
committee we go do you know.
Senator Gallegos first Senator
Tomlinson from Estes go ahead Mr
chair Senator Steinborn expert
witness I I'd love what you're
trying to do here I do have a
couple of questions so
have worked on I. nine audits
and was able to get our
employees the parents are the
parent not the spouse with
parents through by to get it
resolved so they have their work
visas on your up bill here is
there a timeline and cost to
citizenship once you take care
the eighteen to twenty one year
old are they put on a fast track
Mr centers or is it it's a
Longduration Casal around twenty
thousand dollars ours was really
short indeed costs at the time
of because I didn't in turning
but if I'm just wondering is
this going to benefit these
young people in getting it to
citizenship Sir Mr chair
Senators.
Good Jessica.
Mr chair and members of the
committee yes this is one of the
best forms of humanitarian
relief that will actually have a
pathway to permanent residency
and citizenship at a faster rate
correct.
Well thanks for that
Mr chair Senators I'm actually
I've got a Joint Memorial coming
up and it's for humanitarian
sponsorship the president put
out in and and I know they don't
qualify because you're here but
it gives you another opportunity
to bring people from you look at
Cuba Haiti Nicaragua and
Venezuela to here and give them
a little bit of Najd I do have a
couple questions on the bill Mr
chair in centers is
and I was looking State of CYFD
use here I think they made the
kid Carson data I'm sure there
is whether or not here but if
you guys address Mister chairman
Senator the CYFD issues where
they're worried about the
beyond their custody period and
I don't think talk to you about
any of.
Yes when I reviewed their their
input I was disappointed because
it really seems that they did
not understand the concept of
special immigrant juvenile
status because they were looking
for consistency with existing
law and they were looking they
they just
But what what this is is an
attempt to expand the
eligibility for a benefit that
the federal grant the federal of
government offers and so whether
it's consistent with existing
policy or existing procedures
within CYFD is a relevant if the
child meets the criteria that's
laid out in the statute and then
the federal recall of criteria
then the child should get the
relief and so just saying that
well this is inconsistent with
our definition of child was
problematic and I wished that we
had had a conversation with them
before they they provided the
input.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm this new Canadian
version that was was before you
is actions have stricken the
thirty two eight which is the
children's coat so that doesn't
apply in the sense this is
bringing chapter forty which is
the domestic relations code into
alignment with federal statute
but I would like to add that
under thirty two a of the
children's code there is a
remedy that was not put in the
FIR specifically that says that
cut it can go beyond the age of
eighteen for the specific cases
because under the federal
requirements the children's
court is authorized to make
those determinations those
special findings of abuse
abandonment and neglect and it
can be beyond the age of
eighteen so actually that's why
we struck it because it's
already would be repetitive to
add it to this because it's
already in alignment hours under
chapter forty which is primarily
the the area where the gap
states does not have a remedy
and does not go beyond eighteen
there is a rare exception for
the nineteen year olds but even
though in those cases sometimes
those aren't always honored by
the federal immigration agency
so by being in alignment
spelling it out for them that we
are going to align with that
federal statute in fact we're
our chapter forty will align
with the children's code and it
will align with the federal
regulations.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
centers and Jessica I was
talking to Hendrix law because I
use them for they've got a
concept of it short of a program
to help get these does others in
here from our country and he
sort of alluded to that you know
that all we are looking for is
just federal line I'm glad that
the
CYFD issues are no longer
because there for more income
station think consistent depth.
With that out I think I can live
with the bill because I think
there's a lot of good in it
but I was more hung up on the
inconsistency so thank you for
your testimony Mr thank you hi
you.
Thank you senator Sierra thank
you Mr chair thank you
Central Senators ring is forward
So how long is a federal law
that affects that allows
children to be classified as
special immigrant juvenile.
Mr chair members of the
committee this was around
nineteen ninety so that's twenty
two years three years ago so I.
Twenty three years so thirty
two.
Thirty seven passes it's late.
So why is it taken twenty thirty
three years to.
Change the longer.
Mr chairman and members of this
committee that's exactly why
this is so urgent because for
this amount of time many
immigrant youth that could have
had this commentary from relief
do not have it today.
Thank you Mr chair so it is an
attempt made to pass this on the
past no this is the first to Mr
chair Senator this is the first
attempt and I I would say this
is just my own opinion is
because we don't have enough
immigration attorneys
in in New Mexico that spotted
the issue and we're creative
enough to to the to see how to
fix it and so I'm very grateful
to for the New Mexico immigrant
law center for figuring out how
to fix it.
Thank you for that answer and
and Mr chair one one quick
question so.
I assume that these children
have that cut.
Every kind of under the radar
they haven't come to tension of.
The immigration services is
that.
Otherwise they would be deported
for their under the radar.
Well there's many answers to
that but when when possibility
with these children is if they
did thank you know get on ICE's
radar they have the opportunity
to to get the relief with the
New Mexico immigrant law center
and but we but I've The New
Mexico immigrant law center has
done a lot about reaching
developed special projects and
even has a project with the
state bar to get volunteer
attorneys to do this to reach
out and and get this relief
before they come to the
attention of ice.
Thank you for that answers all I
have Mister thank you senator
Senator Maestas.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Lopez Senator
Lopez and
An attorney.
I suck at least they get ****
but the has been the subject of
so I just want to thank you up
the attorney because we don't
just like the dominoes
mentioning Mr and we don't for
citizen legislature we don't
know what we don't know you know
and so to to to learn about this
and to bring it forward and
under the leadership of the
centers to this is just great
lawyering and I want to thank
you for that was also one thing
this is more so the US has been
in the trenches for over ten
years it's always great to run
indoor because a minute into the
conversation we're like so upset
with the world.
It's great but
But it's great that you know
this building is different than
it was ten years ago and and
clear heads are prevailing and
hopefully at the federal level
clear heads will prevail
because.
The dream the dream of or the
dreamers is like the greatest
put political acronym ever.
To be a dreamer.
and to dream because it's it's
it's from up I believe or not
the dream act as top one years
old still trying to be passed in
DC as the development relief and
education for alien minors Act
the dream act so I just want to
commend the dreamers and their
allies for for being here and
turning.
Turning up.
Injustice and despair into
action and to hope and to and to
a promise not just for dreamers
but for all for all New Mexicans
for all of us but just quick
question Mr chairman of senators
to vote Senator Lopez the I
expected the bill to see you
know strike eighteen and put
twenty one out it isn't do that
how does.
How does it up move the age
eligibility from eighteen to
twenty one simply referencing
that federal law it's it's
Just read it for the page to.
Line eighteen.
Understood thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that
And then the.
Mister chairman Senator is the.
The federal law that's.
The federal law that's
referenced three at least three
times.
What is that law.
It's eight USC section eleven a
one.
that that law is the federal law
that provides for special
immigrant juvenile status yes
and that's the one that was
passed in nineteen ninety
absolutely yes three years of.
For those up for those folks
that that made everybody all the
the drop the
The the Dream Team of the
Olympics is thirty years old as
well and then the fab five
thirty years old so so you guys
might be able thank you Mr.
I I had a quick question for you
and I don't think ten years ago
of the bill would have said this
wouldn't have passed in this
budget that said this the
section five.
page six.
The special immigrant juvenile
classification actual be
liberally construed to carry out
its purpose what what is this
what does that mean and and and
is it do you need to say that or
or many.
Mr Senator sometimes some of the
judges are like well I'm I'm no
no if I can do this or whatever
so I understand why it's there I
have a sneaking suspicion that
judiciary is going to strike
section I wondered about that
yet we have to give them
something to do and I think well
but you know I wouldn't I
wouldn't mind if you took it out
now because then maybe they
think it's clear but I I don't
know if.
Mr chair I think that that
language is essential because if
we want to make sure that we
have enough authority that we
are we had given this authority
to federal law and if the we
want to make sure that our law
is clearly going to align with
that at all times and so should
be liberally construed so that
we can apply that law of course
accordingly and so that's why it
it fronts section the section of
applicability in particular okay
we'll go with that will achieve
face the.
Plans for the firing squad
what's will the committee.
So one question yep let's get a
motion on to this because by
Senator Tallman seconded by.
Senator Maestas.
Go ahead Senator yes yes thank
you chairman
And thank you senators Sedillo
Lopez Lopez yeah I was
conferring with our very able to
attorney back here
So along those lines of shall be
liberally construed to carry out
this purpose I was chatting with
him about there's the remedial
aspect of the bill.
And I'm just wondering would it
be appropriate someone can
answer this for me to use the of
remedial.
Really not necessary are not
necessary okay because maybe I
just think maybe that word would
be better for Judiciary then
liberally but the attorneys in
the room can correct me on that.
Mr Mr chair Senator
I but I think that the judiciary
would not like that were either
the reason they're going to take
one of the reasons they're going
to probably take it out is they
hate to see a purpose in the
bill and and so there's not a
purpose in the bill and here
we're saying to carry out its
its purpose so they're just
going to hate it but I I
understand and I don't know
maybe we could think of on the
way to Judiciary a a better
approach to it but what we want
to do is to the to the limits of
federal law we we don't want it
to to leave anyone behind.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
I think but really it's saying
is as long as we can it achieve
the intent of the bill which is
to provide a pathway to
immigrant youth who have been
abused abandoned or neglected
that fit the criteria special
immigrant juvenile status so the
more appropriate term could be
intent as long as the intent of
this bill is met which is
aligned with what we're supposed
to be doing under federal law as
authorized as the court system
within the state of New Mexico
to grant those findings of
special findings I think it's
really saying the intent of this
bill should be applied to its
fullest to align with the
federal statute if that makes
more sense.
Right maybe we should do that
before we get to judicial.
That with.
Chairman and senator as I
understand it Judiciary wants to
do some cutting and slicing of
their own and so even if we cut
and slice here I don't certain
think about some to think about
thank you thank you senator
anybody else what's the
secretary will call the roll.
Their assessment Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center my is this
yes please Senator McKenna yes
thanks committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes
center to subpoena yes at a six
zero vote to the three missing
you have a defect.
Thank you members of the
committee can Mr chair thank
members of the that we will
start our Senator Ivy Soto
portion of the meeting.
We have.
Three bills by Senator Ivey
Soto.
For no he's not going to do
two fifty six so we just have
three bills to go.
He's promised me these will be
fast and easy and conflict free
absolutely thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee if if
we may start.
With
Senator two forty eight probate
partitions of a court.
This is an act of mercy for
representative Garcia it is it
is.
I will I will also say by the
way that the phrase.
Liberally construed for its
purposes already existed statute
then number place of so good
then within that that's
reassuring you may notice that
it doesn't actually have a
purpose
the the plain language of the of
the act yes there you go.
Okay Mr chairman personal.
The Senate bill two forty eight
start with two forty eight to us
it the study with the different
want to forty eight Senate bill
two forty eight is a bill that
would look like to forty six in
the back icy you have to forty
six that we can see okay the six
to update a number of measures
in law related to probate point
of these have been
As you look through the build
you will you will note that
there are a number of these acts
here that are from laws eighteen
fifty one
for laws eighteen sixty five
someone a couple of which have
never been amended up before and
so and so it.
In conversation with the probate
court affiliate that just seem
like it was time to to do a
rewrite of some of this and
bring some of these things into
into the modern age I do have an
amendments.
that is that you all should
have.
We do yes Sir and the and what
the amendment does.
Is that it's strikes subsection
a in section one.
in its entirety and the reason
for that is the spring court
read that is requiring the
The District Court to pay the
salary of the probate judges
which was not the intent we
thought it was an administrative
language there
and then we also.
The other thing that it does.
Is it the the times for the
probate court are determined by
the clerk of the probate court
and published on the kinds
website and then also it's just
that recognizes that there may
be more than one deputy clerk so
that is the amendment we have.
a motion on the amendment.
The.
Motion from Senator Tallman
seconded by the chair
any discussion of this questions
for the Sanchez Sanchez.
Any opposition to the amendment.
We are in total we have I that's
good we can still do things all
right.
We have so we still have a
quorum Senator Gallegos will be
right back you just wanted to
get a charger okay let's take a
lot of votes will is out of the
room.
And
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and with that let me give up my
nose so let me just finish up
seeing no opposition will accept
the amendment as Representative
and consider the bill to them as
senator or representative Garcia
and and and and by way of
introduction in addition to his
public service work
at in Cibola county and among
other places
his his wife currently serves as
the probate judge of Cibola
County okay and so he is
intimately familiar with with
matters related to probate
courts thank you thank you Mr
chairman of the reason we
brought this probate the bill up
is basically because what's
happening each county has a
probate judge.
The thirty three probate judges
in the state of New Mexico it
was happening Mr chairman and
committee if the probate judge's
unable to fulfill her duties for
any or their duty for any reason
being sick or disqualify
themselves from a from a case
then at that point.
He would have to go to the
district judge District Court
and what happens in District
Court Mr Chairman is the time
frame is number one but if the
case goes and I District Court
in the docket is full he can sit
there for months and and another
issue is a when it does go to
District Court most of the time
you have to hire an attorney to
be present with you and these
people that are trying to file
for all these Mr chairman most
of the time they've lost family
members in the room not have the
funding to four.
An attorney the another issue is
the.
Probably just now in like in our
county charges thirty dollars.
To file the paperwork if you go
to District Court he goes up to
about a hundred thirty four
dollars.
And you know the issue what
we're trying to do here is is a
district judge can appoint
appropriate to go practice.
The probate in another community
and another of county I mean but
preferably it'll be within the
same district.
You know would like we have a
total of Santa in the Legisla-
artistry judge would appoint
another.
You see my wife went to do a
probate the judges would appoint
your just in that district
referral please so out of Cibola
into the land into religious or
civil war or Sandoval County.
For need be if Bobby put a
pointer to other parts of the
state but preferred the what
we're trying to do Mr chairman
and committee members this keep
it within the district.
And with that I'll we will turn
it back into my.
It's faster we're happy to
several questions.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this good did you
want to say anything please yes
you Mr chair members of the
committee that use the hand held
because that will pick you up
zoom.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Selena
Jones on the general counsel at
the administrative office of the
courts and I'm here in support
of this bill very much want to
thank the sponsors for their
time addressing the
administrative issues that have
just been described and have
been a problem for probate
judges for sometime in the
additional effort updating and
modernizing the probate code so
we send support thank you thank
you Mr Jones anybody else want
to speak on this yes Sir.
Good evening Mr chair.
Committee my name is Dwight
Torres and the probate judge for
some to get County I'm also the
vice chair for the probate
affiliate and we ask for your
support of this bill we've been
trying to passes for the last
three four years I believe and
what we found the problem where
we found these problems during
the the pandemic where Senator
our of our probate judges live
outside of the county seat and
we we face right now the way the
the code is written we face the
five thousand dollar fine if we
sign will be paid for outside
the county seat so this will
help fix that for us like said
that you know so court judge
live ninety miles of range had a
situation where him and his
neighbor had to drive all the
way to support to do the
paperwork and and sign the
paperwork that to avoid fine the
other money yeah right now there
county offices are in Espanola
but the probate judge has to
drive from seventy miles to go
to that I'm not yet signed the
paperwork filed paper can come
back and I like another example
the chairman of the probate
affiliate does pest Act is act
actually had back surgery this
morning by the year so if cases
will have to sit there for for
the next forty eight weeks so he
gets police plaza drive for the
transfer to District Court so
this.
We change that which help one of
the local probate judges within
that judicial district and cover
for him until he gets back so
again we ask for your support
and passing this bill great so
this is been thoroughly vetted
with all the probate judges.
Yes ma'am.
First and on the.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee and Kathryn Clark
Santa Fe County clerk I did want
to thank the sponsor for making
sure that the clerks were very
aware of this bill he came
before us and made sure that we
were okay with all the changes
in the bill so while we have not
taken an official position on
this bill there is not heartburn
from the clerk's on this bill
and I do believe that the New
Mexico association of counties
does support this bill
officially thank you so much
thank you very much.
Let's see if there's anybody
here in opposition there's
nobody on zoom so anybody in
opposition.
Thank you Representative Garcia
you want to add some things to
German I just forgot to it is
mention one thing the Supreme
Court does approve of this bill
yes.
If they approve who are we to.
Mr chairman of a do pass we have
a motion for a due process
second from Senator Maestas any
discussion any further
discussion CENIC you worked out
really good solution seeing none
the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Six six in the positive zero
negative vote you have a new
path thank you for making it all
those lessons you're right think
of eighteen sixty six eighteen
sixty.
Road rebuilding very good this
this is clearly a revolutionary
action you've taken shifts
exactly Mr chairman the the next
bill is
Senate bill two forty six forty
six and I will note that might
co sponsoring this
Representative Hochman Vigil all
wanted to be here but she's
currently in the middle of a
debate on the house floor
so this is a
Very you may remember that two
years ago we passed a revised
uniform law under chair lacks
this is the revisions to the
revised uniform law on material
acts
you have a committee substitute
in front of you and Committee
substitute
was because after we filed the
bill the secretary of state's
office with ministers much of
this
went through with a fine tooth
come in and have some
suggestions all of which I took
and and it just was cleaner to
do a committees up so if we
could move the committees up
I'll be happy to present it was
to make the motion of where
you're moving.
We do not just those two forty
six in the past.
Two forty six but you do
passing.
But committees of the do a do
pass sense.
Senate bill forty to forty six
substance to committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty six for discussion
purposes only.
Senator what's to so thank you
very much so what we do loan
if the loan bills but it's a
long bill only because a lot of
the clean up follow through so
what we do in this bill first of
all is we clarified the
positions of automatic material
officers be addressed loss or.
Secretary of state our full time
staff members secretary of
state's office county clerk
deputy county clerk or an
individual whose member the
state bar and less practice law
the only new addition in that
list is the secretary of state
or full time staff members
secretary of state's office
everybody else was already has
an automatic ability to be a
notarial officer but we
But that's just this is because
of a title of automatic detail
officer it also the judicial
officers you'll see on page
four.
The judge of a state court
special commissioner hearing
officer pointed to presume to
speak for rural.
Semester pointed as present to
speak our rural parts are
difficult work of the state
board and and so the reason why
we broke up judicial officers
was at the request of the
supreme court because judges and
court clerks have been doing a
lot of this work based on the
inherent authority of the court
for many years and so on page
five you'll see under the
definition notarial act.
We say we get a line thirteen it
does not apply to an act that
would otherwise be a notarial
act if the act is performed by a
judicial officer within scope of
their duties and the record is
filed in the court of the
judicial officer so for the
record that's going to be filed
in the courts and it's within
their their inherent duties then
this law doesn't apply if
they're doing it on a document
that won't be found in the
report then this docket then
this law will apply and so that
that allows I think the
appropriate balance between the
inherent judicial of process
these and the and the and the
law regulating notarial acts
and so the.
The other thing that we do of
some of some note is is we do
find that
we're gonna put the seal back on
the field statements seal of the
notarial officers we're also
going to there's a class
required for part of my cultural
officers for them just to make
sure they know what they're
doing if they're going to do
that
we can then
we also.
really pretty much everything
else is really clean up such as
the uniformity talked about a
federally recognized Indian
tribe question Most would talk
about the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo right we go through and
make those changes throughout
the bills and
And then we also provide a
a transition period if there's a
change to the to the seal so
that if your notary public you
get to keep use the same sealed
through the end of your current
condition.
Because you got to get a new
self at your next question
anyway if your automate notarial
officer you have a year to to
get the new seal if there's
change the scale up and so with
that Mr chairman I'll be happy
to stand for questions.
Thank you.
I wanted the audience and the
support of this.
particularly in front first.
Losses.
If you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee Selena
Jones general counsel with the
administrative office of the
courts we stand in support of
this bill and particularly
appreciate the Sanchez work on
clarifying that the requirements
don't apply to judicial officers
or court clerks are performing
under Tory lacks in the the
record and that was a very
important update and very much
appreciate that that
clarification being made.
Thank you.
The free here that pushed the
topical okay.
Good evening everyone my name is
Lindsay Bachman I am the
legislative and executive
affairs director for the
secretary of state's office I
want to clarify that we're
neutral on this bill it just
felt better to be raise my hand
and the support opportunity
however we do appreciate the
sponsor I'm coming coming to us
after we gave feedback in
regards to the bill
incorporating that into the
committee sub I also just want
to make clear that the technical
changes included in this bill
are changes that we feel are
manageable given that we are
already on putting in some of
those things that you all
decided to do a twenty twenty
two so I just wanted to clarify
that for you all thank you very
much.
And the I believe we have a
third person wants.
Nope okay.
Anyone opposition.
The hearing I will we do have a.
One the person in support as
soon her name is Rebecca branch.
W..
General counsel.
Good evening chairman and
senators my name's Rebecca
Branson deputy general counsel
counsel of the state ethics
commission I am tasked with
enforcing
The revised uniform law on the
toria acts if we receive
complaints against know Torio
officers and I just would like
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill and making
some clarifications and I
believe that it addresses many
of the deficiencies that we have
seen
throughout our enforcement of
over the last year so we stand
in support of this bill and
thank you for your time.
Okay thank you for your comments
and we'll turn to the committee
anyone with a Canadian wishing
to of.
But we have first off we have.
Senator minus thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator Ivy
Soto so we're gonna do away with
notary publics.
Mr chairman and services no
problem we we southerners public
state it would have a a four
year Commission and effect noted
public is a is a defined term on
page five beginning at one
twenty three.
So that there's they're not
noted public has a commission
for four years an automatic
notarial officer has a
commission has a the automatic
authority to do it based upon
their their their position I see
I see yes I was worried because
I don't think people stop saying
no Republic regardless of.
Las we change thank you Mr.
Senator.
On page where is it on page ten.
You're yes that no of what I
would have to hand it over.
I'm sorry Mr go ahead
note if thank you I think we're
all tired I whatever version of
on page thirty six on page the
lines about the test.
Maybe this is just the.
Instructor in me just as they
have to attend it.
Correct is there any kind of
like.
Zoom in examination of whether
they got anything out of it.
So
that should certainly Mr
chairman and senator syllabus so
so this was added at the request
of the secretary of state's
office and and so if you are a
notary public applicant you have
to pass a test that comes
afterwards.
this is this is a new thing for
an automatic material officer
and and so the the decision for
the secretary of state's office
was that it be attendance at the
at the at the course as opposed
to pass a test at the end.
Mr chair Senator what would this
would you ask your expert of the
secretary of state's office to
explain the difference.
Could you explain that could
come over here and serve our
country.
Chair Senator my understanding
is that it has to do with the
payment required so we so we
defer to a different agency in
order to provide the training I
believe the bill says
that training that we will find
or that another
the agency that we designate or
something provides and and
currently I believe that the
certification at the end of the
certificate that you would
receive comes with that with the
payment so I believe that that
is why in discussion with the
sponsor we we decided to give
that feedback.
Mr chair so they get the
certificate but they still don't
have to show that they master
the material and I investor that
they got something out of the
course Mr chair it's it's just I
don't know I I don't see the
difference between requiring
that for notary public and not
requiring it for the for the
senatorial up and.
Notarial officer and maybe I'm
just tired I just don't get it.
Mr chair.
I I Mr chair Senator I I hear
your point I just know that in
discussion that that that that
was the point that was raised
that we're interested in them
completing the the curriculum
but not necessarily in in paying
for the certificate.
And
Mr chairman and center city a
lot because I'm I will know that
when lawyers have to attend the
Sealy nobody verifies that they
paid attention Senator that
they.
In our legislative ethics course
yeah right right that they give
up in our the the left to the
number get back however I will
say having said that Mr chairman
and Senator Lopez on page for my
point exactly.
A page three six line twenty
one.
Before the period it would be
possible to add the words and
attendees will demonstrate an
understanding of the information
provided in the course.
The dentistry.
Well that would be a test that
that's how they would madam so
so we could add that in there if
you would like Mr chair Senator
so
Could that be the test offered
by the secretary of state or
would there be real rulemaking
or or some other processes so
they would have to pay the fee
for the certificate because of
that certificate to pay for
these when you take the state
bar literally you just have to
type in a word like they'll just
flash a word in the middle of
the training so that they know
you didn't just hit the send key
and go do your dishes so
I don't I don't know I mean
where does this go afterwards
issue.
But I would Mr chairman and
senator office I for reasons
that other people may have
expressed at other times as well
I would like to to have this as
clean as possible before because
to Judiciary.
And and so certainly I I don't I
don't I don't have any problem
if we if we indicate that they
will demonstrate an
understanding of the information
provided in the course.
In a manner to be determined by
the secretary secretary of state
Williams of the secretary of
state has has rulemaking
authority with regard to the
revised for monetary lex Mr
chair the secretary of state's
office have a problem with that.
I'm Mr chair Senator I don't
believe we do now.
Thank you Mr chair then I
suggest I make that motion
effect on page thirty six line
twenty one.
Senator deal Lopez's a motion
before the period is and
attendees.
Will demonstrate an
understanding.
Of the information provided in
the course.
Their second to that motion.
That would be from the moment.
Senator discussion on that in
the yeah
At okay.
Demonstrate how about the
testing having it.
Pass the test for demonstrating
knowledge.
I mean do you know what I'm
saying demonstrate versus
passing a test is Mr chair that
that this would give the
secretary state flexibility and
have all of that to Mr okay.
Okay Mr chairman senators
definitely there would need to
be some additional conversations
internally about what that might
exactly look like and so I would
appreciate having that
flexibility you would just use
the same yes that you do for the
notary public.
Mr chair Senator our Mr chair
and senator.
again that is that is a course
that we differ folks to three
different agencies so I just
need to go back on to maybe be
very different yeah so the
flexibility would be helpful I
think but they might align at
them in online this is.
It it opposition to the dimmer
or did you want to make further
comment no thank any opposition
to the equipment and seeing none
will will adopted from the
amendment and and to point.
But to sit quicker just kind of
set a precedent now that that
state employees are going to
have take yes Representative
training Mr Chairman Senator
Tallman
Who knows maybe maybe we might
actually expected to learn
things.
But I have a bill it's been
amended any any of the
discussion Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
On that point these things are
really.
Important positions with duties
that they have to do and take a
license you know it's it's I
just think you should
demonstrate you know what you're
doing right those justice.
account okay okay we're back on
the bill as amended and I had a
question on page ten did you you
had the view of the floor before
of the.
That's all Mr chair of Page ten
you in online
Fifteen sixteen seventeen
eighteen choose faces there for
this does not require an a post
deal apple still what is that so
Mister chairman.
The and apple still
required by the Hague convention
of October fifth nineteen sixty
one if you if you are doing it
what is a notarial act in
another country.
Then then for in order for to be
recognized in the United States
it has to be accompanied by an
apple steel that is effectively
at the normalization of the
notarial act itself.
And so and likewise if I were to
do notarial act in this country
that would be used in another
country.
Then pursuant to the the Hague
convention I would have to take
that to an officer who could do
that apple still now up in the
United States because natural
acts are done the authority is
done at the state level then it
would be the secretary of
state's office that would apply
the apple still they would
verify my authority to do a
notarial act and my signature
and that would be attached to
the document so that was a
Representative receiving this in
another country would be it
would be able to have confidence
on that in this particular case
what we have is what you're
doing a remote online
notarization the notary public
is a New Mexico no Republic but
the person happens to be outside
of the country.
There's a requirement that have
to do it by video that to
maintain the video in our
archive they have to there's a
variety of other things that has
to take place but this simply
clarification that even though
the person doing that the
station is outside of the
country if the notary is in is
in New Mexico and has a in a
remote online notarization that
does not invoke the Hague
convention of nineteen sixty
one.
Mr chair on that point.
Please I believe you learn that
in going with the I did as a
matter of fact you when I was a
program directed by Senator
Sedillo Lopez professor you knew
all about the a post.
Strappedwith two I think he did
I called us up with the live but
I don't know what the correct
pronunciation.
Growth this is been education.
Yeah we do we have a motion.
You have to figure that.
Yes they.
Did the do we do we don't have a
motion on the bill as amended
it.
Fund mo motion for it to pass as
amended as their second seconded
by.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Mr just as
technical matter what will
happen because as a committee
substitute for this committee is
that it will go out as a point
three yep so it'll take a lot of
clean as a point three okay.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Guerreros yes.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes to the point
three committees of.
Senator McKenna health centers
meetings Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator it's.
Comments.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes in to
explain his vote Senator Griggs
Mr chair and senator I just love
to see an Ivy Soto bill Ivey
Soto.
Representative six the six zero
vote you have a do pass thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman the
last of the that I have this
evening is Senate bill two
eighty six there's a project
that I've been working on for
about the last eight years and a
project that Mr chairman you and
I lose your micro Sanchez Bill
been working on for the last two
to three years actually
conjunction with our partner
every burger will be very glad
to see this and
and so.
yes and insular Parker so this
is something I actually brought
this up several years back.
It was opposed by a number of
the of the land title folks and
so that's what that put a kind
of have some of the lower part
of the story about racially
restrictive covenants that that
are still on the books in New
Mexico and so and at that point
then Senator deal our center
Ortiz Y. Pino and I started
working on this issue and I
start with the land title
association in order to find a
way to.
be able to address this issue so
the the the approach that we
used in this bill is to make it
a violation of the Human Rights
Act.
If somebody records a deed or
other instrument related to
property that continues to
contain a racially restrictive
covenants and and the the part
of this deal with covenants is
you don't want to upset the
covenants that say for example
all homes in Santa Fe will be
adobe or or the ones that say
you can't have more than seven
chickens in your backyard those
covenants we don't want to
disrupt what we want to
structure the ones that say No
negroes are Mexicans on lesser
the service borders.
And and so and so that's what we
are fairly specific on the
matter that we did that the
other thing that we did.
Which was brought to my
attention actually by the Santa
Fe County clerk.
Is that a lot of the instruments
related to property continued to
use gender specific language.
And usually gender specific in
terms of women where it will it
will say in a deed a single
woman or married woman they
don't always do that with the
with the opposite gender.
And while there may be a need to
call out whether not someone a
single to merit a committee
property state it does not need
to be done with gender specific
language and and so we address
that as well and so the number
of the bill.
Then is is actually on page
eight.
Towards the bottom beginning on
line twenty three.
And it's really subsection state
and beat any covenant attached
to real real property that
contains language with the
intent or effect to restrict
ownership residency or the use
of real property.
because of a.
Persons of race religion
national origin or any other
class that is protected by the
Human Rights Act is void as
against public policy.
No and then beat noted rather
restaurant right in related to a
property issues gender specific
language when referring to trend
towards or grantees.
And and so we cannot go back and
change the permanent records but
what this does do is that the
stops.
Repeating the ratio the racially
restrictive language moving
forward and it also provides for
a disclaimer that can be used at
any time.
Which is it is a positive step
New Mexico that there be no
discrimination the ownership
residents here use of real
property it covers that would
restrict such ownership in
violation of state or federal
law is hereby void as against
public policy so that is a
description that could go on but
we do allow any homeowner.
Right or a purchaser first of
all if they don't want just that
disclaimer what they want
specific things called out on a
property that that has to be
done and we also allow if you
don't want to wait until
property turns over through
sale.
We also allow at the very end
any homeowner and impressed with
a financial interest in property
can at any time re record their
deed removing the racially
restrictive language so with
that Mr Chairman and my co
sponsor the let me introduce the
Santa Fe County clerk as much
for witness and then we have to
stand for questions.
Representative clear.
She just talked to okay is that
what you can use that went to
thank you Mr chair Committee so
I'm very happy that we need a
push for for us but we're seeing
all over the country the clerks
are discovering that racially
restricted cover covenant
language is being carried
forward and deeds and there is a
movement nationally to prevent
it from being carried forward so
we would simply be aligned with
many other states are doing this
and secondly what we're seeing
is that the gender specific
language unfortunately has the
disparate outcome and that women
are being asked information and
then are not or we're seeing
that they're asking questions
they should not be asking you
cannot be asking about single or
divorced what you're allowed to
ask is married and married or
separated so we're trying to nip
some of these let's say way were
title companies.
Preventing them from continuing
problematic language we like the
disclaimer because many of the
title companies will simply
refer back to the old racially
restrictive covenants without
putting a disclaimer saying that
the things that are in the past
are no longer applicable we
think it's a problem to could
repeat history we want to make
sure we still know have and have
knowledge of our history but we
are not repeating it so thank
you members the committee Mr
subject of it if they try that
then you can reject it and and
ask them to resubmit with the
disclaimer.
If anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Yes Representative.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico association of
realtors and the realtor stand
in support of this proposal
right thank you for.
And up Mr chairman if you're at
all responsible in doing his job
years around would be here on
behalf of the land title
association.
So they they have supported the
the comments for because of the
the Larry Barker thing is he he
interviewed I think me and you a
couple of other people because
they found he is channel
thirteen found these covenants
in our neighborhoods the
neighborhood that I live in has
has all over the place of these
because that No orientals no
blacks no it is a black no
African Americans nope admit of
African ancestry all sorts of.
My neighborhood.
The New Mexicans and the.
The other interesting thing
about that is there were is
there.
So there was no.
The pure there if you
right.
Kind of native people twelve
Spanish so I thought that was
interesting because it did you
want to make a commitment with.
Yes so high country news about
twenty twenty one did a review
of these are being recorded and
they found in Bernalillo county
four out of ten had references
to the racially restrictive
covenants what we have found in
Santa Fe is that people are not
tending to put necessarily the
racially restrictive covenants
in the deeds but they're not
making a disclaimer when
referring back and what we know
about the famous stand houses is
that in order to get those
federally funded through the
federal housing act they were
required to put no African
American descent in oriental
descent so all of those famous
lovely houses that we all love
and adore all have custom eight
all have racially restrictive
covenants and we also have an
internment camp in New Mexico
that made it in Santa Fe and I
may have been part of the reason
why we see a discriminatory
language against people of Asian
American descent but in order to
qualify for federal money that
to put the restrictive covenant
our government was not not
necessarily perfect yes so Mr
Chairman that was so when when
the after post World War two
when we have the housing boom
and we also had FHA created we
also had the GI bill which which
which enabled
veterans to be able to purchase
a home and and whatnot there is
a real concern about maintaining
the value of the homes and so
the federal government itself
engaged in a policy of
redlining.
in order to promote
homeownership but promote
values being maintained in the
homes.
Senator Tallman.
The quick thank you Mr just
quick question.
The center hi this so I just I'm
not questioning your ability to
move bills through the
legislature just curious why it
took you said took eight years
to do this Mr chairman I don't
always get it right the first
time.
I think it's been eight years
but it was been about five or
six out.
At least okay and of course in
the thirty day session.
It is.
No we still have I want to okay
the the just we're just gonna
take a quick vote here Senator
the lesson of the night I I can.
The.
Is there a Moser motion.
Senator Maestas moves a do pass
Senator Tallman seconds it any
other discussion secretary will
call the roll Senator us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Schmidt is center city of this
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Thank you secretary of those six
by six zero seven two press
thank you members of the
committee thank you very much I
look for to see you all up front
at Freddie we'll see you for the
conversion therapy bills and
that and then I've also got one
of the bill that's on the agenda
okay thank you so much to make
sure with that members of the
committee the hell the Senate
