Solution in marriage or county
assessors are multi generational
housing until after we do this
refers.
The the the the policy is the
presenter presents the up for
bills on this appropriations
grid the the presenter presented
we ask if there's anybody in the
audience who wants to show
support for it but we don't take
testimony except if there's one
person who's is essentially
expert witness on who could say
a few words help us understand.
We will we will get an
indication if there is anybody
on the zoom who wants to face or
oppose it if there is any
extensive discussion.
We'll pull it off the grid and
then we'll we'll we'll do the
rest of the grid and then come
back to it and have a more
prolonged thank the idea is to
spend no more than five to ten
minutes on each of these items
we can do that we we should be
through with the group by four
by three thirty by four o'clock
so and then we get on to the
other line bills that aren't on
the grid
so that's kind of the idea we
have a we have a quorum thank
you Senator Hickey so let's go
ahead and get started with
Senator compass we're going to
do all through the of Senator
compass is built on the grid
those are three oh six.
Three the third seventy six and
three seventy seven this is
three seventy seven visit us
through it yes okay okay great
I'm reading the back of this I'm
reading backwards.
If you put all three Senator
Campos please explain the health
centers in Herman peak kept
getting thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's great to going to
be here with you today and I
really appreciate the process
that you're utilizing but today
in as these make their way to
hopefully if they are if up
there will action is taken today
that they make their way into
the Senate finance committee
we're considering if you will
quite a few of the
appropriation tax and also
capital outlay but in essence
Senate bill three oh six
appropriates two hundred fifty
thousand from the general fund
to the Department of Health to
support school based health
centers in communities impacted
by the Herman speak calf canyon
fire this is Mr chairman members
of the committee communities
like Caepio morna L. vai it and
in Las Vegas itself do have the
need if you will for some of the
school based health centers and
within that what this bill would
do is use part of this
appropriation to support those
particular school based health
clinics within this area this
definitely is something that is
needed as we continue to go out
and deal with the devastation of
the fires and the floods we do
have young people of course who
are dealing with mental health
issues as well as some of the of
the physical issues as well so
in essence Mr chairman that's
what this but bill would do.
Thank you is there anybody here
who wants to show their support
for this by raising their in.
So several people here putting a
social work student from
highlands university who is
here.
Right.
Anybody in opposition to this in
the audience.
Any questions from members of
the committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator Pullman I
guess
Do thank you thank you okay to
see what's up but to split
seconds so.
Okay.
There is a contest to see you as
the most seconds by the end of
the session I think Senator
Sedillo Lopez is actually in the
lead on the second competition
for us on this Hey.
Good money on the table and
there's still time their
content.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guy and goes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes the
depressive throughout may I I
zero votes with thank thank you
very much Mr chairman and then
we'll move on to your three
seventy six small local
government Odysseus.
And for that we have the auditor
here.
For these the service is great
thank you for coming thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee in the course of
what this would do it would
appropriate an additional one
million dollars to the office of
the state auditor to help small
local public bodies such as the
New Mexico so get a sick sick SO
ciation the land grant
Association mutual domestic
water associations and so on
water conservation associations
get on track with their
financial reporting duties one
of the the the great thing about
the state auditor as he moves
forward as he realizes the need
for this particular assistance
with these organizations and if
all goes well we're able to go
ahead and to support the this
the resource and so hopefully is
we do move forward that this
committee would give us some
favorable consideration at this
time Mr chairman if I may I'd
like to defer to our state
auditor please stay with us
please thank you Mr chair
members of the committee as you
know the office of the state
auditor we regulate all public
entities to ensure that their
financially compliant
that level of oversight varies
from a full financial what it to
what we call agreed upon
procedures the small political
subdivision entities that was
basically listed by Senator
Campos
over the years many of these
entities have fallen into
financial non compliance of the
five hundred fifty eight small
introduce a secularist mutual
domestics and so forth of the
five hundred fifty eight about
two out of every three of those
entities are non compliant some
have been non compliant for up
to thirteen years and as you
know if they're non compliant
they can access capital outlay
funds or federal funds our
latest analysis of the small
entities that have received
capital outlay but can't access
it we're talking in excess of
six million that's being held
held up for lack of non
compliance and so.
What this effort is it's a multi
year effort
a four million dollar multi year
effort to more aggressively
procure the engagement with
independent public accountants
to assist many more of these
entities on a geographic basis
and help them achieve financial
compliance so we'll be back but
this is going to be an
incredibly important down
payment to
help these entities particularly
the entities in the burn scar
that maybe non compliant and be
poised to receive funding so
with that Mr chair members of
the committee just stand for any
question thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee right thank you
Senator is there anyone in the
audience in support of this.
Visitation will be very opposed.
Nobody on the I I have a quick
question I I just looking at
your list I realized.
We have a house in Dixon yes
thank you the young was one of
the seven I think as index and
we are pursuant this that.
They asked me to give them some
capital outlay to help with the
with the
they had flooding last spring
that wiped out several of the.
Coverts and and flooded actually
some of the homes but they
haven't submitted they have no
data.
The that's in Rio Arriba county
in the lease if it's the same as
a kid or the other maybe there's
more with that would and did
they have they haven't submit
that it would be eligible to use
that capital if I give it to.
That's right in fact what we're
gonna do can this fiscal year
we're gonna reprogram our budget
and move forward on a smaller
scale procurement that way we
have some actual information to
report to all of you in FY
twenty four if we receive this
funding is and and Mister Rogers
they they they should be
submitting an annual report of
some kind you help them to
figure out which depending on
their size the very large I
think at the maybe.
Maybe forty percent this maybe
maybe the.
But so they're dealing with
probably less than five thousand
dollars a year in revenue.
Yes with the revenue level is at
that level all they have to do a
self certified they don't even
require any kind of financial
review of tell them.
In the vicinity you until they
do that is they're not eligible
to spend any of them that's
correct that.
Senator I think it's a very
quick question is there
something else that we should
the state should be doing to
help them to help you have the
capacity.
Well that's not the first time
I've been asked that question
and what my office is going to
do is we're going to expand our
training and education capacity
to ensure that they're aware of
the need to remain financially
compliant and assist them
because these are it's just a
collection of volunteers they
generally don't have the
technology resources to maintain
financial compliance and so
we're going to do our part and
we're also going to forge more
formal agreements with the
stakeholder organizations that
represent these entities that we
oversee a secular Association of
land grants and such and so they
have a stake in the success of
their own let's say customers
and so we want them to step up
in partnership with us to make
that happen and make this
sustainable.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
that sounds great thank you
Sierra.
Thank you thank you for bringing
this forward I guess we'll know
Senator Campos sits on the full
finance committees so by
socialization he's a powerful
Senator I'm just curious.
Of the three appropriations to
bring forth with a great
building for just because she
could get him in the budget or
they were too late the these
request came in too late to get
in the budget.
So Mister chairman Senator
Tallman with all three as you
know I tried different ways in
order to secure the resources so
all three were introduced course
that was while a the
House Appropriations and finance
budget was being considered some
of the resources have made their
way into the appropriations act
we're hoping that they'll be
additional resources
submitted and approved hopefully
in Senate finance and again it's
just a way to try to take care
the various needs that we have
across the state so that so
that's where it's at R. do we
have all three projects fully
funded not as of yet but I'm
gonna continue to to make every
effort to try to get that done
thank you Mr chairman okay thank
you senator that that's all I
have some good thank you with
several of the committee.
Thank seconded by Senator Hickey
that is all the
letter but is ten is yes.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator guided us yes
Representative Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator AUMENT yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes and you have a do
pass on that one is a six year
and then your last one is
integrated substance abuse
programs yes three seventy seven
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the the committee and
I'm gonna go back if I can start
with the with the senator Thomas
talking about so in this Senate
bill three seventy seven it
would appropriate one point
three million from the consumer
settlement fund to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for the purpose
of establishing integrated
substance use disorder purpose
of Seminole county and within
this what we've been doing over
the last several years is
working on what we call the F.
B. Duran program in Las Vegas
and within that we have secured
the the necessary
Fiscal who are appropriations in
order to go ahead and
upgrade if you will a facility
and then working very closely
with the county of San Miguel
what we're doing is working on
the probe programmatic issues
within that if we're able to
secure the one point three
million then that means the
program is ready of course to be
initiated which would include
the upgrade of the facility and
then from there the full
implementation of the
programmatic issue which would
be the one point three million
so that in essence Mr chairman
members of the committee that's
what this bill would do.
Right is there anyone in the
audience here in support of the.
W. Duran program.
Thank you had me when you need
it after you remember she for
the social work student at B. W.
run was for many years the
county social services director
in San Miguel County and I
worked under her supervision.
From September of sixty eight
until January of sixty nine.
She was a marvelous woman so
thank you for naming the program
after for whoever did and I can
vote against that that's for
sure.
But so will the committee so we
have a motion presented health
then Senator Hickey stretching
his lead.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator gave us Senator Hickey
yeah Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez senator Clemente.
Center to the piano yes.
The.
But I when I hear you yeah we
still have a quorum we're
hanging in there thank you so I
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman members of the and
we're going to send a message
over here Senator doing is good.
Senator Rodriguez three thirty
one domestic violence
coordinated response.
Then we'll do you next senator
my sister Gonzales I'm here
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I really
appreciate this I have Linda
Siegel here to help answer any
technical questions Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
that a request within
appropriations bill still has to
go to finance to be vetted there
and we'll see if there's any
where we can get some funding
it's a request for three hundred
fifty thousand dollars for the
it's for domestic violence
coordinated response services
and for the sake of time I'm
going to
turn it over to Linda who can
explain it more succinctly
attempt to talk too much sep Mr
chair thank you Mr chair members
What happens with domestic
violence as with many programs
throughout our state is that
there is a lack of coordination
with all the other entities with
the DA's office with the police
with the sheriff's with other
entities did sexual assault all
the other groups that are doing
doing their work but there's not
a lot of coordination so in four
communities I believe right now
we have these C. C. R. C. C. R.
teams with that it just has a
staff person that brings all the
players together so that there
can be some coordination and
what everybody's doing and
communication about problems and
issues that come up.
Is there anybody in the audience
was to show their support for
this program.
Anybody in opposition.
Okay who's that.
They took their hand out the the
they were almost in support.
Members of the committee.
Sierra thank you Mr chairman
thank you for bringing this bill
forward Senator so this is three
hundred and is this we have
fifty thousand for direct
services for just fifty provide
Sir the series for people are
going to coordinate.
Prison is Mr chairman Senator
it's for direct services to this
program to help coordinate so
that it doesn't go so that we're
not all in different areas but
we coordinate the response to
domestic violence.
Yeah.
So okay thank you Mr chairman I
was going to ask that question.
Would you.
Linda sure Linda Daschle
responded to my question which
was how many different programs
that we okay and then the.
And divestiture has led to see
if there's some coordination yes
me too Mr Chairman would you
like more response Linda can two
senses okay sure Mendell led to
more all rights I'm not sure
what the question was Mr chair
Senator AUMENT health.
How many programs are there.
For well I was.
House where there are a lot of
different program so I was going
to ask a question is there any
coordination throughout the
issue.
That's why we need this chair
Senator yeah.
And it's coordination with all
the other players in our
community.
The courts the dust that the
police six cetera thank you for
the response that's all I have
sent which counties are you
talking about.
If it would be Mr chair will be
decided by.
CYFD who would get the money as
to which community they put out
an RFP probably.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chair that sort of way as
what is going so this would be a
statewide opportunity for CYFD
to determine.
Are there any major secretary so
I understand domestic violence
has gone down but not done I
mean it it's it was even in Lee
County we have a couple
different organizations work on
domestic violence I was on the
board at one time Mr chairman
etcetera
but I was just hoping that
there's more of a.
Statewide you and I guess CYFD
would determine need that with
this because Mr Mr chair Senator
yes that's true and.
Maybe the incidence of domestic
violence in your community is
gone down but I would not say
that domestic violence has gone
down throughout the state I
would not say that.
Mister chairman Senator up on
our analysis as per CYFD
analysis now support at a
university in Mexico UNM
elevation lab reveals steep
decline in domestic violence
convictions convictions
injections that's that's a key
thing there twenty fifteen
twenty twenty so what that'll
you'll thank you thank you.
Any other questions particularly
with some of the committee so
Senator Tallman move Senator guy
it goes second.
Secretary call the roll.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle center Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Clemente yes center to
the piano yes.
I have five to zero vote you
have to do pass Senator thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee present from us this
will you do the last one for the
auditor but I guess that the
yeah it is no there's another
one of the.
This is Senate bill
Three sixty two.
Thank you Mr chairman kidding
for Senator Gonzales is yes on
behalf of a center Gonzalez
Senate bill three hundred sixty
two Mr Chairman and this is a a
propose wanted thousand dollar
appropriation to the state
auditor's office and this is for
an independent study Mr chairman
on the feasibility and the cost
of replacing the state's current
agency by agency annual
financial audit process with a
singular state audit of all
state agencies and with that I
have a daughter of Joseph
Maestas to explain the details
Mr Mrs welcome thank you thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I'm not going to
duplicate what center Maestas
said but what I can tell you is
that we are the only state that
does not have a singular audit
for a consolidated audit of all
state agencies
and we believe that the study
will bear out hopefully the more
advantages than disadvantages
but one advantage we think will
come out of this study is that
the state could realize much
better terms in its state
bonding.
Also given the high level of
federal funding that our state
receives
your federal ID Jeez would jump
for joy if they could just see
how the federal funds are being
spent and and looking at one
singular audit instead of
individual state agencies so we
we think this would be a major
step forward for the state of
New Mexico.
And can you get it done for a
hundred thousand.
We think we can.
The study I guess we think we
can yeah we're we're gonna look
at others other states in the
budget they've realized
being in a singular audit
so we think we can do it with a
hundred thousand Mr Chairman
very good the.
Is there anyone here who was
this show support for that
measure.
Or the house Mr Lara certainly
does.
Did you want to say anything
about just to show support.
I think just to show support our
young gentleman
we even at the county level and
when I was economic development
director for the City of
Albuquerque the fact that we do
have such amounts of federal
funding coming through aligning
that for example for the auditor
of for the assessors office
staff to be seventy seven
reporting.
Makes it a lot easier for us to
have continual funding for the
cap for the state the county and
the cities right okay good.
anybody online members of the
committee.
Any questions or discussion.
You've got a we have a motion
for a do pass.
Is there a second seconded from
Senator Tallman the second
question from Senator this
committee action on.
You've got the right sponsor in
the in the Senate because he's
on the finance committee and you
might be able to get to that
money yes senator Maestas thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members and just to.
Touch on what Sierra.
Asked is where finance folks
coming with appropriations bills
we we we I think we should
consider in future years to
either tweaking the statute or
just changing the culture of LFC
to allow incoming
lateral executives the
opportunity to participate in
the budget process from November
fifth till January twenty that's
a great point by the time he was
elected the budget was finished
done I mean basically they play
tweak a little bit but but
there's a hearing their hearings
in November December that he was
able to participate in so he was
even set back another ninety
days thank you Mr that's a good
thing to consider for the future
with the fund for the rest of
these arrive in January.
That's right.
All right the secretary will
call the roll Senator guided us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna centers committee for
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Tallman yes Senator to the panel
yes Senator committees to
explain is the thank you Mr in
session I'm I'm very sorry to to
be late
I'm just I'm I'm concerned if we
consolidate this is going to
decrease our accountability and
just consolidate all that you
know.
and you know just potentially
open the door to more conflict
of issue conflict issues such as
my my concern when I you know
see bill like this probably not
arms studying it but I'm have a
small concern there thank by a
vote of five in the affirmative
one the negativity of the
passenger.
And then let's Senator Tallman
let's let's let the Mr messes
get back to.
His work of auditing Ezzell.
Senator Tallman of Senate bill
three two three.
Thank you Mr chair.
US Senate bill two three two the
no your views to.
Three two three two three is
that what I said no you said two
three two.
I was in the day yes.
Yes it was it is a simple
dyslexic so the thank you Mr
chair this Bill would
appropriate to in one sentence
or less two hundred ten thousand
dollars from the general fund to
the office of the state auditor
for expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty four to fund the
placement of this state auditors
fraud complaint case management
system which provides intake
assignment disposition and
overall case management of fraud
complaints so Mister chair I
have with me the recently
elected state auditor who may
wish to add some comments and
answer the question thank you
thank you Mr messages that are
Mr chairman members of the
committee as many of you know
the office of the state auditor
manages fraud waste and abuse
hotline we get anonymous
complaints of fraud waste and
abuse it by telephone by email
through our website through
various means intake averages
about three hundred cases a year
currently we have about three
hundred active cases and what I
can say is about half of those
cases are actionable if we find
grounds to make a referral we
can either make a referral to
the state ethics commission to
the prosecuting authority for
that area which is typically the
DA many times will have to
inform law enforcement by
statute so this is very
important to really managing our
fraud waste and abuse intake and
appropriately managing it and
all the information that goes in
to an investigation.
Okay so this would be in
addition to what your current
budget is just a step up being
able to respond to all these yes
as as Senator Maestas stated I
inherited a budget I had no
input into in future fiscal year
budget proposals we will
incorporate these kinds of needs
into our budget instead of going
the appropriations route very
good okay anybody in the
audience here in support of this
measure.
For in opposition to this
measure.
Then nobody online members of
the committee questions for the.
For the auditor.
Being done with will committee.
Seconded by Senator Hickey.
And the secretary will call the
roll Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center my SS.
Yes Senator McKenna Senators
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator AUMENT yes center to the
piano yes.
Six.
She's into.
No I'm gonna do hers okay yeah
I'll do I'll do Senator
Stefanics
Senator you can see the fed ex's
tied up the okay so to pass this
is by a six zero vote give a new
path thank you for thank you
senator I make you members of
thank you Mr thank you.
Yet let me do the next I.
for senators to fed ex.
I had signed on to these with
senator legislation so I offered
to.
The put the money if she wasn't
able to get away from Judiciary.
So
The first one is Senate bill
three fifty two Mr Chairman.
And this is all of these are
from her work with the
the issue of food and nutrition
and
The.
Support for low income and
senior citizens so the first one
is the state food banks she's
asking for five million dollars
to be appropriated to the Human
Services Department.
It.
To provide
Of funding for their food bank
programs around the state
None of this appropriation can
be used for the administration
all has to go into actually
getting food out into a into
people's hands in any and
expended balance will be you
will revert and there's anybody
here from the food banks have
been answer specific questions
with the Representative.
Okay thank you.
Senator anyone in the audience
of wishing to speak in support
of this.
Thank you good.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Zoom zoom can take you up and
you have to keep it that.
Mr chair members of the
committee of the button as we
can okay yeah that's it.
Mr chair members of the
committee
my name is there any separating
upon I am an attorney at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
everyone in New Mexico should
have enough food to eat and no
one should go hungry the problem
is that many New Mexicans don't
have enough food and we have one
of the highest rates of food
insecurity as a public health
emergency ends and with the
emergency snap allotments that
provides families with the
maximum monthly food budget
families will see an average of
eight thirty three percent
reduction in their snap benefits
so we stand in support because
this appropriation of health
food banks provide essential
food for New Mexican families
and.
so thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments
anyone else in the audience is
support for head.
Workers shovel in hand put can
you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee and
Mary Kay re registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico association
of food banks and we stand in
very strong support of this and
the other bills throughout the
pandemic or network to work of
food banks was stretched very
thin as we work to service many
males as possible.
The need remains great and all
thirty three counties in the
appropriation of help feed more
New Mexicans we thank the
sponsors for their hard work on
this and the rest of the food
initiative thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you
for your comments and finally we
have.
Okay thank you.
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
Bring down the we'll turn to the
committee the committee members
wishing to speak on behalf.
Senator Caylus Mr Chairman
center thank you for that I just
a question and I know that
during the COVID it seems like
you mean there's a hardship on
the food banks do we have did we
have any closings during the
COVID of time I Mr chair you
know for sure.
Okay well that's all is chairman
and senator I'm afraid I I don't
know I didn't hear of any
closing the most of them were
able to scramble through and of
course they were eligible for
all the support programs that
came down the line both the
federal and state so thank it
was a hardship but I think they
survived think that earned
Center money else's says HSD
does not have a mechanism in
place to purchase food outside
of those funded by the US
department of ag.
Does this create another
hardship form I don't know if we
as a state give money
does it help the funding from Ag
of from the department Mr chair.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Gallegos
I think I'm not sure if there is
an in our current budget a
recurring line item.
And I don't see anybody here
from the finance committee who
could answer that recurring line
item for the food banks I think
every year there.
They're subject to whatever the
legislature comes up with that
you to supplement the money they
get from the local governments
because a lot of them just local
government support and from the
department of agriculture.
Mr Chairman center of problems
last one they also take
Walter gives for contributions
correct Mr chair Mr chairman and
senator Gallegos absolutely they
they put the large lease whose
subsystem momentary
contributions from the company's
of restaurants food stores and
from the general public
many of them have programs for
produce local farmers who have
surplus produce can take it to
the food bank and it'll be
distributed
thank you Mr chairman Senator
you.
So I might add Senator it goes
that is a former member of the
Roadrunner Food Bank.
For judges.
Twenty five percent of the food
was provided to the Roadrunner
food was from private donations
that that people think they get.
L. twenty thirty forty percent
but is only five five percent
and also the Roadrunner Food
Bank has doubled the amount of.
Food to the donated since the
beginning of the pandemic from
nineteen.
Two thousand nineteen to that to
the present time so the demand
is not going away Mr chair thank
you for that because I was
honored some of the news a lot
larger than five percent was I
tell I got on the board I
thought to all the major foods
anything was sort of.
Aged out was provided but the
appreciate that insight thank
you.
And and Mr I forgot Mr chairman
you were on the Roadrunner board
I didn't know the answer to the.
To the question of whether
there's a regular state
appropriation that goes to the
food banks my understanding is
there is your corrective to
probably should be because the
problems that.
Is that going way that yes it is
we we.
if you and I were on the of
finance committee we would
demand that.
any other questions from the.
Committee members Senator mess
about thank you we have a motion
and second from Senator Hickey.
Of.
Please call the roll.
Senator guide us.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna.
That's because I wasn't here.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez senator Clemente
yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Go back to center since the
Center McKenna.
Food it's.
It's it's a for five million for
the food banks all absolutely
yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you have a do pass Senator
you Representative your next
bill great thank you I'm doing
all of Senator Stefanics bills
for this is Senate bill three
fifty three.
New Mexico grown produce for
senior meals.
This is something that came out
of the the the a program that
involved from an earlier program
where we were encouraging local
farm raised produce to be used
in schools and in
jails the trying to do two
things at once increase the
amount of fresh produce and
fruits that were available for
the for the kids or the other of
the people in jail and also to
support local farmers because we
the state buys the produce from
them and then services this sets
the senior center centers to it
it's a million dollars
appropriated to aging long term
services to buy foods from New
Mexico growers and to distribute
them to the senior meal sites so
they can be served to seniors.
With that will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you that's Senator
anyone audiences support of
this.
Anyone that wanted wishing to
make any comments.
We take a two people.
Percent but.
Thank you Mr.
This keep Italian thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator the aging long term
services department administers
the New Mexico grown program for
the last three years the funding
for this is supported by the
governor's budget and included
in that the food initiatives for
this year's request in twenty
twenty eight percent of New
Mexicans age sixty and over for
food insecure this is the top
ten highest in the nation in
twenty twenty one ninety percent
of New Mexicans sixty and older
reported that they ate less than
five fruits and vegetables a
day.
this appropriation will result
in a positive impact to the
constituents served by the
senior service program providers
senior centers and local and
look and supports local farmers.
At the end of twenty one in FY
twenty one there were thirty
eight participating senior
centers.
Fifty participating senior
centers by the end of FY twenty
two and now in FY twenty three
we have sixty seven providers.
I'm sorry senior centers.
During the FY twenty three
program the available production
and offering from provided
growers and farmers expanded to
include local needs.
By adding this much needed
funding it will increase the
economy and the value of the
viability of the farmers and the
growers this funding is included
in the governor's request in the
food initiatives.
Thank you for your comments I
will take one more person
whoever can get to the Mike the
fastest.
Your you know there's just a
little bit yes for both renters
and soccer players.
Mr chairman and committee
members my names Cameron here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture Policy Council
and farm to table and we stand
in full support of Senate bill
three five three and as already
stated by our department of of
of colleague ms king how
important is program is the only
thing I would add wealth is less
I could add but I won't do that
where would seize this is
meeting the needs in rural urban
and tribal communities and I
can't say enough about the
coordination among state
agencies that are working
together on these programs to
get out there and get to meet
the people who really need these
a program for most and as miss
king said also really ramping up
our local economic opportunities
for farmers ranchers to so thank
you Mr chairman.
Thanks to.
Hi anyone in a position hearing
none will open up to committee
members anyone wishing to speak.
So Mr Senator gave gave us has a
question Mr Chairman center
thank you and I'm just wondering
because in the talked about
locally or healthy locally grown
fresh produce
I'm wondering if they look at
the the senior adult to see if
they have medical needs so my
theory was as of driving from
units to wherever the committee
meetings that an apple or orange
or something would be really
good deals started thanking my
diabetes so I'm just wondering
if they do any research is a
hand these more the fruits up if
there's anything that they look
at on their.
Rationale on it they should eat
in abundance Mr center I didn't
know.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna have does
my expert witness who's who's
here to answer the.
Mr chair and senator guy those
the department does the
providers conduct a annual
estimates on all consumers older
adults accessing the title three
services at the senior centers
the.
Fresh produce is incorporated in
the meals provided by the senior
centers and so we at the
department are working with you
NM to include that kind of
assessment as far as the New
Mexico grown initiative in the
local grown produce being
incorporated in the mails and
how that's impacting the mail
quality of the mails and
enhancing the quality the mails
so we're right now working with
you and I'm on that.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
Center and gentle lady I
appreciate that I would
Assessed by mom who mills would
come in there some really good
food there but I just the I know
for me it's not all good so
thank you know you.
Senator Gallegos you might be
interested in on I was on the
board of directors grow to move
back six years ago they were
they were at.
Find a thirty percent of the
food that they provided was
produce as we know on the.
Lotus is expensive so.
They took great pride in having
within this area that that much
I don't that's still true but
That that that that I was always
impressed by that good thank you
thank you.
Anyone else wishes speak.
Hearing none of please call the
roll we need a second.
Thank you we have a second.
From Senator McKenna.
And so and pushing us along too
fast.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes just explain Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator AUMENT
yes Senator to the piano yes.
One six.
Thank you thank you this is
really fundamentally very very
important bill in concept
because we are in desperate need
of
Bringing the source of the food
closer to the consumer the food
and our diet is is literally
killing us in this country its
crew it's not only killing our
bodies physically but it's
killing our economy and I think
our GDP for Q. our GDP of health
care expenditure is twenty
percent of our GDP or some like
that now it's growing super fast
so we're basically profiting.
Off of sickness.
That industry a not wholly but I
think ninety five percent is
profiting Act after over
preventable illness.
And so much of this is diet
related because our diet is our
food supply national foods was
terrible and so anytime we can
do some like this and bring that
food closer to the consumer the
food is crucial and I highly
support this bill thank you.
So we have to have a seven OO of
folk and that congratulations
you Representative next thank
you should have been eight.
Hey I'm so I can't count
So you you forget to count me.
But we never forget you.
Is there anyway you have a eight
old congratulations and you
present your next bill please
yes and and Mr chairman and
members the committee three
fifty four.
Carries even further what
Senator Schmedes was just saying
and at a further effort at
getting locally produced fruit
and vegetables into the hands of
local consumers who are seniors
who are eligible low income
seniors and and it appropriates
a million dollars.
To the department of health to
match with federal funds and to
expand their existing farmers
market program where you can go
to the local farmers market and
if you have one of these
vouchers you basically pay half
is it still have programs that
there's anybody here know
exactly the pandemic it's a half
the you if you buy ten dollars
worth of potatoes and celery you
pay the five dollars you get.
It's a double is like a double
if you so you did it really
expands the availability of
fresh produce for low income
eligible seniors we want
speakers who we can to signal to
hunt this okay.
Thank you anyone wishing to
speak in favor of this.
Of.
Percent.
Mr chairman committee members
again and thank you senator Pam
Roy lives here in support of
this bill for the New Mexico
never culture Policy Council and
farm to table we've known this
program for many years actually
we were for first on
organization to really help the
state bring the senior farmers
market nutrition program to New
Mexico it's not in every state
and as miss king mentioned a no
are up senior population is on
the increase and so this program
has been codified in its sole in
Preciado buyer seniors for
seniors can go to the local
farmers market and they receive
those the the dollars that
Senator Ortiz Pena was mentioned
through the commodity food
supplement program not through
snap so it's through a commodity
box program the sense like
monthly box program and so this
is what's fresh they can go to
the farmers market with those
vouchers and buy fresh local
produce and thank you Sir sneeze
for really raise that up as well
it's so important is led by the
seniors all these programs are
thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Kendall
Chavez here from the governor's
office I I get to lead our food
and ag work we're here to stand
in strong support of three fifty
to three fifty three and three
fifty four we did want this body
to know that all three of these
budget line items are included
in the executive recommendation
for the food initiative as the
state really starts to look at
food access food quality and
supporting our food food
producers agriculturalist and
ranchers so thank you Mexicans.
Want to speak.
Okay when an opposition to this
bill.
Okay before we move on we have a
And B. R. A. Z. Y.
Representative ang the A. R. P.
who wants to
Know that the A. R. P. is in
support of Senate bill three
fifty four and three fifty six
and we also have occurred Roger
zoom who wants it to be known
that he supports the Senate bill
three fifty four three fifty
five and three fifty six thank
you know open up to members of
the committee anyone wishing to
speak.
Senator kos Mr chair Senator I
look to my numbers and I'm at
seven yes is that is my all time
hi so my mic before I do no I
just wondered why in the gentle
lady from the governor's office
we've had three really good
built together have we ever
looked at having specially since
are already in line item in the
budget overall food type bill
for the state in different
categories Mr center.
I'll defer to ms Chavez from.
Mr chair Senator I would say
that for the last few years
we've really taken a pretty
comprehensive approach across
nine ten agencies to connect the
dots between senior programs
preschool programs programs is
our K. through twelve X. cetera
and also with the focus on
farming ranches so we really
look at the budget a sort of
omnibus approach to package all
these funding line items
together keep them together and
even more strategic about the
way we deploy these programs out
in the world we don't have an
omnibus bill at this point
really focusing on budget.
Thanks for that Mr Mr this year
went to second and senator just
I thought is there might be some
alignments re could have cost
savings in in looking at is a
group in so that may be in the
under those theory but I could
see where instead of having
three different agencies looking
at good food
processes for for different
reasons that they could all be.
Sort of joint they will make
some savings but I would have
mentioned that.
Mr chair Senator I would say we
are exactly on the same page we
would be happy to have that
discussion after the session
prepping for next year both cost
savings and also the impact on
the end user we wanted to be as
easy as possible for your mother
for my mother who never across
the state will don't want them
to have to talk to ten different
agencies for a program for
programs that really should be a
one stop shop so that's sort of
the essence in the spirit behind
the food initiative at large and
we're we're making our way
towards that New Mexico so be
happy to follow up with you
thank you that is occurring
center Mr I was I just wish I
wouldn't it my limit already so
of I'm gonna have to go against
my drive right next to me but
within a year thank you.
Thank you senator anyone else
wishing to speak.
Yes we have a due process and
the second for.
For me second of this.
Senator
Thirty PM please call the roll.
Senator Guerreros.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle center Maestas Senator
McKenna yes Senate committees
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes center to
the piano yes.
Do you.
The aero congradulations says
Senator right now at your last
bill no there's two more I'm
afraid you
can't I told you I could count.
Senate bill three fifty five is
a little different this one is
tied to the step program it
deals with what we often heard
about in this committee the
cliff effect somebody is
struggling they get a benefit
whether it's tentative for snap
which is food will be used to
call food stamps
housing voucher and then.
They get a raise at work or they
get a new job or a if the child
a new baby is born in the family
something changes their
circumstances and all of a
sudden or an older child eight
all of a sudden the families not
eligible any longer because that
clip they they they they they
drop off this price to ease the
transition from.
From being eligible to being
totally an ineligible by
stretching out the the period of
eligibility when you're no
longer eligible through the
federal guidelines for snap
giving you three more months
that the state would pay for it
and that's a million no I
million dollars appropriated to
HSD to cover that.
Senator that could be used for
the program administration us to
go directly to this extended
benefits.
Thank you governor anyone in the
audience wishing to speak on
behalf of this.
The lady raise your hand.
Okay.
Mr chair members of the
committee that any separate in a
bump up from the New Mexico
Center on poverty when people
begin earning too much money to
qualify for snap their income
may still be quite low and they
may still not be able to afford
food for the entire month this
fund this funding will help you
Mexicans during that
transitional period between
losing their snap eligibility
did due to their higher
employment earnings this
transition will allow
hardworking families to keep
their snap benefits for three
months while the new earnings
from their employment are
realized this is specially
important for young children who
cannot learn mother hungry so
thank you so much for students
part of this bill.
Thank you for your comments.
Hey one and apposition this bill
hearing none return to the.
The committee anyone with.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
thank you thank you Mr chair I
don't know if you
If you have a response to the to
the
They have fiscal impact report
where it says the creation of
new category of eligibility.
In the aspen.
LESC eligibility enrollment I.
T. system I guess has been must
be the name of the program would
need to be created a would be MP
impossible to do so by fiscal
year twenty four the earliest it
could be implemented is is
fiscal year twenty five did you
have a conversation with HSD or
anything about that issue is.
Mmhm Mr Chairman is Senator
Sedillo Lopez not and I had and
I had read the FIR is that
coming from HSD yes.
HSD note I
honestly this is just my
personal opinion I I think isn't
just reprogramming the computer
so I seem to of odd that it was
impossible but I I didn't know
if you had a response
I don't know I don't have a
response it seems to me that
we're not really well I guess we
are developing a new category
that is it's all state funded.
For three months it to me it
seems like just a little
programming thing but of course
yeah I don't know they they
would know better I just want to
encourage you to talk to them I
support the bill for legislative
relief
and communicate that was Senator
Stefanics that's a good point.
yeah this is okay anyone else
wish to speak.
Center if you Mr chair and
etcetera so couple years ago I
try to get our congressional
delegation to solve this at
their level of unsuccessful but
my next question the question I
have Mister service for a three
month period what happens after
that.
Well it Mister chairman Senator
goes it it basically is just an
attempt to add to.
Prolonging their eligibility
hopefully in the meantime the
the figure out some other way to
continue being able to buy their
their food but I think we
immediate it just doesn't
eliminate the problem it simply
attenuated someone.
Mr chair Senator I'd vote that
we as legislature would Rick
back out our delegation because
I think they're a they have the
actors there if they have the
backbone to deal with the with
that I don't thank you.
Thank you senator anyone else.
Of the please call the roll.
We don't have a motive to pass.
Second we have a motion and a
second from Senator McKenna.
Please call the roll.
Senator there us.
Senator Hickey yes yes yes
Senator Ingle.
I have been advised by several
members here will get.
Senator my S. the.
A good Senator McKenna yes
Senate committees explained.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
One sixteen.
You have to pass Senator thank
you within the and then the last
of senators to fed ex bills that
I'm putting on is Senate bill
three.
I'm sorry US senators should
committee was six point as well
go ahead I miss Mr sent no no
problem so I'm I'm voting yes
for the snap bills but I I just
want to say that I have a great
concern with what we're doing in
our country.
With snap and I think it's it's
it's it's sincere but it's it's
also trapping people in poverty
and I very much appreciate the
the look at reducing the cliff
effect but it goes even beyond
that so coca-cola's revenue
forty point two percent of
coca-cola's revenues come from
snap.
And I don't know I understand
the personal choice you say well
you know these people are poor.
You know I I think that.
A poor diet can keep a family
poor and can keep a family sick.
And so I think we should really.
Look at what we're doing with
snap
Are we are we unintentionally
harming people given the fact
that we're supporting companies
that know that their products
are harmful and addictive two
people so we need to balance.
The interest to feed people with
interest to protect them from
predatory corporations that are
poisoning our food thank you Mr.
Thank you senator for those
comments
Senator please proceed.
Lex that last bill.
Thank you Senate bill three
fifty six is another snap
benefit bill this is the one for
senior citizens.
There's a for the code minimum
purchase requirement that with
the call of.
States that the Feds have a
requirement that you.
If you're eligible for snap you
have to buy a minimum number you
can't go below that we we we
used state funds to fill in the
gap so that they can go ahead
and be a good.
Thank you.
We use state funds so that they
they don't have to to be subject
to that federal requirement for
minimum supplement payment
And I think that's I think that
that captures it it this bill
would add two million dollars to
what we already or spending for
this program to cover the cost
of living because even even now
with with the inflation given
the amount of money within
appropriating up for this
program read seniors to to buy
less than the minimum amount
they would be required to buy
under the federal program.
In order to get by a lot of them
don't don't don't.
They can they can get meals at
the senior center and some of
the things that supplement but
they but so they don't
necessarily spend.
The minimum that the Feds
require you to spend on food
during the month this makes it
possible for them to at least
get something so they can cover
the what what they do spend out
of their own pocket.
The.
Now we'll get the real story
madam.
I will do my.
to give a.
Mr chair members of the
committee so that and we don't
have anybody here from HSD to
speak to this so I will do my
best but essentially this bill
and again we have this the
executive recommendation
slightly higher amount but this
is a state supplement for
seniors and disabled individuals
currently the state only I think
the maximus I can the majority
of seniors are accessing twenty
five dollars in the supplement
every month which isn't enough
for plus many of our seniors to
actually sign up for staff so
the concept behind this is to
expand that increase the dollar
amounts of seniors have added
buying power many of whom of
course raising grandchildren in
households that could use a
little bit of extra very
targeted approach again for
seniors and disabled individuals
there outside of the work force
so again it's the state
supplement I believe New Mexico
is the only state who has this
so we should be proud of that
Senator Vatican's of the
senator's bill does increase
that amount by two million from
the three million it's in the
base and again and executive I
think we raised a little bit
higher.
Thank.
Okay I'll move it to have a
great day when the audience.
The.
For this.
will take a one person.
Whoever can get to the
microphone the fastest.
Mr chair members of the
committee many older New
Mexicans rely on snap thirty
seven percent of New Mexicos
current snap participants
participants are over the age of
fifty approximately eighty
thousand adults aged fifteen up
are currently snap participants
even with their snap benefits
older adults are struggling to
get by
especially as helpful costs
continue to rise the cost of
living increase will not only
improve the health of our older
communities will also keep money
in New Mexico by having that
money be spent locally thank
you.
Thank you for your comments
anyone in that position.
This bill hearing none will open
up to the committee members
anyone wishing to speak.
I move the path we have a motion
to.
To
a motion to move that second.
Second from Santo lie just this.
So please call the roll Senator
guy just lost his right Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator AUMENT yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
All.
Thank you have a do pass a.
And I know renewable thank you.
It is like to make a quick
comment.
And thank Senator Schmedes for
raising the issue the fact that
coca-cola's forty two percent
other sales or snap.
I'm sure a large portion of that
is sugary drinks and sugary
drinks or follow.
When the very worst things you
can consume
of think about it the danger and
the sadness and tragedy of that
thank you for raising that.
Okay.
Senator Woods Mr chair thank you
so much for the opportunity to
come for you today I've got a
couple of people on zoom that
will act as my expert witnesses
or have any further questions
that let me explain to build
real quickly.
Of this is to make an
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
ministration Fund behavior
health center in curry county
and declared an emergency New
Mexico there's several counties
in in the state of New Mexico
over on the east side that are
trying to come together to put a
of a behavior health center
together and we are requesting
this money and from the analysis
it looks like we may be
requested from the rules hot but
we are actually trying to get
capital of money on the
statewide capital money on this
deal mostly what I want to show
you today is the need for this
Mr chair so if I could let my
two expert witnesses say a word
Mr Justin hello.
Is is one of them a whole prisms
of.
What are the names of.
Could it will start with Mr hold
off can you unmuted and then to
address the committee please.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee can you
hear me yes we can hear you.
Fantastic thank you so this is a
project that the city of Clovis
as well as the super talisman
Roosevelt County the village of
Force under curry county Union
County wake county and the Baca
County started several months
ago we all recognized the need
of having a behavioral health
facility here in eastern New
Mexico and so we were looking
for solutions to solve and so in
that particular problem and so
we all partnered together higher
consultants inicio help to begin
on to that feasibility study for
us they did complete that
visibility study the original
one back in June of twenty
twenty two and then we started
to work with other states and
and our representatives as well
as the HSD.
To review that particular field
feasibility study at that time
we were projecting the need of a
inpatient bed count of ninety
six since then and based off the
feedback that we have received
we've actually reduced that that
count down to forty eight and
what it would consist of is
adult treatment pediatric
treatment and geriatric
treatment we also have a crisis
stabilization center as well as
an out patient services to
include a withdrawal management
short term residential care
tried crisis triage center and
intensive outpatient
hospitalization partial
hospitalization and medication
management
Along with this we recognize the
fact that we're gonna have to
develop a workforce to go along
with this particular facility
and so we've also been working
with Clovis Community College as
well as eastern New Mexico
university to put programs in
place in order to develop that
trained workforce in fact
eastern New Mexico university
has been working to expand their
social work program which
currently is a bachelor's degree
also include a master's degree
in social work CCC has recently
received a grant for senator
Heinrich's office to be able to
expand upon their nursing
program to have a credential
psychiatric nurses as well so
totally recognized the need in
order to provide to make
something like this happen as
well is looking at the workforce
we looked it the overall
operational expenses that would
go along with this we look at
our payer mix what that looks
like for region how much would
have to be generated in order to
make something like this did not
need a long term subsidy
obviously SB seven which is
going through the legislature
currently is something that
we're also in support of to help
us get this project off the
ground but then.
So that with that that payer mix
we present Representative as
well as the bed size that it
could be a standalone
operational facilities so don't
take up too much of your time so
with that I'm happy to answer
any questions the committee may
have thank you.
Very good thank you Sir and
who's the other.
Representative with okay.
All right
Anything else Center before go
to the audience no that's all I
have the more of Clovis was
going to speak also but
evidently he did make it on so
but what's his name Mike Morris.
Okay.
Okay so they were on the same
side.
Anybody in the audience want to
show support for this measure.
Association for counties and the
total student body of the
highlands university social work
program of of in favor of this.
Anybody else just want Dorothy
Seton.
Want to speak up Dorothy.
Can you hear me now yes.
Okay excellent I'm sure the seat
number retired military veterans
I am the advocacy chair for the
veterans and military families
caucus we support this bill and
other related bills that
establish mental health and
substance use disorder
facilities and staff because
veterans suicide ideation and
PTSD or treatable mental health
diagnoses not treatable if there
are no resources facilities and
staff to treat them so we
support this bill and I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak to the committee thank you
thank you Dorothy.
Senator in Mr chair
I understand the Roosevelt
County in curry county both of
those ministrations are trying
to get in but they haven't been
able to to get in but they're
both in support of it so.
I have I would I would be happy
to take questions sure
Members of the committee of
questions for the for this or a
issues on this issue on this
topic.
We have a motion for a new path
but you have discussion here is
there a second through we'll
we'll take this seconded by
Senator Hickey when you have a
question Senator.
But I believe.
Your your first okay senator
McKinney your first thank you
chairman thank you senator
what's this is really exciting
you mentioned at the beginning
your presentation there might be
a different bucket of funds for
this expenditure and I just want
to bring up that
Madam again in case you wanted
to discuss.
Yup.
Mr chair Senator McKenna
I have talked to the governor's
office.
It.
Whether I got my to go she ation
across sure Sir but
I have talked to and and
hopefully they'll be some
statewide capital to do this at
least some of it for a big
majority of it and then
hopefully we can take some of
the funds to finish it up but
that's.
What I have.
Tried to negotiate.
Mr chair.
Senator thank you chairman thank
you senator that's great.
Senator Hickey then Senator
Ingle.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Woods for bringing
this forward a couple of
questions but also an
observation I remember back in
the nineties when we used to
have thirty day hospitalization
programs throughout the state
for long toenails and kindly
knows what else it it was a kind
of a scam industry and and in
reaction to that everything got
closed down I even at love us
close down the mental health
facility there during my tenure
as CEO there
what I'm seeing now and as I
learned more about substance use
and then also the concurrent
relationship with mental health
we are way short of budget we
are just way short of beds that
you heard me say it's often
eleven years between the onset
of symptoms and diagnosis and
and what we're doing is waiting
to the diagnosis in the acute
expression of it and we've lost
so much time and and ground that
cannot be regained and some of
these diagnoses could use a few
days with in a mental hospital
to division in abusive be
detoxified but here it would be
in the schizophrenic or really
exacerbated to type one bipolar
situation having those days to
calm down is really important
and then begin to build
relationships and then to begin
to build the outpatient
treatment therapy with
individuals as certainly as well
as Medicare so I really commend
you for bringing this forward
because it as I think a lot of
us are living under the old
fashioned concept of over you
know here we go again on these
thirty day programs that people
are going to have an all these
hospitals and sat down no we we
we've thrown so many people out
and.
And also the whole lot of the
homelessness is because people
are not getting these of not so
much of long term but the short
term interventions that are so
helpful and giving them a chance
to get their life back in order
to get family connections back
together to be able to support
the individual so this is that
I'm I'm so pleased to hear
you're doing this I just a
couple of practical questions
what city would this be located
in an eastern New Mexico you
know the of Mr chairman and
Senator Hickey it would be in
Clovis New Mexico they have a
Presbyterian Hospital of their
and we're trying to acquire land
forget Presbyterian though not
land right next to that hospital
out in that area right up there
so all it would be moved to a
beneficial.
Place to maybe Mr secretary well
that that that's a Mr chairman
and senator that would be a
great financial move on their
part it well they don't pay
taxes per se but to prove to the
CMS and the cost of point that
they are in need of contributing
to charity care and not just
kind of giving these fictitious
column the which they claim is
their contribution to charity
care so I'd go asking for it
just give it to you.
Is there a lobbyist for
Presbyterian in the room.
No not that he's probably out in
the hall we will have to ask him
if you can relay that
information up Mr chairman I
I've I've I always kind of like
to point out because it's cute
but it's really being that I had
but up I trained their CEO he
was my CFO when I was at love us
so I'd be happy to call the CEO
at Presbyterian and make that
recommendation the the other
piece is if you're gonna have to
have psychiatrists there I mean
is this isn't you need all the
mid level pieces and and
advanced practice no question
but I guess what I read it to
is.
To attract a psychiatrist.
To work almost anywhere one has
to pay about three hundred
percent of Medicare.
I mean that that's just you know
that's just America that's the
going rate at this point and so
I would hope is you build this
plan together in the operating
plan that you not kind of just
say you know we'll we'll we'll
just pay him I mean I hate to
tell you these numbers two
hundred thousand dollars they're
they're doing three hundred
thousand in particular if you're
doing child the child thank you
know you that this is the market
the way it is not good or bad
three hundred fifty thousand so
please put that into your
planning and then also.
The other reason I want to
commend this Mr Chairman I'm
sorry to take this time but you
know for behavioral health I I
be we all seem to be depending
upon the state and that it's a
state based facility this is a
community based facility
associated with hospitals I'm
understanding which is very
important and I wish that are
not for profit and and even some
of the for profits would realize
that behavioral health is
something they should invest in
in brick and mortar as well as
person and it can be profitable
having having lived on that side
of it I know the economic it
could be profitable we can't
always be depending upon the
state for this but for this in
these counties absolutely due to
start but we need to get those
hospitals back going around the
state so I commend you for
bringing this forward and
you just remember it because it
always gets left off to the
side.
The cost of the person build
that into your operating costs
and then
when my bill hopefully get set
through the finance committees
we're the health plans cannot
block the entry anymore you'll
be able to get the clientele to
fill it up and be able to charge
and be able to pay for those
folks so thank you Senator with
and thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Hickey.
I guarantee you.
The reluctance hat and carrying
this is ma non knowledge of the
the medical industry whatsoever
and I commend you because you do
have that knowledge and I take
it to heart Sir thank you thank
you thank you Mr thank you
senator with Senator Ingle your
next then Senator again thank
you Mr chairman and chairman the
we have a very large air base
there that certainly will
benefit from this facility and
certainly the five counties are
involved this is a good place
for the location here right now
we're having to take those folks
over into Texas in many cases
and distances are quite a ways
away and the visitation as
curtailed and and so I think
this is a good place to start
here we've got good support from
the the five counties involved
in this and I think this will
for very good purpose for our
area and our area is very good
about supporting things do good
things and with air base there
of.
At some point.
It's.
there because there's about six
thousand folks out there and
there's Montoya situations you
often have some things like this
is needed so anyway Senator
Woods in our sponsoring this and
He is one of the more generous
Senators I've ever been around
he's good for at least thirty
million on this the service
capital using no it's just you
know his own funds owed funds
yeah he's done very good farming
north clovers.
No and I have gone to several
meetings on this we've been
having meetings all year
Roosevelt counties on this we've
got a good base started we've
got good familiarity with our
city councils county commissions
on what we're trying to do and
they're ready to help in any
Center faction they can so this
will be a good investment for
the state thank you thank you
senator Senator guy who's.
Mr chair Senator appreciate this
love the idea sent note pro or
Marian Hobbs same cop well we're
looking to take the old Lee
regional hospital can convert it
so what you're doing here is
going to matter because we won
me will provide the same funding
source Mr and Sir but I I just
have a question I know the
proximity you have to to Texas
right now would you be in your
belief system that a large
amount of your constituents are
going down rule for into their
mental mental health.
Issues.
Yes I do Mr chair and senator
that is what we are sending
people out of state right now to
to get the help and a lot of
them are some at least for
military but there's also some
more in our part of the world
that you know Ag cultures pretty
tough industry.
And the yes there are they are
going out of state right now and
this is a pretty big area we're
talking about trying to draw
from Mr chair Senator yes thank
you Mr chairman center I've
walked that are literally and
and I so I understand where
you're at I guess one month the
thoughts were because you have
you unmuted you right there and
they are able to educate
students in that I see you guys
of having a really good
opportunity to be the first in
the state to be able to
capture the.
The students because they're
already right there do you have
a brand new facility are you
remodeling the facility Mr chair
Senator.
In Mr chair and center it is
we're we're proposing a brand
new facility is what we're
proposing.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that and then just last one
comment Mister chairman Senator
I love all the people you've got
already involved in it it takes
a community to build something
like this the lecture going all
would you County which you
representative but I know
there's hardship there they go
to dell harder they go Redstone
in needs of those locations have
proper facilities so appreciate
which didn't like I say we'll be
watching I think we're going to
mimic ours is already built but
we still made a funding stream
so we'll be watching your bill
progress thank you thank you Mr
thank you senator we already
have a motion to have a motion
yes second time Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair I apologize
but that is the couple live
office would off and that I
think is going to be very
important number one I've Mr
chair and etcetera so glad to
hear you're designing it new
from the ground up the old
mental health hospitals had
people isolated waiting rooms if
it a lot of what happens there
is is interaction and
interaction with staff and
having sat being able to be
visible to all that the new
pieds the heavier a health
hospital here at UNM you know
they couldn't remodel it had to
be from the ground up to really
be in a connection with how
we're treating the genesis today
so I'm glad to hear that and as
Senator guy a goes I encourage
you to speak with the
doctors that don't just who has
is done a lot of work around
building hospitals but I would
also encourage you doctor woods
want to get this going and and
and I'm trying to boil the ocean
here I apologize but you've got
a large geographic area you're
gonna want to have community
mental health centers around in
these other towns yes they need
the acute facility for sure but
then having this kind of spoken
hub and again I would encourage
you to talk to doctors of donors
who was at the university of
Massachusetts and head of
psychiatry out in western
Massachusetts he built an
amazing number of community
mental health centers all over
western Massachusetts and so
cleverly he did it all with
federal funds were sent on this
one this all at I'm sorry
doctors it down this is the new
Paul Ross so to speak he is the
the because now the executive
vice president for the health
sciences center and he's he's
doing an amazing job there but
he's a psychiatrist addiction
knowledges that's his medical
training thank you.
Before we take over is going to
come in a couple of things in
the and can give us on page six
Google point
Your this would include a crisis
triage center I think is really
important
You don't necessarily have to
have a hospital that the crisis
center but it works well if you
have a credit crisis triage
center.
Where they could refer people
who need the hospitalization
right away without having to
wait for someone to open up so
that's a great second I thought
at one point were you talking to
seven counties.
Then Chavez county get in there
to somebody else.
I'm not sure that Chavis no
never to.
Wouldn't that be a logical
addition to this thing.
To
be a little bit.
Okay have a.
Share with the.
To maybe Chavis let eighty eight
together that.
He wants he wants to he wants to
to to by the north with whatever
the other one is the the empty
hospitalizations at any have I I
just bring that up because it
does seem like there's a lot of
interest and I know when we had
our health and Human Services
meetings
and I can't remember if it was
in Russell or in Los crucis the
point was made is about three
years ago before COVID
That the state hospital is is
very difficult for these
counties to to utilize still
take two deputies to convey
somebody the court ordered
treatment spend a whole day
driving up to Las Vegas getting
in having the person evaluated
only to be told I'm sorry he
doesn't meet our criteria and we
can accept.
Well and and they got into and
they have in two weeks so said
this the state hospital as of
the wings right now but they're
understaffed so that's going to
be whatever we do it's going to
be one of the big dilemma but I
think there is a need for some
kind of a regional facility and
I applaud you for doing this.
The other issue that comes up on
page seven though that you'll
need to addresses ownership and
I know you're talking about you
know a big happy family with all
of I counties and municipalities
all agreeing that is harder than
heck to pull up is maybe in
eastern New Mexico's different
you'll get along just fine but.
I.
It's it's it's hard to envision
a situation which I counties in
six to seven cities working
collaboratively could could own
something jointly and so.
That I just throw that.
Yeah Mr chair you know it's like
many of our small communities
you have to have a financial
agents are more yeah you have to
take someone to be the number
one and.
The public is going to be the
where the facility is is going
to have to be more three mins
early others to follow their
lead in the one runs it and then
the others participate or
something like that last thing
is you probably don't need
thirty nine million right away
this year but if you get
anything to get a plan going and
then it does point out that the
state board of finance as
mechanisms for for for low
interest or for requests are
very low interest loans to get
the thing built so I think
you're on the right track
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Wirth yes Representative
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator SS yes Senator
McKenna yes centers committee
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
And fruit and so by a vote of
two zero nine zero you're the
first I think that's the first
nine zero voted.
We had one other names are of a
that's doing awfully well that's
like a shot at this.
Thank you very much Senator
diamonds was the only the only
bill on the grid we didn't cover
and we're we're rolling that
over to Monday.
And we'll go then to Senator
Gallegos David to Senator
Maestas for two bills Senator
we'll start with you with
Representative I mean Senator
Gonzales is three twenty four.
We'll take it with.
You might be confused Mr
chairman that Mr Senator
Gonzales of that here but I do
know he's getting well and so on
his behalf but like to present
this bill and so with me is
Bernalillo county assessor
Damian Lara who will serve as my
expert witness and I'm gonna go
ahead and that let you know what
I know from Senator Gonzales any
questions I can answer it answer
I'll defer to my expert witness
but the purpose of the New
Mexico certified appraisers
certificate is to recognize
professionalism and those
certifications and the valuation
of property or property taxation
purposes certified appraisers
use this designation in
conjunction with the valuation
of a wide range of properties
within their assessment
jurisdictions in accordance with
the New Mexico property tax
division's commitment to
excellence.
The subjugation opportunity
provides Mr chairman competent
and qualified staff with the
certificate and the respective
fields awarded by the New Mexico
property tax division as part of
the certification process
there's an element of continuing
education that results in a
recurrent learning progression
the budget the assessors offices
as well as the property owners
of the county.
The certification initiative is
similar to a teacher board
certification bilingual
differential pay and
certification pay afforded to
journeyman electric electricians
and plumbers the certification
pay provides by the statute also
for the means to retain these
qualified and certified
individuals once these
individuals are educated trained
and experienced that they are
recruited by a fee appraisers
surveyors real estate brokers
government vendors and even
other state agencies counties
provide these trainings that
should have the means to retain
these highly trained and
certified appraisers trained and
qualified individuals are
critical to the success of any
assessors office fair and
equitable validations our
product to filled reviews data
collection and statistical
analysis qualified appraisers
insure that values are current
and correct so the property
owners are paying their fair
share now what this means Mr
chairman and members of the
committee is this remains the
county option it's not a
requirement and it has zero
impact to the state general fund
so what this does is it make
sure that we it counties have
the option to to compensate
those assessor employees to get
the certifications and with that
Mr chairman I'll quickly yield
to my expert witness Mr Damon on
for a lot of welcome thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee I couldn't have said
it any better than us and our
harm you indicated only to say
that are cosponsored
Representative Cynthia Borrego
was here but was called away for
comedian that you also stands in
full support of this and I also
stand for questions Mr chair
right let's go to the audience
and see if there's anyone here
was to speak in support of the
bill.
The Burleigh county assessor
does.
Go ahead.
I mean that go ahead Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you again for
hearing this bill we
we strive to keep people
employed at the assessor's
office and we're struggling with
staffing just like a lot of
other businesses are and this
helps us retain those that we
have spent county dollars to
train not only do we have that
you know commitment from them
but we are committed to their
training as well so we need that
opportunity to reward them for
their training I apologize I I
said you're the Bernalillo
county assessor but you're not
let me introduce myself Mr
Chairman I'm sorry Clyde ward
the assessors administrator
Bernalillo county but I'm also
here today representing the New
Mexico counties assessor
affiliate and we have Santa Fe
representative today as well as
Torrance County so we have a
wide variety of counties here
today good did you want to say
anything about this bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Ivan berry
and I'm the chief deputy
assessor here in Santa Fe County
and we support the certification
pay increase I worked in
government for nearly twenty
years and in my experience there
are not many opportunities for
training and education across
the board the incentive pay for.
Was very attractive to me and
was something that I considered
in making the assessors office a
place where I could have a
career disincentive pay also
helps our offices collectively
with retention and recruitment
our appraisers are trained and
educated to operate at a high
level from a national
perspective and they are able to
provide this level of service to
our communities here in New
Mexico thank you for your
consideration thank you Mr
anybody else want to speak on
this measure.
Is there anyone here opposed to
it.
Anybody online members of the
committee.
I have a question I'm not sure I
understand.
The the certification who
certified the.
Mr chair members of the
committee the taxation revenue
department a property tax
division to to director of
property tax division certifies
all thirty three county assessor
offices and they would be
providing the certification
based on courses taken with the
international association of
assessing offices so so is this
an existing certification
program correct all you're
trying to do is make there's
some steps to correct years so
there is a current statute that
provides certification already
in place and we are trying to
ramp up that certification in
steps so it gets progressively
harder the more step to put in
there is about a four year of
process to receive on average
all four of those a state
classes and then the state
certification once you've passed
all four.
And and is the basic salary for
the staff of the assessors
office who sets that I mean is
the county commissions County Mr
chair members of committee the
county commission in conjunction
with the county elected
assessors budget sets the
salaries for all of the
employees.
And it looks to me from this.
Analysis in our in our.
In our book that.
You this is the the those steps
have not been the certification
steps have not been increased
since nineteen seventy eight in
the case of the county assessors
that is correct Mr chair.
Other members of the committee
any other question Senator
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center how to meal thank you
says a lot of presented preshow
you scouring the statues and
doing what you can for your
workers and for the S.
affiliates.
That brought up of kind of an
interesting point to me and and
You know in nineteen seventy
seven five hundred Bucks which
is on page two line eighteen
five hundred Bucks today is two
thousand four hundred sixty
dollars.
And then if you go the on the
high end.
Three thousand dollars.
I'm doing it says my head Mr
the.
A tough crowd sees so
So if you go three thousand
dollars Mr chairman just a
moment the internet is slow it's
got it somewhere in the fourteen
thousand eight intent so I think
it's a modest stuff modest
increase that we should also for
the you should consider up
bumping it a tad more in the
next twenty days or or maybe in
a couple years we review this
finished a tally from the
nineteen seventy seven numbers
thank you Mr.
Senator Gallegos you're next.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
this.
Actually you are can assessors
office said text me previously
said they wanted this and the
young lady that's in their own
right of so I'll be voting yes
this clarification but I do have
a question so on that in my of
the analysis we have it all
right says purse for the city of
Denver in Colorado these limits
are set by the county and rank
based on skill level and time
work rather in certificate just
certification levels so as we
train them will that change
their classifications is that
how it's going to work to be
able to give them.
More more opportunities Mr chair
Senator the Mr chair Senator
gray was that is correct so each
certification that they have
increases not only their
qualifications but also allows
them to move up the career
ladder so we're trying to find
in most county assessors office
a career ladder as was presented
by a chief deputy of for Santa
Fe that we want to make this to
occur a career ladder for our
employees because that's the way
that we provide professionalism
and excellence to the property
owners of the state.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
Jeremy on gentleman that and I
and I appreciate that but I
think this does more in that
because as you maintain these
jobs
if people in school start
looking at these as that career
opportunity that you know of a
lot of people look at five years
and that's a long time.
In reality if we have I work for
Gascon New Mexico for thirty
years and I've been with my
wife's uncle's company for
fifteen so you need look long
term and how you do that is
increase to pay end of by given
the education to be able to be
sustainable they could possibly
say they're their whole career
so I like that idea I just
wanted in there again has been
job of Lee County would permit
plus loaded no but I just wanted
to clarify that because I think
there's a broader group would be
interested in this once it's in
place Mr chairman Sir economy I
yield thank you anybody else.
What's the will do we have a
motion we have a motion what's
really commit a motion for do
that seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any other discussion
questions sent the secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Wirth.
Right.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
So by a seven zero vote you have
the defense center thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee on behalf of the
centre Gonzalez thank you so
much thank you Mr letter for
coming today thank you and thank
you for having us.
Senator Duhigg I understand
you're finished with Judiciary
you can join us here thank you
thank you so much Mr chairman.
Appreciate your.
At the center of.
Mr chair.
Members of the committee.
The three percent on.
But that national had yes please
you know what I would use a hand
held Mike with you're gonna have
your mask on because your hand
is just doesn't pick it up very
well.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is this is a very
simple bill hi that were I'm
gonna offer one very simple
amendment on as well all this is
doing is updating what are
statewide elected their salaries
they have not been updated in
twenty one years
they are.
Awfully low especially
considering the incredible work
that goes into to these
positions.
as an anecdote.
I heard that when our new
Attorney General moved into to
his office he had to bring with
them a George foreman grill
cause lunches on because the pay
cut he was taking taking that
position
if they are I know are secretary
of state who works tirelessly
also these are just very.
It is hard to get good people to
run for these positions when
they pay so little.
So this would.
Go ahead and and increase those
salaries and the one amendment
that I'd like to offer.
Is that right now in the title
it says whose term state began
on or after January twenty first
or January first twenty twenty
seven I'd like to change that
seven two or three and I know
that in the FIR is as you we
can't do that but the FIR is
wrong Mr chair on there was.
We we did this in in nineteen
seventy one and it went to.
To our Supreme Court I believe
And was up health so in in
nineteen seventy one during the
session the legislature
authorized in the governor
signed several bills allowed for
an increase in compensation for
constitutional officers during
the course of their currently
elected term in office
if anyone wants.
Any of the the sites I'm happy
to give them but this isn't
Judiciary soft people in rural
hi there there was a lawsuit
that was filed
and that dot seeking to bar them
from receiving that additional
compensation based on the
provisions of our constitution
article four section twenty
seven the prohibits a mid term
salary increase Santa Fe
District Court judge Santiago
Campos found for the defendants
in a lengthy memorandum opinion
which I have here you can really
tell it's from nineteen seventy
one based on the quality is a
lot of fun three let me tie at
And it but but this this like if
you really it was that was a
history lesson an analysis of
the evolution of article four
section twenty seven and also
related provision in our
constitution article four
section twelve article four
section twenty seven its final
version wasn't is amended for
rate was amended to read except
as otherwise provided in this
constitution so says you can't
increase salaries mid term
except as otherwise provided.
And judge Campos asserted that
the otherwise that otherwise of
cracks up as otherwise provided
provision are to be is was
referring to article I section
twelve which with which does not
provide a prohibition on
compensation increases during
the term of office so what did
Campos spent on was that the
prohibition mid term salary
increase was there for limited
to a period of time of the first
ten years following the adoption
of our constitution so since we
are thankfully well past that
time now
The it is constitutional for us
to go ahead and increase the is
salary is despite the fact that
we are mid term.
and so this and it was I've held
and it was never for challenge
beyond the.
Which is why would we want to do
that.
Why would we want to increase
their salaries the middle of
their I mean they already read
for it knowing that the salaries
such and such why would you want
to give the I can see in the
future you might want to say
well we're not gonna get
candidates to run for these
offices unless they could at
least get what they could get in
the private sector whatever but
right now they they were willing
to run for the salaries why
would we want to increase them
now.
Well Mister chair I think for a
couple reasons one to to
acknowledge and appropriately
compensate them for the
incredible hard job they're
doing but to for the same reason
that.
We who all ran for this position
knowing it didn't pay anything
but those of us who are still
advocating for professionalizing
our legislature and having to
pay legislature
the fact that the fact that
people are are willing to do
public service should not
foreclose on ever appropriately
compensating them for that
service so I I ran for this
position knowing it didn't pay a
penny I still think we should
have a rate look professional
provided
Of that.
Would you wanted to take effect
twelve well we're still serving.
I would yes.
Mr chair this.
Though I mean it mean if you
have to run again then you've
you've you've to date the next
election takes effect I mean I.
In the middle of the I'm unless
I'm missing something here what
do we gain by doing this I I I
don't know I mean the bill
itself but I I'm just talking
about this when amendment
Senator my assistant Senator
Hickey on the amendment all of
the members of the discussion
with the amendment is to to
change the date to make it
effective.
To make it effective this year.
Mr Chairman yes this.
Have.
And this and Mr chair Senator I
just it verbally it would just
be changing the seven in the
title two or three that's all I
see I see
Because I think that for
example.
You're the
on page two this is help talk
about governor.
Just just.
I
perspective that prohibit the
government from raising their
own self.
Governor hello.
I think that the salaries of the
committee for this becomes law
with the exception of the exact
titled.
Getting on or after.
I would support him and then
they tell you one thing.
The public policies to do.
And and Mr chair Senator the
reason that was in the titles
because LCS bills the that it
needed to be and give and I
think probably it probably based
on that language that was in the
constitution I don't know that I
think they were unaware of that
we we have this this is a string
case law.
A little over the number of.
Well we still don't have an
amendment yet she's proposed one
does anybody want to move that
amendment.
Senator Hickey would move the
amendment seconded by Senator
McKenna Senator Ingle the
amendment is this it's a pen and
pencil change
on the top of the in the title
online thirteen.
Twenty twenty seven would be
changed to twenty twenty three
so that these salary increases
would go into effect right now.
She said she proposed it we just
had a motion to do it no we have
to vote on.
You need to to include the
Senate to to get the raises.
That one I forgot to prepare
yes.
No no no we have with overhead
as you may know we discuss the
amendment yeah don't do not
panic we're not going to vote on
this.
Is.
Well that Mr chair now I'm
tempted but all right.
Under you may be amendments at
let's just say let's get an
eight why would you make that
amendment what is your rationale
for that.
Mister chairman Senator you
don't even want to get me
started.
I.
Why because I have great empathy
for the hard work for the that
these people do number one I
have huge empathy learn to the
lived experience empathy sitting
in this committee meeting last
Friday night Intel eight o'clock
and the other times we work our
**** off I'm sorry is just
that's the phrase and that's
what it is and
the people who are in these
positions we deserve to be
compensated at something that
gets close to what they might be
able to do in the real world I
have spent most of my career in
business hiring people and I've
had the fortune of hiring
phenomenally talented people and
I've had the fortune of being
very successful and it was
because I was able to bring that
talent in this rewards account
that we have in the state as
well as as that is we are going
to go to keep for we're going
forward to keep doing this and
given you know given the fact
that that I may die before the
session is over with another
comment exposure and the risks
of work taking I mean all these
other people there up here all
the time as well that's kind of
a joke but in all seriousness.
New Mexico to me has this this
kind of culture of oil you know
we're just a little state and we
don't have you know who you need
to get us out of the difficult
situations were and people who
really work hard and have a good
experience and I think this
reinforces that and any business
person would tell you that so
that's why I think we should do
it now.
But twenty twenty seven no
that's not going to I'm not
going to have another election
until twenty I I don't it
doesn't matter who you go to
attract in me I'm I'm saying I
appreciate the work that all of
these people do and that they
you know and that that like me
they were foolish enough to do
this with such low pay and no
pay you know I want to say thank
you to them I can't say thank
you to me.
Okay the Senator Maestas thank
you Mr thank you Sir do a I up.
I would consider I'm going to
support them the amendment I
would consent I think LFC
respectfully as wrong as well
but it's tough to tell.
Tell him that tell it that.
Your LCS.
I think you meant LCS I'm sorry
as I am in let's council of.
But I don't believe we can.
Increase a past salary.
Constitutionally so it's gonna
have to come this can have to be
forward because if this becomes
law then that means they get a
bump from January February a
week I don't think we could do
that but I'm not gonna fuss now
thank you Mr and and and Mr
chair Senator I I think you're
right this is just talking about
when the term began so I don't
think that this would
necessarily allow for
retroactive salary but you're
right if K. you're right hi I
understand for the that's just
talking about with the term
begins not not necessarily when
the payment what that payment at
this level would have begun that
payment at this level would not
begin until this bill goes into
effect
what January electors well we
should we say that then that
means sentencing.
Mr I don't think we need to I I
I don't think.
I think it's just when the bill
goes into effect that's when the
payment would increase.
Senator Gallegos you're next.
In your then we have you got me
so not yet but I will Mr
chairman this will elicit a few
comments Mr Chairman etcetera
and just wondering
I don't like the idea at all
personally I volunteered for
this and I will continue to do
it for free and I'll continue to
vote no on it but eserver reason
lieutenant governor's left out
of this it looks really bad that
are
Helper for the governor.
It's not even being considered
in my mission that Mr chair and
Mr chair Senator I believe it's
because he's not already of the
lieutenant governor's not
already on this list in statute
and so to the governor if if
there are compensation is fixed
in statute which I don't think
it is that it would be somewhere
else but I think I think the
time governor's composition is
not fixed and static the same
way these other statewide
elected as our Mr Chairman
center I I thought he was rate
same as a secretary stating that
group but I guess my thing is we
might want to if you go forward
with this figure out if you're
truly saying thank you for a job
well done.
here to be in that same category
until opposition to it but I
think in fairness you got to
have him included somehow
somewhere in your bill who is it
I'm sorry miss to it we can
govern.
Lieutenant governor yes good
point in Mr chair and senator
David my next question or
concern is why we are looking at
the LAX election cycle I know
you've already talked about that
but to me it looks like we are.
Profiting this cycle.
And in for me if if I was gonna
leave.
At the end of this session or
the end of my term that I
wouldn't mind voting for someone
else's pay but I think it looks
really petty on us to be able to
appropriate money that we're
going to benefit from and that
would include the executive and
the staff they are currently in
and I just want to throw that
out there because I think that's
going to be the basis of my no
vote is because I think they.
Ran knowing what they're going
to be paid and the expectations
were there that this would be
their income for that term and
so with that all you'll but I
just want to make sure that you
had heard from me because I I I
plan to vote no on this and our
races so thank you Mr thank you
senator guys next to Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
We have built.
No we're we're on the amendment.
Of
mention the they always.
The the Annalise's just pointed
out that.
The only place there's an
effective date is in the title
there's nothing in the bill
itself to give an effective date
then Mr chair
when that's the case the
effective they automatically is
which June something it's a yeah
there's so many days after after
the adjournment so so unless
unless we specify S. and at
different effective date so you
you're you're you're waiting
until the debate on the bill
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Listening Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
Three quick questions what these
a.
Propose there is going to affect
the where where they rank.
Space Mr chair Senator that is a
good question but I do not know
what the answer is I'm I'm
guessing.
We probably will still rank
pretty low in comparison to our
surrounding states you outcomes
so the second question is
Why wasn't this in the original
bill why the amendment now.
Mr chair Senator because I did
not know the LCS was going to
put that in the title.
Thank you so are the last until
until it came out and I thought
and was was kind of surprised by
that because it in all candor I
I wasn't the person who is it
Senator mean else was the one on
the file and then.
And then I I signed on right at
right when it was being
introduced and then we saw it in
want to accept.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chair one final question.
I wholeheartedly support what
you're trying to do a little
troubled by the the starting
date and I've been in public
service forty years I it's six
or seven different states and
I've seen a lot of these types
of bills and as an almost
exclusively they always start
kit the the beginning.
Date is.
The new the the next election we
get the.
Our state of the next election
the four years so I'm a little
troubled by
I haven't decided I could go
either way depending on you know
how the wind is blowing I guess.
So but I wholeheartedly support
you know these the proposed.
The salary so.
In the state that's that though
I have think that anybody else
on the amendment thank you for
bringing Senator McKenna refuse
I question about the bill and
that's the amendment okay let's
go to.
You think question the related
to.
Of.
You turn your Michael.
Thank you Mr chair so on the.
Is being consistent.
With the amendment.
Or does it just exclude the
governor.
Mr chair Senator I think it's a
six was the governor
And and I would also I I I know
that's existing language I
wonder how that existing
language frankly is impacted by.
The sentence of new case I I
worked with us precisely my
question to you you've got there
before I did and that is
is is this impacted and is your
intent to exclude the governor
in light of that case.
You Mr chair Senator Hey.
I don't know what the answer to
that is and and I hesitate to
answer without hi consulting
with my mic co sponsor
I adult think there'd be
anything wrong with excluding
the governor.
from this from it kicking in mid
term
Mostly because I have concerns
about her being willing to sign
it
when it goes up there so as we
were sitting and having this
discussion I was thinking to
myself boy I wonder if that's an
amendment that should be made in
finance maxed is to just remove
the questions about her or make
that make clear that that that
that one would not kick in
during her term because I think
it's likely to to get the bill
kids but with at thank you Mr
check which which raises the
other issue and and if she did
sign it would be a violation of
the ethics because we're not
supposed to slide built a
personally benefit us
individually so that that I've
my question was is that is that
a reason for it for.
And and Mr chair Senator I I I
think probably I hope that
you're right but I I do think
that.
I do think that this could would
probably benefit from making
about a little more clear and I
can commit to to doing that I I
don't want to do it on the fly
right now but I I would
definitely commit to doing that
and in finance where this bill's
going next.
Thank you with that I will vote
for the amendment thank you.
Any other debate Senator Ingle
did you want to weigh in on this
ammendment making the raises
effective immediately.
Changes
it seven where the bill was the
with the bill was written this
with these races would take
effect in twenty twenty seven
the amendment changed it to take
effect this year I'm told they
won't really take effect in
January first it would be July
first that they would take or
June thirtieth something like
that they would take effect.
I would rather be as it was
originally written myself twenty
seven okay let's vote than
anybody else any other input
information anybody needs
secretary will call the roll
Senator I have us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
bills etcetera Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente.
Forty two forty two.
This is.
Go with what it was forty two
right now yes this morning for
in favor to know if you vote no
and I will it's a type of.
No.
The center to the Pino no such a
tie voted fails on a tie vote
thank you thank you.
Yes you could amended anyway
what you can offer an amendment.
We making effective halfway
through their term January
twenty five.
But is that too could what would
you do what would you do that
some of this the because of.
As long as are you trying to get
good results I know well you can
make it if you get a second will
vote on it but if you don't get
a check those up there to be no
that'll correct.
If you want to make one.
At should go close Senator
Hickey you are to make an
amendment.
I.
January first.
Got to get this out of.
You
it.
Go ahead do we do accept that as
a friendly amendment so so
Mister chair so what is is
because terms began on or after
January first so here's the
thing I don't think I don't
think anything twenty four
twenty five anything between
three and seven doesn't matter
pushes at all the seven no
matter what so I'm not sure that
your comment co conspirator is
here senator I mean because
sponsors here Senator moon
Jooss.
One of the.
Yes.
So so do you want to make that a
that the members I mean it
didn't it didn't wouldn't
wouldn't do an amendment that
three thank you Mr chair sponsor
thank you for pointing out that
the conflict it internally with
the bills
I I
I'm trying to think of something
clever so we can come out of
this again now that we have
Senator moon yo's here with you
with his eloquence that will
persuade one of the no votes to
a yes vote so I'm working on
that and I'll yield to someone
else or just say the word
capital.
Senator Sedillo Lopez right now
we're debating.
We're now debating the bill
itself Senator Sedillo I can
tell governor line items.
Mr chair this is a compromise
but coming at it a different way
having the having at the.
The subsection do the salaries
will be effective and then just
putting an effective day that
would would be viewed as a
compromise.
Four Bucks septimal to the
sponsor.
And the Mr Chairman increase in
salaries would be affected this
increase in salaries would be
effective and then what and I'll
let me just I do have another
question and that is
on the bill and that is
shouldn't we also tie it to of
the consumer index the CPI so
that because it coming like
however long it's been it's
really ridiculous.
But the lose that we just
increase them winded we just
increase the governor's
authority to do that research
it's right here anyone here
twenty twenty two thousand two
was increased from ninety
thousand to a hundred and ten
Madam has that delayed anybody
certain seeking seeking any of
these offices I mean it's not
like we have a shortage of
candidates up there all Mr
chairman of my own position
about this is it limits who can
run hello.
Forty thousand dollars a year
it's live or a hundred and ten
thousand dollars you who it
limits if you've got two kids in
college or whatever it's going
to be very tough to make it on.
Four three kids in college or
whatever it's it's.
Okay I'm I'm getting blue in the
face I think I will have that
approval.
Senator Munoz did you have
anything to add to this
discussion or I I mean I mean I
don't know what the basic
question is assumed walking and
I the basic question is why
should we raise the salaries.
Twenty years are non salary
racing it doesn't matter who's
running for office whose
governor right you should do in
base pay increase we just set
the new PRC commissioners at one
ninety six to to average or
above in which is in judicial
pay some of these the the exact
amount of their their their
above district judges and
Supreme Court judges but those
are the highly regulated since
that we should have hi dollar
payment to with quality people
in there the pay for an elected
official doesn't matter who runs
or whatever right but we should
be in guidelines where you know
the I don't know about the
government say that one sixty
nine if you're governor and that
you're only pace or something
yes I.
Will make a great.
For the next election cycle as
far as I'm concerned that you
may want it started earlier you
want to started earlier.
Mr chair like starting to when
this bill becomes effective.
Thank you Maestas.
Thank that failed that motion
failed we already had to tell me
that.
So.
This be a friendly
I guess to be the same to order
just we consider if this goes
close to the next committee on
lines twelve and thirteen just
to respect.
delete the words whose terms
began on or after January one
point three seven I think that
would work.
and that would that would kick
in ninety days or in terms of
fiscal year you could take out
that sentence and then put in
July first I think that this is
an incentive bill even though we
what did want to say publicly
the judge's races was kind of an
incentive bill for lawyers to
apply
this is not a Senate bill this
is just a salary package
comparable to the jobs that are
being done that are being done
I think the last time the
governor vetoed a similar bill I
think if this if the judges.
A bill that's tied to federal
magistrates becomes law we may
want to take this on the on the
back in in a couple years and
then just never have to deal
with it that's kind of this the
consumer price index type of
races but I appreciate you
bringing this forward I
And
I appreciate the leadership in
terms of like the nuances of the
law the nuances of a potential
signage of the bill so thank you
thank you Mr I noticed none of
them are in the room.
No.
Okay anybody else want to debate
the bill itself Senator Ingle
then Senator Gallegos.
Rural.
Hi.
No.
Senator Gallegos David Senator
McKenna.
Mr Chairman now the sermon
else is here I was just
wondering if you could tell us
because no one else knows in
this list of those getting
raises was lieutenant governor's
not include.
Would you have insight on that
Mr Chairman center
I do not know that.
Mr chair Senator I think he'll
be offended if this passes so
I'll have to put anyone in this
room tells the money to be in
trouble.
I think I already announced in
New Mexico Mr ideologist open
getting answers Senator line the
one that I looked up the
lieutenant governor's salary
currently is eighty five
thousand dollars.
Should you this is the ten
eleven years Allori is eighty
five thousand dollars.
Okay this Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators do hit again when you
also.
And before that falls off my
radar
can we it include the lieutenant
governor in here.
Because I'll tell you I'm
looking at these numbers and
these current salaries are
disrespectful full stop.
I have no hesitation to say that
and folks that have expressed
why are we doing this how bout
those candidates that are
turning more than the salaries
yeah they won an election but
they've got families to support
so this is a this is a this is a
heavy duty decision to takes
what could be a much lower
salary than what they're earning
on the outside to serve in
public service
so.
I'll say that again the current
salaries are disrespectful I
can't say that laden off
so couple of things that in
writing down here how about a
start date of the July one which
is the beginning of the fiscal
year.
And then I'm wondering on page
two.
Line seven where we have.
shall receive two hundred fifty
dollars as compensation.
is that reflective of
recommended compensation.
Or is that a place where we this
body cannot correct that change
that number.
and then too I think someone
here on the on the committee RT
said something about.
Checking the seller of the
salary every.
Every so often and I'm wondering
would be great if we could
trigger something in this bill
we're every five years.
Salary surveys are conducted and
offer recommendations to the
legislature so we're not we're
not having such a lapse of
twenty years I mean I think
that's just this is not
acceptable.
Mr chair Senator of the two
hundred fifty is when the
lieutenant governor serving as
governor for the day that's the
that's the increase that
centering referred to and is
that in addition to because this
was written before he was paid a
salary.
So is that in addition to his
salary.
Yes Mr I think it's a celery Mr
chairman and that's in addition
to salaries let's in addition a
anyone I have not that point Mr
sent Mister chairman Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your patience I know it I
know it's hard which is why you
should be getting paid to that
I I I would point out I'm
assuming the governor's gone
thirty days from the state
vacation travel trips in may let
that's seventy five hundred
dollars in addition to the
eighty five so it's still very
low for the lieutenant governor
I mean I agree it's not the
governor and that just the the
governor also isn't overseeing
the session for sixty days
thirty days so I just wanted to
give that data to the.
Thank you.
Thank you so the floors Center
mechanic the meet me what our
answer that again to answer okay
I think this bill's been up to
the executive throughout history
maybe have been there roughly
fifteen years you've been on a
and every executive has to be to
the bill every time we send it
up freight of their reelection
the LFC LFC whatever and and so
they vetoed it themselves the
analyst issues had back there
and so it's been up there to
give them the increases
throughout just the executive it
has the does that but I couldn't
agree with you more I mean this
is like handing a hand grenade
to the existing incumbents if
they want to seek any other
office even if they're term
limited out of this one that's
the first thing they're they're
they're they're oppositional
right will they raise their own
state reserves so so I don't
think we gain anything by making
it effective before your
original starting date.
And then efforts at finding a
way to make it started July one
two it all amounts to the same
thing.
They were elected.
Milling with the salary was.
Let's make it effective for the
next term starts in the people
running for it.
Will be subject to this.
Potential legal liability of
having both of having accepted a
raise in the middle of a term
that was handed or having signed
the bill the again in the race
that that's all I'm saying.
At no no and I agree fully that
we need to pay the more we've
always voted for these bills
going up but to make it
effective now is is is just.
in a a veto I mean it is like
killing the bill to do that.
Thank you.
Department for Senator Tallman
suggest putting them all on a
four day week and therefore
they're failing.
What about us.
You want amend the bill to
the and K. kilometers.
They be making a lot more per
hour and and a and a real races
thank you get a second job in
the other day and and and do
really well any other debate on
nobody so far has made an
amendment yet sure I still have
some questions and go ahead
you've got the forces yeah
Okay so.
The two hundred fifty dollars.
Has that has a our salary survey
yes I mean I don't know how long
that's two hundred fifty dollar
rate has been there.
Mr chair Senator you have to
just interning at least probably
sentencing Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
comprise the longest serving
ones there but that is the days
is probably set right.
hello what is currently but.
Maybe different than what's
currently maybe the analyst
knows is shaking his head back
there.
No idea I think it's low to I
think.
All these numbers are
disrespectful can I say that
again these numbers are
disrespectful and we've got
enough brain power in this room
to fix it
And then my other thing is what
is the
because.
I.
With the with the chairman and
senators would you consider.
language in there that would
trigger a salary survey every
say five years so that we don't
have such a lapse of twenty
years between we're examining
what are executives who have an
enormous amount of
responsibility are receiving.
Are you making a motion or you
just know I'm asking.
I'm asking about would be
friendly to incorporate that
kind of language.
Sure.
So he said it differently now I
want to do okay so I guess so
let's see so my first one of my
first the second observation I
had was starting the new salary
on July one with that considered
friendly chairman and senators
July twenty what.
July.
July one.
Twenty twenty three.
Is it right friendly that Jim is
not friendly to them.
yeah we four four four on that
issue so we should Senator it
with all due respect which we've
been down that road we've tried
to pay them in the middle of
their term and it didn't get out
of here.
If Senator Schmedes was here
would have been flat out
defeated I suppose but right now
you don't have the votes to get
that out so let's not go over
the same again and again if you
want to propose an increase in
the rate for the lieutenant
governor the secretary the state
to ever takes over for the
governor let's to consider that
but let's not try to started to
date well we've already rejected
several times and besides which
would lead us to veto the whole
the governor to have to be to
the old bill okay she's excluded
but he's excluded.
She's the our chairman and so
will the total.
These
were the ones doing the
legislation she's a senator I
apologize you make your motion
and if it passes it'll be fine
go ahead.
I don't know what else to tell
you go ahead and make a motion
okay sure I'm just trying to
discuss this and I just feel
like there's a lot of tension
and I'm trying to wind us around
attention because we've already
talked about it for thirty
minutes and we're still going
over the same topic so if you
could add something new to the
discussion that would help well.
Motion to approve the lieutenant
governor okay.
Chairman Senators I would like
to add on page one.
between the lines FY twenty one
that we also include lieutenant
governor.
the rate of pay and
The new proposed rate of pay
which is the same so with that
be the same as the secretary of
state yes I think that is yes
okay.
So we have to do one of the time
so that's my first one that said
from the amendment yes.
Any discussion on that in the
second amendment Mr chairman I
don't quite have the admin one
page one line twenty one insert.
After line twenty one.
Lieutenant governor eighty five
scratch out one forty four seven
fourteen include an educator I
don't even know you know that we
need to add eighty five scratch
out I think we could just put in
the one forty four for seven one
four so because it's not it's
not exist at all.
We did passes salary for the
lieutenant governor where is
that.
Then a different statute yeah so
we'll need to amend the other
statute.
You track that down Frank.
And Mister chair if if I may say
because I think we've gotten a
lot of good suggestions and this
committee and it might be it
because this is going next to my
co sponsors Committee it might
be easier for us to to take all
of this input from this
committee develops amendments
based on that input and then
offer though have those drafted
by LCS make sure we're not
conflicting with any other
existing statutes and then offer
them in in the finance
committee.
And reduce tension.
Well it what you're asking is
for us to pass a bill that you
say you're going to amended in
to the committee if we were in
Judiciary would they do that Mr
chair that is a fair question
that the pro the prop probably
not they wouldn't and I wouldn't
do it I wanted to Senator
Tallman on the amendment.
Close just a quick far is
because of finance I support
increasing the impact governors
but not two hundred forty four
thousand I I could go to maybe a
hundred twenty.
She said one forty four CENIC
forty four yeah we're not going
to.
Okay you that's good point who
else wants to debate the
amendment.
Secretary will call the roll.
We have an amendment and a
second to raise the salary of
the lieutenant governor from
eighty five to one forty four
that may involve a second the
statute is pointed out that
we're still tracking down
because it's not in the statute.
To this stuff that you to in.
I wonder where we have to chair
I I just want to point out that
on the point of of senator
Thomas is his current salary is
exactly the same the position of
the.
Thank you very they were near
the responsibility these other.
Interesting our treasure General
yes mark but senator what how
did you arrive at that number is
arbitrarily that's why it that's
I don't see how that would make
any.
Okay the list of those voters
amendments and you can make
another one if you if you if you
want to make another one you can
but right right now we're going
to vote on this one the the the
the amendment has to do with the
lieutenant governor it being
included in his salary says
secretary will call the roll
forty four yeah.
Senator Davis no ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Center mass this will move to
explain Senator McKenna
absolutely yes Senate committees
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes so what
we.
Thank you for.
Not only in the.
Yes.
That we don't include the
lieutenant governor.
Thank you Mr chairman senator
Senator of my Thurman us the
reason I voted no because it's
it's it's equal to these to
these executive offices so it
happened somehow and so if it's
not in statute I would hate to
put it in statute.
Us but they're committed to
figuring it out and making sure
everything's.
Thank you and that.
That may be something that you
can do in finance if you if you
had that the other amendment
senator McKinney still the
floor.
Okay so a chairman and senators
so line H. two H. two nine
seven.
I'm just really troubled about
that amount two hundred fifty
dollars I do not want to suggest
to be changed to well.
Yes Representative so I moved.
An amendment on page two line
seven strike two hundred fifty
dollars and replace with five
hundred dollars.
Is there a second to that
amendment second.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any discussion on.
For.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator there goes.
Senator Hickey.
I doubt.
Senator Ingle you know Senator
last this was the motion five
hundred dollars for the two
fifty per day.
That isn't just.
Senator McKenna yes Finnish
media center city Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes K. that motion
passes given another motion
Senator yes thank you chairman
and senators my last one as I
mentioned is.
I'm not sure about the the
language but
I guess this would be on.
Let's see second all
compensation
So.
D.
Yes you just need to okay so I
guess would be my suggestion is
page two adding a section do
for effective date would be the
first day of the of the new
fiscal year July one.
He got a letter one of what year
I.
Well last time I said a year a
year which was this one I got it
would really got rolled over so
I'm just saying it should start
on the the first day of the
fiscal year.
Of the new fiscal year but but I
mean if you're saying effective
date you need to say what you
what the date is.
Should match with our.
Yeah the title now is January
one twenty twenty seven I do
want to say.
Yes when they take office they
take office in January one that
it is January twenty first at.
Okay so that there are their new
salary should start the day they
take office January one.
Twenty twenty seven.
Have second motion called the
west.
Twenty twenty twenty twenty
seven to the rental payment but
then.
Certain twenty five January
twenty three twenty two twenty
three.
Both sorry I thought you said
the same as the title no I said
twenty seven twenty seven which
is the same as the trial twenty
twenty seven to six okay any any
discussion of that making the
effective date.
January first twenty twenty
seven
million.
We know this at the effective
date C..
If you don't do that then it
takes effect July one twenty
twenty three.
Which is why the chairman of the
to do that now the yes chairman
Senators that doesn't make sense
because the day that you were
per to the job you should get.
the salary that is indicated and
it shouldn't be thrown off by
six months.
But.
I'm sorry I didn't understand
what you just a day you started
a job January first you should
get the rate that is indicated
and you shouldn't have to wait
six months for it to be
effective this way that's what
you're saying January first yes
the twenty seven that's right
nice to live first no you start
the one January first that's
right.
So that the so your motion is
January first so the January
first.
And then you right first is here
maybe I can can solve this by
saying that's an unfriendly
amendment
I think because it that that all
that would mean is that the soft
really process doesn't exist
until then and.
I don't see and I don't see the
need for for a delayed
implementation date if it's
already delayed through the
title.
But it there's no need for the
delayed implementation date
since this order would not kick
in until that that twenty is
that term that's not true she
said there is no effective date
in you as you are you explain to
us that it's effective date is
the next July one that is true
but it wouldn't actually Kickin
still until for anyone because
no one's term would have
started.
honor after.
Twenty twenty seven but even
though in the so effectively it
so it would be on the books but
that's it I I don't think we
came really anything from
delaying the implementation
date.
Thank.
That.
To make it clear.
I think you need to have an
effective date all right but I
mean whatever it is before we
take payment yeah we're going to
change in finance so we're.
Okay so chairman let's.
I got all this now so chairman
and senator so then again page
two we have a new section do.
Effective date.
Would be January one twenty
twenty seven is that correct.
Two thousand twenty yeah.
Okay and it is that Mr Chairman
that of senator McCain is that
delete the words in the title
you're you're headed.
Units or units are insisting.
Now.
Supposing leading the title now
okay thank I reflecting the
information on the title.
Thank you
secretary will call the roll
everybody clear on what the over
voting okay Senator guided us
the thing so.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
to the building I'll yes.
Any other discussion on the bill
any other Senator McKenna one
more chairman thank you senator
chairman senators so my last one
is same page.
Perhaps a section he.
I'm not sure
What would be the proper.
Language to trigger salary
survey.
Every five years and offer
recommendations to the
legislature.
Mr Chairman center we can do a
salary survey this study out
there.
Salary survey if you feel
comfortable we'll make sure that
added in into the salary survey
for executive and elector
official surveys now gives a
twenty year service.
Thank you and it's a different
bill.
Chairman and senator Munoz did
you say that that's in another
bill we have we have a bill
Memorial we have the money to
just ten when the twenty year
salary study that's currently in
that was in the female that's in
Legislative Council full if you
feel comfortable enough will
include the executive and the
elected in that salary survey so
we can get a call from around
the nation.
Four that would be good our
chairman senators is so is with
that be good Senator do have yes
okay.
I relinquish the floor thank you
chairman okay then Senator any
other discussion on the on the
bill as presented with the two
amendments we've adopted Senator
Maestas thank you Mr.
Process.
The
second seconded by Senator
Hickey.
Thanks for.
Any any discussion or debate
anybody want to make any other
statement Senator the secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senate committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes center to
the piano yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members thank you Senators the
state or this next one I do and
I it average your cosponsored
opened her statement with this
is a very simple bill that was
very per state I know that the.
Okay we were thirty four please
Senator.
Neville transcriptomics this do
you have your yes special
witnesses here for your bills.
Okay well let's let's see we get
senator Neville is done quickly
and then we'll go to years we'll
get your next to.
This is a very complex bill is
in the it is a very complex
built.
I think it was possible.
Okay senator Neville we're ready
for you for three thirty eight
okay thank you Mr chairman
most of you all know that I
spent thirty forty years as a
real estate appraiser doing
commercial properties around the
state.
the hardest part of the job was
always finding data.
You based appraisals on three
approaches you use comparable
sales that's we're gonna talk
about here in a minute use cost
analyses you figure out what it
cost to build the property
depreciated or you use an income
analysis to determine how the
rents relate to the value.
The assessors are very hindered
by the fact that they have no
data available in this bill
seeks to reap remedy that in
large part we have already done
this for all residential
properties this bill if you read
it it says a we currently
require that you followed
affidavit when your house is
sold when you sell your house
either the buyer or the seller
who ever files and a record to
do they were file an affidavit
saying that the house was
purchased for three hundred
thousand dollars or something
like that doesn't mean that's
what it's worth it's just what
the actual transaction was three
hundred thousand dollars of we
don't have that particular
provision for non residential
properties commercial properties
so when an office building sales
of of commercial building state
of retail of building or
anything like that we have no
data so the assessors are
tremendously hindered by the
fact that they don't have sale
data or information that tells
them what the market is that for
any given neighborhood or town
or wherever they're working so
this bill would require the same
thing that we already require
for all of residential
properties in the state it is
not a disclosure bill this is
not public information this is
strictly for the assessors to
use to analyze the property
values that they put on there so
that when you pay your property
taxes on your
office building or whatever it
is that we're talking about it
is a fair assessment as far as
the data can be again they're
very hindered by that and
that was always my toughest job
when I was soon as a commercial
appraiser and I can imagine how
difficult it is for the
assessors I had access to the
Representative the realtors
database MLS and those kind of
things but they don't they're
not allowed to be members of the
MLS or those kind of things
because it's private that's a
private organization owned by
the realtors so they have to get
their data by just getting on
the phone said Senator.
Would you order building for
they have to do about a hardware
and it's very difficult it makes
their job of assisting your
properties accurately is getting
the taxes I have Mister Damon
Lara firms of Bernalillo county
assessors my expert and we will
stand are all if you make any
comments you'd like to the most
of questions were hit anything
else on that Mr Lara Mr chair
members of the committee no Sir.
Let's go to the audience anybody
here in support of this bill.
All the assessors are good.
Raise your hand yet but well I.
Anybody here Representative
posed to the bill anybody
online.
There are going to dinner
probably.
Members of the committee.
Also.
Senator Ingle thank you.
Bill of.
FY are proficient in math
I recall to property this Mr
Chairman there's a section in
the ill that excludes
agriculture properties it's
vague because it is
the better contract to a in
which it's on page five number
seventeen in which properties
valued pursuant to section
whatever that's the agriculture
section agriculture properties
are valued by a formula and it's
based on their productivity and
so forth that that's not this is
not part of it it wouldn't work
so that it's not part of thank
you.
Any other discussion what's the
will of the committee we do that
we have a motion for a new
pastor Domingo seconded by
Gaydos secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey had Senator Ingle
yes Senator my SS.
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator smitteez Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes the legislation
referred.
Yes where you go.
This is like a he's like the
wind he's here and he's got
right about that said you want
to go next.
Very serious.
Chairman members committee when
the PRC commission got switched
to a three member commission we
have a quorum issue and so on
page five
line nineteen
we are many that so that when to
commissioners are meeting
together and talk discussing
business or using the same
secretary that they don't have a
quorum and they're violating the
important issues that stand for
questions.
yeah let's online twenty two
yeah.
Okay did you want to add
anything okay she's just here
for to give you a little more
awesome server looks I'm here
for my voice okay great anybody
in the audience support this.
Anybody in the audience opposes
anybody online.
Good loser.
The real.
PRC commissioner regular Gabriel
from the visa PRC commissioner
and peers yeah the new it
Gabrielle.
Are you let up please join us
and share your instance sites
with this.
The muted.
You have to a New Mexico
governor.
He's used to the ruling cornet's
curling place so yes these
muted.
I
just.
Yeah the do me a lot of good.
The debate on why that committee
vote this morning didn't include
somebody being on camera there's
no way we have it we haven't had
anybody echo realization that
seem.
The there and go to the next
one.
He can.
It is only ten can you on mute.
This should be in the room
thank.
Thank you senator Munoz thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee they should be here.
Speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce that supports this bill
this is legislation designed to
help the new PRC work not just
in concept but in practices as
well it takes reasonable steps
to ensure the commissioners and
do their job and efficient and
candid manner while maintaining
a proper level of openness
oversight and accountability
thank you.
Right thank you JD members of
the committee.
We have a motion for a due
process second from no I have
questions I know is there a
second from anybody second
seconded from Senator Hickey
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'll start by saying I knew
there would be problems of the
smaller commission and one of
the problems of the smaller
commission is the lack of
transparency if this were to
pass
the reason we have open meetings
act is so that the public is is
aware of these kinds of
conversations that they have so
I find this really disappointing
In with regard to one of the
first things that the commission
seeks is to to hide their
discussions and then to I mean.
How I understand advisory staff
may discuss public business
matters of public policy with an
individual commissioner has big
may be necessary that's already
true that's not necessary on
page five because that
individual commissioner can talk
with the staff what's bothersome
is a discussion a discussion or
series of discussions between
advisory seven individual
commissioners concerning the
views of individual
commissioners shall not
establish a quorum that's
exactly why we have the the open
meetings act is to avoid this so
I I find this really problem
problematic and then it's as a
final well about that and again
the next line it's just also
true that's just a truism but
just on the point can I ask you.
We talk among ourselves
constantly I ask you what your
views on this bill you share
your views of me on my bills.
We don't consider that a
violation of the vote means that
because there's forty two of us
exactly if there were just three
of us we were supposed to make
only all of our decisions to
start our own little quiet those
are the rules of of of the of
that those have been the rules
of this commission of the public
the Regulatory Commission in and
that's because there's a lot of.
Of.
A lot of these discussions you
want to have on record because
they're they're concerning right
rate very concerning you know
there concerning an industry I
find it problematic anything
else.
So I I don't know if you would
of consider it friendly to
remove well I don't know it's
not necessary yeah I guess the
but then for matters involving
public business the other part
for.
The public business of the
commission
I guess it's also the majority
can constitute a quorum for the
transaction of public business
I find it.
Of a little bit confusing what
do you mean by.
Like public businesses not shall
constitute matters.
Within the commission's
principal statutory
constitution.
Transaction of public business
so this I guess this addresses I
guess my question is.
so that they can have lunch and
not discuss public business what
what is the purpose of of the
definition and this particular
definition.
To ride together to the same
location.
All right well then that makes
sense.
That makes sense because that's
true that but again that's true
now as long as they don't
discuss public to public
business.
Currently they can be together
at any point in time I can't
share secretary they can share
anything because that would
constitute a quorum the current
law if they shared the ministry
of assistant or are didn't share
ad have to NMAA straight I'm
sorry servers to manage stress
and administrative assistant
instead of one they can actually
share one page they're looking
at Mr chair of a service center
I didn't mean to interrupt
apologist so that they're a they
currently they cannot share
administrative assistants
because if they share one then
that constitutes a quorum of the
bold given directive to to
administrative assistant in the
same manner missed Mr chair of
Senator could you point that to
me a rule that says that a rule
or statute for and I'm not but I
mean that that is the issues
that they brought up.
When we discussed it with the
care commission PRC commissioner
that could.
Choice yes the amendment makes
lots of this.
Okay I just it will pick Rep
really use that.
We've we've when they're wearing
a mask it's it be just becomes a
muffled Mr chair Senator my name
is Troy Corey I'm the new chief
of staff for the public
regulation commission one of the
challenges that this new three
member commission is struggling
with is simple administrative
tasks that because they can't
share those.
Issues with each other we're
worried about the functioning of
the agency so examples are who
can be here together to
Representative the PRC on behalf
of the PRC for this bill
coordinating who's gonna be
where their communications with
each other constitute a quorum
and so those types of
administrative functions are
being hampered right now because
of the shrunk in size of the
commission.
Mr chair Senator I knew that we
all knew that this was a problem
when we shrank the commission
because we're concentrating
power and we're also of.
You know losing the districts I
mean there are many problems
with this and that this is
another one really is is
challenging for me because I lot
of these discussions I think
should be public the public
should be aware that they're
having them and and this
definition of public business.
My understanding of the vote
right meetings act is that is
true now you can be in the same
place if you're having dinner
you're attending a wedding or
whatever as long as you don't
talk business you know the
business of the commission
that's why understanding Mr
chair.
A pass as quickly AS and the
question is is it I ask I
already asked where the rules is
your do you see that my
understanding is incorrect where
is that written where is the
with the policy.
Mr chair Senator good.
Your interpretation of them
being in the same place at the
same time as long as they don't
discuss business hi I would have
to look at it very carefully I
don't want to take a position
right now on the spot but I
think more of them of more
concern is being able to discuss
administrative matters Hey are
you going to this thing sharing
the administrative assistant as
the senator pointed out if
they're discussing business with
the administrative assistant
then it she is now participating
in that rolling quorum so it's
those types of functioning
issues that we're attempting to
address here.
Mr chair I don't I'm not sure
that this does which you what
you say it does by deceptive.
I think this is creating another
another credit bureaucracy
because everything's going to be
at have to be identified his
either within the constitutional
powers and duties for not the
the duties and powers.
Set forth in one of I guess I
would be more comfortable if you
if if you would clarify that
that's what you're talking
about.
With you know in other words say
administrative matters are not
public.
because I think this idea of
what's public and and what's not
is gonna be confusing to the
public and and probably to the
media to because they're going
to want to know what what kinds
of conversations are happening.
And especially and I but I think
more problematic than David this
is C. because
That's why we have the vote this
meeting at meetings act is so
that.
People who have business before
the commission don't.
Talk to commissioners about
what's going on and and that you
don't have a an agent that you
know of all.
An agent going back and forth to
try to find out with the votes
are in advance.
And that you don't you know why
it's so I'm I don't know I am
troubled by this I'm very
troubled by it but you know I've
been trouble ever since we lost
the districts and ever since we
shrink the commission and
concentrated power.
and I just I think this is
problematic thank you Mr chair
Senator message you're next
thank.
just a second I apologize but
what I've given it no never got
through to me recognizes
apparently the governor of of
you that are new PRC
commissioners is able to on mute
now so let's hear what he has to
say about this.
Mr are you here yes we can.
Excellent I apologize about that
I had to switch my device so yes
I am Gabriel Legler at current
commissioner of the PRC I wanted
to speak to support these
amendments as they allow the
commission to perform our
statutory statutory duties
effectively.
So the restructuring that
shifted us from five
commissioners to two three
commissioners I think created an
unintentional important problem
under the previous structure to
commissioners could speak to
each other about internal
procedures and contested cases
these amendments only bring us
partially closer to the
flexibility that existed before.
The bill would allow the
commission to communicate
concerning our internal
procedures so I I came to the
PRC with the regulatory
background and understand the
process season staffing needed
to evaluate a complex case that
a regulatory agency is charged
with considering.
Unfortunately the adequate
procedures currently do not
exist at the PRC and I can not
effectively establish new
internal advisory procedures
without the ability to
communicate with my fellow
commissioners and this
discussion between two
commissioners was allowed when
the commission had five members.
The the bill would also
clarified that when it comes to
the public business that falls
under the commission's
responsibilities which is a
value valuation and building on
regulatory filings.
our shared advisors may
communicate with us use of ended
Vigil commissioners so this this
I want to clarify that this is
standard practice for regulatory
agencies across the country my
previous post at the federal
energy regulatory commission was
as an advisor and I can tell you
with certainty that this change
is aligned with how advisors
work at the federal level and.
Other other state commissions so
again this type of conversation
between the two commissioners
was allowed when the commission
had five members.
On chairman and senators I.
I am committed to making the PRC
a model commission nationwide
and integrity impartiality.
Currency and preparedness are
critical to ensuring the PRC
works for New Mexicans and.
This bill respects the open
meetings act and ensures that
the commissioners are prepared
to make well informed decisions
and so I thank you for the
ability to make some comments on
that so that a green coat passes
bill thank you Mr I Gilera.
Senator messes thank you thank
you Mr Chairman Semenya's.
Madam chief clerk chief of staff
is great great hired the like
the gentleman said.
Before in two commissioners
could talk to people who took
commissioners could talk they go
visit thing I'd like to get to
know each other that should be
the same now.
It's three members we can't
change that all we can do is
facilitate these relationships
with this the goal is to have
three technocrats as opposed to
five politicians and so we get
three technocrats that can
withstand the the political
winds from all angles you should
be able to get to know each
other and and visit without
violating violating the law
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator anybody else Senator
Gallegos.
Mister chairman Senator of being
on school war for like twenty
four years I know what up open
meetings so to give you just
some background the other day
all the school districts we're
here in the capital before we
come they give us targeted
discussions so we only talked
our legislators about what we
are needs are we don't actually
talk policy.
So I can see where even the open
meetings is usable by you
because if you as chief of staff
told them you know as dinner
wherever you're going organ
talked about these items but not
the subcommittee been open
meetings so that's that's just
COVID I do have a question noble
question.
And Center is in on page three
line to your striking citizens
an input and residents is that
so that the non residents are
the noncitizens would have.
I guess I'm trying to figure out
why you would strike citizen.
And replace it with president Mr
and etcetera.
Mr chair all the commissioners
are going to be residents of New
Mexico and Australia are is
already moved.
Find residents are closing on
one and so this a resident so
that to provide the term you
have to live in the boundaries
of the state we have state
citizenship.
But I don't know if there is
such thing is is that citizen of
the state so it's a bit it's a
more accurate term I think.
Okay well Mister chairman
Senator those confusing me
because I guess.
The letter of the law it might
be better but Mr Chairman center
of the next question has sort of
goes back to that conversation
which are doing a dinner or you
know with with commissioners of.
In.
Search and see it talks about
staff discussing is there any
other time that you would have
public involved in those
discussions Mr chairman and
chief chief of staff.
Mr Chairman center I.
I think staff can meet with
almost anybody and have a
discussion right with
individuals about policy or
what's coming up on the
commission agenda where report
is it can be any issue with that
right and then if the
commissioner seems walking on
the system thank you hello
rolling corn because guessing
the matters of commission so
that's why I think that's that
change their.
I appreciate that Mr and
etcetera I guess just my thought
is at some point time you have
to have the ability to gather
information.
Before you go into a decision
making role I think they're
different just from what I've
been used in schools but without
all yield thank you thank you
senator guys this body else on
the.
Of the bill.
What loan for second time but
for the second time Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
So this doesn't distinguish
between the contested cases they
have to roll they have a because
I judicial role and they also
have the rulemaking role and
this doesn't it's is it true
that this does not distinguish
between that so staff members
could discuss contested cases.
Where you ring from Santo on
page well I'm I'm asking
if if it's true.
That.
Fund page five.
An advisory staff maintenance
discuss public business.
With an individual commissioner
which again that's just true
that the fact already not
necessary and then a discussion
here is this is the problematic
line a discussion or series of
discussions between advisory
step in individual commissioners
concerning the views of
individual commissioner shall
not establish a quorum will
would that include contested
cases.
Madam I mean Madam Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator currently
there's no distinction between
contested non contested cases.
Mr chair would you can see I'd I
think that is the most
problematic aspect of this that
that they could be discussing
contested cases which are highly
of there they have a lot of
rules about how contested cases
proceed.
And.
There's a lot of confidential I
mean a lot of information that
needs to be shared with the
public.
And then you're supposed to
observe them.
Come to a decision and you're
supposed to observe be able to
serve their reasoning.
in their discussion and so that
seems really provide you know
problematic I don't know it
looks like it's going to pass
but I would I don't know if you
consider that a friendly amended
in except in contested cases.
Insurance and I don't think I
have the technical experience.
You and I know this bill goes to
Judiciary next.
Mr chair Senator
I think there are a number of
ways to address your concerns
and that might be one of them
although I'm not sure that is
the
most targeted.
Well has this bill stands I
cannot I cannot vote for it has
okay I'll just leave it I I was
just seeing if there was a way
to fix I think you're going to
persuade them let's see if
you've got any other support
here for your position is there
a motion.
Yep.
Ocean produce best from Senator
Tallman.
Second from Senator Hickey do we
already have one.
Thank you well we are in England
he can start you got a school.
To I just think that any other
discussion we we thoroughly
aired whatever issues people
have.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator us.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna.
Senators maintenance Senator
Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Tallman yes center to
actually connect.
There was the Senators this is
yes yes McKenna was McKenna.
That yes.
no.
Center to the piano yes so you
have a to pass nation I to to
vote in the Senate rule
addresses questions in addition
to ensure that you go to
Judiciary next yeah center
Adrian did bringing your sheets
with the governor's yeah so good
thank you thank you thank you.
All the witnesses of these don't
read those now.
We need their attention where
you're trying to distract our
committee okay Senator messed us
to bills.
Twenty two you want to start
with the dissolution of marriage
she's.
I hate three twenty two.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members this is a Senate bill
three hundred twenty two I'm
joined by Dr and I the house ni
who went to a peculiar situation
last year we chill explained.
And he talked to me about he was
getting divorced.
And his wife at the time passed
away.
Two children all but instead of
a.
Consolidating its assets and
being a father and and making
decisions on behalf of his
children's lives the divorce
proceeding continued.
And so I suggest so I didn't
realize this was law but the
judge
The judge of may have acted
correctly or actually did act
correctly and and and pursuing
the the dissolution of marriage.
but I suggest that that's a
policy question we should
revisit.
And I think that just like a
criminal case just like in the
all almost all matters of the
death of a party ends the case.
and I I would ask Miss this this
committee to revisit that matter
however Mr chairman I was not
intimately involved in the
drafting of this case drafting
this bill rather and didn't have
time to really go over it prior
to the last twenty four hours
and this is not what I wanted I
merely wanted to abate a
dissolution of marriage and so
That so I don't want to abate
determination of paternity and
and things of that nature of
what we could talk about that
and see if if amendments are are
brought forth.
But that but Mr Haasan it is a
widower not at do you do for
state so I'll turn it over to
the general.
So so just on you on your point.
Is this this first thing all
they did was change magistrate
right thank you Mr let me go
through the bill thank you Mr so
we are on page one just just a
cleanup language justice of the
peace to magistrates page two
of.
A paragraph be.
that paragraph is consistent
with the middle of page three
that was crossed out
what I was going to put what I'm
gonna proposes that on page two
lines two three and four that be
struck.
That up.
That on lines are nine ten
eleven some of those cross outs
be struck.
Of that online's thirteen and
fourteen.
That up that be struck up until
death of a party.
and then on page three.
Lines up.
Lines up.
Eight through four seventeen
that that not be struck so all I
want to talk about is
dissolution of marriage I don't
believe a dissolution of
marriage should continue upon
the death of a party that's
that's what that's what I asked
the bill drive to do
so I I do want to complicate
things but this this actually
abates.
Up.
Determination of paternity of
child support things of that
nature which wasn't the intent
of the bill.
So
Maybe we could hear the
testimony from your witness.
And then you could have this re
drafted and that was going to
propose that we have a quick
hearing now we we talk about
disillusioned marriage good or
good or bad because they hate
for him to have to come back
yeah and then based on the
testimony in the the temperature
the committee I can come up with
the committee sub on that
subject matter okay the rollover
Committee well let's see we're
we're we're we're gonna see what
what we do thank you thank you
Mr Taylor Stewart who German
please introduce yourself Sir
when Ms Fabiani.
And it's going to take a little
bit of my story of how this bill
affected.
My wife I guess in my children's
lives but I was going through a
pretty brutal marriage of sorry
divorce which started in and our
September of twenty nineteen.
And after drugs out six day
trial and three months go by
after March fifth through three
months go by and.
no nothing no word from the
judge my wife passed away from
the phone overdose.
So three months went by and then
after that you know it's hard
enough to go through a brutal
marriage brutal divorce
animators because of the over
opioid addiction.
In.
To not realize to realize that
I'm still going through a
divorce after.
After she passed away is it was
pretty hard.
For my kids and I threw this is
pretty tough so N. as of today
it's still not over and she
passed away on
June seventh of twenty twenty
one and as of today solar so her
her relatives or somebody is
trying to get her share of your
estate with no.
Just went to hire three
additional trains which run with
the garden of item the
representative to represent her
and someone to represent the
estate so I'm going to have to
go into a statement that there.
And and I'm waiting for I'm
still waiting for the garden of
one to come up with her with her
judgment order.
Report.
But it's been months now nothing
yet.
Thank.
Members of the committee any
discussion of the Senator Lopez
well I'm glad you're
one of the items that I hope is
there anybody in the audience
was speak on this.
Yes.
You support us to our.
Thank you very opposed to it.
The video online about this.
Okay so so did you want to
Revenue essentially half of all.
Half of.
You know upon divorces staff
would go to the beach spouse but
upon a death instead of him
using the entire assets of of
his belongings and is where with
all to raise children half of
his property was then
essentially sees by the court
put in trust and have a total
stranger dole it out to the
children in their twenties as
opposed him using it today to
benefit them in any way he sees
fit as a father.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
will appreciate your taking like
some of the most egregious
things of out and and I
appreciate your rolling over
because that would just be so
problematic of of you know the
parentage if you can establish
parentage and you couldn't
establish child support but the
family law section of New Mexico
I don't remember how many years
ago probably fifteen to twenty
or you may remember.
Brought forward this this rule
that the court should conclude
the proceedings has it both
parties had survived in order to
continue the intent of the
parties at the time because what
was happening is when when it
was the.
And then going to give the court
discretion and and and the
reason it was important to
conclude the previous
proceedings is because it
created a mess community
property that should have been
split and and should go to the
kids all of a sudden was going
to the spouse even though they
were divorcing and over and over
again it was kind of leaving the
kids out in the cold
because that's community
property when somebody dies the
community is in in the event
that there's no will all of the
property goes to the other you
know the part the surviving
party and that was very
problematic and so they they
brought this and then
child support was another
another issue
And parentage you know all of
the all of these problems and
that's why the family law
section I believe Tom into and I
don't see the family law section
here I'm not a I don't know if
they're aware of this bill but
that's why they they brought
this forward it at the time
everybody supported it to me
this is an example of bad facts
making potentially making bad
law because my question is is
and I understand there's an
individual who was harmed by
this we don't know the facts of
the case and why the court
decided to to take this property
into trust and and I'm sorry
that this I'm sorry both for the
loss of your former.
Your former spouse and and for
what happened to the court
system.
and I am deeply sorry for it but
the purpose of this is to
effectuate the intent of the
parties at the time of the death
and the intent of the parties is
to dissolve the marriage at the
time of the death and and so I I
don't support the change in the
bill I am very glad that you
intend to change it to get rid
of some of the things that I was
going to really get.
so that you know I appreciate
that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator Hickey this is the thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
I think the really good intense
but I'm I would hope that some
of the parties would go back and
discuss this and then bring it
back rather than try and
educated this evening the
lateness of the hour and
complexity thank and and I mean
rolled over to Intel they've
been able to have some
discussion because this is going
to this is going to get really
confusing like it did last.
Friday evening when we yeah the
legal stuff going off and all
sorts of directions and so I
think it would behoove the we
would make better judgment with
prior discussion and I so I
asked.
If I can do that.
To bring it back no yes I
appreciate the time Mister
chairman Senator Hickey of this
was supposed to be heard on the
snow day and so Mr Asti couldn't
be here so but I appreciate the
time and visiting with them and
I'll bring it forward it with
this true intent and see if
there's time time accountability
good energy you as you realize
is the family law section.
Cut taxes with the unit
opposition it'll be really hard
to to support it but yeah but
the other discussion on this
okay so Senator will we'll we'll
leave it there you you work with
the probably was Senator Sedillo
office in the drafters and try
to get it to where you really
wanted to reflect and then we'll
hear it again Monday or
Wednesday whenever you have a
ready thank you Mr thank you for
thank you Mr Yazzie Ozzie for
for come thank you very much.
Yes thank you.
Okay so now we have
Senator o'neill's asked me to
put his bill on so I'll I'll do
that if he's not back yet and I
think we're ready for.
Refusal of end of life option
Senators defenses I think you
to.
What would you add another one
three three three oh I forgot
about three thirds of sorry
multi generational housing and
zoning.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman up right so this is a
dealing with those single family
zoning districts and give us a
chance to look at the statutory
framework for zoning the zoning
ordinances in my home town or.
Three hundred pages long but
here is the the freight the
statutory framework for zoning
that the state grants counties
and municipalities of the
ability to regulate and
restrict.
Buildings and property private
property private buildings of
the we give them the authority
to restrict the height of the
building or the number of
stories the size of the building
of the percentage of the lot
that maybe occupied the size of
the yard the courts open space
the density of a population area
the location on the use of
building up for trade industry
residents other purposes.
And of course we divide
territory in a different zoning
districts based on number shaped
area important and it regulates
our restricts the direction
construction reconstruction
alteration repair or use of
someone's building someone
structure someone's land also it
is a heavy duty it is the
epitome of government.
Regulation we we got to be
cognizant of that
if up.
Just just you know just your
economics one one zoning hinders
economic growth and out but it
has a lot of you know public
benefits if you care to think
that way.
So anyway what this does Mr
chairman is this this adds in
I'm amendment to paragraph F. of
the zoning authority to counties
and municipalities to
incentivize
and deal with our homeless
crisis particularly in
Bernalillo county there needs to
be at least five thousand of
course according to the F. I. R.
Mr chairman the analysis.
there is to be approximately
forty seven hundred homes built
each year between now and twenty
thirty to deal with the demand
of folks who want to buy homes
and those folks that are
homeless what this does is
allows an additional detached
dwelling unit as a permissive
use.
In other words a casita.
So that you can build a casita
or little house in your backyard
as permissive use instead of
having to beg the zoning
authorities to allow you to do
it this will help and and
several ways wanted will create
housing.
You know by by the by allowing
folks to do that they could
create an income or better yet
they can bring of grandmas and
grandpas into their homes and
into their regards to have
relationships with themselves
and their kids in the twilight
of their lives.
And so this accommodates one
additional dwelling unit within
each lot in a single family
zoning district as permissive
use so I I asked the committee
to consider it.
it was consistent with the
dialogue we had on on rental
control is we have to have a
kitchen sink approach to
homelessness and I believe that
on the margin this will really
be eight some of the the supply
side of of available low income
homes thank you Mr fit thank you
Senator let's go to the audience
is there anyone here who wants
to spend those support for this
bill.
Okay anybody here in opposition.
I want to say something and Mr
trainer.
Come up and use to make.
That.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee Randy trainer
representing the New Mexico home
builders association
I I want to applaud the Senator
for bringing this forward and if
my memory serves me correct
other multi generational aspect
of the law all right now I
believe.
Senator chairman brought that
forth many years ago if I recall
correctly I think at the request
of the city I did years ago.
anyway this is really forward
thinking given our situation
with housing right now
I think that the pandemic kind
of opened up this issue of a
housing crisis but it has been
building for twenty years
a single family zoning is a
really difficult thing to talk
to people about they feel
threatened about discussions
about single family zoning they
feel threatened about at the
same time they have family
members who can't afford a home
local government sometimes are
threatened by this discussion on
zoning even though they have a.
City full of homeless people.
so we really need to open up the
the tool box so to speak and
think of all of ways to address
our housing needs of all close
by just telling you that is in
our in our larger urban areas in
the state of New Mexico we can't
build a home for less than three
hundred thousand dollars.
We just can't do it and so the
affordable housing that we have
right now really is our existing
housing stock if you think of it
that way and so we really should
do a lot to take care of our
existing neighborhoods in our
existing housing stock because
that's really the housing that's
the most affordable for people
is so with we're just closing I
would just say like to support
this bill
we have a long ways to go in
terms of addressing housing
thank you thank thank you.
Did you want to say anything
about the bill or just show
support anybody online members
of the committee.
Senator a guy across Mr chair
Senator I just question so of
when I worked with the guests
come in New Mexico and
especially here in in house they
seem to have.
A family home.
And then three or four little
dwellings at one time when of
being in was being sold Mr chair
Senator or the gas just it was
I'd look to take a job on the.
The creekside.
And a lot of these guys can't
even get into the yards to be
able to do any kind of
maintenance what you're
proposing someone's got a of
large enough Mr that they go
into a supplemental home in the
back are you having to
of consider the utilities and in
those type things in your a
proposal just wondering how that
we thank you Mr Senator Gallegos
no definitely on an issue that
would be just be done on a case
by case basis whether the family
has the means to build to
consider whether whether they
have the.
The cost maybe more in certain
places and less than others this
simply up kind of changes the it
will force every city and county
to abide by this new law if it
becomes law to to allow
permissive use it will they will
essentially have permission to
do.
If they so choose Mr chair
Senator that go to the zoning
board and then they'd have
flexibility.
Mr chairman of the center goes
this would diminish the
authority of that zoning board
to say no.
It would it would be permissive
use and if it felt that if it
was with all the other
guidelines you know so far from
the fans and things of that
nature of the the this is only
the local authorities could not
say no.
Mr chair Senator than us so we
do development turned off we
don't build a house we do the
property development but in our
view we build the lot to fit the
house.
Hi here the house I stay at as
two and a half acres and they're
obligated because there.
Homeowners association whatever
it is
only allows and have that house
so what your bill would be doing
Mr chair and centers you have
then the flexibility if they did
want to have a secondary house
when they have the.
But if I'm building Mr center a
lot that only fits one house and
they wouldn't have room or
capacity then the zoning people
would know that.
That's a maximum space so is
that correct Mr correct Mr
chairman Senator was you you
interpreted the bill correctly
yes if you're not space on the
space but for those who have the
where with all the new
inclination they would have
permission to build a because he
done and invite their mom in the
twilight over life or or and and
the and the the definition of
Of a multi generational is in
the back page and that's blood
common interesting marriage
guardianship adoption so they
can they can up.
You don't have family let me
live with them for whatever
reason
And then that would open up that
home but for example my mom's
eighty five she came to live
with us she will live in our
house you choose to use won't.
She they graduated from day is
you know said
but if we had a because he
thought she live there then her
home would become of would go on
the market and help alleviate
the housing crisis in that
respect.
Mr chair Senator I just went
through that I was more
considering myself because I'm
adoptable now in case you did
have room in there but all yield
with that Mr thank you.
Thank you senator anybody else.
Senator twelve.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this forward is you
know as you know as a nation
wide trend a lot of cities are.
Are not considered observing
similar so to follow up on that
that the doctor.
Senator gig was question so the
local agency has to have the
Flexibility to decide just how
much room would have how much
square feet would have to be
available to to build.
A just certain size building the
words fair three thousand square
a lot.
you'll be able to put up a.
The maximum of the.
Thousand square foot I mean it
is a current rules are you at
this time what.
How much then you have to have
in order to build a certain size
building Mr chairman Sierra yes
there is and that was the
wouldn't change that would be a
local option that's the local
like in my hometown the idea the
the the the zoning ordinance of
that particular town or
municipality or county was still
apply in terms of
You know away from the fence
away from the original structure
things of that nature we
wouldn't change that so if you
don't have the space on the
space but today it's just a
bureaucratic nightmare to build
across the the
that this would the terminology
is permissive use the magic word
is on page three line twenty
five
it would change all single
family zoning districts to have
permissive use for casitas for
multi generational purposes.
So as the law stands now are you
able to build a detached
building Mr chairman and senator
Tom and may I know and so it
many times you are not correct
you are not allowed to do that
so thank you for bringing this
forward to things important
bills so I have some thank you
so thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I think this is a great
built perfect because I'm gonna
be.
No I just I'm head in that way
may not be here that
and and I and I and I have
several friends who are doing
this and other places in the
country is just it's it's huge
and and I'm gonna bring a little
health perspective to it here
one of the one of the biggest
problems and exacerbations of
disease in the elderly is is
isolation.
And having something like this
will help bring people to and
families together and will
lessen disease impact on those
individuals so I just wanted to
make that observation that some
others I'm very excited about as
that's where I'm headed
eventually but I do have one
question I live in a homeowner's
I'm I'm I live in what we could
have it again hi unity no its
not gated it's itself.
You have a homeowner's assessed
thank you I have a homeowner's
association who is not very
enlightened
and with this kind of blocked
them from we would with the what
would prevail the homeowner
association loss or this law.
For the homeowners thank you Mr
chairman Senator can I'm I'm not
being rude I'm up texting
The the constituent that brought
this to me
I don't know I believe.
You know you have the freedom of
contract.
but this but but I think those
contracts are within the
confines of.
Laws and zoning ordinances stop
so I think this would trump all
future homeowners associations I
don't know if it would trump
existing homeowners association
contracts but there's always
that one home owner homeowner
that'll fight the good fight
yeah I've I've done that a few
times thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I also think it's such a great
idea I have a couple of things
at three.
I think.
Four of these thank you.
Thank you for a test drive unit
that that that within a single
family that.
I.
It's.
What exactly does that mean
conditional use permit for
that's my question thank you
for.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez I I should know the I
should learn these zoning.
Codes and laws more than I do I
used to know it in school I
think Miss your nose but but the
conditional uses condition upon
this or condition upon that for
example condition upon you know
four feet from the from the from
the back wall you know twelve
feet from the from the back of
the house I.
let me just read this.
Right here we go it's.
With this is required for you
know that because I don't know
whether this is permits or
prohibits.
And then such as the.
Mr chair Senator Lopez that's
existing law I don't want to
that's existed law it's not it's
not awkwardly phrased I mean if
you just read the whole sentence
it's pretty clear it's
conditional use permits permit.
This is accommodate multi
generational housing by creating
a mechanism to allow up to two
mechanism.
Such as conditional use permits.
That is you give people the
option of conditional use
permits hi I I find it awkward
and hard to figure out what
exactly this but you're right
this is the law for old.
Will be that they have.
Please.
The only for the single family
zoning districts have to be
effective effective date of the
twenty twenty three have so
there will be no single family.
The area.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
correct the deal note there will
not be any single family zoning
districts that do not that do
not have this provision that the
program number three just simply
emphasizes the language in
paragraphs one and two that they
will be up there will be single
family zoning districts with up.
With this modification correct.
I think you're raising a good
point Senator.
I think it's broader than.
Share that with the way the way
I'm reading it again maybe tired
because I'm
from affirmative permits
and.
But I think that is limited
suggests.
This
new by the in the New.
city.
I don't I just think that's very
very broad I guess I'm
interested in the if you would
like to have Mr traitor.
And and and I would add to it I
think the point you make is good
when it seems like you've
already cover the ground with
number two.
Thank you members three thank
you Mr chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez up.
I'll hopefully have an answer
with you soon but my.
But my persons on zoom in it's a
tape delay but to answer the
previous question it says
however you know yes.
Permissive use all of the set
back requirements still must be
satisfied all of the building
code requirements must be
satisfied to build a custom.
No.
That for fishing and.
Fifteen projects.
That's.
I think this over with.
From what from the
I wonder Senator most as if we
could ask Mr trainable yes with
with your permission Mr chairman
would you come up and use the
Micronesian Phillis and on what
you interpret that to be and I
and I have an answer as well.
Thank you the the Mr chair of
Senators
when I first read this bill I
thought there was a conflict
between permissive use and
conditional use permits to be
used to just go do you meet the
building code setbacks those
types of things a conditional
use requires an action by some
board two you know if it
basically says yes it's an
appropriate use given certain
conditions described the logic
and so the way that's drafted I
thought was a little confusing I
I wouldn't I wouldn't make a
reference to a conditional use
in this bill because I think it
confuses the.
But this is still a good idea.
It's a great idea and suggesting
it if you.
I like the idea a little bit
concerned really but I really
think it's a great idea Mister
chairman Senator Lopez I believe
I agree with you I think I'll
talk to the bill drafter and
with the the lawyers annex
Committee this committee.
Permitting online twenty two I
think we should strike such as
conditional use permits permits
but the answer to your question
on on up the the not
establishing the single family
zoning districts.
That means that the extra
drawing will automatically be
allowed if there's adequate
would room for it on the lot
that you don't have to ask
permission it's a state law that
you could build a casita on your
property for a multi
generational use.
This is directing the city
through an ideal way to do we do
those things that.
Maybe this is there will no
longer be a S. F. so.
I think I could see the should
be permitted in F. F. F. Jones
but it is the transient more
mixed uses it and I I understand
that but I'm just wondering
whether all of the city feel the
same way about that and and what
that might be for just a little
bit too far
you know because they might have
here is that the one single
family with that I think that
and in another life once
apartments another area where
the I want.
I agree with you that the trend
around you know has been to have
more makes the difference.
and I just a real that was if
you if you're intent is that all
single family zones we'll have
to see the that should be very
different and.
Mr chair.
If you want to do it on the fly.
For the legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez with the come committee.
The committee allows and goes to
the next committee I'll work on
that I'll get with the zoning
folks from Albuquerque I was
gonna ask compared to maybe help
let me borrow as owning person
to present this and will
probably do that at the next
committee if this bill moves
forward Senator Hickey I do
pass.
The second.
Second seconded by twelve any
other discussion you got all
your issues secretary secretary
called the roll Senator gray of
us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna.
Senators maintenance Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator to the
piano yes.
Seven
seven zero two of the best thank
you Mr anymore and just tweak it
for Judiciary Senator o'neill
welcome back.
They're not moving real well
Senator.
The good news is I don't have
the money is bad news is we need
your jump shot ever.
K. that the legendary running
thing that you do after after
another couple of these.
Marathon committees let me look
again I can either run or shoot
at Saddam's time listen listen
all of our memories so is this
yes please thank you Mr so this
is Senate bill three eighty
eight age limit for children
custody and this should be a
faster rate I wish it was more
complicated maybe you could make
it more companies but no it is
it's a important will challenge
this.
Okay Senate bill three eighty
eight raises the age for a child
may be held in detention under
the delinquency Act from the
lates Levin to age twelve and
the reason why I bring this
before you is our devoted Nico
Stallis who's supposed to be
retired but he can't stay away
from this building you know a
long time advocate and CYFD
world for kids incarcerated kids
and so he brought this to me and
thank you for working us into
your schedule so Nick can
explain why this bill is
important.
Mr caused us welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I agree it should
be a very easy bill Mr chairman
what we're trying to do with
this piece of legislation is
really just bring New Mexico and
alignment with national best
practices of or somebody that
maybe no or don't know New
Mexico is considered one of the
leaders in juvenile justice
system improvement all across
the country of the juvenile
justice delinquency prevention
the NET Casey foundation they
both work with New Mexico four
years and I've recognized the
hard work that everybody has
done I think we have a great
partnership between community
and descriptor is office of the
courts and juvenile probation
and and prosecutors and public
defenders are just a large group
that comes together we're trying
to take care of the kids in New
Mexico and this is just going to
continue to do those same things
so what we're doing here is we
are looking at a bill that
basically changes two words an
existing stature and if you look
at page three a line line we are
simply going Wirth says the
child under the age of eleven
shopping not held the detention
of a child under the age of
eleven poses a substantial risk
of harm to the child self or
others a peace officer may
detain and you can read the rest
of us so we're simply changing
age eleven to age twelve now
just to give you some context we
don't like doing anything
juvenile justice related without
having some data to be able to
present to you I'm in the last
four years so fiscal year
nineteen through fiscal year
twenty to we have had a total of
six eleven year olds detained in
the state of New Mexico so we're
not talking about a large
numbers are worse to and twenty
nineteen there was one in twenty
twenty I think that was one of
twenty one and then to use the
twenty twenty two this is really
just to bring this morning
alignment with national best
practices and although I want to
recognize you know all those
partners that I ready kind of
brought forth to you you know
the courts and community and
things like that this
legislature has been an amazing
partner and most of the work
that we do.
One New Mexico could not have
been done without the support of
the legislature on New Mexico
was the first state to require
risk assessment instrument be
used before kids could be
detained we're the first state
to have a standardized statewide
appropriations agreement we were
the first a twin bed in statute
the tenants of detention reform
we have one of the strongest
statute to talk about the role
of juvenile probation working
with our tribal partners and
this is just another one of
those steps that really keeps
the great things we've been
doing in New Mexico moving for
so if there's any question that
Mr Chairman does not I love to
be available actuals of possible
and I have a honestly I have a
question Nick if you could
explain what's the difference
between eleven year old and a
twelve year old in the context
of juvenile justice.
Sure Mr chairman members of the
committee.
One of the things that this
really does any of you that have
worked with use and child you
know the extreme difference in
size and mental capacity at all
those different things we're
talking about a difference
between an eleven year old and a
twelve year old what this bill
also does is assist County
detention centers with the
population that they have to
work with as well because County
detention juvenile detention
centers are responsible
obviously for the safety of
everybody that's in the
facilities so to remove an
eleven year old I'm not trying
to have to keep them safe and
find all the same programming
that they would have to at the
same time separated them from
seventeen year old an eighteen
year old it's just another way
to also assist our county
juvenile detention staff as well
to be able to perform the role
without the actual on the added
burden of dealing with such a
young population thank you thank
you thank you with that will
stand for questions that anybody
in the audience want to speak on
this bill.
A very either for or against
anybody for against your yes
motion for a due process
seconded by tomonews fast is
very fast.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator there was.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna health centers
maintenance Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Yes Senator Tallman yes center
to the piano yes congratulations
your budget on a seven zero zero
the.
The next day thank you.
But K. Senator the fed ex with
the.
refusal refusal of end of life
options act use of.
The use of.
Senate bill four seventy one.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of with me today
is Mr B. Armstrong former
representative who is a policy
adviser to the governor Senate
bill four seventy one is an
effort by the supporters of
medical aid in dying in New
Mexico to better realize their
commitment our commitment to be
even handed in its
implementation and honor the
perspectives of those who do not
wish to participate in any
fashion as a matter of
conscience and I'd like to have
my expert witness speak to this
thank you thank you thank you Mr
chair and committee members not
only was I the sponsor of the
end of life options act I'm now
policy adviser to the governor
and I also sit on the board of
the a relatively new form to
nonprofit end of life options
New Mexico that works on
education and outreach and on
medical aid in dying in other
end of life options.
this our intent when we did the
bill was not to force anyone to
participate that didn't that had
a conscious conscientious
objection to doing so it however
there's been a lawsuit filed
against the state over a couple
of provisions that seem unclear
to some folks it says
there's a doctor in the state
and the
of Christian doctors and
dentists association and
national association and this
addresses the things that they
claim are not clear that there
would be no repercussions or
negative on actions for someone
who refuses so we've tried to
make that really clear on page
two for reasons of refusing for
reasons of conscience to
participate in medical aid in
dying in anyway which includes
providing information on medical
aid in dying or referring a
patient
It
and who is it if they don't
want to participate it also
cleans up a couple of other
things that we mist
so on a paragraph be
professional organizations or
associations should be able to
like the Christian doctor
dentist Association should be
able to decide their their
membership
qualifications on that the other
entities
should not discriminate either
way but a professional
organization association should
be able to decide what what it
is that there are associating
for.
And lastly on page for at the
bottom
we just missed us participating
or not participating in medical
aid in dying shall not be the
basis for report of
unprofessional conduct.
And with that a stand for
questions happy to answer
anything about the act itself
this only addresses so a section
on immunities and conscience
protections it does and not open
the whole bill right thank you
let's go to the audience anybody
here in support of this measure.
Yes did you want to speak.
In.
Mr chair members of the
committee a lot of dances on the
Medicaid medical director just a
little about my background I'm a
nurse and nurse practitioner I
was a hospice nurse for about
four years and I was a geriatric
nurse practitioner and at the
very beginning of my career I
was a medical ICU nurse so I
have been part of end of life
decision making and with people
at the end of their life many
times
so Human Services Department
supports this bill we want this
to be an available service to
people in the state and so if
clarification of the bill helps
with that we support it thanks
thank you very much alone.
and online we have somebody was
on who supported and then had to
get off but now we have net dean
on who is opposed to the bill.
Mr chair of members of the
committee I miss understood the
in support opposition
perspective through the language
of the bill I stand in support
of there being an option and
that it is optional and that of
the education efforts for
patients to know what their
options are is the important
component of this and if someone
chooses to not exercise the
option of medical aid in dying
that they should have that
option but that the educational
piece should be there as an
option and in short Mr chair
members of the committee and
of.
Senator Stefanics and
Representative Armstrong.
Someone who you probably will
remember from being an advocate
for people with disabilities
just passed away and it was not
a good experience because she
had difficulty accessing the
option and more education we
have I think the better we will
be overall and having an option
to have a life well lived and
the death well the be a positive
experience thank you very much
Mr chair members the committee
thank you that members of the
committee Senator Hickey I will
do that thank you seconded by
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
message to discuss
things
more disco question yep.
Thank you Mr chairman says the
panics and I'll miss Armstrong
well great to see welcome that.
so it's fair to say if you look
on page a two line for.
It's fair to say we're not
changing public policy we're
just writing it's been a much
better fashion to leave no
confusion that folks have the
right to refuse to participate
that's correct Mr chair Senator
thank you Mr thank you senator
Senator Gallegos of Mr chairman
and senator Representative of.
In twenty twenty one I would
have been opposed this but I was
out due to family illness but Mr
center was this not discuss as
far as the liability for lawsuit
I I I appreciate that you're
going back to fix things but I
truly believe center.
Chair Senators that we should be
held accountable Aid.
In a lot of times we go too far
one way for takeaway other
people's rights and I'm just
wondering if you remember if
there's conversations to this
affect of lawsuits specter Mr
chair Senator.
Representative Armstrong Mr
chair and senator there was a I
was only involved in it on the
Senate side not the house
discussion solve this reflect on
Senate Judiciary where there was
quite a bit of discussion about
community and
Senator Cervantes did make some
amendments to the final bill
that was passed and I'll let
Miss Armstrong for the comment
Mr chair and and senator there
was a lot of discussion about
immunities I don't recall that
there was anything specific to
these particular clauses we
really thought we were being
pretty clear that no one had to
participate that didn't didn't
want to that was never the
intent and we thought we were
being clear about participating
or not participating no entity
no person no provider has to do
that but the way a couple of
classes were written they were
there was concern that it that
may not apply to those clauses
so we wanted to make it really
clear that that was our intent
not to force anyone to
participate thank you for that
Mr Chairman center I hope we use
this as a blueprint going
forward because just the cost of
lawsuits it's one of things were
we need to consider all aspects
of the with that are you thank
you thank you secretary I've I
would just say you can never
anticipate what people will see
you of a I mean they're free to
sue over anything.
Yeah we have a motion and a
second is there any other
discussion the secretary will
call the roll Senator I have us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senators media's
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes center to
the piano yes.
By a seven votes you have to do
best thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you.
And the last bill of the.
Chairman.
Senate bill four four one.
Sure.
Came out of the interim
committee Mr chairman this is an
attempt to dealing with the the
recurring issue the one that
we've heard about all through
the summer the shortage of
behavioral health professionals
so it it asks for money.
And of course you know ten
million dollars sounded like in.
Insignificance in the summer
when we were thinking we would
be able to tap the untold wealth
of the state it sounds like a
lot more now it is going to be a
heck of a battle but we want to
get on register with this so
that at least by next summer
when they start putting the LFC
budget together we can at least
try to get something in the if
not now so what it does is it
creates a fund.
The fund.
Call the community behavioral
health resource development fund
would be administered by the.
Behavioral health division at
HSD.
Money they would have to be the
one to set up the regulations in
the process sees for act
accessing those money's money
would be available to do.
Four things.
First of.
It would be available to
behavioral health provider wants
to move into an area where
there's no look where there is
no existing service this would
find a way to paid for their
operation Montoya reimbursements
can begin flowing.
That might be a clinic that that
that wants to start of
behavioral health program in
addition to what they're already
doing it might be a private
practice the the provider who
would want to move into a
community that doesn't have a
provider now and then it is very
hard to do that if you don't get
reimbursements for six or eight
months and that's that usually
takes.
Second thing you would pay for
preceptors who supervise.
Trainees the these are graduates
of programs.
Who are.
hello this is the first official
the trainees these are the ones
who are in the graduate programs
who have to do an internship
they have to spend time each
week working in a clinic or with
a patient that which is all well
and good but.
The people at supervisor were
taken away from their work that
would generate reimbursement for
the organization the third thing
it does so that would that would
pay for the preceptors the time
that they put into supervising
the third thing is it would pay
for providers to compensate into
to pay for the intern to come
work after they graduate they
still have to put in up to three
thousand hours for social
workers.
Under supervision and they're
not eligible for reimbursement.
So that's that's a lot of hours
that they put in and what we're
finding is that that's the big
barrier right now a lot of lot
of graduate to spend money
graduating people training them.
Then they can they have a hard
time finding agency that they
want to work it is not state
agencies they have plenty of
jobs the health department that
CYFD
the early childhood.
Aging long term services they'll
hire those graduates and put him
to work but if they if they
wanted to work in a private
sector position there's
literally no way to for them to
unless the that's a very wealthy
agency they can afford to pay
them without getting re
reimbursement for the time and
the supervision that they
request so this would cover
that.
And the fourth thing would be to
compensate the graduate students
the of who are actually doing
that field work.
Probably not at that full
professional salaries but some
kind of this type in to make it
a more attractive field for them
this is paralleled with the bill
two two bills that we have
it currently and if there is a
no high it's it's in finance I
guess tending to ask for higher
rate to do some studies of two
other aspects of this how do we
get more social work counseling
psychiatric nurse psychology of.
Professional students how do we
expand those programs first
maybe through Ruth to give us a
reporter what it would take
maybe it's free tuition maybe
it's of some kind of scholarship
of whatever they do they work at
and then the other one is to
expand the community colleges
the bridge colleges so they
begin doing a lot more the A. A.
and and
certificate programs like
community health workers if
you're counselors the late
accidental arrest and with that
will stand for questions we were
asking for ten million for that
but.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you Ellen pods
Representative disability
coalition as the sponsor
mentioned this one of a number
of bills that came out of the
interim health and Human
Services Committee aimed at
building our behavioral health
workforce we at the disability
coalition of strongly support
measures to do that I know all
of you do as well so I don't
need to urge you to support this
bill but I will anyway thank you
thanks.
The.
To build a whole development.
The to keep it in.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico
yeah we don't have to convince
you that we have a terrible
shortage in this field and the
for functions that the the
senator has laid out and
explained this fund would
support are all critical to
improving our behavioral health
system and I guess I would just
say it is kind of ironic and
appropriate that ten years ago
the state seem hell bent frankly
on destroying our system so it's
only appropriate that we turn
the tide of that and we really
focus on what we what we can do
to rebuild the system so we urge
your support thank you.
Thank you for.
As soon as of.
Color name that and she'll speak
Senator.
There's an audience.
Yes that but the speed.
Mr chair can ask a question.
Yes compression thanks for.
Will.
And after graduation yes there's
two separate provisions the
question was who cover interns
while they're in school and also
after the graduate yeah.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
amber of us I'm a graduate of
social work student New Mexico
highlands university and I am
concerned by the lack of trained
professionals
meeting behavioral health needs
including social workers for New
Mexicans and I do believe that
this is an immediate crisis.
And one of the ways that more
social workers can be brought
into the field is to support
them during their education
social work students are
required to complete field
practicum placements that are
mostly on compensated
successfully completing and
uncompensated practicum can take
can come at a personal and
economic cost in require
students to take on to.
So our local chapter of payment
for placements at New Mexico
highlands university conducted a
student let's survey to gather
data and students part to comes
experiences so this is an issue
the students care about the
survey received over a hundred
and seventy responses.
And it reveals that only.
Thirteen point four percent had
received a stipend for a field
practicum placement ninety nine
point three percent reported
that completing their field
hours require them to sacrifice
some other priorities and for
eighty one point six percent
those sacrifices included paid
employment hours.
So I trained behavioral health
providers including social
workers are needed in New Mexico
I ask that you take immediate
action and encourage you to vote
yes thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Care
go forward this is critical this
is the bridge.
Whether recently.
So I urge my colleagues to pass
this bill and I I.
I wish all the best.
Senator Sedillo Lopez what is
coming thank you I I served on
that committee and I of course
the heard all the interim
discussion so I thoroughly
support this up I just wondered
if you were ahead address
because I was trying to figure
out of the bill the technical
issue raised by the by the
analysis of.
Think that the regulation
licensing department suggested
therapists are not explicitly
included and they were worried
that since there is that you
might assume that therapists
fall within the counselors but
of by not specifying therapists
there could be an inadvertent
exclusion of like marriage
therapists family therapists art
therapists I don't know if
you're addressing and you want
to dress that on the way up to.
Financial services it's it's an
excellent question I I think we
we should be amended I and I had
actually I thought I had a an
amendment prepared to address
that we didn't get your so what
will we will.
The amended for the next
committee this budget is tonight
to include and we'll have to get
the exact wording from the I
thought by doing counseling that
covered all of them but
apparently it doesn't.
Thank.
Just put their be.
If it.
The committee never mind divide
that will drive and that's the
so in a thank you to it is a
little more complicated so we'll
have to we'll have to get the
exact wording from of regulation
licensing include that.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair.
Yes.
Their motion the.
Question.
Thank.
Thank you Mister chair if you
money of Mr Mr so I'm trying to
understand if we have this
additional funding will help
create incentives for people to
come for providers is that
in the ten million dollars what
portion of that would be
incentives well for them Mr
chairman that that that's an
excellent question I mean it
really depends on what the what
the request coming in to
behavioral health services would
be so sometimes it would be I
mean I I just do there's no way
to anticipate ahead of time but
I'm assuming they would set
aside maybe half of it for
incentives half of it for the
Steichen's so I've been type
programs but that would be up to
behavior health the allocate
funds in a way that and then if
if if they if they started and
they come back to us and say you
know this the incentives were
were all the interest was and we
increase the next year for that
but right now we're just kind of
saying there's need for all for
these but I don't know how to
allocate the money among the.
Thank.
Chairman Mr chair as you shows
they're still gonna be
significant challenges
recruiting providers I like the
idea of trying to have some
money out there in order to
prepare food to give us an
option it brought up education
we already have free college and
I don't know that it's helped
with this area
but I know the
Asian Medicine university I've
just recently given a hundred
thousand because I've got some
programs orders search medic
because are looking to go and
try to start of broadening the
mental health yes search so with
that are you thank you.
Very briefly if I may madam Mr
chair on that point I just
passed the my mental health
parity bills which will require
insurance companies to pay
competitive rates so it will
substantially for these
individuals.
The when they get there when
they get their certification
they will be we New Mexico will
be paying basically the bill
says you got to pay higher
and it just passed through to
committees just get a little bit
to finance but it's going to
address that issue up but this
is the bridge to help them get
to where they can get out decent
income thank you senator.
Anyone else
hearing we have a motion and a
second please call the roll
Senator guy Ellis Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes Senator McKenna yes Senate
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Thoman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
The best thank you very much
members of the graduation and
