The staff.
Yes.
Representative yeah here.
Your.
Here centimetric.
Bye bye.
Sen
Bob.
Representative.
If.
On this.
Chair.
Get.
Here.
And with that we're gonna start
with their first built this is
house bill fifty two
International Baccalaureate
program yes presented by
Representative Anthony Allison
and if you also introduce your
expert witnesses today as start
as soon as you're ready.
Okay thank you madam chair.
And members of the committee
today we present to you house
bill fifty two and the my expert
witnesses today is Shawna L.
simplicity and Tony Garlits.
So.
House bill fifty two.
Six to make an appropriation to
fund International Baccalaureate
for the IB exam fees for all
eligible students in the state.
International Baccalaureate
programs are found in more than
five thousand four hundred
schools and one hundred and
fifty nine countries making the
scores for these tests.
Widely acceptable for accepted
in universities and colleges
globally than any other exams
including Advanced Placement.
For publicly funded I'd be
schools in New Mexico offer the
programs which include these
exams the schools are Navajo
preparatory schools in
Farmington Mandela international
magnet school in Santa Fe
cottonwood classical preparatory
charter school in Albuquerque
and send the a high school in
Albuquerque.
International Baccalaureate
offers for different programs.
Excuse me.
The most well known being the
diploma program for juniors and
seniors.
This program of study typically
includes up to six college level
courses students have the
opportunity to explore each
discipline and depth and
demonstrate their knowledge in
many different ways.
Throughout their two years of
the diploma program students
home there create creative and
critical thinking skills as well
as their reading writing and
research skills.
In just a moment you will have
an opportunity to ask questions
of our expert witness who is a
member of the leadership team at
the Navajo preparatory school
before I go into the full
details I don't want to take the
funds out of my experts
witnesses so want to convince
that this introduction to this
and then I want to refer to my
expert witnesses for the rest of
the time my first witnesses Sean
percent.
Good morning chair members of
the committee chase on Allison
this anti initiative touching
insulin I she hand by sixteen
money to skis need us to take
over the Shinola off with
elements like I'm I stand before
you as the head of school of
Navajo preparatory school we run
the International Baccalaureate
prep program we are implementing
the middle years program and the
diploma program.
Navajo prep peas and and I'm
sure in your document you'll see
the fees that it costs to
administer eggs and exam when a
student at Navajo prep they all
take deployment coursework so it
just as at cottonwood classical
and other IB schools it's it it
is a framework it's not viewed
as a curriculum it's a way that
in which we engage with content
it is the way it everything's
based on inquiry asking why a
theory of knowledge course that
also is a fee that is included
the theory of knowledge teaches
students how to question and how
to be very research oriented all
based on a profile through the
International Baccalaureate
program it is of Navajo prep was
founded as the Navajo nation's
college preparatory school and
is what we provide to have the
skills and this program is a
skills necessary for our
students to be prepared for
whatever job may come before
them we do not know some in
these days what is the economy
what is the job force and now
they have the skills necessary
and that is in International
Baccalaureate program.
AP is already supported by the
state and we thank you so much
for that support Advanced
Placement classes through
college board is already
supported by the state and we
just ask that we recognize the
International Baccalaureate exam
as in a state that finds itself
from our own funding of
diversity equity inclusion I
feel like New Mexico forty have
those ideas ideologies were
ready embedded in who we are and
that truly leads us to have this
belonging with adversity in
equity you limit that barrier
for students to have to take the
class to be able to take the
course work and know that they
can sit for the exam remember
that it's a hundred and nineteen
dollars per stripper child per
exam so as those fees add up and
we're just asking for the same
equity and account and limit
that barrier for the
International Baccalaureate
programs across our state thank
you so much.
Thank you madam chair my next
witness Tony early.
And madam chair members of the
committee and wearing two hats
this morning one is analyst for
the fraternity Committee another
one because I've had quite a bit
of experience in the IT world
and I totally agree with
everything that is present a
has articulated I will just add
some history the I. B. was
founded in nineteen sixty
internationally in Geneva
Switzerland and is primarily for
the diplomatic world in the the
international corporate world to
provide an education for their
students
they come up with a curriculum
called the International
Baccalaureate enter the United
States in the eighties and has
since taken off across the
country and it's taken off
across the country because it's
generally recognized as the gold
standard of high school
education if you speak to any
college admissions officers be
they from private universities
or public universities they have
told me as a head of school do
they take all of their
applicants for college will put
them in a pile if they see
anybody with an ID deployment
will take them out of that pile
women separate pile and they get
the first crack that's just an
example of how highly sought out
the IB diploma is the diploma
funds from Washington DC it's
above and beyond the statewide
deployment it's much more
rigorous than the statewide
deployment so to achieve an IB
diploma is quite an achievement
here in the audience is the
current head of the Mandela
international school Randy
Griego told me last year we had
over eighty percent of their
students who decided to go for
the diploma get it us a
phenomenal rate that means that
those students they got it
compare with the best of the
international students around
the world unfortunately he has
to pay parents have to pay for
all of the fees that Miss.
Presenting raised and that's
where the inequity lies and
that's the genesis of the bill
that representative Allison is
bringing before.
Thank you Mr Chairman said madam
chair I would like to also give
the opportunity to use some of
the members in the audience.
Thank you Representative his
will stand for questions and
then they'll be able to speak
that okay.
Thank you madam chair we're
standing for questions and
before we take questions and
testimonies I want to make a
note that there was a minor
amendment that has to be re done
for this bill which will come up
in our third bill today about
the bureau of Indian education
schools being included in this
advantage so we're going to hear
all the testimony from the
public online but will actually
vote on Monday when we get the
amendment so thank you for
everybody's understanding that
was what our energetic last
minute rush was about okay with
that I'm gonna start today with
our online commentators we're
gonna start with those for this
bill I want to remind everybody
that I'm expecting a lot of
COVID keep it very short
we have a two minute bill
and we will finish it to an as a
try to keep it short and and not
repetitious so is there anybody
online who would like to speak
and when you speak please
introduce yourself and then make
your statement okay Mister pool.
Here on.
Mr Poole unmute yourself and
that is.
Thanks very much madam chair I
should know better by now it
that so many of these yes my
name's Bob Poole I work for the
International Baccalaureate
organization and the deal with
government relations I'm just
want to let you all know that
the IT is very supportive of
this bill we're very eager to
remove barriers
to access to advanced coursework
of any sort to students across
the country this bill is as John
mentioned is doing that you
should know that in the United
States ninety percent of the IB
schools are public schools and
of those ninety percent sixty
three our title one schools we
have a large number of kids
taking the program being
involved that are from
disadvantage in a disadvantage
situation having trouble finding
these fees to pay for them and
that sort barrier for short for
families and kids so we
definitely in support of this
bill there are some a number of
other states that have similar
sorts of provisions but the
whole idea is as a game trying
to mention access inequity of to
programs like this for kids
thanks very much I hope that
this bill will move forward.
Thank you.
The.
Mr my Estes.
You of mace.
No.
This.
Hi Derek my Estes unmute
yourself you have permission to
speak all right thank you for
the chance to speak on behalf of
the IB program yes and the high
school my program has been here
for ten years and we've has seen
tremendous growth from our
students and our fact and staff
here it is a great opportunity
for us to be able to be in this
bill and have opportunity for
our students to have this equity
that all the stuff I do school
the state would be able to have
our schools has had over seventy
five percent more students are
usually transfer students
throughout the community of
Albuquerque and we come from the
spelling of the land less than
us Los crucis as our students
have really been a benefit of
benefited by the IB program I'm
so we're just thankful for the
opportunity to be here and we're
happy for this opportunity that
is presented here to the
legislators.
Thank you.
Our next speaker in favor is
merry par Sanchez.
Good morning chairman Garrett
and members of the committee my
name is very par Sanchez and I'm
the president of the national
education association in New
Mexico I'd like to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward in the national
education association stands in
support of this bill thank you
thank you for.
Okay seeing no more people
online will be moved to the
audience will start on my right
side if you would like to speak
in support of house bill fifty
two please raise your hand.
Okay we'll go and we'll go from
front to back so yes introduce
yourself and your two minutes.
Chair members of the committee.
Thanks so much Representative
Allison for a spell my name's
Randy real school and
International magnet school year
and we are the school hundred
percent lottery based commission
only part of Santa Fe public
schools.
Our students range between
thirty three and fifty percent
reduced lunch as we heard more
expert witness garlic's that we
have an eighty percent pass rate
for the full deployment the full
deployment costs roughly sixty
one dollars for students we
subsidize that by asking parents
to sponsor other students and
pass the school district for
support where possible instances
for one exam is roughly one
hundred sixteen dollars program
this is my twenty fifth year of
public education and type AB
classes great thank you that was
and we're grateful for the
support from other people the AP
exams where a hundred dollars
and subsidized fifty percent of
three reduced lunch students
will pay roughly five dollars
per HBs and I thanks for your
support looking at neighboring
states Arizona Colorado
Washington Minnesota Florida hi
there is a lot of support for
subsidizing IT exams in those
public education department so
thank you so much.
Thank you and I missed one
person online so dera Topman if
you can unmute yourself and
speak in favor.
A good morning my name is Keith
Hermio ex in these misstatements
computer right now but I'm the
dean of instruction Navajo
preparatory school speaking in
favor of this bill our students
have a unique opportunity with
the International Baccalaureate
program to be recognized with
the diploma around the world
through this organization and
the skills that students are
walking away with are phenomenal
truly
lifelong skills of students can
use wherever they may end up a
bill like this will help support
our students to help us increase
the number of students that can
pursue the full diploma exam
fees can become overwhelming for
our students and families and
add an extra burden of
especially due to the number of
our students are on free or
reduced lunch this would help
move this program forward and
give students opportunities they
would not traditionally have in
any other type of environment so
we appreciate any support that
we can get for this bill thank
you thank you.
We'll continue to our people on
the right of the next row okay
Robert.
The monitor members of the
committee my name is Robert up
without the well this for a
Navajo prep as Mr sent the.
Earlier the of the program is
this is very important to have a
little prep and I would fully
support Representative Allison
also in the school force we
of the jewel supported as well
and also to include
it'll be the federal control
schools you for think about to
thank you our next of percent
yes.
Morning madam chair as well as
members of the committee I
wanted to introduce myself I'm
the director of any.
Unity schools and by it's Soto
strong support of this bill and
especially in in the space of
removing barriers for access
opportunities for students that
is a key tenet of community
schools and the focus of the
Indian New Mexico has and
centering students and all that
so we are just one of the
reasons for this.
Thank you a next person on this
side certain videos on the side.
Okay the move to my left side
the front row.
We'll go one two three.
More.
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in full support this is
really about thank you so much
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico look at all the
agreement on this bill.
Madam chair if you look at the
list of school to benefit from
this I just wanna take the
opportunity just note this
programs working for kids across
cultures across income levels
and the ability to pay for this
from the state I think is a
worthy endeavor to make sure
more funds go directly to kids
in the classroom so thank you
our organization supports and
thanks to everybody worked on
stuff.
Thanks.
That they've been in madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Watson with great I am a
student at Navajo preparatory
school and also the IB diploma
students and HB fifty two the
bill is because to is important
to me and my fellow students and
a preparatory school because on
the reservation you know we
don't have this higher income to
pay for these exams and this is
a really great opportunity for
our students to attend and be a
part of this program it's
worldwide and so we're able to
have a more open minded
we have thinking instead of just
thinking of our community of
ourselves we're able to think on
a global scale and it really has
helped me personally become more
Open to being able to talk to
other people and now here I am
standing in front of you guys so
it's this is proof so.
Thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Devin Lansing
have a parent or student also a
former student back once and I
come from the community of
coyote canyon which is roughly
two hour drive from farm to New
Mexico for no purpose based you
know I support this bill as well
because.
What's a large part of the
navigation equipment and poverty
and no higher education isn't
really attainable so you know
Navajo prep is making costs
efforts and wanted to give
Navajo students the best that we
we can you know continue to push
forward and bring you know push
up our nation as Navajo students
and as Navajo people so this is
really a bill about equity and
you know just making it better
for Navajo students and the
Navajo Nation thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Asher grown our and I am the
board members and that will.
And in my role and
Representative twenty seven
chapters in New Mexico and
Arizona and I support this bill
it's important to all I do
schools it's important to our
schools and I see the IB program
as a tool in the toolbox to move
our our state forward and to
move our state forward not
providing education.
Next row.
Anybody in the next that.
For.
because.
And all the legislative
priorities are for the for the
educational equity and fair
share.
Thank you for your rights and
obligations of the education is
a priority.
In thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody in the next row row
three thanks.
My name is Daniel saying I'm a
junior from Comcast affect our
school and the state as a junior
I'm starting to look at colleges
and I feel that I be curriculum
this is a good idea diploma
program has helped me prepare me
for college and so I feel like
this bill I'm in support of this
bill just to put this in the
right stuff thank you thank you
anybody else in that row.
K. next row.
Committee chair members of the
committee I'm John and executive
director of common cause school
during school that's one of the
representative Allison are
expert witness today for the
support of the program and the
bills I I I see we've seen four
hundred graduate from our school
we currently have a hundred
fifty students in this program
from Sapporo to Santa Fe and
everywhere in between we've seen
the power and we've also seen
the diminishing aspect of
families not be in for the for
the phone up and having to
settle for just one or two exams
which is really troubling so
thank you for your support we
appreciate focus on equity in
this bill.
Thank you anybody else in that
row.
Thank.
My name is Megan low hello thank
you so much
to that of the committee for for
hearing this bill my name is
Megan loan and I need to form of
the coordinator at cottonwood
possible so I am able to help
support students as they
navigate the program and one of
the most amazing things that we
get out all of the open doors
that students have for them as a
result of their IT education
they get incredible amounts of
college credit not just in New
Mexico I beyond and and students
can really hone all of the
skills that they need to be as
successful as they can possibly
be in any college as well as any
career it opens many many doors
for students and we see that
you're out here and we think
that this is really and truly
life transforming programs for
students that allows them to
connect with each other and
really useful ways as well as
connect with the world so thank
you so much the committee and so
much to our sponsors racks.
Thank you anybody else in that
row okay.
I've been here my name is the
most and yes and I'm a senior at
Coppin classical preparatory
school and I firmly support this
bill of the I. P. program has
really helped me to learn how to
gain knowledge of not only
understand they've also through
hi it and I've learned this
through also the T. okay course
and all of my teachers and I
firmly support this bill because
not all families are able to pay
for IBM.
these are exempt can get a lot
of college credit for students
it's a great opportunity
especially after you to
Representative the all students
should be able to have this
opportunity thank you thank you.
Hi
my name is makayla G. Kernan I
am a second year diploma Canada
COVID classical territories will
I just wanted to take this
opportunity to thank you guys
and.
Express how much stuff
International Baccalaureate
program means needs this coming
so many important skills going
into my future for example time
management skills as well as
open mindedness and I wanted to
express how much this bill would
have.
Thank you next row anybody in
the next then we'll go to the
yes ma'am.
Good morning everyone this is
doctor today but Canadian from
sharp Ralph community.
One of the newly elected board
members.
And I have a
in a public school teacher for
twenty six years and retired
from there
Eight eight.
And so the previous board member
for.
College.
Yeah the consolidated school
board as well as well as
serving.
Application for the patient so
with all of this experiences
the coming that I wanted to just
do some simple after I retire
and I I truly appreciate your
support for this of house bill
two to one I think it's a great
opportunity I have experience
going to getting a of school
education from within as a
parent then going out and
getting my masters in curriculum
almost as a grandparent and then
getting my.
Even later so it's really
exciting to see these young
students being able to jump all
of those who use but I think
they need your support the
state.
State to help again assist with
whatever
financial income support that we
can get from all of the because
it's going to affect your
communities these kids are going
to go back to our communities
help with in the long run so we
extensive thank you very much.
Thank you and I see one more
hand in the back when it was all
wrong the dean of student life
there are some fifty four thank
you for this bill I speaking on
behalf of the of the of the
parent to parents that would do
that will correct that what what
the program is set up they are
childcare that entered college
as a sophomore due to number for
and I do I have a child now the
through the ID program as a
parent in oversee the
residential program there as a
parent it's great to see up to
me again our pick getting
letters from members voted in
slot work in the schools on the
east coast creating the my kid
because of the IB program and my
kid will probably be going to a
yes college because of that I
needed for my hand this is open
the door for Devin for Watson
and I see firsthand the
struggles of how hard the kids
working over the.
They are staying up late the are
working with the cast community
projects and everything that
we're doing on our campuses need
for giving back to the community
and even on driving on the way
over our kids are trying to
provide wifi so they can do
homework.
Our other kids I hate.
In our case the one our hotel to
the hi the project and homework
because they want the
opportunity to leave the
reservation come back they're
very very educated people and
come back and Debin  there was
to be go into linguistics and he
wants to come back and teach at
are and then I mean come on I
think that is phenomenal for our
students thank you for your time
as a parent and as one of the
minutes thank you very much
thank you anybody else on the
side to speak in support.
Okay we'll go to those and
proposition if you're online and
you're not supporting this bill
raise your hand.
I promise to be honest about
this.
Okay see no opposition online is
there anybody on this side who
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill.
K. C. no hands there anybody on
the side we would like to speak
in opposition.
Okay and I just want to say a
special thank you to all the
students for coming here your
why we're here so it's just
inspiring to hear your voices
thank you will go to our
committee first we have
Representative lame.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair to sit just a comment all
the part of me thinks I should
not pass up the opportunity to
cross examine the majority
analysts but the maybe for
another day.
madam chair I just would
encourage the committee.
I think it's important that we
as a legislative body support
students that are really trying
to achieve the highest of
standards
so I think that's important
kudos also to Navajo prep
San Juan County school we're all
very proud of them and their
with efforts on this in a lot of
ways so just encourage the body
to support this thank you madam
chair thank you and I'm very
sorry I missed one hand up
online
Of the.
This's now you.
Mission you have permission to
speak please send mute.
I can't hear me yes.
Okay great thank you thank you
for everyone I yes I I would
like to propose for these are up
you know and I don't think
children are
old enough to make decisions on
their own and legislative
session seconded parents of
guidance as provision.
Okay thank you very much.
K. with that we will continue of
Representative are you finished.
Yes thank you madam chair care
next speaker is Representative
Baca.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Allison for
bringing this forward
last in the intersection as you
guys know we are all over the
state one of the highlights of
being in probably a dozen
different communities is
actually going visiting Shiprock
and having dinner with our
friends from Navajo prep
the to the and actually I
recognize and we actually had
dinner together.
And I think this is a good
example of opportunities for
kids
through this challenging a
program to not only be okay
readers in your community
leaders in this in the state so
I appreciate that and I I stand
in full support of this bill.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
of Representative Allison
Preciado bring this bill for a
couple of questions I do have.
Is states at the end of the bill
that the at any money that was
left in the count will revert to
the general fund budget you're
going to do next year whenever
you want it this program up to
get in twenty twenty five to get
the program going again.
It would revert back to the
phone yes for the general fund
yes but the.
I think we're always in this way
I'm reading it will revert back
to the general fund yes this is
we would just keep reinventing
the wheel just continue of
produce an educated individuals
okay well that that I don't see
this money go away if it's
actually helping going to where
it's supposed to be going so
there in lies my concern about
why are we gonna have a river
and madam chair Representative
Allison.
Whenever it comes to P. E. D..
How are we going to ensure that
PED is sending this money to the
schools that do offer the I. B.
programs and how will they.
Distribute these Feds equitably.
Motor third to my expert witness
Mr sent to on house to address
is that thank you.
Currently you the within the
language and within the
reporting report it states even
throughly see that we would use
the same criteria with advance
paid placement exams and how
that is reimbursed to the school
so the schools will still have
paid up front and then there
will be a reimbursement process
and that's currently how it's
operated through of Advanced
Placement and madam chair that
makes that makes sense there are
nine schools listed here in our
in our reading material and I
just want to make sure that it
is equitably distributed to all
these kids can benefit from it I
think this is an excellent
program thank you very much
that's all madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative an expert for
of this wonderful bills finally
up it's a very rigorous program
and I commend the students of
for their dedication and
commitment and I commend all of
the parents and the support
systems that are in place I
absolutely do believe madam
chair that this is an issue of
equity and justice and I'm
appalled actually that we have
not is a state been paying for
these exams as we do for AP
exams and other states supported
exams that promote our students
and so I just but I'm I'm I
don't know why we haven't been
doing that.
That's not an issue right now we
have an obligation to do it at
this point four and
Representative Mr madam
Representative I also had a
question about the reverting so
somehow we have to ensure
that we include this in
recurring funding today becomes
institutionalized within the
budget request that PED so that
it does become now of an
equitable response to what
you're Representative racing
before us today so I'm fully
supportive I appreciate the
students I am a a daughter of a
military of parent and I have
the advantage of being able to
travel around the world and
learn and understand other
cultures madam chair but more
importantly I was able to
understand the roots and history
of our indigenous connections to
other indigenous communities
around the world which was very
wholesome and which contributed
to my education that was more
educational actually than
sitting in a classroom and
learning of materials that
didn't really.
What what what they present for
my future in the future that I
selected so I commend you for
your dedication and I strongly
encourage you to continue on
that track and encourage other
students to pursue of this track
as well thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I fully
support this bill thank you
thank you Representative
Trujillo and the representative
at at a followed by
Representative made about
million.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters thank you my
colleague Representative.
Representative Allison for
bringing this this bill forward
hello I'm a strong proponent of
public education I'm high school
dropout eventually got my higher
degrees.
But one of the things that
compels me to be involved and
engaged in public education is
the fact that.
We need to make public education
accessible to everyone.
And I really resent that
sometimes we all sit here and
I'm not just I'm not saying us
but us decision makers in
general create so many obstacles
for students who really do want
to access a higher education and
get we make them jump through
all kinds of financial hoops to
access it.
If we want.
Jump up jump from fiftieth in
education standing there we need
to put promote and and support
all kids to reach their highest
levels of of education instead
of building barriers we need to
build the bridges and I'm not
trying to be.
What if that would.
You know I've I'm the known to
be to read the writing on the
sidewalk so I never get any of
those things are clear.
What is the point is we need to
make education absolutely free
and that involves access to
paying for tech tests paying for
scholarships everything that
keeps kids away from public
education we need to do away
with that maybe a month.
Rabble rouser but the scent
still keeps coming up in a
support very strongly about.
Thank you.
Representative the data.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill before this committee I
deeply appreciate your work on
this
my youngest brother has been in
the American schools abroad
program all his life working at
career forty five years he has
been superintendent schools
improve Chile Brazil Bangladesh
he's worked all over the world
this is just a matter of
practice in in American schools
abroad every school adopts the
IB program they're at their they
take it seriously the the work
hard to implement this program
and have X. and that have the
highest standard so I am I
really appreciate you bringing I
think this is the best money we
could spend really and I
appreciate all of you bringing
this bill Ford thank you thank
you Representative mutable Moya.
Thank you madam chair
representative for bringing this
to my attention I wanted to
focus on the students are I
loved hearing from you I love
seeing the passion in your face
for what you were doing at your
schools and that you were
fighting for what for what you
truly want to achieve in your
life and and I personally don't
think that that should ever be
limited by someone's ability to
pay so if you have the desire I
mean as as a high school teacher
it is my job to to help those
that are struggling and empower
and challenge those that are
excelling so the ability to pay
pay for this kind of program
should not be your very here
because your mind right now is
already out there and we should
get that we should just support
you and get out of your way and
let you achieve your greatness
so I strongly support this bill
thank you and Representative
Ezzell for a second Madam.
Madam chair I just got this
message from a friend of mine
and her message says my daughter
is a senior at Sandia in the IB
program her grade point average
is four point seven two five
thank you for support in this
program that speaks volumes
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative see no
further questions from our panel
as I start as I started our
presentation we do have to roll
this over we have a minor
amendment that will be presented
on Monday and then we will do
the vote did I do that
correctly.
The first time thank you very
very much Representative Allison
and everybody from Navajo prep
for being here and everybody
point be present thank you madam
chair and one's one one last
comment we talk about reversion.
When our students that are I'd
be educated start walking around
as living examples I think the
rivers and is going to be very
very minimal if anything.
We might come before you again
asking for more money.
And the reversion is going to be
very very minimal if any thank
you madam chair thank you to the
panel.
Thank you and to all of our
students here I always remind
our students that the age to run
for the house of representatives
is twenty one at the age for
Senate is twenty five so we hope
to see you.
Thank you with that our next
bill at the request of the
sponsor representative Lente
will be rolled over and so we
are now moving to house bill one
ninety eight career and
technical funds for Indian
education schools.
Thank.
The yes.
The meeting.
The system was.
Well and it's like we have this.
Right.
At the scope is in the.
And because we're going to start
another presentation we kindly
ask those exiting to take your
conversations outside because we
have another extremely important
building here.
Okay Representative Lente when
you're ready thank you madam
chair I I thought this import
ice in this season's
Representative Allison was so
successful and you guys kept on
sending the appreciation as well
do the same as well appreciate
the the consideration this
morning from the committee
members as well as the chair and
vice chair representative this
bill accrued technical education
is a hot topic on those things
that that we are coming up on
now that is extremely important
in our educational society
As members of this committee we
all know and and as well as I do
that we have a responsibility to
ensure that native American
students have an equal access to
programs and services necessary
to make them college and career
ready the last four years an
average of three point nine
million dollars annually has
been allocated to about eighty
seven local education agencies
for high quality career
technical education CTE programs
under the C. D. E. statute.
at this point in time both the
LFC and executive budget
recommendations that include in
in increase in those CTE funding
calculations from about ten
million to fifteen million in FY
twenty four and many of us are
here still working on this to
ensure that that number can
continue to grow because we
recognized its excellence and so
that being said none the less
that the statute does not allow
for unfortunately secondary
schools in New Mexico funded by
the B. I. E. bureau of Indian
education to apply for those
types of findings and to provide
career technical education
programming within their within
their schools and the schools
again predominately B. I. E.
schools are
native American schools.
Educating the American students
so that being said house bill
one ninety eight will make
technical corrections to the
career technical education pilot
project and CTE funding statute
also known as the next
generation CTE project so that
nine secondary schools in New
Mexico funded by the bureau of
Indian education are eligible to
apply for and participate in
these types of programs and
projects this affects an
inconsistency between our state
law and the federal Carl D.
Perkins career and technical
education act of two thousand
and six the act in fact
instructs to Mexico and other
states to treat B. I. E. funded
schools secondary schools as
local education agencies for the
purpose of receiving these
federal technical education
funding allocation that the
state enjoys so Madam chairwoman
and and committee members that's
what this bill does that's why
we're here and with that we send
any questions and before items
are let me introduce a Mr album
more in as my
as my expert witness as well as
governor we just because as well
as our eggs expert witness so
that madam chair we sent any
questions.
Thank you very.
Thank you very much K. and do
either expert witnesses wanted
any short comments.
Madam chair and members of the
committee just two quick points
the issue of race but again is
the issue of the anti donation
matter as we discussed in the
previous bill before this
committee that has been a moot
issue for twenty six years so
helices inclusion I'm not sure
why the second point I want to
make is that there are other
similar
circumstances were of.
Title for E. as an example the
dollars that flow from the
federal government to the state
similarly the state for many
years did not pass those dollars
on to tribes until the state was
challenge for some thirty years
now that has been corrected the
other most recent example with
regard to the same kind of
arbitrary decisions of the
federal dollars under the older
Americans act in nineteen sixty
five in the original act did not
include tribes until nineteen
seventy five with the equipment
at the federal level that the
tribes of of have an opportunity
to be part of that framework and
for forty years despite the
statutory authority to the state
to pass on these dollars title
three for community services for
elder programs it was an
arbitrary decision not
statutorily prohibited until
just last year was that resolved
and dollars finally flow to
tribal elders programs on the
reservation so this is the
principle is very much the same
to make it uniform that for
twenty six years B. I. A.
schools within eligible for
program and capital projects and
so this if you will is a clean
up to make consistent across the
spectrum that they deserve that
opportunity to access these
resources as the federal law
provides thank you madam chair
members of thank you madam chair
of members of the committee I'll
just be brief
You know I I appreciated the
comments regarding the last bill
about students who are in the
audience and and so I want to
turn our attention to the fact
that this bill is really about
seventeen hundred native
American high school students in
our state and through what I
would consider to be an
oversight when the next Gen CTE
law was enacted those seventeen
hundred students don't have
access to funding for career
technical education in our state
I think you would probably agree
with me that especially with the
brilliance that was on the
audience we don't want to deny
any native American student in
fact any student in our state
access to creating technical
education opportunities this
bill it is a technical
correction and it and it fixes
that oversight to make sure that
all students in our state
including native American
students attending these nine B.
I. a high schools have access to
these programs as a former
secretary of Indian affairs
we are still unfortunately as a
state trying to be consistent in
how we interact with entry
tribes and and bureau of Indian
education funded schools your
action today will help us to to
continue to to kind of meet the
president the governor pickles
talked about well established
for over twenty five years but
still needing occasional
corrections and so thank you
very much for your
consideration.
Thank you and.
Did you want Kate reductions
will turn to our audience this
time I'm gonna start for our in
person audience if you are in
favor of this bill and would
like to speak up please raise
your hand on the side.
Okay we'll start with the first
row and again I try to keep your
comments of brief and to the
point and thank you for being
here.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Gerry Lujan governor of tells
Pueblo most recently an employee
of Santa Fe Indian school taking
a leave of absence from the my
community we are at Santa Fe in
this school is V. I. F. B. I. E.
funded school trip however
tribally controlled we stand in
support of a house bill one
ninety eight for several reasons
first we believe that the I. E.
secondary schools are eligible
to receive state funding
specifically CTE funding have
there is precedence for this in
terms of the tribal schools
receiving that capital outlay
specifically Santa Fe Indian
school in general obligation
bond funding so the mechanisms
there secondly New Mexico she's
federal funding for CTE programs
and strengthening the CTE for
the twenty first century act
commonly known as Perkins is the
federal law that establishes
funding for CTE from the federal
government to states in FY
twenty three to stay receive ten
point one million for its
Perkins.
And then lastly at six six
thousand native American
students in New Mexico ten
schools on tribal lands funded
by the federal B. I. E. in their
academic life times students
living on tribal lands may end
up attending both B. I. E. and
state support of public schools
at various points of their
schooling we know the
educational outcomes for native
American students have been
consistently low they all they
all need the opportunities that
are available to all students
including CTE we ask that you
support house bill one ninety
eight thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you governor more in the first
row yes.
Yes good morning thank you
honorable representatives that
sit here this important
committee my name is level
Martinez professor for the
university Mexico as well as a
proud member of the publication
of tiles and the Navajo Nation
and I sit here with my with two
students to native women and
three men and women who are all
getting certified within eight
American teacher preparation
program to work in our secondary
schools and I am a full full
full support at this hospital
and I think my brother is here
for for your good work till.
Thank you and thanks for
mentioning that you're becoming
certified teachers okay next.
In the front row.
yes Sir.
Was.
the morning.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee.
Openings without channel on the
first time to go over the public
more.
You have of.
The IAD's schools on our nation
and we have a children that
attend the Santa Fe and school.
So it's kind would be brief
Behalf of the public back more
towards the floor.
This bill women.
Thank you thank you.
And good morning madam chair
members the committee holiday Mr
merry again the director percent
occur public Representative rich
every you look forward to
complies with federal law this
project even more so we
opportunities for students
officials put in schools of the
tribal control schools so we do
status part of this bill thank
you thank you.
Yes Sir.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
former governor Ricky hill.
To Shuki talking in behalf of
governor Matt and on the twenty
twenty three tribal council Mr
support house bill one ninety
eight listening to the very
unique because I was also part
of the infrastructure here at
Santa Fe Indian school and seen
the children grow from the
respective communities I
personally have a daughter that
is executed her education into
becoming a dental system many of
our community members have gone
to Ivy League institution and
that's just an example what we
can do with the equity of
funding truly being walking the
halls of Congress the department
of education as a leader from
many years ago you're seeing the
equity that we need to look at
overall to provide the resources
all native American student I we
stand in support of house bill
one ninety eight thank you thank
you anybody else in that role
okay we'll go to the next for.
We'll go from right to left.
Good morning
Vice chair and members of the
committee my name is Laura and I
and GTO and the executive
director of transport Education
Mexico and I am a representative
of up to twenty five different
organizations across the state
are committed to equity and this
is the next one I so appreciate.
To be at at every opportunity
barriers and that's essentially
since hi this is on site dental
support.
Thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I am an attorney with
the New Mexico.
And we stand strong support of
this bill maybe American
students including those who
attend PID school deserve
To access important CTE programs
and funding.
Thank you yes.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Christy
of the ten on the superintendent
of Santa Fe Indian school
strongly support house bill one
ninety eight and thank
Representative Lente and those
of you.
Excuse me whoever developed this
important bill as I just if I
just believe that are native
American student should have
equal access programs and
services necessary so that they
are colleges they're ready this
cannot happen investment by
another eight and the other
eight B. are you funded high
schools continue to be denied
career technical education pilot
project and CTE funding statute
SFI just is striving to offer
multiple CTE programs to R. four
hundred and seventy for high
school students excuse me these
include health care technology
media education natural
resources career pathways.
Sorry to do so we now have to
use our limited operating
dollars whether that be
formation of requests for other
resources to support those
programs
as Representative went to
mention the federal court of the
Perkins career and technical
education active twenty sixteen.
Sako and other states to treat
the IT funded second closest
local educational agencies for
the purpose of receiving federal
CTE funding allocated to the
state our New Mexico next
generation ship because of that
federal law we appreciate your
time and consideration my
gratitude to all of those
support thank you thank you
next row.
Okay.
Morning madam chair I'm as well
as members of the committee had
with the and in New Mexico
Center.
And I stand in strong support of
house bill one eighty eight
because American students in New
Mexico regardless of where they
go to school regardless of the
family income a place of
residence deserve equal access
to career and technical
education we believe the
opportunity for all students and
the power education has to
transform lives and create a
more just and inclusive society
for these reasons as well as the
others that have been mentioned
here by public comment already
we ask you to support house bill
one ninety eight in order to
strengthen our state's efforts
to ensure that all native
American students have equal
access to programs and services
necessary to make them college
career and community ready.
Thank you the next moving.
Long road yes.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Preston
Census an attorney at the ACLU
of New Mexico also indicated the
US Martinez litigation and I
just want to say that he said he
fully supports and we want to.
Medicaid or the case what we've
identified in most situations is
that students that live in the
rural areas of New Mexico is
particularly those that attend
schools located on or near
tribal lands often lack the
opportunities in this that this
bill would provide and as you
see you see in some of the the
articulation but students for
the Navajo prep School increase
academic opportunities for
students they engage in the
process improves academic
outcomes and it's exactly what
the US Martinez the spirit of
the case about so with that said
I hope you were inspired by
their message of as I was and we
hope the passage we want to get
thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks for a.
K. I see one hand in the back
yes good morning madam vice
chair members of the committee
my name is Elizabeth Liz I'm
general counsel for the
Mescalero Apache tribe and also
general counsel for the
Mescalero Apache school
mismatches schools is a tribal
controlled for the.
this is a technical fix that is
needed to ensure equal access to
funding Mexico had you tried and
missile hatches schools schools
support on this bill and one of.
Representative.
Others.
With him for putting this bill
Ford thank you.
Thank you anybody else on this
side cake thank you.
not a vice chair and members of.
Hi yes public of local Navajo.
currently a second semester
social studies teacher with the
native American teacher
preparation program.
As well as possibly as a vice
chair of the democratic caucus
of New Mexico.
Are always a stated ladies and
people.
The second part of this bill and
ask for your.
Thank you.
Okay we'll move to this side
will go starting the front
please raise your hand if you
like to speak yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee and thank you
Representative Lente for your
support and also the expert
witnesses some of the sent to
the head of school of Navajo
preparatory school we receive
the New Mexico path requests and
I think that this clears
language we have a community
schools grant for everybody
language revitalization and with
that this language is that
insurers that there's equity
across all departments with and
New Mexico had so Navajo prep
stands in full support of health
thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
sure grown worse and the school
board member for novel crap in
my capacity or percent that
twenty seven chapters Navajo
chapters on that New Mexico and
Arizona side and I think this
sponsor for his leadership as
well as former secretary Warren.
Like us we appreciate that this
is important to
our students and be I yeah he
funded schools and provide for
the students to grow and we're
state that is moving forward and
what the number one and this is
one pathway that will move us
along
The path to success thank you
thank you.
moving to the next row system
who like to stand up.
Okay next row.
K..
Then.
Committee members of the
committee my name again.
Personal former friends.
programs.
Minnesota.
House bill one ninety eight
thank you on behalf of.
Of course is for children where
I'm a state policy fellow and a
research and policy analyst the
benefits of CTE are well known
and then to be a students from.
The
school graduated.
Mexico has a vested interest
among students in college and
career ready.
And we ask for your support of
the house from one ninety eight
thank you thank you.
Anybody else never go back okay
ma'am and then gentleman
watching state hope up my name
is Rebecca section time for the
public to do that and I
represent congressman gave us
is fast Office of the field
Representative and I'm here in
support of tribes in addition
district to to support
house bill one ninety eight and
I would like to thank
Representative there are plenty
and.
For putting this forward because
it is important to have this
money available for students to
sixty.
thanks for.
Thank.
Thank you and gentleman.
I did not you also thought this
is it the whole place good
morning madam chair and members
of the house committee my name
is Terry via and I'm here on
behalf of chairman mark Mitchell
representing the awful council
governors today we stand strong
support for house bill one
eighty eight for all the reasons
mentioned for state
representative Lente Mr pickles
Mr Warren and all public
leadership for their strong for.
Tina's Yazeed versus the lawsuit
that so many of our educational
experts have stressed for years
now really.
Fix that as long long time
the makings urge this committee
to
have.
Bill thank you so much.
Thank you ma'am.
Thank you again the.
Thank you for all this
legislation.
For the communications to.
Combined the two.
I'm in strong support of this
House bill one ninety eight I am
the one time.
Basically.
Principal in the cold.
And there are areas that are
labeled there is a need for
support in the state of New
Mexico and so I do believe that
you bring in Effects also
heard the children and it also
heard the communities were still
dealing with the issue and so I
appreciate your support to help
these kids because we're finding
out that a lot of our community
members and offers Division and
they're coming to the states and
they're working in your in
different capacities across the
state so I I do believe that.
We get from you and anything
that we can
work on structural quality I
think will benefit all across
the board yeah.
Thank you.
One caller said
good morning madam chair of the
committee my name's coverage you
know.
The reserve this for the bubbles
back one thousand you for from
leadership is I'm also Roger law
restricts this for several of
the and we are in strong support
of age.
And I just wanted
grow your tier two concerns
raised for the of us I think
it's the F. I. R. regarding
whether or not funding for
Schools schools schools was
unconstitutional and feasible
and and it is madam chair we've
done the research there is a
former AG's opinion which shot
has allowed tribes to be
eligible for capital outlay
you for as well as for other
funding sources so we use
certain job this falls within
that.
Three to four region so.
Sure that the committee thank
you for your time we urge
response we wanted thank you
thank you anybody else on the
side.
But that will move online or in
support of house bill one ninety
eight of I'm sorry we have one
more commentator live in person.
good morning madam House
committee my name is Marshall
the No.
I am also expert.
The F. House.
The IAD's school and I am also a
clean and the Yazzie Martinez.
Here is the support
Representative third.
One.
Thank you very much and with
that we'll move to our online
educators if raise your hand if
you would like to speak in
support of house bill one ninety
eight and our first speaker will
be Valerie.
Valerie and mute yourself and
you have two minutes.
Good morning this is Valerie
balsam I work at this any public
library and I'm a parent to a
sixth grader and the seventh
grade and I support house bill
one ninety eight because I am
looking forward to the day when
they're in high school I'm
thinking of going on to higher
education and I think our
parents like myself think of
those days and supporting this
bill and having it go on and
pass and secure funding for
education one native American
students is important so I
support this bill and I think
representative Lente and the
team from the travel remedy
framework
you vision that great
possibilities and the great
expectations we have for our
children thank you thank you.
And our next speaker is merry
par Sanchez.
The morning of madam chair
members of the committee my name
is very far such as and I'm the
president of the national
education association in New
Mexico I would like to thank you
representative Lente and the
expert witnesses for bringing
this legislation forward we
stand in strong support on
career and technical education
Is an important aspect of school
and should be afforded equitably
across the state to every child
thank you very much thank you.
and our next speaker is car lot
of bird.
Please send it yourself
Carlotta.
Good morning legislators good
morning representative Lente and
expert witnesses and everyone in
the audience I am in full
support of this bill as.
A former Assistant Secretary for
Indian education for New Mexico
and also as a member of the New
Mexico tribal language
consortium.
This bill is not only an equity
issue but it also speaks to what
I've heard across the state from
parents and grandparents about
the many pathways that we have
to success this bill offers
options for students not only
just college but also finding
the passion that they need for
lifelong work so I am in full
support of this has built when
ninety eight thank you for
bringing it forward.
Representative Lente and thank
you legislators for supporting
it.
Thank you.
And our next speaker is a
Charlene the Cerro a new
yourself and you have the floor.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Charlene the Cerro I'm from the
public just let us and turtle
mountain Chippewa I'm I have
also been a teacher for science
and math and currently I'm the
director of the department of
education for the public just
let us the Peublo strongly
supports house bill one ninety
nine one ninety eight in order
to provide equitable
opportunities for students who
attend B. I. A. schools for CTE
programs as you know CTE
programs provide foundations for
students to grow into drugs and
traits necessary for community
health and wellness and I
appreciate all those efforts to
bring this bill forward thank
you thank you.
And our next speaker is Keith
Neal keep the make yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
actually Tara T. ram I'm
assuming and from Mr else
computer and I'm the dean of
student community engagement at
metal preparatory school I
wanted to speak in support of
house bill one ninety eight and
and thank all of the legislators
who worked hard to bring this
bill forward I'm I wanted just
to comment on the importance of
pairing college preparatory
programs with career guidance as
schools that serve often first
generation college students are
rural students we have a
responsibility not just to show
students what kinds of
possibilities are out there when
it comes to college but also
what that education can do for
students and it's really
important that we have access to
this funding so that we can
create innovative and culturally
responsive programs that work
within our own communities thank
you all for your time and your
consideration of this bill thank
you.
And I
Let's see I see nobody else on
line speaking in favor is there
anybody on this side who would
like to speak in opposition to
house bill one ninety eight.
Okay thank you have five seconds
to decide great okay anybody on
this side who would like to
speak in opposition to house
bill one ninety eight.
Kate see no people in the
audience is there anybody online
who wishes to speak against
house bill one ninety eight.
Sorry.
Okay
will now turn to our panel and
Representative Lara you have the
floor thank you madam chair
thank you chairman Lente for
bringing this forward I'm I'm
very very surprised.
You're here today is I figured
this would be something I would
have been done automatically a
long time ago.
Up.
B. I. A. schools madam chair
chair of the schools are
mistreated me I don't know how
they work out or how the money
flows in so if you could clarify
me on how the federal money
comes into the schools and how
they're used they're at the
schools where as an why the CTE
programs haven't been considered
before Mr chair chair.
madam slide show men and
Representative if I could have
one of my expert witnesses talk
about that structure they pay
articulated much better and I
can't.
The manager of members
Representative Lara is so I
appreciate your point and and I
think there's something that we
might all want to concentrate on
doing is helping to to to all
become better educated about the
I. in funded schools because
you're you're not the only one
who doesn't fully understand
their structure I also sit on
the board of trustees for the
Santa Fe Indian school as well
as on the board for us another
tribally controlled school in
the public Santa Clara of the
primary funding is is under the
acronym of isip that comes from
the federal government to
provide operational dollars be a
funded schools can also receive
funding a portion of funding
through the department of
education and I'm just gonna
describe this this probably
within those there are several
Senator sort of specific
programmatic funds that come in
but I can tell you those that
there's no specific funding for
career technical education now
that the federal Carl Perkins
act does allow some of that
funding to reach B. I. funded
schools but it is a very
convoluted path there's two ways
one
they have a competitive highly
competitive part of a program
that is a national pod that all
five hundred seventy four tribes
in any tribal entity in any
trouble secondary school can
apply for C. can imagine for a
small number of requests how
competitive that is and those
entities if they are awarded
could choose to use those funds
to support a secondary school
but he requires the B. I. E. to
match those funds into run into
jump through some other hoops
the state of New Mexico receives
Carl Perkins act in the close to
the PED as well as the sponsor
said the PED in the state of New
Mexico are told to to treat B.
I. funded schools as if they
were local educational agency
and provide those funds to the
schools I'm very sad to tell you
that our state has not done
that.
in fact most of the B. A. funded
high schools don't even know
that they have access to that
part of funding no
So to the to the of the effect
is that these nine high schools
have no access to direct funding
for CT and the superintendent
Abeyta said have to pull from
operational dollars or five more
likely have to apply for private
requests in order to provide
these programs to the students.
Thank you for that Sir and and
madam chair it up.
You know as as we all know you
know education is the great
equalizer brings people out of
poverty.
Many of us are here today
because of public education.
And so the the idea.
That the students haven't had
this opportunity in my opinion
is appalling to me as I can't
believe it so with with this
funding madam chair Mr chair
let's take a with this from the
with with the schools the
starting at the very bottom
basically purchasing equipment
hiring staff will how how's this
going to houses initial source
of funding and we're going to
work madam vice chairman and
representative as as the expert
witness mention is that some
have actually started the
process on a very fundamental
shoestring budget point from
their own internal budgets of
finally focused and and funded
by big sales.
Just kidding about some big
sales
but but it but honestly I mean I
a lot of these programs are are
very minimal and so this would
absolutely engage them and
provide them the opportunity to
get to begin to scale them to a
point where they can be truly
successful and and an
opportunity for the students to
learn.
Thank you thank you
representative of advised her Mr
chair is this is something I I'm
very happy that you about the
sort of fortunately you have to
bring it forward it should like
I said before it should have
been there already but I think
this is really important to to
everyone to all the communities
are going to be impacted by it
and I fully support thank you.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair it I think it's
this as an institution we have
sort of turned a corner when it
comes to CTE.
I know on the the work that we
did on LFC and enter on this was
a common theme.
you can tell by the increase in
funding on both LFC reckon the
Garbarek.
that priority I think that we as
a body or putting on CTE and I
think that's because we
recognize the opportunities it
gives to all kids.
So I think it's very hard for us
to say with a straight face that
we support CTE but don't make
that available to every single
student New Mexico so just a
comment thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative that at a.
Thank you madam chair and Jack I
have to recognize first of all
Alvin worn for my district a
community activist and leader in
all things that matter so at
good to have him on our team I
was very honored that
representative Lente asked me to
sign on this legislation as a
former director of the land
foundation founding director for
seventeen years our moral
compass in educational program
was always access equity and
excellence and I think this bill
house bill one ninety eight
embodies all of those values and
for that I stand in strong
support thank you madam chair
vice chair.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
representative Lente do an
expert witnesses thank you for
taking time to be here today.
And Representative lefty knows
is thorough issue are on every
matter that there is out there
except for farming and ranching
the this I'm so ladies and
gentlemen with this just a
little thing we have going to be
traveling.
Because I am one of those two.
I'm sure you have read the FIR
regarding this particular bill
in on page two of that down
towards the bottom it states and
I will quote on what this does
say the latest version of the
Perkins act states an eligible
recipient is defined as a local
educational agency looting the
public charter school that
operates as a local educational
agency and educational servants
service agency.
An Indian tribe tribal
organization or tribal
educational agency or consortium
eligible to receive assistance
or an eligible institution or
consortium of eligible
institutions Elop table to
receive this assistance.
It plainly states.
That this program this Perkins
act.
Is.
He that is made very specific.
And I'm kind of appalled that
PED has not stepped up and.
Done something about that I
would never there's no quality
part of it whenever the ten
percent of the public school
enrollment is native American
students to me it's very
important and I do recognize the
fact that all not all kids do
want to go to college they do
need to technical career.
It's very important.
And we have a new one that has
started to my particular area
down there in Travis county and
it's amazing because they are
including high school kids in
conjunction with Indian name you
are.
And it's a joint effort and
these kids are thriving thriving
so madam chair of Mr chair I'm
so sorry Mr chair and members of
this committee I think that we
need to.
Have P. E. D..
Answer some questions for so why
this has not been implemented.
The quality is the key here
Madam chair representative thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative Roybal
cover yeah.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and experts
for being here today and for
presenting this very important
bill and in response to a much
needed.
Address
and statement that and thank I
want to thank Representative
Ezzell because you basically.
Brought up exactly what I was
going to bring up I think we
need some accountability yeah we
it's very obvious that we need
accountability and even though
we all madam chair standing here
and will support this the
accountability issue is is
critical because we do not want
these systems of inequity to
continue and the only way for us
to be able to change that is not
just by piece Mealing
legislation for comprehensive
legislation that we need to now.
examine the accountability so
that we then can institute
changes the need to be done so
that this is not it does not
occur again and I want it madam
chair to think of the field
representative for can go
congressman Vasquez because
that's very important role here.
Kong congress and our
congressional representatives
need to know that our state has
not responded as it should
respond in terms of providing
equitable education across the
board to all our students so I
wish the field representative to
take this message back to our
congressional district to
Representative Vasquez because
Carl Perkins and the department
of education need to understand
that our schools in the state
have not responded.
As they should and consequently
as madam chair right mentioned
earlier we remain at the lowest
of educational attainment which
is unconscionable and appalling
and unacceptable so thank you to
the center for lawn poverty for
taking on are Yazzie messiness
for all of our tribal nations
for supporting our gas emitting
this lawsuit but this is
indicative of how we have to
remain vigilant and how we have
to remain
Requesting and demanding from
our public education department.
Answers as to how they are going
to institutionalize these
changes so that we don't face
future generations in the
situation madam chair thank you
so very much and thank you again
to the Representative Lente all
the sponsors and the experts.
Thank you and what is the will
of the committee we have a
motion madam chair I move it to
pass second the okay we have a.
Motion to pass from
Representative Roybal Caballero
and a second by Representative
Baca committees.
Is there any opposition to
passing this bill.
Okay seeing see no opposition
Representative Lente you have a
do pass thank you madam chair
they'd Committee.
With the.
Madam.
Madam chair thank you for taking
over for today just a couple of
announcements for committee
house bill fifty two is pending
amendments as I understand it
we'll see if we get them in
today to put it on for Monday
and then.
House bill one fifty one it
dropped from the agenda on line
for some reason but the agenda
that our committee assistant had
put out includes.
So we're going with house bill
one fifty one it was just an
oversight it's been cleared up
it's back on the agenda online
and very official on the golden
right it is here bill.
For Monday yes so it is dropped
off the list.
Wasn't all that stuff.
Yeah I think that one's going to
need a little bit further review
will see if we get anything in.
If I get it in all posted.
Under an update.
Yeah.
It's
a little bit a little bit.
We have other priorities but
we'll talk about other bills
thank you I thank you committee.
And on.
