You seem to hear.
Representative vice chair
Garrett.
Here.
Representative is now hi because
we were stuck in the queue.
Excuse tardy.
Here.
All right thank you everybody I
did want to make one
announcement before we jump into
the bills for today is that
certainly you've heard in
several committees about the
fiscal impact report getting out
later in the day things like
that know that we've been
putting out our agenda about
forty eight hours in advance and
to further facilitate things if
you notice we have the agenda as
posted for Friday and for Monday
in advance so that everybody
that does submit reports has an
adequate heads up to get those
reports out in a timely manner
so we're trying to do that
almost a week in advance so that
we can facilitate the FIR
process for everybody we get
them with adequate time but some
of those things are out of our
hands in terms of trying to do
that that's how
hi is chair can facilitate that
process for members in my
capacity so I appreciate
everybody's
Patience and diligence in this
committee
but with that we will jump back
into house bill eighty two if
you remember this is the first
bill we rolled on Monday's
meeting we had Representative
Chandler we have Representative
Roybal cover yet currently
please Mr chair could resume in
the expert witness please we we
are trying to do that I do have
him as a panelists so I believe
we'll be able to hear him one
side on mute he's able to on
mute chair I I am available and
ready you can hear me he's
available we're just having
problems with being able to see
him but
at this point I think we care
more about what he's saying than
how he looks today that's right
so.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative we do have an
amendment right yes so that's
what we're looking for so can
have a motion on the amendment.
All right so we have a motion by
Representative the cell to
Move the amendment a second by
Representative a for discussion.
All right so we'll wait till
that gets passed out to
everybody.
So we'll just wait.
All right so if we remember
members we already took public
testimony we already talked
about the bill ask questions
stick to the amendment see if we
adopt the amendment and then
take final action on the bill so
Representative Roybal Caballero
please if you would explain the
amendment place thank you Mr
chair I'm proposing to the house
Education Committee the
following amendment to house
bill eighty two and if you and
first I want to say thank you to
everyone who input on and made
suggestions because it did help
improve the language in the
movement of the bill so I
appreciate that we appreciate
that if you turn the page look
at your amendment number one on
page nine line seventeen As
suggested before each we're
going to insert.
To quote the following the
partnership is registered to do
business in New Mexico and is in
good standing.
And and then that's all for
number one on page nine.
We go to number two still stay
on page nine line nineteen
before the you insert the
following the corporation or
association is registered to do
business in New Mexico and is in
good standing and.
Again for suggestion number
three on page tentative ten.
And
Nibert before each you insert
the following the limited
liability company is registered
to do business in New Mexico and
is in good standing and and then
after each you insert officer
comma chair for.
And then the final of the line
number four on page forty four.
Online eight you're going to
strike the line through state.
And insert in lieu of their of
the following the District Court
in the judicial district with
the student loan borrower of
cosigner signs Mr chair those
were what we noted as the
suggested amendments and changes
in order to improve the bill and
I stand for questions great do
we have questions on the
amendment.
Okay.
And I believe Representative
lane was the impetus for some of
these amendments.
So I'll accept a motion on the
amendment.
The amendments read.
Thank adoption of the.
Oil production the amendments
are at so we have a motion to
adopt the minutes state
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative Chatfield I
heard that correctly is there
any objection to the adoption of
the amendments I see none you
have an amended bill awesome
further discussion or at this
time all except motion this.
That we adopt.
The path from house bill eighty
two is amended.
All right on house bill eighty
two is amended and.
A second by Representative law.
And secretary called the roll on
a do pass please.
Representative Oct yes
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative is a.
Representative Grove yes
Representative Herrerra yes.
Representative Lane yes right
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid
Representative more about one
yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Trujillo yes
madam vice chair.
I I strict yes and Mr chair yes.
With the pass all right so by a
vote.
Two one you have a up to twelve
sorry twelve zero the past and
has related to as amended thank
you thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee all right thank
you so we're currently getting
Representative Rehm so we'll
take a brief pause while we get
Representative Rehm or hear from
him so we'll hang tight.
Thank you that.
Representative result when
personal privilege please
please.
Mr Chairman like I said that
there was some concerns we there
was a.
Over the elevator.
And the key cards would not even
work to unlock the door we were
stuck in that cubicle in the
elevator was going up and down
Do we need to notify over that
particular issue.
Representative is I believe
that's Council Service it is
because I know that there's been
I was at a pop quiz yes.
Mr Chairman I've learned if you
always know the answer before
yes the question and I did all
the and so I I practice the same
philosophy so I appreciate that
Representative is Mr chairman
could of we notify Council
services that there is a big
problem with that particular
elevate you to have to get off
on the second floor go to the
fourth floor and then walk down
or walk at the the one that is
causing a lot of problems sure
will make that contact you know
a cute those issues resolved I
know there's an issue on the
floor yesterday about parking as
well Representative Rebecca yes
I just might add I got stuck in
the elevator and it was horrible
I had to they have to go all
over the place looking for
someone to unlock the elevator
so I've had that experience and
based on that I was told we
could directly call Building
services so I just wanted to add
that from my experience it was
it was terrible.
Thank you Mr chairman if we
don't have a quorum on the floor
today it's because we're all
stuck in an elevator at.
Hopefully not that many
representatives can fit in the
elevator this is a one time
contest.
Thank you Mr thank you hello you
for word from Representative
remove give it a couple minutes
I think Representative Baca went
to.
Try to find them so give it a
couple minutes if not.
We'll see where we're at.
Thank you for.
Okay so I've gotten word that
Representative Rehm is
presenting a bill currently
Representative Lara.
Yes would you be able to.
Present on house bill one oh
two.
Actually we can skip ahead a
little bit.
I will just yeah thank you.
Okay because all right so move
on to house bill one of two from
now.
All right so.
Representative Lara.
Well you get situated.
All right so.
We'll go with brief
presentations brief comments
from our audience in the normal
process so welcome if you all
would introduce yourselves and
we'll move on to house bill one
of two good morning Mr chair
thank you Committee house bill
one of two.
And I'm gonna keep in mind your
words Mr chair being brief as we
have a lot of work to do
house bill one or two.
In.
We have a house bill for one or
two addresses.
Two things right right right on
the surface first is the teacher
shortage and secondly is
offering the opportunity for
educators in New Mexico to have
their health care coverage one
hundred percent.
So each be one or two of.
Will provide affordable high
quality healthcare benefits for
all educators and eliminate
unneeded stress from a from its
from educators mines by allowing
them to focus on our classrooms
providing a high quality health
care benefits also acts as
important tool to improve
improve to improving recruitment
and retention as well as to
dressing the educator shores
Crisis.
I had a whole list but it but in
the in the
In the in the intent of getting
this through quickly and and
saving everyone's time I'm gonna
go ahead and introduce my expert
witnesses Mister chair Mister
Simon motor from DFA and the
smart the container from New
Mexico.
Thanks good morning Mister chair
members of the committee again
my name is Simon Miller and I'm
an analyst at the FAA
Basically what this bill does is
ships more of the cost of the
health care premium from
employees to the employer
currently are almost all
educational employees cover
about sixty percent are sorry
forty percent of their health
care premium
but under this plan the employer
will cover the first ten
thousand dollars of everyone's
premium and then sixty percent
of the cost beyond ten thousand
dollars so what that means for
employees is that they would see
about an average savings of four
thousand dollars per year.
I I can go into more detail if
you want or I can leave it
there.
No I'll leave it there for now
thanks north if you have thank
you.
Thank you Mr Representative Lara
Mr chair members of the
committee my thinking time over
the public schools insurance
authority so we've been
assisting the department of
finance with several scenarios
that include the
Amy of the.
The first ten thousand and then
the sixty percent employer forty
percent employees split on the
contributions in our analysis we
found that with our premium plan
designs that anyone on a single
plan except for folks under Blue
Cross blue shield transaction
would re aligns
If not all or.
Part of that first ten thousand
to cover their premiums based on
our enrollment so
in our analysis we did find out
of our twenty one thousand
employees that are currently
insured that there were twelve
individuals who might not
benefit from that scenario and
we are willing to either do a
grandfathering for those
individuals allowing to switch
to more cost effective plan will
be able to accommodate you so
they can realize the benefits of
that first ten thousand for
their coverage.
In a stand for any questions
thank you Mr chair without will
stand for questions all right
thank you all for The
presentation so you have in the
house Education Committee or go
to the audience thank you all
for being here being willing to
participate please keep coming
short and concise you'll have up
to two minutes but if comments
have been said it please just
reference them and then we'll
move on but as I always say
privative is the soul of wit I'm
very fond of so please keep your
comments short.
All right so we will go to
support so last those members
that are participating on zoom
if you wish to speak in support
of house bill one oh two please
indicate by raising your hand we
will let you all assemble
yourselves we will go to our
members of the audience so on my
right hand side.
If you wish to speak in support
of house bill one of two please
indicate there is your hand okay
we'll start will start in the
front Willie Mae please have up
to two minutes welcome.
Mr chairman members of the
committee little more to pledge
their lives off of the school
board association of this sort
of sufficient annually in the
summer all of its members of a
vote on their priorities for
legislative I told this issue is
one of the top ten issues
providing additional support for
teachers return to play benefits
to help of the take home a
greater portion of their
paycheck we support bills that
will help that and recruitment
center in New Mexico last year
the legislature and thank you so
much bumped up the return
fixture levels and that along
with coupled with the insurance
package increasing take home pay
allowing them portion more pay
more for the insurance costs I
think will make us even more
competitive than we currently
are within the state school
boards association strongly
supports legislation that
teachers Representative thank
you with open will support thank
you right.
Please welcome good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is money on the the I'm
currently the interim cabinet
secretary for the public
education department I'm also
the children children's cabinet
director in the office of the
governor.
Every person working gold
provides vital connection to and
for our students they are all in
the business of education from
bus drivers to artist audience
to our principles it is
important to the administration
that while they take on the care
and education of our children
they don't at the cost of health
care to the long list of things
that they are already concerned
with healthcare expenses can be
catastrophic for families this
is a way to make sure that the
burden of costly health care
doesn't follow them to work
every day in a practical sense
this will help us keep the well
trained effective staff who are
already hard at work in our
schools and from looking for
another job opportunity the side
effect of a well cared for staff
is that they don't feel the
pressure to look for different
opportunity thank you for
working with us to prioritize
the health well being and
retention of our hard working
educators across the state thank
you right thank you an arms
secretary all right others in
the same row.
All right we'll go to the next
row anybody in support house
bill one of two we speak okay on
to the next row may that we're
speaking support okay ma'am
please welcome give up two
minutes.
Learning Mr chair committee
members my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce as you all
know adequately staffing our
schools and classroom affects
the quality of education our
students receive in the state
this will can increase the take
home pay of educators especially
with the rising cost of
healthcare.
Essentially becoming a strategy
for recruitment and retention we
were pleased to see a bill
coming the governor's budget
request as well the chamber
supports HB one or two because
it is more investment to use the
budget surplus on thank you
thank thank you others in that
same rather speak please give up
two minutes welcome Mr chairman
members of the committee just
supposed to be about the
proposed school again this is a
great recruitment and retention
tool for our thousand Decatur's
thank you thank.
Thank you all right the next row
icy hands are it will start on
my right hand side please give
two minutes walking around the
school superintendents
association we also for the
reasons stated support this bill
we would only make one comment
as this moves forward
distribution of this we would we
believe should not be through
the state equalization
guaranteed or rather direct cost
and as it goes up to districts
thank great thank you so much
please Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee jobless youth with the
New Mexico federation of labor
we believe that healthcare is in
the central right and the fact
that the the Sanchez trying to
get this cover for all of our
educators is that correct after
we applaud the sponsor for that
and stand in solidarity with our
educators that we represent as
well thank you very much thank
you please thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee John
Lewis with American federation
of teachers on two points would
like to have about house bill
one or two obviously we are in
support of this legislation I
think it achieves two things
some folks have mentioned the
potential support provided to
teachers I would say that
support is even more important
are classified educators in the
work force is I think would be a
much more impactful bill for
those types of education workers
in our system it certainly is
good for everybody I really want
to lift up those particular
educators the second thing that
I also want to does is it
achieve a longstanding goal of a
up to Mexico to remove the
artificial cap of eighty percent
coverage by providing this
coverage for the first ten
thousand so it really is a good
girl and she's a couple things
at the same time so would urge
your support right thank you
anybody else on my right hand
side that we speak alright we'll
go to my left hand side those
which speak in support please
indicate there is your hand.
Okay we'll start on the way way
back ma'am in the glasses if you
looking back welcome.
finally three I am a project
manager or primary care HSD and
as secretary and I there is a
bill we believe this will help.
Where any insured people in the
state so I thank you very much
great thank you so much all
right anybody else in that same
row that wish speak in support.
I will move to the next row or
so I had to go up please madam
secretary.
Members
of the cabinet secretaries in
New Mexico higher education
department and nine of our
community colleges and branch
campuses are members of the
and this would definitely
benefit higher education as well
thank you.
Thank you so much other than
that summer that wish to speak.
That I'd seen another hand all
right we'll move to the next row
all right on the end here.
Welcome good morning General
batter of the committee my name
is merry par Sanchez I'm the
president of the national
education association in New
Mexico and we stand in strong
support will and we want to
thank the sponsor Representative
Lara for bringing this forward
we all want to see our students
succeed and be the best that
they can be so excellent to
their life's work care for and
respect others and have
integrity we wanted to leave the
world better than they found it
house bill one of two will be a
game changer for the eighteen
thousand New Mexico students who
do not have a highly qualified
experienced teachers as their
teacher.
Last year we had over a thousand
vacancies and you acted on that
and you increase salaries about
decrease that they can see rate
by thirty four percent this is
an educator retention of the
bill of today you have before
you an opportunity to further
decrease that make it that I.
to get a highly qualified
educator in every New Mexico
classroom the passage of this
bill provides an opportunity for
action educators site this is
the number one reason why they
can't remain in education and it
influences their decision to
leave so with that I urge of
support thank you so much great
thank you please welcome.
Chairman members of the
committee on more information
speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
university women and the league
of women voters and we stand in
strong support for the all the
reasons mentioned by those in
the audience I I don't wish to
repeat them but I do want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
in experts those who worked on
this bill forward I was vice
president Santa Fe community
college and one of the things
that happened is we would lose
the teachers and a lot of
pictures just to four
to be in the profession frankly
had to take on more jobs than
they could handle and what
happens is we do sacrifice
quality when teachers are
working two and three jobs in
order to pay the bills we have
high cost of living in places
like Santa Fe and and other
places around the state so we
really do need the support and
retain will thank you very very
much right thank you all right
so we'll go back stagger the NEA
folks welcome thank you.
Committee members and Bethany
Carolina long time early
childhood educator Alamogordo
New Mexico in the NBA New
Mexico.
And I stand in support of this
for all the reasons why
everybody in the room but I just
want to share some of the things
I'm hearing from my co workers
in my district this bill could
be life changing for that my
classroom assistant who works as
an assistant as well as two
other jobs would be able to just
work as an assistant and be able
to afford insurances that would
make this big of a difference
for her in some of the meetings
I've had with educators they're
talking about how they can bump
up to the higher level of
insurance for their family and
be able to afford it and survive
and take their children to the
doctor as much of a need to
because right now they're in the
lower level just to have
churches ridge so thank you to
the to the presenters of the
bill and to all of you for
listening to this and I need to
support great thank you so much
others in several places.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee my name is Andrew may.
The secretary of New Mexico
Center community schools and I
stand in strong support of house
bill one of two for the facts
mentioned before but also.
This is a bill that truly
strengthens the community from
the custodian to the classroom
educators administrators this
really puts emphasis on equity
in regards to health care access
for all.
Louise within the school
building as well as throughout
the district so one of the
greatest things about being an
educator and was one for nearly
a decade it really puts that
center of the community in the
classroom I think this bill does
just that thank you so much
thank thank you others in my
left hand side that we speak.
In person all right that's the
cue for online folks so if you
wish to speak in support.
Please make sure your hand is
that so we will go to.
Hope.
Good morning hope you have up to
two minutes here with us.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Health moralis and I wear many
hats in the educational world as
president of the Russell school
board I want to acknowledge a
resolution the school board
passed in December in support of
the legislator to fully fund the
eighty twenty rule to decrease
the percentage of insurance
premiums paid by all employees
at the exit excuse me is the
executive director for teach
plus New Mexico we have heard a
variety of stories from our
teachers related to the direct
positive impact this bill would
have on their families I would
most certainly be an incentive
to keep educators in the
profession as a mother I'm
talking with my children about
their future careers as my son
who is a senior in high school
narrows down his areas of
interest I can't help but
advocate for the teaching
profession for variety of
reasons including pay and
possibly the great insurance
benefits New Mexico has the
opportunity to be an example for
quality teacher pay and benefits
thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you for joining us.
All right Mary good morning
merry of up to two minutes here
with us.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is merry puzzle and I am a
current teacher at MAS charter
school in Albuquerque as well as
a member of New Mexico teach
plus
many important facts and stories
of the chair today and I just
want to add to that with a
personal anecdote so last night
I'm an impact in anticipation of
this hearing I asked my
teammates my volleyball team but
their health care costs look
like Adam a single man pays less
than a hundred dollars from
another man Tyler also carrying
his wife and children on his
policies that he pays a hundred
thirty five dollars Adam was
incredulous at the high cost and
said well I guess that's not too
bad you have to add your wife
and kids Tyler corrected him no
it's a hundred thirty five
dollars per paycheck so it's
really two hundred and seventy
dollars per month Adam was even
more incredulous I laughed sort
of hysterically and told them
that that was less than I paid
per paycheck and they both make
more money than I do.
In fact two hundred seventy
dollars a month is less than any
educator in our state can pay
and that's just for themselves
let alone for a family of four.
Based on an MSW NMPSIA
literature from the website all
but the very cheapest to plan
options which have a high
deductible nothing except for
basic medical that plan is twice
as expensive for one person and
my friend pays for family of
four for better insurance.
The average rent to New Mexico
is rising right now in
Albuquerque for a one bedroom
apartment it's one thousand
thirty dollars I've co workers
who live sparse lifestyles with
only the bare necessities and
they can barely get by for
myself and my family we're
grateful because I daughter
still qualifies for Medicaid as
soon as that runs out to be
quite Frank one of us is going
to have to pick up a part time
job if not both we are both full
time educators and even one of
us having an extra job it would
definitely affect both of our
performances in our classrooms
and by extension our children.
This legislation all of the
difference to our family thank
you so much merry those two
minutes thank you for your
testimony all right then you all
good morning annually of up to
two minutes welcome.
Then you know you're with us if
you would and you.
All right we'll try to come back
to you.
J. Granada.
Good morning here with us.
Please have a few minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Joshua
Granada I am the general counsel
for Santa Fe public schools and
I urge you guys to see support
this bill Santa Fe public school
board of education passed a
resolution as well I'm
indicating their support for the
eighty twenty proposal which was
part of the NDA legislative
platform this bill will greatly
help Santa Fe public schools to
retract retain and attract
teachers and again I strongly
urge your support thank you very
much Mr chair thank thank you
all right so go back to manual
Martinez.
C. many are you with us could
you and Mewe.
So be your last opportunity.
Then you all.
All right sorry manual.
Okay that's all I have in
support so we will go to
opposition is there opposition
to house bill one oh two so
those of you online if you're in
opposition please be sure to
indicate by raising your hand.
Those in the room is our
opposition to house bill one of
two please raise your hand.
If you wish to speak.
Nobody in the room that's in
opposition.
There's an nobody with a hand up
on the attendees side.
Confirming this my time.
Okay then we come back to
committee is the first on my
list Representative Chatfield
please thank you Mr.
Chair so that I can also build
I think we need what state are.
Might be alive to.
the that you're able to have the
insurance that you need to have
that big of a costly before we
get started I question to you is
Yes I said that that will be
good for of the SCG has there
been any changes in the S. need
to find.
Mr chair representative I'd like
to do for that too one of my
experts please.
Mr chair representative yes
you're right the public school
portion would flow out of the
SCG it's about ninety three
million and then the other seven
million for the participating
higher education institutions
that would not flow out through
the SCG.
And has served me an easy
additional money.
I have provided in this.
I also.
Mr chair representative yes the
the ninety three million that
would go out through the SCG
would cover the cost of this
change for the for all public
schools funding to.
Yes I it would be and a ninety
three million dollar increase to
the SCG.
Thank you just remember to keep
questions going through the
chair please Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair does this bill apply to
all districts in the state.
Mr chair representative yes it
does.
Mr Chairman curious for the the
ten thousand amount of premium
payments of two hundred percent
I should rephrase it is Mr
chairs are present up to ten
thousand.
For a family for how many months
would that be.
Representative Mr chair I'd like
to a defer to my experts
without.
Mr chair representative
Right now a typical.
The typical cost of family
coverage through PSI a.
Total employer and employee is
about twenty five thousand
dollars.
So Mister chair is a roughly
about five months worth of but
in fact the math and look real
quick in my mind.
Mr chair representative on.
Without
being able to do the math in
front of you right now basically
a family with family coverage
right now pays forty percent of
that twenty five thousand which
is about ten thousand dollars
and under this bill that would
decrease to about six thousand
dollars the state picking up
that extra four thousand
dollars.
Mr chair
I do think we we need to visitor
maybe re look at this funding
flowing through the SCG so Mr
chair can I can I just
understand what the rationale is
now that we're talking about
pumping I mean a significant
amount of the amount of money in
the local church districts and
running that through the SCG.
What the rationale is beyond
half.
Representative Mr chair I'd like
to do for the two million to my
experts on Mr chair
representative.
Insurance costs are normally
paid for through the SCG
whenever there's a premium
increase which happens basically
annually there's an increase to
the SCG for that premium
increases so this is the same
idea where
more costs for employer
insurance are you on the
employer side then flows out
through the SCG so the schools
can can pay for it.
Mr Mr chair Senator and sort of
the that's the way we've always
done it but we're we're making a
pretty substantial change here.
And in the meantime expressed my
concern this way.
Mr I'm worried about big
districts that have a con is a
scale.
Getting in over a proportionate
size of these health insurance
premiums.
If we finalised through the SCG.
so Mister chair I don't know if
you have any thoughts on on that
piece but that's really the root
of my concern.
Mr chair representative on and I
apologize I I'm not
understanding your question but
if each school gets there I.
Yes they get through the SCG
their allocation that is based
on the the funding formula the
statute that governs it so
You can I'm not not sure if that
answers your question but but it
would flow out to the schools
based on the funding formula.
Mr I guess I'm just worried
about you know a district size
of Albuquerque getting a
disproportionate share.
Because a running through SCG
that's that's my concern.
Mr chair are you are you guys
open at all to the concept of if
if we are going to be providing
a hundred percent up to ten
thousand and sixty percent there
after.
It seems like a better model.
And one that is sort of a one to
one ratio with the actual costs
would be to send money directly
to the New Mexico public school
insurance authority and APS and
higher and based on the actual
cost of you guys considered
anything along those lines.
Mr chair representative that has
been a point of discussion
amongst the group we we are
considering looking at different
at the two different options and
see which works out better but
that the the direct payments and
into has been discussed and and
we've we are we've been looking
at how how that would work.
Mr because I think you can still
accomplish the the goal of
what's been expressed here which
is to you know provide more
employer coverage on these
premiums but also avoid the the
possibility of of are you know
frankly are more rural and in
smaller districts maybe not
getting.
The program on a funding I'm
just worried about them having
to.
This is the statutory changes in
having to scramble and take
other money that they're
receiving threats you need to to
cover this so to speak and so I
just want to avoid that kind of
scenario.
Mr chair R. do you know are we
doing.
a hundred percent up to ten
thousand for any of our other
state agencies.
Mr chair of Mr leader no no not
at the time now this month.
So Mister chair I I understand
the rationale and to a large
extent I supported make sense to
me.
But I think I hang up at the in
the days it's it's hard for me.
As a legislator to to pick.
Favorite so to speak.
so it I don't know how I could
say we should two hundred
percent up to ten thousand for
teachers but not state police
For many of the other state
agencies that we have and so I
think that's.
We've more of a philosophical
problem that I think I have in
terms of picking winners and
losers I don't know that that's
fair the rest of our state
employees so.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
please.
Mr Mr derive I'm glad to wrap
that up because that is being
discussed and addressed in both
house drum roll one and senator
John memorial two.
Where we are studying the.
The the classification
compensation and benefits for
state employees.
And Mister chair I think more
expert has something as well
sure Mr chair representative
But you're right in that.
This bill would create and it's
inequity between educational
employees and state employees
but that inequity would actually
be are smaller than than the
current inequity in the opposite
way are currently GSD employees
are not just employees but state
employees on average pay about
three thousand less per year for
their insurance and then if this
bill were to pass it would it
would flip the opposite way but
educational employees would be
paying
about one thousand less than
they're a state employee
counterparts
It obviously depends on the type
of plan that you have and some
other factors so that's just on
average about a thousand dollars
less.
Mr chair and I you know I I to
me it I to make sense to bring
teachers up to whatever we're
doing with other state agencies
I have zero problem that that
that I think is it is it is a
given that we should do that and
I don't understand history
behind why that's not or the
case so you know I think we
should we should do that at a
minimum and I appreciate Mr
chair the the Sanchez comments
about the other two items and I
I confess I've looked at those
but I do have to vote today on
this so just want to share
amount thanks right thank you
doctor I thank you Mr chairman
and thank you for bringing the
sport I support this but I do
have some questions and maybe
can help to direct as farmers
what makes more sense I I Mr
chairman and Representative Lara
I think it's a direct payment to
NMPSIA may be the way because
with the SCG this money is a ten
year that all comes together and
it may as far as for some it may
be you know they may not get
intended place so that's just a
suggestion you know the direct
payment maybe one Mr chairman
and of the I'm sorry from them
to you know APS is actually
there they have their own
insurance is that correct so
with this impact EPS at all or
how would that work Mr chair
representative Baca
APS would get portion through
SCG to for them to administer
that for their employees.
APS's handle their own
insurance and we have all the
eighty eight school districts
except for APS under the public
schools insurance authority.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of the question I have is about
right now we we do have this
opportunity I I support this
about bringing people from all
up there but is there any
consideration of these funds at
somewhere in the future not
available if we have a downturn
in the the the revenue coming in
is there is there some kind of
language that could be added
same if funds are available or
of some funds you know are are
kind of your mark for this Mr
chairman I think that's
something because we have the
money now within three to five
years if we're looking at some
kind of downturn there you may
not be as easy to cover this but
And then finally Mr chairman and
this is just the my colleague
Representative Lara.
Is anywhere in this bill is a
address retiree health because I
think that's even a even more
cost burden on many of our
employees because as we know
with the school and school
district paying the portion
whatever it is right now when
you retire.
The retirements of portion of
that is is from what I
understand somebody's looking
retired next year's is is pretty
extensive so those are my
questions Mr chair thank you
right thank you our
representative at all.
Thank you Mr chair and
You know I used to buy insurance
for small foundation twenty
employees and it was always a
nightmare I I totally get that
can you tell me with the what is
the annual premium for a family
would two teachers are one
teacher if they're over fifty
five now.
The annual premium.
Connect this Mr chair
representative
Were you saying.
Five fifty five years old for an
older between fifty five and
sixty five okay Mr chair
representative if you get
insurance through the public
school insurance authority your
your age doesn't affect your
premium on so right now it the
the typical high option plan
through PSI
the employee would pay about ten
thousand dollars a year for
family coverage.
You know I I and Mr chair and
representative I I just want you
to know that we also have a lot
of older teachers older than
sixty five certainly and that is
certainly in the colleges you
have instructors and and you
know just people in general over
sixty five I just want to note
that the lab after sixty five
you automatically go on Medicare
it saved a lot of money and
insurance premiums so I don't
know if anybody's thought about
this or if if you could do it
but I'm sure you know once you
get on Medicare I mean a lot of
people work in the private
sector even when they could
retire earlier because they
can't afford health insurance
after the age of fifty five it's
it's just exorbitant so it you
might think about asking people
to formally switch over to
Medicare at the age of sixty
five a lot of big corporations
certainly the laboratory does
that and saves a lot of money
and and the coverage would be
just as good for for people
paying about two hundred dollars
a month and it's pretty amazing
so I just want to add that Mr
chair and representative of a
lot of something to think about
something to look at I am in
full support of this I
understand why this would be a
game changer I to worry about
price tags you know is it's not
like that Santa just one side of
the island so I'm I'm looking
for ways to help improve the
budget on this thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bring forward
this.
very significant bills we're
trying to Mr chair we're
have been trying to
Correct many years of inequities
and disparities between.
pay salaries and insurance
benefits so there's been a a
long history of us as a state
not being able to meet just the
minimum requirements and it's
either been because we've not
had the funds and or would not
have the will Mr chair so now
that we have.
The funds of now that we have
the ability to plan and look at
the systems and how they've been
operating Mr chair and improve
them
I bring this up because and
investments pensions and
oversight committee the
committee that I've been able to
chair the last couple years
we've been hearing
how all the systems are being
reviewed evaluated and how it is
that we're going to address many
of the concerns that were
brought up by my colleagues on
this committee so thank you they
are being addressed by the E. R.
B. by the para by all of the the
retiree health care in fact just
yesterday to answer
Representative Atlanta and New
Representative Bob us questions
directly Mr chair we in labour
Committee we passed house bill
one fifty which was to him
increase the contributions for
retiree health care for the same
reason for the very same reason
because we're trying to bring
everyone up to where the level
where they should be but also to
cover those that have
historically not been able to
afford so the the the mantra for
us is recruitment retention and
honoring our employees across
the board so that we can
address the of vacancy rates and
other issues that that we're
being faced with thank just
wanted to clarify one question
because I'm not sure if I think
I heard the question that I'm
not sure I heard the response
Representative this bill will
apply to
every district across the state
correct.
Mr chair representative yes
that's correct okay so that does
stand drive my point that every
district on every
Cut every districts insurance.
Administrator on is working with
the retiree systems that we have
in place to try to find ways to
improve our
Coverage and our and in honor of
the fact that we make a pledge
to our employees when they're
hired and we have to honor that
pledge and so the question
Representative about that that
you brought up about planning
for the future that has been
part of the report that they've
given to I pop so I just wanted
to assure you all that that we
that is being addressed and
hopefully in this interim coming
twenty twenty three I will have
more answers and more plans to
present.
Rest all of these issues thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Representative
Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Lara.
And Mr Miller agency second time
to thank you for being here
today the questions I have
there's no appropriation
attached to this bill.
Yet the cost is going to be
recurring.
And that gives me great it gives
me heartburn Mr chairman I was
kind of referred to by another
up.
Person appear on the panel but
I'll tell you where that extra
money is coming from it's coming
from the oil and gas industry
and I want to recognize him for
all that they do for our state
especially in education because
of that wasn't for them school
not get rebuilt.
our first responders would be in
a heck of a bind the list goes
on and on and it's due to the
oil and gas associate of oil and
gas industry Mr chairman we have
seen in the past over my many
years at pier.
Fluctuation in the price of oil.
And it has either been a
blessing to us are all of a
sudden what we gonna do we're
having to scramble to make sure
that we do go back and be able
to bring fund all of these
things that we as the
legislative body has done.
And how are we going to get it
done.
This is a recurring.
Appropriation appropriation the
dressing for this particular
bill.
In my concern there is Mr
chairman and Representative
Lara.
Is this going to be a direct
appropriation to the districts
instead of flowing through this
CG.
Mr chair Representative Ezzell I
would like to defer to my
experts on the question.
Mr chair representative the
executive budget recommendations
of bills in the funding for this
bill which is why there's a not
an appropriation in the bill
but the funding for public
schools which is about ninety
three million
for this bill that that would
flow out through the SCG
under the the governor's budget
recommendations.
Okay Mister chairman I have big
problems with that
Representative floor Mr Miller I
don't understand why it cannot
be directed we are going to pass
this legislation and listening
which is going to cost us over a
hundred thousand dollars what is
not flowing get directly and I
do have a problem with that.
I see it I have visited with a
few teachers over this Mr
chairman and Representative Lara
Mr Miller agency can town.
I have visited with a few
teachers over this granted they
are not first year teachers.
The.
Thank goodness we got him rice
they were all very thankful over
that
I know that there was.
Some things going over there on
the in West Texas area where
there is a sign on bonus for
these first first year teachers
and sometimes that is an
incentive to go over there.
But I just came what is it going
to cost you as far as taxes go
and they had concerns Mr
chairman.
And yes they have gotten a raise
in pay.
And now they're getting this
additional help with insurance
and they're concerned about
their what tax bracket they're
going to be in and what their
tax burden will be Mr Chairman
representative are do
To my experts on the.
Mr chair representative I'll
defer to the other expert
witness.
Mr chair representative so.
When.
Twenty two years of course when.
Teachers got their races this
last year.
And as we've said we anticipate
a premium increase every year we
have been held steady at six
percent for the last two years
and
Those have increased and I think
one of the concerns at that
point was oh my gosh you know my
premiums went up and there went
my race but you're totally
correct that when teachers got
that Rainey's there you know not
only is there.
A minimal impact to the premium
increase it is minimal but that
consideration does have to be
made for that did somebody jump
into the next tax bracket most
of our school employers offer
section a cafeteria plan a
section one twenty five plant
where their health insurance
premiums their portion are
collected before taxes are
assessed so that they don't have
that significant tax burden on
that pay every paycheck but when
you also consider all the other
deductions that are assessed on
that gross pay when you're
talking retiree health care it's
already you're talking social
security here
the I get taxes all those are
going to increase incrementally
with that race.
So when we're looking at this
influx of ten thousand dollars
to the employer to help
contribute to that health
insurance premium.
That's the employer making that
that contribution to that
premium.
The impact to that employee who
may be and that highest premium
which is a Blue Cross blue
shield hi option family plan
that's the highest premium that
we have right now.
If they're they're impact would
be our calculations were about
five hundred dollars per month.
Would be their forty percent to
pay for that premium so a two
hundred and fifty dollar per
paycheck so there this influx of
this ten thousand dollars and
then still sixty percent
contribution from that employer.
The tax impact to that employee
may be more because they're
forty percent and if they're on
a one twenty five plan that
amount has reduced
significantly.
To be taken out before taxes so
now they're paying our taxes are
going to be S. as will be more
so there is that impact for
teachers to consider.
Mr chairman that is.
As Mr Thomas stated it is
something to be considered.
I was also reading I do like to
read everything pertaining to
need these guys to come up Mr
chairman and Representative Lara
and I'm reading the bill
analysis from the New Mexico
independent community colleges
the council of university
presidents.
Alex New Mexico tech and I'm
assuming that you.
Mr Chairman representative Laura
have done the same and I'm sure
your expert witnesses there have
also read the.
And.
Just these poor that I named off
do have concerns.
Mr chairman I would like to hear
some sort of X. men explanation
why.
These four do have those
concerns that they do in regard
to.
Of how it will increase the
employer benefit cost and how
are they going to be able to
cover.
Is Mr chair representative.
Yes you are right the PSA
participating higher education
institutions will pay more
because more of the cost of the
healthcare PNM is shifting to
the employer
but the the executive budget
recommendations accounts for
that and includes
sufficient funding for those
institutions to to cover the the
increased employer cost.
There's there's a hundred
million dollars in the executive
budget recommendations in about
seven million of that will go to
the participating higher
education institutions.
And that number was was
calculated by the Public School
Insurance Authority for each of
those participating
institutions.
Mr Chairman whenever there's
concerns from those entities
that I named off it does make me
go back and re re read again
another this bill is going to
have a significant impact on the
state of New Mexico my concern
is it is a recurring costs it is
over a hundred million dollars
recurring cost and that will
probably rise if I know this but
legislative body in the needs of
our state I can see that rising
my concern is are we going to be
able to afford.
My other concern here is.
We have one particular school
district in our state that is
bigger than everybody else and I
think you all know who I'm
talking about.
My concern is I Representative
let me think one two three four
of four different school
districts in my particular
district my concern is those for
school districts right there.
And whenever we have one school
district that has over eighty
five.
Five thousand students is that
correct my remembering that
right it's it's a huge number.
Of verses are more rural areas
of the state in December
including the rural areas of the
state there is a concern there.
Are we going to be Mr chairman
and Representative floor next
year are we going to see.
State employees coming to us
one I just did the same thing
for them because it seems like
we are leaving them out.
I see there being a problem Mr
chairman I'd like to hear
Representative Flores thoughts
on this Mr chair Representative
Ezzell.
That has been discussed and that
that concern has been brought up
to me.
What I do what what I like to
think is that there are things
already happening to address a
and I will refer back to House
Joint Memorial one incident will
too where those for the studies
are are happening for state
employees because I I personally
believe Mr chair and
representative that this is just
one part of the effort to
possibly consolidate all school
employees and all state
employees under one umbrella
eventually this is my personal
thought of what's happening but
this is where I am vision that
that's gonna that's gonna moving
it's moving forward to because I
believe Mr chair representative
that this would create a
A very large base of employees
that are working and it gives us
as a state the ability to
bargain for lower rates.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Lara thank you
for that explanation and I'm in
agreements with more people you
have a fault in it the better
deal you're gonna get so Mister
chairman my.
Statement to you would be why
don't we do this all together
let's look at house memorial one
house memorial two let's see if
we can come up with some sort of
compromise it's gone because the
hell out of this I know that and
in the future I'm not sure how
we're gonna pay for because Mr
chairman and Representative Lara
renewables are gonna do it.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you without seeing further
debate all entertain a motion.
Representative to pass.
Bill one old too right so we
have a motion for do pass on
house bill one oh two.
Second by Representative Roybal
Caballero
and secretary if you call the
roll on the to pass motion.
Representative Baca yes
Representative.
Yes I would like to explain my
will.
Representative Ezzell no.
Representative corolla yes.
Representative her yes
Representative lane the.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative more about Maya
yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative yes madam vice
chair yes.
Mr chair yes so Representative
before an answer Representative
Chatfield explains the.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair when
I when I hear the discussion on
this I see that certain
institutions are left out and
The.
Right here the discussion I see
that certain is institutions are
left out of this I think it's a
good thing I support it but we
need to be inclusive of of some
of our junior colleges and in
institutions where it's not
where that's not appropriated to
them I think it would be better
as a direct appropriation the
sits in the executive budget
this afternoon I will set a set
it in the House Appropriations
and we will reconcile.
Executive budget with the LFC
budget so if it's in the
executive budget but not the LFC
and we choose not to take the
act recommendation that leaves
and unfunded mandate possibly to
some of these rules so I would
hope that we can work on this
thing is it goes through the
various committees to insure
that is not in for unfunded
mandate and to be sure this for
everyone thank you Mr chair
right thank you in with that you
have a do passed by a vote of
ten to to to pass on house bill
one of thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you members of the
committee all right so I
understand Representative Rehm
is making his way over you have
Representative ring but first we
do have some students so as we
make the transition
Representative Rehm you're
welcome to come set up at the
presenters terror but do you
have a sponsor if you could
announce who you all are within
if the students could briefly
introduce.
Has the New Mexico.
Health care.
F. here today group of students
with two sponsors who are from
Albuquerque high school there
there educators and two of them
Representative testified Monday
virtually on house bill one
twelve and one thirty four and
in fact one of the statements
from.
This is
if you would briefly introduce
yourself.
If you which is.
yeah.
My name is John from the deposit
by one of the two and also the
students next on house bill one
twelve thirty four to come off
before the committee they're
available to testify on mine.
Good morning my name is a lot of
images and I am the vice
president.
Good morning it's construction.
Hello my name is.
The situation is here
Representative.
My name.
Good morning I'm can't cope man
I'm one of the funds to the pot.
Do you remember.
Representative.
I move wise with
get our free time I hope is.
have.
Great well welcome to you all
for being here and thank you for
participating in the various
ways in education and our
legislative process I thank you
all for being here.
Of course all right so we have
Representative redeem to
possible eighty five so please
we do brief introduction
presentations of legislation
here so if you would thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill eighty five
is of the discussion about
dividing up the Albuquerque
public schools into smaller
districts when I speak with
fellow legislators and
Bernalillo county the needs on
the west side of the river river
or different than the needs on
the side of the river and this
is not an attempt to go ahead in
Make one side with more money
than the other side.
In the past I've heard these
discussions and so how do we
divide the money equitably and
what we're eight in the previous
and I'm talking probably fifteen
years ago of presentations
everyone tried to carve PNM into
their district.
And the reason was because there
was a windfall of money.
If you notice in this bill I
don't set out the districts I
don't set out the boundaries it
is a committee that will
determine the boundaries.
What I do say about the money is
will take all the money we're
going to put it one pot.
And then on October first we're
going to see you have X. number
of students and you get your
fair share.
That way no one knows and no one
district has a disproportionate
amount in Bernalillo county.
Another criticism that I heard
is that we're going to not on
our the current contracts and
procedures that
APS has and that's not true if
we go to page seven one eleven
you'll see the rights and
protections of employees
provided by policies and
procedures of the existing
school district shall be
maintained upon completion of
redistricting so I'm not trying
to interfere with any of the
contracts what I found is that
school districts that are
smaller.
For more successful.
And insert to their students and
their parents.
Up better and that's what I'm
trying to get to.
That I notice if we go to our
FIR and we go to the beach well
so last page under other
substantially the issues it
shows that studies show that
smaller school districts are
more successful.
And I want to point out to the
committee that Rio Rancho school
district was part of APS.
And they broke away.
And they have a higher
graduation rate than APS that
they're doing better.
This legislation is meant to go
ahead and help our students and
our parents and improve our
education and Bernalillo county.
With that Mr chairman I'll stand
for questions all right thank
you for the same presentation we
will go to members of our
audience of those that wish to
speak support of house bill
eighty five if you're online
please indicate by the raising
your hand.
Those in our audience here in
person those in support of house
bill eighty five if you to keep
a raise your hand please.
Support.
All right.
Okay I do have one in support
online it looks like.
Okay it doesn't look like maybe
just maybe they're anticipating
all right so we'll go to support
opposition to house bill eighty
five so those of you online here
in opposition if you'd indicate
by raising your hand those in
the room on my left hand side if
you're in opposition to house
bill eighty five if you'd
indicate there is your hand.
I hope it's my left hand side.
All right going once twice I
don't see anybody all right now
my right hand side those in
opposition okay so please
superintendent.
You have up to two minutes
welcome.
Chairman members committee thank
this opportunity to speak and
thank you Representative reading
for the dialogue is Albuquerque
New the issue Albuquerque public
schools is proud to be a large
diverse urban suburban rural
school district there's a real
advantages to being large we
have more resources we have more
choices more opportunities and
we recognize economies of scale
but we do recognize that one
size doesn't fit all which is
why we have learning so.
Four zones supervised by
associate superintendents allows
to combine the advantage of
being a large school district
with more personalized approach
to education need to share the
to the committee thank you right
thank you others are speaking
support not rough please board
member welcome thank you good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
alignment to a part of that
board president for Albuquerque
public schools I just wanted to
apprise you of us a practice
that we're currently engaged in
the board of education has been
working with the council of
great city schools ought to form
a new governance that focuses on
student outcomes we recognize
that the school district needs
to reflect the vision and values
of our diverse community so last
fall we went to the community
and asked what our students
should know and should be able
to do we met and all four city
quadrants and reached out to
newcomers Spanish speakers
tribal representatives
neighborhood groups special
education families nonprofit
organizations and student groups
of the public have public input
was the impetus for us to set
for specific measurable and
relevant goals that we set for
the next five years the
administration is now working on
internal goals that will allow
us to monitor progress and shift
course if we're and if we're not
just which of course if we're
not meeting our path to success
this is difficult work but we
are dedicated to making a
difference in the lives of all
the students we serve Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I ask that you allow
us to keep local control and
continue to work toward moving
are large and vastly diverse
urban school district forward
thank you great thank you others
in opposition in the same row.
Okay will we move to the next
row those in opposition that
wished to speak okay I'll move
to the final Rowe okay ma'am
please welcome.
My name is funny like that
president of the New Mexico
School Superman Association and
you can count on it eighty
three.
we oppose the redistricting of
this is because we think it
should be a initiated locally
the way it's written as the
company that.
Position and.
Could potentially become
unfunded mandates so we support
we support you are opposition
thank you all right thank you so
much please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Remember the committee John
which is with the New Mexico
federation labor once again we
stand in solidarity with our
educators are teaching these
tools and we appreciate the
intent of what is trying to be
done but we actually just
believe that this is the wrong
way to go about trying to fix
some of the problems with our
school system but I respectfully
propose Senator thank you great
others in the same row please
family of two minutes welcome.
Many carry around bring this for
public charter schools New
Mexico we're actually speaking
on behalf of charter schools
that are locally authorized by
the Albuquerque public schools
school board we have concerns
about the legislation because it
would significantly change how
the authorization process is
happening for those schools
because new school boards would
be new on risers which means we
have to renegotiate contracts so
we have some concerns about how
the bill would be structured and
how would be implemented and
wanted to get that for me today
great thank you others I wish to
speak in opposition.
Okay so we've gone through all I
don't have anybody online.
Cool so we'll go to the first
person on my list Representative
box.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Rehm
providing for I have some
questions about this so
Representative Mr chairman in
what year did Rio Rancho of.
Becomes on district.
Mr chairman and Representative
Baca I don't remember exactly
but it's about twenty twenty
five years ago somewhere right
near of thank you Mr chairman
and it is my understanding it.
It was about nineteen ninety is
about twenty five years ago
ninety fourth thank you Mr
chairman but of Mr chairman and
Representative read it was my
understanding is that the
community itself of Rio Rancho
or the errors of their we're the
ones that came for the proposal
for this breaking away so Mister
chairman and of Representative
Rehm have we had communities
within the APS schools that are
asking to be split up were
divided.
Mr chairman and Representative
Baca yes the I think the most
vocal has been the west side.
don't you think so.
It Mr chairman you know I think
that a.
I do agree Mr chairman as far as
in Representative Rehm smaller
districts to someone easier to
move and in make these things
but I was I was kind of looking
Mr chairman and and
Representative read about how
this could be done are we going
I twenty five we going east side
west side real I. forty north
and south because the one thing
for the unintended consequence
of doing this may be I I know
that there's some amazing
facilities on the west side I
know that the athletic
facilities on the on the east
side not so great.
So I think that a Mr Chairman
one of the things I I think
that.
Study this in seeing the
feasibility with getting
community input I think it's a
great way to do this and not me
as a legislator to come here say
we're gonna break up your
district because it Mr chairman
in Representative Rehm if
somebody would say we're gonna
come up and we're going to break
up the also the school district.
I think as a community I think
we would have a lot of concerns
with that so Mr chairman I I.
I do have the special the first
time I agree with providing
funding for of the study to give
APS and it's people's
constituents money so that they
can properly study this see
where the redistricting what it
looks like because the only I
see that can be equal second
German German during kind of
like puts some of our political
boundaries look like so I don't
know that that would be that I
don't think it's going to be so
clear cut and easy Mr chairman
And the
The final piece about it because
it says that it will that will
automatically result in a order
from Pat and I would say Mr
chairman that without in a study
getting the political on input
without being vetted through
that in L. E. S. C..
I think that we're we're we're
we're taking something from a
legislative perspective we
always talk about local control
we've talked a local decision
making I think that for me I
think that's above my pay grade
which is citizen legislator
which is free right volunteer so
Mr Chairman I I think that you
know I agree with this I agree
that there needs to be something
done I do agree with you know
providing funding for about Mr
chairman I think that for us to
make a decision here on this
bill in its current form saying
that it will happen Mr chairman
is is just I think it's not the
the the the responsibility of
this committee Sir right thank
you Representative.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
welcome Representative Rehm
I taught in the Albuquerque
public schools for twenty four
years about seventeen years ago.
And this issue came up about
once or twice regarding the the
break up of APS and I taught at
the my first school was Torrez
consultants right in the middle.
Then I taught a kit Carson then
I thought it went to Vista and
when I first started towards
Gonzales and get Carson I really
did think there was a disparity
in the distribution of the funds
in the supports that occurred in
the district.
But when I went to amount of
this stuff which was a much more
affluent.
Community I realized it isn't it
isn't the district that provides
the support I mean they're
they're pretty even over the
city it was a community.
There was more engagement in a
white upper class men of.
Community then there was on the
whether it is that I taught.
Because that to work all the
time.
They came from poverty all of
those things that had nothing to
do.
With control over the district
by APS.
So only concerns with the
disparity from the District
Court because of the district.
This comes up all the time but
I've never heard of any of my
colleagues or past colleagues
say that we needed to to break
it up.
Eight I really strongly believe
in local control this is thank
you this is one issue where I
think somehow you you Mr
conversation about that because
this has to be local control and
I you know I think about the
amount of money it's going to
take to do this that would be I
don't know how many districts to
a break it up into says about
forty thousand per student size
and I don't know how many
students APS has it's a lot that
would involve creating new
school boards and you.
Administrative things so I have
a real concern in eight I love
you but I don't support this
bill.
Great thank you Representative
provocative thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative we we've been
discussing this for as long as
I've been a Representative and
it it's not ever been able to
gain the kind of support that it
nonsense that it needs to get
anywhere Representative and I'm
sorry for all the reasons that
were stated in the opposition
but most importantly Mr chair I
wanted to bring up the fact that
APS's of the Albuquerque public
schools and the board are very
aware of the multitude of issues
that must be addressed and very
aware of how to address them in
a school district that is large
that is diverse on and that it
represents probably every school
district in the state of New
Mexico and they Mr chair in
their of understanding of the
problems that are associated
with administering such a large
school district they've taken
many steps in the past I would
say since I've been elected to
address representation on a
local
area by area manner so that the
areas that they've divided up
into have area representatives
coordinators we've been invited
as legislators that are in
involved in the US are in the
APS area we've been asked to
participate in our particular
areas and to address the issues
that we could help solve local
control of local input is of
utmost importance in making
these kinds of decisions and I
think APS's done and is on the
path of continuing to do a great
job of trying to address the
multitude of of issues and in
fact.
All of their the results are
proof and graduation rates
improving
you know across the board have
been improvements so I don't
really see any real reason why
we would be addressing
redistricting at this issue are
at this time or at any time I
don't think it's appropriate I
think it's a belongs to to the
local school district and local
communities to make that
decision thank you Mr chair
right thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Rehm it's always
a discussion starter for this
kind of the bill I am a west
side legislator and I have
taught in three quadrants of APS
southeast height southwest
heights and northwest so my
question is are you aware that
studies are very very in
relationship to districts sites
you you said that they show
small but my review as a
graduate student of the study
show that studies have different
outcomes are you aware of that.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
I think that we could all find a
study to for whatever position
you want
But I think that
when we just logically think
about a smaller school
districts.
We tend to know more of the of.
Of the staff on a personal basis
and that's what I'm meaning you
know you hear what you have more
of a personal relationship with
that in that's what I'm hearing
from some of my constituents is
that APS's gotten so big it's
some difficult to go ahead and
meet with with them or or work
with them.
And you know I I did not put in
here boundaries.
And there's a reason why put
didn't put in boundaries it is
it is this group that I want to
discuss that.
And hearing the concerns from
this committee if you want to
turn this into a memorial where
it is studied.
Over the summer to see if it
would be feasible I have no
problem with that.
I think there needs to be a
discussion about making a
smaller district in the
advantages.
And if if you want to study it
then this become a memorial.
I usually don't take me
legislation and say I want to
change it to that but if that's
the desire of this committee I
think the discussion needs to
continue.
Mr chair just have one other
question there's no
appropriation when I went
through all the sections from
deems for the members which
could be around twenty people
and school board members don't
get preteens currently all the
way to studies some very
detailed studies
I don't understand who would
fund this and where the money
would come from do you have a
response to that
madam chair and I mean Mr
chairman and madam vice chair I
was in visioning PED would fund
this but you know maybe it's not
clear in in the legislation
thank you those are my questions
Mr chair thank you all except
the motion from the committee.
Representative do not pass okay.
A second.
Table
table you are at a table all
right so we have a tabling
motions by Representative
Trujillo a second by
Representative Garrett madam
secretary called the roll on the
tabling motion please.
Representative okay Mister chair
if I may just get some
clarification so this is what it
is not at the table motion is
non debatable yes Sir okay
Yes.
Representative Chatfield no to
table.
Representative Ezzell is a.
Is to.
Representative girl.
Representative Herrerra yes.
Representative Lane no.
Representative Lara yes to
table.
Representative meraviglia yes to
table.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes to table.
The end of Trujillo yes thank
you madam vice chair yes to
table Mr Chairman yes to table.
All right tend to to by a vote
of ten to to bill has been
tabled.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
All right Representative block.
I thought I saw him walk in.
We get Representative Lago.
So.
I just heard so we're waiting
for all right through chairman
of that that for one second I
apologize no worries so we have
house bill one oh seven we're
gonna roll over house bill one
of seven is that correct
Representative that's correct
all right so house bill one of
seven we will see another time
and house bill one oh eight that
is the bill will be on so
Representative we do brief
presentations of bills in here
so when you're ready welcome
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee so the
I bring before you today house
bill one oh eight which would
require the New Mexico public
eight education department to
identify New Mexico's public
schools according to whether
they properly serve the needs of
students.
This bill would allow children
who are in chronically failing
schools to be able to transfer
out of that failing school and
have a higher priority in New
Mexico's open enrollment
statutes.
This would break barriers for
children who are under served
based on their zip code and
allow them to thrive in a better
school environment.
No tell New Mexico's education
systems to be stuck in a school
that is under serving or holding
them back from reaching their
full potential.
And with that I'll I'll make it
short and I'll stand for
questions okay I appreciate that
all right so we will go to
support for house bill one oh
eight so if you're online or in
house bill one oh eight if you
wish to show support and speak
please indicate areas your hand
those out that's online but I'm
going to the audience next so
those of you that are in support
of house bill one eight please
indicate very your hand.
All right please you have up to
two minutes welcome if you
introduce yourself.
After.
I'm.
Change the school for very.
We actually.
It's priority.
It was by the legislature.
It was if you're in the
hospital.
One of our concerns at the time
of need for great with getting
rid of the vision that allows
children out of the.
To have
settled for great.
Block dad back forward using the
new criteria and the new school
accountability framework being
implemented by PED and approved
by the city or.
Thank you.
Right.
Thank you so much others that
we're speaking support all right
so go to opposition is our
opposition to house bill one
await if you're online please
indicate there is your hand.
Give it a moment those of you in
the room opposition to house
bill one away.
All right so we have Jake up
good morning Jake up you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Jacob Vigil
with a New Mexico voices for
children and we would like to
stand in opposition
To H. H. B. one oh eight.
Thank you so much.
All right so I don't see anybody
else in opposition will come
back to committee representative
blamed for.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair actually appreciate
what the Sanchez trying to do
here.
particularly targeting
th students who are living in a
zip code where you their school
you know for whatever reason
isn't performing isn't serving
their needs.
Mr chair at I think though my my
heartburn though and as maybe
like to discern the rationale
is the pecking order so to speak
so.
We're talking about priorities
for Roman students in this only
becomes an issue if you have a
district that's at our school
that's at capacity so now we
have to sort of shape the who
makes listen who doesn't this is
where this comes into play so
I'm just curious Mr chair the
the rationale behind putting
this language in just a second.
Instead of third.
Mr chair the reason I say that
is because I I do have some
concerns about students who
present ten of this the public
school being bumped.
and so maybe just if I can hear
for the rational for putting it
second set third.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
leader lane I appreciate the
question and I I totally get
where you're coming from I think
the children that are in
chronically underserved
districts or schools I think
there is a increase need at
least in that community because
if that child cannot get a good
education where there is owned I
think that they should be higher
prioritized than any other
people on that critical pecking
order as we call it but I think
that.
Well right now Federal
guidelines have limits on how
many children can be in a
classroom so I wish these better
schools that were serving better
their community could create
more programs and hire more
teachers and have more
classrooms and I hope that
something that can be achieved
in the future by allowing this
in this bill thank you Mr chair
Mr chair of.
and I I confess that no expert
in this area but the way that I
read this this priority or
preference for involvement is I
I I don't.
want to be in a situation where
students who present to the
public school get left off the
list I don't think that's
helpful for them either
particularly if
they were one of the students
that transfer and now they have
to go but anyways I think.
Mr chair you know if this passes
along moves along today or if
you bring it back in future
years.
If you would consider swapping
second third I think actually
I'd be in complete support with
what you're trying to do here
it's just that's my concerns I
don't I don't want to bump
consider early in the districts
of thank you Mr chair right
thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative glad you're here
with us today Mr chairman I did
not have an FIR so one of the
analyst has pull this up for me
of.
I'm not going to reiterate what
representative Lancia
Representative plot can you tell
me how this will affect in any
way negatively or positively the
of Martinez Yazzie lawsuit
please thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative I I
think it actually would help
becoming can into compliance
with the lawsuit by giving these
children in under served
communities a higher priority
and able to get a better
education in the state of New
Mexico as the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit did compel the state to
do so I think this would
actually go in the right
direction Mr speaker Mr chair
Representative Representative
Ezzell.
Okay thank you of.
Mr chairman and Representative
block I know it's going to
create more work as far as our
administrative person because
obviously and the.
I think your concern here might
be.
Properly placed is if you want
to call it that for those
students that are here.
if the family is in active duty.
So tell me some of the problems
at the showing students might be
facing if their family is
affiliated with military base.
And I know that there's we have
quite a few.
Of those in our state so tell me
the problems that you see that
you would like to see this bill
particularly in particular be
able to solve.
Thank you Mr speaker aren't Mr
Chairman representative I agree
with you I think that this bill
actually would keep it the
status quo regarding folks in
the military and military
families I know some of the
concerns at least we have I live
in Alamogordo and we have a base
right outside of town and we
have children there that
actually they can't get a lot of
the state resources such as a
the free lunch programs that we
have in New Mexico because the
military so unfortunately this
bill doesn't hone in directly on
those kids but it doesn't change
their order any means thank you
Mr chair okay and.
Mr chairman I I don't know what
the outcome of the front of the
does take place and.
As far as charters to schools go
In the lottery system that a lot
of them have in place Mr
chairman.
And Representative block.
If a student is going to a
charter school and I do want to
change to another one with I'm
assuming that they would have to
get through the lottery process
to get to be a change this
other.
To another charter school tell
me about the fix that it would
have on our charter schools.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative that's a very
good question and this bill
actually doesn't give specifics
to those charter schools and
what they would need to do they
would need to promulgate new
rules but they would also have
probably I would guess have to
go back in the lottery Mr
speaker Mr chair.
Okay Mister chairman and
Representative block I do see in
your bill on the fact that a
ticket and.
This lawsuits.
So we are not going to allow
student Mr chairman and
Representative block to change
schools input that particular
class over the role meant
requirements that are that are
already in place right now is
that correct thank you Mr chair
that's correct at the Mr
chairman that's all I have thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative bye.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative lot of.
I I again I I agree with a lot
of this but to some
clarification as far as how this
actually plays out because I do
Mr chairman I believe that
students should have if they're
not being currently the
receiving education quality
education that they are entitled
to more provided that we're
expect to find that there be
some flexibility Mr chairman and
Representative block the
question is kind of like how
this actually plays out in the
in unseen burn it may put on
school districts so
Mr chairman and Representative
block as far as we currently
have open enrollment as a as it
is a request that part of our
state already how does this is
this overlapping does it the
seat the clarifier or how does
this fit into an existing policy
that we have Mr Chairman thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative Baca yes the
current law already allows
children to transfer between
schools but gives priority with
those in the same school
district this bill would merely
prioritized children who are in
failing schools and determined
by the PED as a second priority
after those with in the school
district and and before those
who previously attended the
school and then all other
applicants after them Mr chair
of Mr chairman and
Representative and I'm looking
around I keep looking for
somebody from PED Mr Chairman
representative block what is our
current of system for school
designation I remember it some
time ago but I have to leave
that's not the area that are
working now so we have been.
Thank you for.
Can you come up to the Mike
concern Mr for sure.
Please please introduce
yourself.
Mr chair and technical so thank
you I think you got a little bit
of hope that.
Was this the third time is the
charm good morning Mr chair
representative thank you for the
questions I'm Jacqueline because
Dallas W. secretary at the
public education department we
currently you specific
indicators that are given to us
that meet the requirements from
US DOE under the elementary and
secondary schools act up in our
for I don't want to sit here and
read to you what you may have
already read but there is a good
description of the different
categories that we are required
to categorize schools into so.
we have spot quickly spotlight
schools are sort of the top
performing schools there's going
above the seventy fifth
percentile there's traditional
support schools
that's that are still scoring
above the threshold for the need
for so a school improvement or
intervention there's T. SI
schools they have one or more
subgroups consistently under
performing.
there's additional targeted
support to schools and they have
one or more subgroups performing
as poorly as the lowest five
percent in the state we have CSI
schools they have Department
performing in the bottom five
percent of title one schools in
the state this is a federal
requirements so they really
focus on those those schools
funded by those federal funds
or their high school failing to
graduate thirty three percent of
their students or they have not
exited additional target support
intervention.
And then at the sort of the
highest level
in need of improvement if you
will MRI schools would be
current CSI schools right now
because in New Mexico we don't
have any MRI schools designated
currently okay but those would
be schools that are currently
CSI schools that would be
exiting what that have not
exited over three years at that
designation and we will be re
categorizing schools for the
twenty five twenty six school
year when we've had enough data
again after the pandemic.
there's about thirty thousand
students that attend ninety five
PSI schools right now.
And H. bill one await would
prioritize transfer enrollment
for those students to open seats
in any of the seventy eight
percent of schools statewide
that do not require improvement
interventions at this time.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for your answers W.
secretary secretary I guess the
question is this is with the
disconnect with designation and
with COVID as far as how these
things because attendance with
that that has difficulty so Mr
chairman is this for the
designation the with the impact
of COVID is is is is still
Accurate and at some point I Mr
chairman and Representative
block at what point triggers at
what level is as we we I think
if of Mr chairman us County I
think you have six or seven
designations of at least so at
what level would this trigger
that somebody being you know
what Representative block is
putting forward in a in that
regard representative Mr
Chairman representative block
what would you anticipate what
level because again is this
trigger if you're not at the
highest level you can go into
another screen is it somewhere
in the middle I think that is a
question that I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you Mr chair and I will
defer to the W. secretary if you
have anything to say but.
As I read the less it
legislation I did note that
there seems to be some language
that skips over but from TS I
schools over to MRI schools and
in between there are CSI schools
so I I guess I I would probably
recommend that maybe some
amendment to that language occur
because it's skipping one of
those levels and they can get
very complex as I was trying to
summarize them for you as you
can imagine so I think we would
need to look at that in terms of
Making sure that there's a
progression right in terms of
the needs of the school and
where a parent might want to
transfer their student to I also
am concerned along those lines
with the numbers in terms of how
many seats of Mr chair is
Representative lane said we
don't appear based on what I can
read in the legislation to have
the number of seats in the
schools that don't have
designations to accommodate all
requests and so then I wonder
what happens in communities when
that it may be re enforces how
those parents are feeling in
terms of not being able to
access something that they're
trying to access.
And thank you Mr chairman
perfect segue into my last
question and this is this as far
as Mr chairman we've already
talked about vacancies but I can
foresee that this would have an
impact on food facilities as far
as the need for more classrooms
or otherwise based upon people
coming here and Mr chairman also
as far as transportation who
pays for the transportation of
to these of to these schools who
pays for and if it's the
district that's going to be
responsible as I believe that
probably is would that be a
negative impact to schools
budgets for this Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative real quick about
the bill I did see that in the
FIR did mention transportation
and that is certainly a concern.
But I think that that should not
hold back a child from being
able to access education and as
you said before
Right now New Mexico are funded
per student so we would just
fund those better schools that
are doing their job with more
funding Mr Mr chair
representative and I defer to
the W. secretary.
Senator thank you Mr chair
members of the committee this is
a really interesting question.
often and when parents are
requesting transfers they will
be expected to transport their
own student this is a complex
issue if a student happens to be
wanting to accent from a school
that is at you know
where they may be experiencing
poverty already.
Getting them far away to another
school may not be possible and
an added burden for the family
and if the district were to do
it would definitely affect the
transportation budget which as
you all know given actuation
fluctuating prices that such a
that's often a number that we
are consistently trying to
monitor and look at and see if
there will be enough money at
that point.
Thank you Mr chairman for the
question thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr this year I have a
question about.
Central has behavioral problems
and they're going to a a failing
schools and.
There if they want to transfer
into a a better school but there
I come from a land where few we
compete for students I mean we
want everybody come home down
with the we what students in our
schools so I'm a little bit
unfamiliar with the school
district where the classrooms
are full where the schools at at
Max capacity but.
Does the school have any say so
in whether this child with a
behavioral problem kicks out
another child may not have a
behavioral problem from
attending their school thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chatfield that's
a very good question and this
does not specifically outlined
that in this bill so I believe
it would be implied that that
individual would be able to
transfer if there's open spaces
and other schools however I know
that the funding formula at
least for behavioral health is a
little different and so we would
need to make sure that those
those dollars get into those
proper schools to ensure that
that is compliant with federal
laws as well as New Mexico state
laws thank you Mr chair Senator
chair for every child is kicked
in by higher priority another
child was kicked out by lower
priority so what I think it
would have some type of affect
their and I think this is a good
bill I think it's a good idea
it's a good idea and I think
it's attempted school choice
which way we need to have but
who's left in the failing
schools to know who's left there
within the no appropriation
cation maybe it's more
appropriate to see that each of
those schools comes up and and
meets the standards and provides
a good education and that's all
Mr chairman thank you thank you
Mr chair if I could just in case
they simply reflect that I agree
with you I think if we if we
just take all that students from
these failing schools what's
going to happen to them and I
think the the point of this bill
Mr chair representative is to
make these schools compete with
each other to be better together
across the state and I think
that's really the impetus of
creating this piece of
legislation so children want to
go to different schools that are
better and it makes a higher
priority for the lower schools
to change and make make changes
to ensure that they can be the
best schools they can be
especially in rural areas like
you and I live in you know we
are a little farther out and we
do compete for students so we
want to make sure the students
stay exactly where they are near
where they live thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr you all right
what's the will of the committee
Mr.
Representative a lot of move to
table so we have a tabling
motion second by Representative
will hold a madam secretary if
you call the roll on a table in
motion.
Representative Baca.
Yes and I'd like to spend my
vote.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Ezzell.
The.
Representative Grove yes
Representative for a yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Marable Moya yes
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes to table.
Representative Trujillo.
Madam vice chair yes.
Mr Chairman yes all right so we
have a couple to explain their
vote Representative Baca please
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative block is actually
in in ninety percent of what is
in here I am a hundred percent
on that but it's for those
questions regarding the
transportation costs the
unforeseen costs to both the
parents and the school district
is is why I think that this bill
to be reworked in those
questions answered allied
including the designation
regarding that are somewhat
missing in the middle there and
it will point is triggered is
the reason why I think this
should be thank you for the
laughs please yes thank you I of
of wholeheartedly agree about
most of this one of percent
agree with a couple of things I
would love to see of the two and
three flipped also because the
people that are the students
that are already there and forty
status relationships with these
teachers should not be thrown
out because someone else wants
to come in and then also I would
love some language in here about
years this cut off is as far as
performing schools so let's say
there are not in this top tier
but they're in a tear that still
servicing them well enough that
they are getting there you know
but they but they would really
like to be in this top tier so
they're not being neglected so
to speak but what we I would
love to find some language in
there thank you thank you so
much for by a vote of nine to to
the bill's been tabled thank you
committee thank you
Representative thank you I do
have some announcements for for
you all run off.
All right so.
Seven to eight o'clock the pre
conference breakfast with the
New Mexico school board
association invites all of us to
join our school board members
at the same Fe convention center
I'm getting there I just like my
students all right Santa Fe
convention center seven AM pre
conference breakfasts
Friday Friday morning seven
o'clock February third two
thousand twenty three.
We got it all right the other
thing is that we're going to
have a committee dinner please
RSVP by Friday to Erika please
it'll be on Wednesday next week
okay six o'clock.
Thank you and over and finally
thank you Linda committee will
be at nine o'clock on Friday in
order to accommodate us going to
the breakfast being able to come
back so we'll change the
schedule time because it's not
reflected currently but will
reflect that as well without
further ado thank you all.
