Good weekend, uh, we've got.
Looks like uh 7 bills on the
agenda today and hopefully a
number of them I don't think are
terribly long or difficult.
Hopefully we'll be able to get
through most of them, if not
all, um.
We do, do we know what time the
floor session is today? Is it
1111, so we'll have a hard stop
at at 10:50.
I wish they would fix whatever
that is because it happens once
or twice per meeting and I don't
know. Yeah, particularly early
in the morning when I haven't
had enough coffee yet so um.
But we will have a hard stop at
at 10:50. So please be aware
people and conscious of the time
so we can get through uh the,
the various bills and things
that we have, uh.
I don't see Senator Brandt or
Girola, and so.
Yeah, I heard he was not going
to be here and so I don't know
if Representative Garrola is
gonna come in and so we'll,
we're gonna skip over 64 right
now and that may also limit uh
116. So we're gonna go down to
Senate Bill 68 graduate
scholarship Act changes, Senator
Pope.
While Senator Pope's coming down
just a reminder again for people
when we get to public comment,
people are limited to 2 minutes.
You don't all have to talk about
it if you don't want to, please
try not to repeat what some
people have already said, uh,
the ideas we kind of want to get
a feel for in the room and.
And where people are with
things, but Senator Pope, if you
would please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members. First off, I'd like to
introduce uh Victor Reyes, who
is a student regent at UNM and I
know most of you already know
him.
Well from my
Working up here at the
Roundhouse as well, so he'll be
helping me on this bill.
Uh, Senate Bill 68 amends the
graduate scholarship Act
changing eligibility by
increasing awards.
Uh, the, the amendments will
remove the United States
citizenship or naturalization
requirements as great, great
point average qualification
criteria.
And it removes full-time
enrollment so that folks going
part-time can still receive the
scholarship.
The bill also removes unpaid
internship requirements and
requires continuous enrollment
in consecutive academic years to
maintain qualification for the
scholarship.
Bill also removes the maximum
award of 7200 per academic a
year.
To 100% of tuition and fees
provided the student remains
enrolled.
With that, um, I just want to
say that this bill does not have
an appropriation.
And I will pass it over.
Mr. Reyes to say a few words.
Thank you, Senator Pope, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, it's, I appreciate the
opportunity to have this bill
heard. It's an important bill.
Um, and I think Senator Pope for
carrying it on behalf of the
graduate professionals Students
Association who brought, brought
him this bill and other members
of the UNM and the higher
education community across the
state. I think it's an important
effort to make sure that we are
able to attract graduate
students in some of the key
professions that we are looking
forward to obtain in this state
and I stand open for any
questions.
Thank you. Out to the audience,
those in support, just if you'd
raise your hands.
Thank you, couple. Anyone in
opposition?
Would anybody like to come and
speak on behalf of this bill.
Consider or there you go, we
got, got a mic.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Nathan Bush. I'm with the
University of New Mexico. We
stand in strong support of the
bill, our graduate scholars are
the lifeblood of our future
thinkers, problem solvers, uh,
community service providers, and
we really, uh, hope to sustain
them in their educational
journey. Thank you.
Thank you, Nathan.
Anyone else in support?
You must come up to the
microphone because that's the
only way it goes out to the
webcast, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the League of voters of New
Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
and we also stand in very strong
support. This is very needed,
and we appreciate the sponsor
for bringing forth. Thank you.
Thank you.
And I don't, is there anyone
online?
Do in support
If you would please uh make them
live.
Please go ahead.
Introduce yourself and you have
2 minutes.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Ranji Kodali. I serve as a
graduate dean and the associate
provost for International
Affairs at New Mexico State
University. I'm truly grateful
to Senator Harold Pope for uh
this bill, as was indicated
previously, uh,
This is a much-needed bill
providing opportunities for
Students who otherwise might not
pursue graduate education. So
thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. The 2nd speaker,
please.
OK. Thank you. Um, with that,
uh, anyone in opposition online.
OK.
I'm getting a no, no opposition
online, um, questions from the
committee, please.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Uh thank you.
Senator Pope for bringing this
forward.
A couple of questions I have.
To uh I would like clarification
on page 3 of your bill.
Under section 2, starting with
line 6.
Says students from groups
underrepresented,
underrepresented.
Represented
In graduate education. Give me a
few examples of that, please.
Mr. Chairman Senator.
Uh, that would be groups that
were are socioeconomically
disadvantaged, low income.
Race, religion.
Um, just basically making sure
that those um.
positions are, you know,
inclusive of everyone.
I, I'll give
Mr. Ray is an opportunity to
respond as well. OK, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Pope, um,
Senator, I believe that that
also would represent senator,
yes.
I, I, I, I, I have to catch
myself. We would go toe to toe
when you're representative, so I
have a little bit of PTSD in
this moment, Senator, I have to
admit, at least I'm not
representing uh conservation
voters in Mexico anymore, so.
So, um, I also believe from my
understanding and speaking to um
our administration and members
of the higher higher education
department. This would also
include individuals who come
from communities that aren't
typically represented, rural
communities in particular, um,
which I think is important. So,
um, in addition to the groups
that Senator Pope mentioned, I
believe that rural and um
communities that don't often
send graduate students to
universities would also be
included in that group.
Thank you for that explanation,
and Mr.
Chairman and Senator Pope and
Mr. Reyes.
How, how are these scholarships
distributed where it's gonna be
equitable throughout our state.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Azel, um,
this is a, this is a program.
What happens is that the um the
higher education department
equally distributes is my
understanding, the funding for
to our education, our
institutions of higher
education, and then the um the
individual institutions are able
to use this as a tool to ensure
that they're able to the
students are able to enroll in
their offers.
Thank you very much for that.
I'm also reading Mr. Chairman
and Senator Pope and Mr. Reyes,
their I on it and it says right
now the department report 68
students received the
scholarship in FY 25.
So what is the max that you can
go as far as what money is
available to fund these
scholarships.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't have
that number right here. I might
be able to calculate it while
we're still.
Um, going through these
questions, but I don't have that
answer for you right now. OK,
thank you very much for that
response.
Oh, let's see here.
Also under one of the analysis,
I think this is the committee
analysis, yes, it is, uh.
It well, actually it's from HED
it is stating that they do have
to maintain enrollment.
And the 3.0 grade point average
in consecutive academic years to
be able to continue receiving
this.
But my concern is where are we
removing a doctor of medicine as
an eligible program.
To
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Azel, the
reason is that there are other
scholarship funds that are
primarily used for the um higher
for the um health sciences, uh,
particularly the school of
medicine in particular. So while
this would still cover, for
instance, a doctor or nursing.
Um, it wouldn't cover a doctor
in medicine because there are
separate scholarship funds that
aren't currently from my
understanding, uh, with higher
education and other institutions
that aren't being fully used,
they're not being fully
depleted. Um, and so this
would target some of the
scholarships to some of the
other programs that are
included. And I, I don't want to
give you an incorrect number,
Senator, but I believe that the
number that is available for the
scholarship right now, um, in
the past, in the past HB 2 that
we're currently operating under
right now is about $400,000.
All right, thank you for that
information.
And Mr. Chairman, that's all the
questions I have, Senator, Mr.
Reyes, thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Thornton might miss the.
Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Pope.
I actually like this bill. I
think it's important that we uh
have the opportunity to give
folks opportunities to move on
to graduate school.
I was fortunate enough to be one
of those folks who received a
graduate program support. So I
understand the importance of
that.
Um
The question I have though is
the removal, the only question I
have with regards to this is the
removal of uh of US citizenship
requirement, permanent resident
requirement, and I'm concerned
of funding students who are who
are not uh permanent residents
here or or United States
citizens with the US were with
New Mexico taxpayer funding. So,
why was that removed? Why did
you, why did you make that
requirement?
That, that's the only thing
about this bill that I have some
concerns over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
good to see you again. Um, the
reason that we, that that
requirement is being removed is
they're international students
that are in some of our really
targeted high-key graduate
student programs that our
students that we need to retain
and to keep practicing um their
professions within our state,
and this gives us the ability to
support those students. And so,
um, in addition, Senator, I want
to just make sure you know, they
do have to have met the
residency requirements that are
required to be a
New Mexico resident, for
instance, uh, the same residency
requirements that would be in
place for a student to receive
the Opportunity scholarship.
So while they don't have to be
um US citizens, they do have to
be New Mexico residents.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Pope and uh.
region for bringing this bill.
Um,
Very important, Bill. A few
questions, um, I wasn't clear on
the description if there is a
Uh
Till favor for New Mexico
residents versus others, or is
it pretty much clean across the
board in terms of who gets to be
who gets to receive scholarship.
Mr. Chair, Senator, it must be a
New Mexico resident.
It must be. Thank you.
Um
The uh
Job training is so critical and,
and, and the point of being
able, particularly, I know some
have looked at South American
residents who speak Spanish and
so forth and STEM science is
going to the multiple high-tech
jobs, uh, STEM type jobs here is
a good idea.
But uh I'm, I'm worried because
I know at the University of New
Mexico, I can't remember the
portion of the medical school,
um, so many end up, uh, because,
well, they do residency and they
end up leaving the state. What
are we going to do to people?
What are we going to do for
people who received this
scholarship, you start to
connect them to jobs here.
Is there, is there a provision
instead of actions that line
them up.
With jobs to do internships, uh,
maybe extra income for living
expenses, but without that, we
just may be, you know, uh,
Paying our taxes for a lot of
other states.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
that's not in this bill, but.
Um, I think the plan would be to
Um
Use our current
Systems in place to do that, and
I know we need to do more. I
think you're bringing up a good
point of how we grow our own,
but make sure they don't leave
out of state or go somewhere
else. And so I think we have to
continue to do that work, but I
think this is important because
we have people that have chosen
to be here and be New Mexico
residents. They want to be here.
Um, regardless of
Of their status.
Um
And they want to contribute.
And I think this is a way that I
think you're bringing up a point
is how we transition from the
education into the world.
For
And if I may add to that,
Senator Pope, Mr. Chair, Senator
Hickey, I think the senators
spot on that that's work that
we're already doing within the
higher education space after
this meeting, I'm headed back to
UNM to meet with the science
technology and research
committee uh with the Board of
Regents and what we're talking
about is post graduation
outcomes, and part of that is
making sure that we have the
placements, uh, available in
order for our students,
including in the medical
professions and as you know,
that is a that is our top
priority as a university. Um.
This, this session and, and, you
know, one of the top priorities
I think continuously will be is
to make sure that we are able to
build that healthcare
infrastructure. But I also added
that this bill does require that
there be internships that are
practiced. And I think that that
is another tool to give people
the career placements and to
start getting them incorporated
within the the field of study
that they're working on. And so
what we know is that when
students are here, we are able
to recruit them, they stay here.
They're much more likely to stay
in New Mexico. And I think that
this bill is an important tool
to help.
Keep people in our state and
instead of leaving um and never
being able to, to obtain them
back. And so, um, I know that
for instance, in the program
that I'm in,
The students that we graduate
are very likely to stay in state
and to practice in state and
that's what we're trying to
encourage.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
The, uh, I
Very likely is hope. Hope is not
a strategy.
Um
I, and I'm not sure how to do
this. I think one of our
functions in the legislature has
to progressively become
oversight to see that we're
getting the results that we um
are funding.
And so I don't want to mess it
up and have.
put an amendment on saying that
uh we you return in a year, but
come back with a report, uh,
verbal as well as written as to
what it is specifically that's
being done, make those linkages,
at the internships, and then
what are the results of that?
So that we know um rather than
just wishing that we're doing
that we are actually are
succeeding in getting these
people to stay in New Mexico.
So, basically I'm asking
voluntarily Department of Higher
Education, uh, the universities,
uh, business chambers to come
together. Sounds like you've got
some framework that you need to
put a structure and and they um
Uh, a report to the structure to
be sure that this is happening.
So I would just ask Mr. Chairman
if
They could take this on and I
see you were talking and maybe
you've got a great answer for
us. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Mr.
Chair, thank you, Senator and uh
hopefully we've done enough on
our STEM center of excellence.
I think that has a little more
oversight on it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
If not
Somebody like to make a motion.
Senator Hickey.
What is your motion? Thank you.
We have a motion for a due pass.
Well, I think once we've stopped
the debate, he can't make it as
part of that. This was a react
the, the question was because he
had just debated, can he now
make the motion?
Once we've stopped the bait,
I've looked around. Nobody else
has debate. Now we're wide open
for emotions, so Senator Hickey
makes the motion for a due pass
seconded by Senator Azell. If
you'll call the roll, please.
Oh
Yes.
yes, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members. Thank you.
OK, the next bill that we've
got.
Whoa
Is the education retirement
changes, Senator Figueroa, as
she's coming down, this is
Senate Bill 75 following that,
we'll go to Senate Bill 82, the
public school capital outlay
changes, which I'll be carrying.
Mr. Chairman.
Before we uh carry on, I, I
move.
The Amendment 230251.1 for
discussion purposes.
Thank you
So we do have an amendment to
Senate Bill 75.
Moved for discussion purposes,
so we're going to start with on
that amendment if that's
appropriate, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Senator for moving that
amendment.
To start with that amendment,
this bill was heard at
investment and pension oversight
during interim and at that point
we did not catch.
The peace that dealt with gifts
is superseded by a gift act, so
instead of making changes to the
language in the ERB, the
amendment says we're just gonna
repeal that section, because all
of the folks need to follow the
gift act.
Anyway
So that's the discussion of the
amendment.
We can discuss the rest of the
bill after.
Thank you. So we are discussing
the amendment only.
The first I out to the audience,
you all probably don't have the
amendment, but you heard the
descriptions or anybody that
particularly wants to support or
oppose the amendment.
OK.
To the committee chairman, I
move that we adopt senate.
Uh, education committee.
Amendment 230 for adoption. You
have a motion and a 2nd. 1st, is
there any other discussion on
the amendment?
But make sure people have an
opportunity.
If not
You'll call the role on the
amendment.
Boom. Yes.
Send
Hickey. Senator No.
The dramas, yes.
T
Yes.
Yes.
Senator, you have an amended
bill now and so now we are on
Senate Bill 75 as amended. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
committee, uh, the bill does 6
things.
One of them we've already
discussed in the amendment.
appeals the section dealing with
gifts.
Um, 4 of the other items are
things that.
Currently practiced by the ERB.
This is clarifying language in
current practice, which is why
it has no appropriation attached
to it.
The one section that is new is
the section that allows ERB to
share information with Pera,
where a member might have some
years of credit in both.
Um, but the two institutions are
prohibited from sharing that
data, so a person might be
receiving a pension from Pera
and not realize they have some
years in credit available to add
to that in the ERB.
So this is a request to allow
ERB and ERB to share that
information with Perra.
Um, the other pieces are
outlined clearly in the FAR, but
they are to allow unclaimed
contributions to be deposited in
the retirement fund.
Which is already current
practice, there they sit until
the beneficiary or can comes to
claim them.
Um, to clarify the contribution
period, which is 5 years, but it
causes some confusion, so the
clarifying language says the
last day of the 60th month,
unless you're contract employee,
in which case it's the last day
of the year.
And to allow flexibility in
buying service credit.
Or military members who.
For members who have military
service and want to use it to
buy bread.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
think we can stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator. Um, and so
first out to the audience with a
quick show of hands, those in
support.
And the opposition.
If you'd like to come up and
voice your support or just
stand, you know, with the, the
hand, whichever you like, you
need to come up to a microphone.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Richard Romero, I am
a registered lobbyist
representing the New Mexico
Association of Educational
Retirees, and we support this
legislation strongly. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else, Marla?
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I am
president of the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational Leaders
here representing the NEM cell
that is the acronym, also
Superintendent Association on
behalf of Stan Rounds. Uh, we
appreciate the bill's sponsor
and stand in full support of
this motion.
Thank you, Marla.
Oh Bonnie, I'm sorry.
Confuse you with Marlo's show. I
apologize, Bonnie.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of AAUW New
Mexico and the League of Women
voters of New Mexico, we stand
