Yes.
Yes I heard to.
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Vice chair care at their.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum.
All right thank you madam
secretary good morning everybody
happy St Patrick's day I hope
you all got some rest last night
You as well Senator now you all
are burning the Midnight Oil as
well so we'll start off Senate
bill seventeen so Senator
welcome good morning
got ready.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
morning everyone.
A simple seventeen is a bill
that I've started to get very
excited about
it creates a family income index
of the L. E. S. C. members will
remember that we heard from Kim
Johnson of from the this is a
retiree math and science group I
always forget the acronym that
has suggested there's better
ways to look at and defined
poverty.
New Mexico we have the highest
poverty rate among our children
of any state in the nation so
the idea behind this bill is to
have a two year pilots will
we'll both have pilot
Representative Romero
it to your pilot will.
Look at and determine the of
family income index for all the
schools in New Mexico
they will categorize kids into
families students into I.
And the two groups that we're
going to be talking about today
are a called the extremely low
income and low income I'm so
extremely low income as the
bottom lowincome is next so the
taxation revenue department the
Human Services department and
census information all have the
imho you with the department of
education to basically rank all
the schools in the state and
this is what a Kim Johnson
presented to the LFC then we
have I believe it's thirty
million for two years we will be
able to look at about a hundred
schools in the seventy one
districts they're going to be
reading and then we're going to
ensure that each district that
qualifies oh we only use ten
percent of those schools so we
spread this funding around so it
will be a a of funding
distribution directly to each of
these schools
if the in we we set a bottom cap
of twenty thousand of fifteen
million doesn't go real far but
at least this is a a pilot they
have to focus on reading and
math and then professional
development tutoring after
school summer enrichment
programs community schools
services parent family
engagement services for native
American children and then they
decide how they're going to
spend this.
Money for those purposes.
So that's essentially what it is
I am happy to answer any
questions I do think that the
secretary of education is
probably on Mr chairman and if
he could make some comments
also.
Sure.
Secretary.
Just when I found in the races
and.
Right will promote in.
All right good morning
secretary.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman again morning members
of the committee thanks for the
this opportunity and and for
hearing this really important
bill and I just want to say just
a deep and sincere thanks to a
sponsor for all of the hard work
working with us over a long
period of time really making
this a bill that I think we can
be proud of a bill this very
innovative I think it's really
gonna put New Mexico on the
forefront with regard to how we
use really precise data to make
targeted investments really for
the purpose of attacking
concentrated poverty and the
affect the concentrated poverty
has a schools and so I think the
the approach we're taking will
will soon be copied by many
around the nation and I think
the the Senator eloquently
stated some of the the many
important facets of this bill
notably that this is really
going to put resources in the
hands of our schools that have
the highest concentrations of of
students living in circumstances
of poverty is gonna put it
toward the the things that we
know make a difference that
research shows make a difference
both in the the academic portion
and in the student support
portion of what it is that we're
trying to do and this gives the
legislature a really important
vehicle for another way that you
can determine how funding goes
out to schools across the state
and this gives us some time to
to really look at this program
determine how it works make the
adjustments that we need to in
order to ensure that this
vehicle accomplishes what what
we set out to do so again I just
wanna to thank all of those who
who spent time on this and I I
would be remiss if I didn't say
a special thank you to secretary
Schardin Clarke from the tax
revenue department this is the
way state government is supposed
to work
I'm so as far as the
accountability measures school
districts have to include the
interventions planned each year
in their educational plan the
basement to the Department and
then each school district that
receives a distribution we'll
have to show at the end of the
year a detailed description of
how each of these schools has
used the funding and if they can
measure the impact of student
income so we have I think we
have a for the pilots and how we
stand for questions.
Great thank you senator thank
you Mr secretary so we'll go to
the attendees list those in
support of Senate bill seventeen
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Given moment.
All right six so you'll have up
to two minutes.
less is more as I always say you
have up to two minutes Jack
please give up to two minutes.
What do Mister chairman Senator
Stewart I'm check your calcium a
principal partner with this
innovative technology
partnerships in Albuquerque.
Thank you for the support
education initiatives in the
state of New Mexico for almost
fifty years and different
organizations one of those are
currently is as co chair of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
education workforce committee
with Amanda Aragon.
IT is strongly is in support of
Senate bill seventeen as a
method for us to examine how
targeting individual schools
with extra funding.
To promote and assist them.
Might be able to feed into
future initiatives.
To address the equalization
formula.
I am also a board member of the
coalition of excellence in
science and math education C. E.
S. E..
The organization that Senator
Stuart mentioned that Kim
Johnson is working with us.
To develop a much more
robust model for identifying
schools that are in need of
assistance.
Keller initiative by PED of US
secretary Senator Stewart is to
be applauded as a very quick we
to get money money to schools
that need that kind of
assistance thank you very much
for the opportunity this morning
to speech.
Right thank you Jack.
All right so we'll go to really
made.
Morning Willie Mae of up to two
minutes.
Mr chairman thank you so much I
am willing more tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico scored Association and Mr
chairman members of the
committee we at like centers is
stored are excited about this
legislation as well in a minute
be a support circle seventeen
which sends additional financial
support for school districts to
provide academic social and
emotional intervention and
specifically the funds is the
harder targeted to school
students and schools most
acutely impacted by concentrated
poverty the bill will identify
school districts with the
greatest property to provide
supplemental funding to provide
supports for students.
New Mexico scored Association
supports this funding that's
going to go to our schools for
instructors literacy
interventions and in space
instruction and other inventions
we especially appreciate the
twenty million appropriation
your market HFC that will be
utilized over the next three
years to fund initiatives we
think Senator Stewart for all
her work that she does for the
students the students and the
children of our state and we
**** Committee to favourably
consider this piece of
legislation thank you great
thank you.
All right so go to Ashley good
morning actually about two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
support this bill according to
the national coalition on school
diversity concentrated poverty
in schools creates and sustains
disparities in academic outcomes
the evidence based approach
proposed in this legislation
targets and provide support to
some of the most in the schools
we appreciate this and the
fiscal accountability measures
being taken we urge you to
support SB seventeen as it is a
great start to addressing the
needs of the most at risk
students thank you.
Right thank you.
All right merry.
Good morning merry of up to two
minutes please.
Morning Mr chair
and committee members we would
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward we
stand in strong support of
Senate bill seventeen we like
the innovative collaborative
inter departmental
it workings of this bill and
believe that it is the type of
information that we need moving
forward in New Mexico public
schools so we urge Committee
support and thank you very much.
Thank you.
More stand.
Learning expanding of up to two
minutes good morning Mr chair
members the committee stand
around on behalf of the state
superintendents association a
colors of New K. leaders we want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward we're
delighted that of the secretary
of education our PED partners
are exploring better ways for us
to care for our educational of
needs within the state targeting
this group of students in the
particularly these the schools
are will indeed we thank you
give us a great foundation for
future design an exploration of
funding so will affect the
sponsoring this for the
secretary for support we want
you to know of our full support
for this in the basket Act
favorably thank you.
Thank you all right we'll go to
Dennis.
Learning Tennessee about two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I don't want to
necessarily echo stand comments
he speaks for organization on
the superintendents association
but we do want to highlight that
the Senate finance committee
amendments for house bill two
has actually raise the amount of
money available for this
particular funding stream from
twenty million to thirty million
and we are excited at the
opportunity to really move the
needle for students in poverty
please stand in support of this
bill with us thanks so much
great thank you.
All right we'll go to Steve
morning Steve you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
see Anya's NDA New Mexico
government relations director on
behalf of our members and to
echo the words of our any New
Mexico state president Mary par
Sanchez we thank the sponsor for
bringing forward this
legislation and the secretary
for is supported vision this two
year pilot program does the
right thing by directing much
needed funds to schools and
students that suffer the highest
poverty rates in the state it's
common sense school policy and
as a you that stand for equality
and equity public education for
all students we're very proud
and look forward to making this
bill a common practice not only
for our state but hopefully for
the rest of the country for this
reason we respectfully request
that you vote in the affirmative
thank you.
Thank you.
All right great.
Good morning okay good morning.
Good morning Mr chair I imagine
students and APS on a member of
the sectors teacher buys you
more I'm a school master fellow
with the United States
department of education I'm
speaking today in support of
Senate bill seventeen this bill
addresses the systemic
educational inequities prevalent
throughout New Mexico and eight
it really at addresses the need
for greater greater equity and I
determine the level of needs for
the school communities by
providing providing targeted
wraparound supports and using a
separate funding stream I
believe this is a very
innovative targeted effort to
address the schools who have the
greatest needs by putting that
monies and and in school
communities that need it so that
they could provide for greater
school counselors resource
center school true and what's
the we are diverse classroom
taxed innovative professional
learning so I asked the
committee to approve the Senate
bill seventeen years they're
very innovative measure thank
you.
Right thank you.
All right.
So we'll go to opposition is our
opposition to Senate bill
seventeen.
Post.
All right so we'll come to
committee first MLS
Representative Dow please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I'm I
guess my question I don't know
exactly who is directed to which
any opening comments it was
proposed that this is a pilot
and that it would and even those
that were supporting the bill
we're saying you know this is an
innovative way to look at
getting dollars directly to
students and I absolutely agree
with that we have to have.
A way to measure our investments
beyond them becoming and
restricted when they hit the
district level says very
exciting element of this pilot
program yet as we're moving
forward it was also discussed
money begins almost assume that
this is the solution so which is
it Mr chairman
Senator Stewart do you believe
that this is a pilot or are we
is this the method that we're
moving forward.
Mr chairman I believe this is a
pilot it the secretary about six
weeks to convince me that it
would be okay to do this because
what I first said is if we're
going to spend forty million
dollars it should go into the
STTC it should go into the at
risk funding but I do believe
that we've been hearing for
years we can't track the money
directly to the school we're
part of the big district how do
we get the at risk funding
directly to our school so
although we have a I believe a
good at risk funding with a
whole section in law about how
to use that money this to me is
an experiment it's a pilot it's
outside the SCG so in my mind it
may contribute to a deceitful
icing the formula so that's why
it's a pilot it's a two year
pilot it's using funds from the
EDD reform Fund and you know I'm
hoping after two years we'll see
whether or not this has has made
a difference these are our
highest poverty schools they are
the kids that struggle getting
to school age struggle having
enough food they struggle with
having clothing their families
struggle to get them to attend
school every day this is to help
schools they could hired.
They could get a bilingual
person that would go into home
visiting they can do before and
after school they can you know
as long as the the funding is at
least two thirds of it has to be
spent on the academic issues
that we have in these high
poverty schools many of them
have single digit proficiency in
math.
So it's it's a way to try to
spur innovation it's a way to
try to deal directly with the
kids in our state that are the
most at risk and we'll see after
two years of perhaps they should
become part of our funding
formula.
It's definitely a pilot.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary for that and hope the
innovation and the flexibility
and targeting students are the
things I love about it what I
hope that this body that this
committee and that does that are
are elected officials right now
pay attention to is the other at
an initiatives and that I've
signed on to that look at other
factors in addition to poverty
those that are identified in the
Ozzie Martinez lawsuit so we
have a commitment in the interim
from both LFC and hopefully L.
E. S. C. you know this bill will
pass to brought the memorial two
broaden the perspective box
brought in what we're looking at
and what and how we're targeting
funds directly to students
beyond simply income and those
would be the factors that are
listed in the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit but I love I love that
we're tying the body to the
students that worst targeting
schools for those students
attend and that we're going to
measure outcomes tied to those
dollars that's that's that is
where we need to be to measure
student outcomes so I'm
wondering if as this moves
forward do you see this stopping
the other efforts that are
looking at index funding that go
beyond just poverty or to those
still be considered moving
forward considering.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
I'm not I'm not sure sure what
you're referring to we're we're
hoping that we can.
Representative Romero's pile it
up and running as funding in the
budget for that I know you
signed on to that bill that that
bill is moving easily here I
don't know what else you're
referring to but this this is
really specific to try to help
of families at each of the
schools so
it's broader than just academics
although the funding is focused
on academics if you're one of
those schools that don't have
very many students and you don't
generate very much money we put
up brought up a cap of no less
than twenty thousand twenty
thousand will get you a lot of
professional development to try
to change the way we're teaching
math reading at the elementary
level it'll set up good before
and after school programs it
will help with counseling it
might help with professional
development around making sure
that teachers understand how to
teach conclusively looking at
our multi cultural aspect of all
of our students so it's you know
people schools districts have
always said just give us the
money we know what to do.
Here's the money you see what
you can do with that.
My favorite part and that will
measure the outcomes rather than
one size fits all so Mr chairman
and senator I I guess my final
question is I and I'm sorry that
I didn't understand this until
today.
Parents are not submitting this
information somehow at the state
level we are going to agree M.
O. U.
with other agencies review
families tax returns and there
there are maybe there how how
are we determining could you
explain that to me I guess my
concern would be
any any parents date.
The that being extracted from
inner agencies without their
consent.
Mr chairman and Representative
Dow we're being very careful
about this when the bill first
was written and offered in the
Senate
people reacted to those concerns
about.
About the personal information
so we redid the bill that's why
it's a substitute took out
entire sections and language
basically our state agencies
will set up a memorandum of
understanding to work together
if these so we will send a
rostrum of names they will check
with the tax department some of
these families will not be on
those rules and then we will try
with you then services
department some of these
families will be getting.
Eight services and finally if we
can't find any information from
there we will look at the census
information so those three
measures up they've already done
it they've already found that
information of for this year
right now so that we can be
prepared for next year and it
doesn't go anywhere other than
to the PED to set up this family
income index thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator
for that and is there a reason
why we didn't just use the USDA
food the free reduced lunch
income eligibility form our
schools not using that word
anymore Mr chairman they are but
that was part of the
presentation to the L. E. S. C.
in the PED from Kim Johnson and
you heard from Jack your cow ski
again about this coalition is
that it doesn't really measure
well especially when kids are in
middle or high school they don't
like to fill out those forms
based so in general we have to
you know when when we set those
indexes we have to
we have to generalize even with
those forms so we've been
struggling with do we continue
to use free and reduced lunch or
do we move to something else
this is a public to see if this
will give us better index a
better idea of where the real
real poverty is.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I I it it's exciting
to be the pilots exciting to be
and I I'm glad it's a pilot
because I think there's going to
need to be adjustments to the
formula specifically for us to
respond to the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit I think this is a good
step in the right direction of
accountability to the school
level of how our dollars are
invested I love the flexibility
part of it because I do believe
that our districts know best
there are many many evidence
based programs out there that we
are not that right now schools
are prohibited from implementing
even if it's right for their
community their culture their
district and so that's what I'm
most exciting things to me about
this and so I hope that we come
out of this honoring the
expertise and the local decision
making decision of our of our
school boards and our our our
professional in the education
the world of education I hope
that we come out of this making
some adjustments to account for
things beyond poverty like those
things identified in the LFC
Martinez lawsuit and I am glad
that we are here today at
reiterating pilots and that we
can make adjustments as we move
forward and so I look forward to
supporting this pilot program
thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chairman as thank
you Senator Stewart for and are
for bringing this bill forward
I've I've mentioned to Secretary
Stewart before that I really
like this idea and I and I and I
and I think it's you know what I
don't want to repeat in order to
set about it but I do have a
question I have to have a couple
of questions first of all
is it is is there any way that
you can give me an example of
how this you will our pilot
project funding would be paraded
with the yes wire K. five plus
to deliver even a better service
to our kids.
Mr Chairman that is just a great
question.
So I don't I don't know that it
has to be.
I don't.
As.
well I'll just think of the
school that I know will be on
this index because they're so
poor they are not doing K. five
plus but they are doing extended
learning
they don't have they don't have
a very good clothing bank they
don't have enough bilingual
liaisons with parents they have
a huge problem with absenteeism
so certainly the extended
learning that they're doing
you know I I'm just hoping that
eventually not now eventually we
will be just increasing the
length of the school year I just
think eventually that's what
we're going to we're gonna have
to do so if you increase your
length of the school year and
we're not even talking about
other programs we're talking
about calendar reform and then
of this kind of funding could
just supplement anything that
they're doing it's really a
pretty wide open so once you
start so what when you're you're
one of the schools that has the
most students you're going to
get a significant amount of
money so that's why we we tried
to focus it at least in part on
academics so I could see a
professional development for
teachers and teaching reading
and math we could even get codes
they could hire coaches of
course this is non recurring
money it's a two year pilot and
we have increased it to thirty
million so
I couldn't you know it's it's
hard to hire a coach with non
recurring money but never the
less we certainly could do that.
So but I mean this will create
innovation and
I'm hoping the people are right
now starting to figure out what
to do with the money.
Thank you for that the thank you
Mr chairman Senator I think it's
really important and I agree
with you one hundred percent I
think this is really exciting
and it allows a school districts
to be able to blend that funding
to use it for different things
that they may need to
specifically target those kids
and I really want to up thank
you for that and other thing
that I want to thank you for
including is settled thank you
saw on there in the section that
that instructional resources are
also included in this and I want
to thank you for that as well
that's a that's really important
because you know they are that's
what I do I I work with
instructional resources and
sometimes were very short on
that and and I want to thank you
for that so is this going to be
R. Mr chair and and Senator is
just going to go through an RFP
process or a house houses can be
determined.
So Mr Chairman representative
the the index's already outlined
in the bill
at every school be ranked then
we'll look at the top have
that is really in that extremely
low income or low income at
extremely low income is seventy
five percent less than the
poverty level low income is up
to a hundred thirty five percent
of the poverty level so we're
talking about families that are
making twenty thousand for for
kids I mean it's just really
hard to live on those kinds of
wages so we we do that the the
top half of the schools with the
lowest income then we determine
how much money we're going to be
able to use and we have
increased it to fifteen million
a year and then they'll just do
the math and sorted out now so
that so that some areas of the
state don't get all the funding
we put in the ten percent cap so
if you've got a hundred schools
ten of those could get funding
in this pilot proper process so
that will just be done they'll
be no don't have to apply.
anything you will be told you
are in the as part of the
school's and you're going to get
two hundred thousand next year
it'll be like a it'll be like
Christmas.
Thank you thank you senator and
and I just want I just wanted to
respond to my support for this
and I think this is a really
exciting proposition and I'm and
I look forward to seeing the
results after the two years
thank you thank you Mr.
Right thank you representative
Lente that please.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
good morning good morning good
morning I I appreciate your
efforts in your work on this and
and and I in an excited that the
this pilot program is moved on
to a point where it's at today
at when you were talking your
presentation about the impacted
school districts that this is
intended to help I thought will
the senator is is really just is
outlining and identifying the
school districts within my
community districts and I and I
have five of those within my
within my district and and my
question to you Mr chairman and
and and senator is.
Because the pilot program we're
trying to meet certain focus
criterias.
Realizing that many of those
financially disadvantaged school
districts are in fact native
American school districts along
the same lines as I know
Representative Dow is getting to
in the Yazzie Martinez aspects
but because those native
American school districts face
not only just poverty levels but
they also face of criterias and
disadvantages when it comes to a
distinct culture up thanks for
disadvantage but distinct
cultural aspect.
Sorry.
Michael.
When my phone goes off.
That used to happen to me all
the time to into the chairman
had.
It could go away.
Going back to due to my
questions because native
American in addition to at
school districts and children
based not only does poverty
level but they have a distinct
cultural identity associate to
better and their school
districts but also they faced in
some cases what people might
consider barriers when it comes
to the geographical and
technological.
Access.
And so so so my question to you
is
Back in twenty nineteen I I
passed an amendment to the
Indian Education Act that that
help to focus to refocus
priorities on when school
districts have have a plan to
make they it is now that their
goal is to focus and and they
have to do this to go to those
tribal entities to kind of come
together as to this is the game
plan with for for your children
that are in our school district
and this is how we will for in
that same manner as a
collaboration so so Mister
chairman and senator my question
to you is is is what would you
be open to that type of of
inclusion into this type of bill
what we have a reference to the
Indian Education Act
specifically that amendment
because I I as as I've learned
over my my short five years
you're in the legislature is
that unless something is
explicitly outlined within the
piece of legislation many times
it'll just be overlooked and and
then it'll be shame on me for
not asking early it'll be shame
on me for for for voting in
support of something that again
expressly does not include many
of the children and the school
district that I represent Mr
chairman and senator.
Mr chairman and representative I
I refer you to page eight.
this is the section five uses of
family income index allocations
on page eight of line eighteen
of the funding of includes
services to engage and support
tribal communities in the
education of native American
students and remember the
schools are just going to get
the money so it's not my job to
tell any of the rules what to do
with that for how to do it's
it's you're going to decide that
they decide if they want to use
it for native languages I can do
that if they want to bring in if
they want to do I mean it's just
it's wide open so we we wanted
to ensure that there were the
academic school dressed so
third for evidence based
structured literacy
interventions of third for
evidence based math instruction
and then a third for basically
anything else including
culturally relevant professional
curriculum development I mean
it's not it's not up to us it's
up to the schools so I think
it's the most direct funding for
the schools we've ever done and
so I I I would just hate to you
know just tie this down because
this is for all the schools that
are high poverty yes there are
many native American schools are
high property but you're not
alone I mean there are schools
all over the southern part of
the state that are high poverty
there are huge parts of
Albuquerque high poverty so we
wanted to ensure that this money
goes everywhere but that can be
used however each school wants
so I don't know what kind of
language.
You're thinking of but I would I
would caution against at this
point in time you know we were
up till twelve thirty last night
doing concurrent says this is
going to this bill hasn't even
made it to your floor so.
I I think the beginning of
really is focused on your issue
and I think what we've put in
here very specifically for
native American students is is
actually to do that to
essentially let you do whatever
you want with the funding.
Mr chairman and senator I I
appreciate your sentiments and
and what what I look at the
budget the money's already in
the budget so that money is
already there right yes
regardless of this bill passes
or not.
No there's no there's
contingency language okay okay
and so for that clarification
thank you Mr chairman and
senator up again but back to my
my point though is that it seems
that that be part of this of
this committee this past session
many of us respectively within
our own school districts I know
focal for me it seems like we're
always trying to.
When the Olympics of oppression
in some ways making it seem like
all my school district is worse
than yours All My Children are
or or where she yours and it's
it's not a good place to be it
really isn't and and I hope that
that the efforts of of what the
secretaries moving towards and
what this legislation is moving
towards a what all of the pieces
of legislation that many of us
have us to do this.
Later session we're moving
towards that goal of of just
feeling so sorry for schools our
school districts and our
students because at the end of
the day there are they're the
ones that that that are impacted
the most but I I must go back
then to the point where I was
making in reference to the
amendment but I made to the
Indian Education Act which I
would I would hope that land
would be would be included into
a bill like this and and I and I
understand that that we're not
trying to be overbearing and try
to to control what happens now
for our school districts but
again the the the the Indian
Education Act
was built upon the idea and that
amendment was built on the idea
that now school districts and
schools cannot only just work
toward one goal without the
inclusion of parents students
tribal governments and the like
and and and I think that without
that type of focus with in a
pilot program like this many of
my school districts and many of
those students in those school
districts.
Their target will not be it will
not be reached and so you know I
I I it's it's it's unfortunate
that we're now days away from
the end of the legislative
session or trying to usher this
through but and I appreciate you
Mr chairman and senator in in
saying that you would caution
against it but I would caution
against us being in such a hurry
to try to get something to do
this the the the the process and
exclude a large portion of of
students that I represent
because what's the purpose of me
being here and being on this
committee if I was to sit
quietly and but my left during
the conversation like this so
Mister chairman and and and
senator I I I have language if
you would be amenable as a
friendly amendment to include
which I think would make your
bill just much more targeted to
a point where I can say without
a doubt that those native
American school districts but
then be focus as part of this
family index which I think the
ultimate goal is it's it's it's
a pilot project program that
we're all looking for great
success and I do do that point
Mr chairman and senator if
you're amenable I don't want to
hold up the process at all
that's not my intent and I
appreciate all the work that
you've done thus far but at the
same time I I feel compelled to
be able to bring this up in a
very friendly way this point Mr
chairman and and senator so
Mister chairman at
Representative you'll read the
language on page eight.
Its case management during after
school summer enrichment
programs that are delivered by
social workers counselors
teachers need culturally
relevant professional curriculum
development including those
necessary to support language
acquisition bilingual and
multicultural education whole
school interventions including
social emotional learning
programs multi layered systems
of support student tradition
school based health centers and
community schools instructional
resources and materials services
to engage and support parents
and families in the education of
students services to engage and
support tribal communities the
education of native American
students so rather than do it
here and now you could do it on
the floor if you've got an
amendment you know I'm supposed
to be in rules passing house
bill's you know this is
important and I know what's
important to you I just I just
don't think that what you're
asking is is needed but you know
it's up to you and.
You know I I just think we've
got it covered especially since
there are no barriers between
you've got a dignified school
and here are the funds so
So.
At.
She's.
You but you know maybe could do
it on the floor.
Mr chairman and senator but by
no means and like I all of the
process by no means am I trying
to keep you away from your own
committees of on your side Mr
chairman and and senator up I I
would accept your offer to to
find something on the floor and
I will are you pass by you
before anything like that we can
work on this together because
again I and I know the executive
is looking for this I know that
secretary the board is and are
you looking for this we're all
looking forward to some type of
success thinking outside the box
to improve education for our
children Mr chairman and senator
I will take you up on that offer
and I will I will send you some
language Mr chairman and and
senator thank you so much for
for the dialogue this morning
and Representative fifteen bills
just.
Look then the LFC staff you know
they're kind of the best of
figuring out where to put things
in bills and so yes happy to
work with you on that.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman right thank you
Representative care please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Stewart I do support
this but I I have a series of
questions.
it's great to get a Christmas
present with schools know that
they're gonna be getting this
Christmas present for the twenty
one twenty two school year when
would they be notified.
Well there's a lot of steps Mr
chairman and representative
First is passing it and then
right I think that let's assume
all that happens you know I was
have to knock on wood when we
get to this point in the session
but then if this passes this
work is already it's already
being done it's already been
done to look at how we would do
this because of course this has
to be in the budget so
I guess I would phone a friend
and see if that Secretary
Stewart would be able to answer
a more precise I think within
months is what I would say you
know if that this doesn't have
an emergency clause wouldn't go
into effect all ninety days so
we're talking in in June we
talking June a certainly the
nest thanks next fiscal year is
a July one so Mister chairman I
wonder of Secretary Stewart
would have any other answers.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and senator
for your question like centers
that we have done all of the the
background work with with our
partners on this and so we would
let schools know for this budget
cycle what they're what they're
allocations would be so they can
build it into their budget as
they're planning for the
upcoming year.
Okay Mister chairman had it at
about senator and secretary.
If they're going to start using
it in August it's just a short
at the very practical question
Mr chairman and Senator our
community schools that are
already getting targeted funds
that go beyond the SCG are they
going to be eligible absolutely
Mr chairman yes if they hit the
index yes.
You know I poverty all hands on
deck so if they fall in the
index yes.
Okay Mister chairman Senator
since.
Only ten percent and and I think
it's important to remind
everybody that this target
schools not districts right I'm
we're charter schools
what.
Of the schools in the district
are eligible never the less each
charter school.
Which would apply in the top
fifty percent they would be
eligible totally is that
correct.
A so Mister chairman the way
this works is we separated out
state charters so they form
their own group the charters
that are each district are in
the district so in your district
if you have charter schools that
meet this threshold they will be
part of that and then the state
charters are all in their own
district and they will be
targeted also.
Mister chairman Senator ten
percent of the state charter
schools would be eligible is
that correct that's correct if
they need the index right.
My last question is are there
thank you Mr chairman and
senator and
actually quite profound that was
mentioned in the FIR and and I
don't think we can really
explore it now and just the fact
that someone from the department
of education was here the for
the F. I. R. so that
the title one component in the
at risk calculation could be
replaced by the F. I I yeah the
FY I index would would really
profoundly affect the way we
target title one funds I just
wonder if anybody wants to make
a comment about that because
that has profound repercussions
this is supplemental money this
could steer title one money to
really reaching the specific
schools more than actually
happens right now does anybody
want to make a comment on that
at this time Mr Chairman you
know the title one is for the
federal government so I don't
yes really changing that we may
change our at risk part of the
SCG you know these are all
possibilities for the future but
you know we are just not there
and I know the FIR Sir kind of
going beyond this bill but it
certainly will be something that
we look at.
Right Mr chairman and secretary
I'm just
Yes that that's all thank you Mr
chairman thank you so much
Senators your.
Okay thank you Representative
Sweetser place.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I'm kind of entering the
Olympics of oppression or
whatever my colleague referred
to that as I'm going for the
gold medal because my districts
border Mexico my families are
very mobile and they are often
off the grid and I just kind of
wondered how they were going to
factor in their students are in
our schools but I'm not sure you
have their data and I just
didn't know how that was going
to work thank you Mr chair Mr
Chairman representative so
you know we're using the attacks
Department then we're using
Human Services then we're using
census so they could prop they
would probably show up in the
census information because we
will have we have the school
rosters so we know where the
students are and they've already
taken that into account to to do
the first draft of where the
schools would be so yep there
there's a lot of poverty in the
southern part of the state.
Absolutely and thank you Senator
and and and secretary and Mr
chair for all recognizing how
diverse are just different
districts are you know we are a
universal free lunch district
here and so my daughter the
other day was saying she had
seen something on TV where
students are paying for lunch
and she thought that was like at
Disney made up things here never
paid for lunch you know and I
thought while the things we
don't realize that go on in a
high poverty district and so
anyway at that just occurred to
me that many of our students
don't come until later in the
school year when they they
migrated from Mexico and and so
I'm just I know you're all aware
of all of that I just felt the
need to also mention that so
thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
Baldonado please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam tem um just a couple
questions I think everybody has
stolen from me in one way or
another but
You mentioned Mr chairman and
senator
a significant significant
significant amount of money
going to schools are we talking
tens of thousands hundreds of
thousands I know it's going to
vary from school to school based
on have a an idea of what we're
talking about SO Mr chairman
we've put lower calf so that
we don't give schools a few
thousand dollars so the lowest
the the lowest amount you can
get is twenty thousand okay.
So and and schools that generate
less than forty thousand
aren't required to follow the
you know two thirds academics
one third whatever else they're
not required to follow that so
when I look through this the
school that generates the most
of any school is a SUNY and they
generate three hundred nineteen
thousand so goes from twenty
thousand for very small schools
to roughly about three hundred
thousand okay thank you thank
you Mr chairman and senator
So so right now what happens is
that money goes to the district
and the district spends it as
they see fit and then just not
necessarily hit the screen that
it needs to have is that the
case sort of.
Well Mr chairman I would not
characterize it like that but
you know I'm a policy wonk and I
like to get into the policies so
we have significant funding in
our at risk index I think we're
at something like three hundred
fifty million dollars now and at
risk index is based on second
language learners poverty
mobility and I think I think I'm
right.
About that so those school
districts with metrics generate
more of the at risk and then it
really is the district that
helps decide how to do that so
I'll just give you an example of
in Albuquerque I've looked in
detail at a comparison between a
look where the high school which
doesn't generate very many units
of any at risk it's in the far
northeast heights and west mesa
that is a school was significant
at risk students there's.
There's more counselors there
was more intervention specialist
at there's more bilingual
teachers date generate and we
actually spend on them
the significantly more than we
do the same student outlook
quite for as we should that's
where the problems and the
issues are so I think most
districts do a good job of that
but there's always the criticism
that the money doesn't follow
the students
I don't think that's necessarily
true it might be in some
instances but this bill is
definitely money following the
student so it's a it's a good
experiment it's a pilot we'll
see what happens thank thank you
Mr chairman and senator
And and I take it you've had
some robust conversations with
the tax and revenue health and
Human Services that are
mentioned in the bill is that
correct Mr chairman Senator Mr
Chairman representative I
certainly have not this is
coming from the PED and we're
very we're very aware
that this information is private
there's all kinds of federal and
state laws about how to use it
so no I I don't want to hear
about it.
It's of understanding that sell
these agencies will interact so
we took all of that out of the
bill and just left and that they
will interact with their their
normal and low use thank you Mr
chairman senator at
Representative Garrett kind of
had some concerns about the
timeline and things of that
nature and that's maybe what
concerns me a little bit too is
that you were trying to do this
in just a few short months and
of course on COVID still still
an issue for us and and that
puts a damper on on our
communications so but thank you
Mr chairman and and thank you
senator and that's all the
questions and.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and secretary.
This morning I am super excited
about this bill and the
potential for schools to
creatively find ways to serve
their students and families I
think is phenomenal I have
concerns about the amount of
money being enough to make a
difference following that and
I'm concerned about the timeline
that have been mentioned the
schools are going to know about
this while they're developing
their budget for next year that
essentially means right now and
looking at the bill it seems
like the data has to be pulled
from tax and Rev calculated the
top fifty percent to me the
index identified top fifty
percent we maybe we should call
that the bottom fifty percent
that meet the index.
Ten percent of schools in a
particular district if there are
many we said ten percent cap
with this bill
how.
We schools in the district is it
going to be the most.
Based on that income index or is
it going to be a decision of
that PED.
Or the district or is the school
itself gonna raise their hand
and say I meet that criteria I
wanted that decision has to be
made and then the schools will
be notified.
Excuse me.
Mr chair and and senator that's
a lot that has to happen like
now so I'm wondering why this
doesn't have an emergency clause
and is PED gonna be I'm able to
get the information from tax and
rest until July first with a
memorandum of understanding when
this bill goes into effect.
All good questions most of that
work has already been done all
of the work protection revenue
Human Services the census is
already been done we would not
have a bill to offer you unless
it'd already been done I mean I
I have a preliminary list that's
already already been done so
You know I I I I think I have an
emergency clause somewhere I was
going to slap on it I don't
think we need to it's already
done this if we can pass the
Senate get signed those school
districts will know immediately
now we'll have to redo our
calculations because we're
putting more money into it so
there might be a few more
schools that are on this but
it's all the index no one has to
applaud school that PED is going
to tell within a couple of
months of us ending how much
it's going to be which schools
so I I just believe that it's
not nearly as well my phone is
blowing up with everyone wanting
to answer all these questions us
so it's it's ready to go and we
need to get the signature of the
governor's signature and and
it's all hands on deck okay.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
that's that's what I wanted to
hear because that this list
wasn't already created it wasn't
gonna happen in time so I'm glad
that that was able to be done
even before we we passed the
bill my second question is more
about the other and and it
relates to something
Representative Lara brought up
we what is the metrics that
we're going to measure by.
Is on page nine of the bill that
the department is going to
evaluate how each public school
uses allocation and the way it
impacted students.
Highland means we're trying
something out in order to make a
decision at the end about
whether to continue whether to
increase.
Whether it works whether it can
be replicated in other places
what is the yeah we're going to
have two years from now that we
can base that decision on that
is comparable across schools
because school one as Mr
chairman and senator you
mentioned says we need to reach
are bilingual families we're
gonna spend some of this money
Onge interpreters and bilingual
family liaisons.
Their report at the end is going
to say something like we reach
this many more families than we
did the year before sh hello is
that going to compared to data
from another school that says
you know we did an after school
mascot program I mean what are
the metrics for success is
attendance reduction of
referrals isn't
progress academically mass
assessments literacy assessments
what are we gonna have to make a
decision with in two years.
Mr Chairman representative this
is this is going to be driven by
the PED but we are not going to
be comparing school to school
what happens in the schools is
up to them they're very
different metrics will say yes
we did this and this and this we
approved in attendance yes we
did this and this and this and
look at the a native languages
that we've we are now teaching
in the school it's up to the
individual school and it is
going to be what what did you
work on that's why that
districts working with the
school have to put the plan into
their educational plan that's
you know due in April so you
know this always happens to us
we can never do any innovation
because it's like well you
didn't tell us soon enough that
money can't get here soon enough
but I don't think anybody is
complaining about this bill yet
so those metrics will be a whole
variety of things that you
mentioned depending upon what
schools are working on we
certainly have measures for math
and literacy already we don't
have measures for other things
but you know what are your goals
did you reach them and I I just
I don't think we need to wait we
didn't want to lay it all out on
the bill it's impossible to do
that when you have this much
innovation and individual
individualization from the
schools and what they need and
want.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator those are my questions
thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam pro tem it's nice to see
you in the committee again I am
Thrilled to pieces that you
brought this up I know that
there are questions galore about
the implementation in a variety
of things that the.
Overall this seems to really
address some of the concerns
that we've had through the years
about how to reach deep poverty
in certain parts of the state
and I think this seems to
address that.
I don't have too many other
comments except for the fact
that I'm really really happy
that you included C. ESE.
As part of the of the group you
know the group that actually
helped you with the statistics
because those people are
apolitical they don't care
whether you're a Republican or
Democrat or whatever they get
the job done they're accurate
and there's
really professional and I am so
glad that they were part of it I
think that
You know forty million dollars
is a lot of money and to be
honest with you.
Hurts my heart both three thirty
minute million thirty minutes
over two years thirty million
dollars is still a lot and some
of us who had are built
tabled in appropriations our
hearts heard about that because
we are some of our bills were.
To address some of these issues
however you know this seems to
help.
My heart a little bit better
because it addresses some of the
current concerns that I had and
and the last thing we want to do
is be redundant so hopefully
this will be successful I will
do whatever I can to help you
with that and
I plan to vote for it in the
thank you again for including C.
E. S. C. and a cut in the
construct thank you thank you.
Here Representative Roybal
Caballero.
You Mr chair and thank you
senator it's it's amazing how
I'm in another committee
With the sponsorship of the anti
institutional racism bill.
And we're talking about and then
I come back to education and
we're talking about attempting
to remedy
practices and and
Of the past that have in
adequately funded inadequately
addressed systemic the the
result of systemic racism
because that's what it is it's
been systemic racism that has
contributed to our children
being disproportionately
assisted and elevated.
As in an equitable and fair
position as the other students
and so every attempt madam chair
and senator that we make is in
advance forward I recognize that
it's still not enough it's
unfortunate madam chair and I
mean Mr chairman.
Senator that we I concur with
what Representative Trujillo
just sent that we and land and
representative Lente and all the
others that I've been paying
attention to as well as this
discussion of non forward and
that is that we had.
Built with with what we thought
were adequate more than adequate
funding but it in but they took
a different approach Mr chair
and Senator and I'm hoping my my
contribution to this discussion
is that.
We you know.
When we index or standardize
poverty.
Is when I think we get into
trouble.
I know that it's part of our
traditional ways of approaching.
And and when we put pilots it's
part of our traditional ways of
approaching problems.
But what we were attempting to
do with all the other bills and
the funding mechanisms for them
was to
Take a more comprehensive and
holistic approach.
Two system causing systemic
change for the long run.
So what I'm hoping that this
bill I mean you're this SB
seventeen.
Mr chair and senator will look
will address.
Or help begin to address is that
approach so that we don't take
mentally when we look at minute
when we use the words anymore
like minimum wage or pilot like
temporary.
It does something to the psyche
and how we approach things.
And so it keeps us
compartmentalized.
In that.
Into just performing within that
realm and not looking beyond
that so my hope
in I don't know the secretary
still on.
Mr chair and senator is that we
monitor the US and that we.
To use this as an opportunity to
contribute to taking the more
comprehensive.
And systemic approach to causing
the changes that have to occur
within our systems of education
in order to be able to bring
equity we're not gonna be able
to catch up I've been saying
this for years we can't make up
it's we're front too far behind
so we've got to make a break at
some point and then take a step
forward and every opportunity
that gives us that
chance to do that we need to
take it so a message to Mr
secretary is that we look at it
from that approach we take it
perhaps as a two year but we try
to leverage it and incorporate
what we learned from it into the
larger picture of creating that
change that we have an
obligation to do not just a
court order but we have an
obligation to do otherwise I
worry about whether we're going
to be making the advances that
we hope that you envision
Senator on all of us have
envision throughout the years
and all our models on they can't
be models anymore we now have to
implement them so Mr chair I
didn't have a question but I I
do wish to caution us
and and try to move away from
the standardized index hi let
models.
And get into
on a more comprehensive long
term systemic model for change
and so we can monitor this you
know I I think through the LESC
process
Mr chair and senator of which
you'll you'll and all of us will
help most of us will be part of
we continue to ask the hard
questions in terms of the
Whether they're making a
systemic change we're not thank
you
Mr chair and senator this is a
An advance everything we do is
in advance of thank you.
Mr chairman if I can just make a
few brief comments.
Please.
Plus started in two thousand and
three as kindergarten plus four
hundred thousand dollars house
bill sixty one my first bill
with Richardson as.
The the governor.
Four years after that it was so
successful that we turned it
into K. three plus and two
thousand and seven House Bill.
One ninety eight
LFC and everyone started getting
on board because the results
were phenomenal.
So we've come this far there was
a Representative that there was
a portion of the budget that
asked for K. twelve plus pilot.
We've turned that into an
extended day pilot so there are
good things occasionally about
pilots you learn things from
them and it gives us a direction
for the future so I understand
what you're saying I agree with
you but there are times when
pilots are exactly what we need
and I'm hoping that this will be
one thank you Mr chairman.
Right thank you I'm so before I
accept the motion on this I just
I just want to thank the
secretary and certainly you
Senator Stewart but starting
with the PED first is they've
been looking at the side the
since the fall and really worked
hard to get
the ducks in the row so to speak
in terms of the various
departments on board to get
their information down and and
to take comments from a lot of
us and pulling us into of the
discussion pretty early on and
then Senator Stewart certainly
there the session you working
with Public Education Department
on on get very getting
everything else in order I think
is C. is it's really a model of
collaboration and I I certainly
appreciate that night I was I
was going to echo your while I
was going to say and now I'm
echoing your sentiments about
pilot projects is that they can
and do tell us a lot and things
that may be unexpected and
that's certainly the things that
we look at you know I mean this
is awkward position or weird
position of being a member of
the LFC and LESC simultaneously
and looking at the various
aspects of these programs the
very financial
based questions as part of the
LFC and then putting a lot of
that in context like we do E.
and L. E. S. C. having current
form or educators all part of
that committee and in trying to
bring
a more holistic picture and what
we're doing with the state's
finances and what we're doing
with the state's children
because as I say in this
committee you know we may index
certain things but the these are
New Mexico students we have a
rich diverse set of students and
we're certainly trying to reach
them all and give the districts
the tools that they really need
in order to have their students
succeed in the way that they now
and see as best they.
And we're here trying to make
sense of it and do the best that
we can so
I certainly think the work is
been put in this I certainly
appreciate the work of the
Senate and putting an added ten
million dollars into the into
the pilot project so that its
fifteen million over two years I
think will help this time it
reach more students and make a
bigger impact I think is what I
heard from this discussion so
with that thank you so much for
bringing this forward
and
emotional I I just think I was
going to to think that PED so
I'm glad you did because this is
really a PED initiative it
really just it started there
well of course and as
Representative Trujillo said
that the C. E. S. C. Kim Johnson
they came to the LFC so they've
been working with the PED thank
goodness for the PED for keeping
this going so thank thank you
for thanking them and I add my
thanks to.
We're we're all echoing each
other this morning.
All right so with that being
said I'll entertain a motion.
I said we.
So we have a two passed motion
by Representative Figueroa
second by Representative Garrett
madam secretary called the roll
on a new path motion.
No.
Or.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Gleim.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative were brought
Caballero yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Chair vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman yes.
Ten but tend to to.
All right so by a vote of ten to
to do have a due pass on Senate
bill seventeen all right so
you'll stick with us yes and
thank you secretary.
We will promote you back to our
attendees with.
All right.
And Senate bill forty so if you
would we'll go through the bill
and then we'll get to the
amendment.
Mr chairman I would like to talk
about the amendment as I also go
through the health but then you
can take aspirin so definitely
yeah so the Senate bill forty
has six sections the first five
sections improve the
flexibility and utilization of
both K. five plus an extended
learning we met several times
with the superintendents of
charter schools one of the
teachers unions and others to
try to change some of the issues
with the implementation of both
K. five plus extended learning
the last section is the section
that's a temporary position to
have everyone a do more school
next year the amendment will
take that completely out so
everybody can put their knives
away so.
We will in we will in we'll take
out section six there's one
other small amendment for the
rest of the sections to ensure
that because with the when we
wrote this that some of the
changes we made for K. five plus
extended learning was to take
away the repeated applications
every year so that once you're
in the program all you do is
tell the PED if you're
continuing program so the other
amendments.
Is going to ensure that if
you're brand new school to use
that you have to apply but if
you've had it before you go so
the other changes are just to.
I just what we do with K. five
plus extended learning to
accommodate the four day a week
and and the first is the five
day a week nice to look at how
many days have you already
thank you increased so that you
don't have to increase more to
get the extended learning once
we take out sections six which
is a mandatory provision
temporary for next year once we
take that out and I think what
is going to happen is you'll
then have some districts want to
do K. five plus an extended
learning so the first five
sections helps that be more
flexible it also adds that
That there's more flexibility
with students who may need to
move from one classroom to
another so Mister chairman that
is the bill and the amendment
both.
Right so can I have a motion on
the amendment please for
discussion.
Session after second your
Representative Wagner second by
Representative Trujillo I think
Senator Stewart just mentioned
the amendment
is there discussion questions
comments concerns.
The amendment.
The two oh two it's point two
two zero seven two two point one
in your packet.
Digital comments questions.
Have a motion on the amendment.
Hi so move on the amendment Mr
second the amendment.
Right so we have a motion to
adopt Representative Trujillo
second by Representative Dow.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
All right see none Senator
Stewart you have an amended bill
did you wish to comment further
so we go to the attendees no
whatever you want to do Mr
chairman.
All right.
So we'll go to the attendees
list on those we have some eager
beavers the attendees less okay
all honor at this time.
So those in support of Senate
bill forty amended.
All right see I have a two
minutes Dennis.
Good morning welcome back the
chairman and the Senator Stewart
thank you for your continued
work on this bill the
superintendents association has
been privileged to participate
in ongoing discussions we love
the changes to the underlying
programmatic statutes around K.
five plus an extended learning
time I think there will be more
districts participate because of
these important changes and we
we applaud the removal of the
mandate I think that that
actually help the bill comply
more with our platform which
calls for local decision making
in the design of instructional
calendars so we are very much in
support of it now we supported
it before but we love it now and
so appreciate all of your work
Senator Stewart and Mr chairman
thank you for the opportunity to
support the bill great thank you
all right so go to Secretary
Stewart.
Secretary welcome back.
Thank you I just want to say
deep north Preciado shin to the
sponsor and Mr chairman for for
for your work on this as well I
know there was a lot of
conversation and compromise and
discussion and we appreciate the
fact that as a result of all
that work together we're able to
be here and stand in support of
a bill to improve and
continuously get more students
into these programs are very
much interested in getting more
students into these programs and
we look forward to the on going
rollout as we move forward
thank.
Right thank you Mr secretary.
Right so go to really make money
really really make welcome back.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning knowing more tease the
legislative liaison representing
the New Mexico school board
association Mr chairman and
committee The New Mexico school
boards association is to
positions that relate to this
bill with a position on
supporting early childhood pre
K. funding that provides all the
pre school happy preschool for
three and five year olds plus
initiatives that will include
flexibility
and operational facility in
transportation costs we also
have a position that deals with
extended learning programs in
New Mexico scored Association
supports greater local school
board decision making and
flexibility in the
implementation of the student
centered extended learning
programs we feel very strongly
that the benefits of K. five
plus an external in a program to
help our students be successful
we also very much appreciate the
amendment and appreciate taking
out the mandatory position
because as you know we will have
a local control and that local
school districts need to make
decisions based on the needs of
their students we thank the
senator for all her work in
improving education New Mexico
go to make our students
successful Mr Chairman on a
personal note I'd like to thank
the chairman and members of the
committee for your thoughtful
and conscientious consideration
of all the education bills on
behalf of our students in New
Mexico especially during this
challenging virtual environment
and thank you for that I could
not get I I had a chance to do
that yet thank you Mr chairman.
Great thank you.
All right Sarah.
Morning sorry of up to two
minutes welcome good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
separate sterile senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chambers in strong support
of this bill in fact extended
school year is the chamber's top
education priority this session
as you know New Mexico school
closures had a profoundly
negative impact on our kids
academic growth and well being
and virtual learning has
unfortunately proven to be
inadequate logic and data both
say that extending the amount of
time kids are learning in the
classroom will raise their
academic achievement and close
persistent gaps among students
it'll take years for states kids
to recover from the learning
loss if sustained over the last
two school years we have to
commit now to longer school
years and more in person
classroom instruction for years
to come this bill is an
important start and we urge the
committee support thank you
great thank you all right
Matthew good morning Matthew
about two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Matt Paul from
public charter schools of New
Mexico we support this bill
would support the amendment this
is a testament of the
legislative process really
working for New Mexicans and we
appreciate that I also just want
to thank the sponsor for the
bill who who continually
order out back on the bill in
the changes we really appreciate
that and we believe that this
bill in its current form we
combined with the the pilot
that's been mentioned a few
times really presents an
appropriate package for extended
school year moving forward so we
appreciate both Senator Stewart
and the chair for their work on
this thank you.
Great thank you
all right Mary.
Morning very welcome back.
Thank you good morning chairman
role metal and committee members
I also would like to thank the
sponsor of Senate pro tem
Stewart for her collaboration
and flexibility with this bill
my name is merry par Sanchez and
I am the president of NEA New
Mexico and I'm speaking on
behalf of educators across the
state we stand in support of SB
forty amended and we appreciate
the collaboration and
flexibility of the bill and that
it is not a one size fits all
approach
and we we have always supported
extended learning and K. five
plus we we have members that
have taught K. five plus since
its first iteration and are and
are very supportive of
K. five plus an extended
learning another reason that we
stand in support of well there's
two reasons mainly one is that
the bill recognizes and fund
school districts that are ready
added the days and hours to
their calendars and allows them
the flexibility of not having to
fill out an application very
appreciative of that in addition
we are appreciative I talk in a
middle school in a farming
community that brought future
farmers of America for example
into the middle school and four
H. programs that really
interested students in that
particular school because that's
what they live so we believe in
the power of the extended
learning and
K. five plus we just believe
that it needs to be flexible to
the community that it serves and
we just what again stand in
support of this bill would like
to thank the sponsor.
Senate pro tem Stuart.
Thank you.
Right thank you have an internal
two minute clock.
Hi Bonnie.
Good morning money of up to two
minutes please.
Good morning my name is funny
life that I am currently the New
Mexico superintended Association
secretary and I would like to
say thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
Senator Stewart for your work on
this and and I I think can Mr
chairman you said earlier
sometimes saying less is better
so I guess I will say less is
better we a we also stand in
support of this Senate bill
forty as amended and appreciate
the local decision making
options for school districts
thank you.
Winning me over with short
comments.
Steve good morning Steve.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Steve see ideas
ADA New Mexico government
relations director on behalf of
our members and echo the words
again over in the New Mexico
state president very par Sanchez
we think the sponsor for
bringing for this billing gladly
welcomed the amendments this
bill puts a great dent on the
academic achievement of our
students by providing research
based expended extended learning
for students in need of such
services especially those
identified in Yazzie Martinez
again we echo the public
sentiment in this and support of
this bill appreciate the
collaboration in making this a
bill work for all and
respectfully ask that you vote
in favor thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is our opposition to
Senate bill forty.
Lower Steve and I don't think
he's changes mind.
Okay no opposition indifference
there any indifference the rest
of everybody okay so we'll come
to committee.
Committee comments questions
concerns.
You all wear yourselves out and
save yourself for the kick
Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you members the
committee thank you Stuart I
could you please for the folks
that are listening but have not
seen the amendment could you
explain the flexibility that's
been added to the bill.
Mr Chairman there are six
sections to this bill the first
five sections go into the
statutes around K. five plus an
extended learning and make that
more flexible it's taking away
the testing it's taking away the
application process it said
recognizing when schools have
added days to their calendar so
that they don't have to add an
additional ten days for extended
learning it takes away some of
the extended learning language
that was problematic with not
being able to do different
things for different students
and it recognizes the difference
with a four day week school
districts and allows them to do
two weeks like a five day a week
with the extended learning so
that's eight days not ten days
and allows them to do five weeks
for K. five plus of that's
twenty days twenty five days is
just loosens up the restrictions
it also says that if kids are in
K. five plus and they just need
to be moved to a different class
on a student by student basis
you can certainly do that so
that's the first five sections I
also added to that section that
if you're a new school to K.
five plus or extended learning
then you do need to have an
application that not if you've
had it in the past and then the
six section which has now been
taken completely out of the bill
was a temporary provision to the
every for everybody to do at
least that is extended learning
next year and you know eight
reasons why it's in there is
that last.
This year a wind districts
wanted more flexibility they
also to us it's too hard when
it's voluntary just mandated for
us so this year everybody's
changed their mind so I also
change mine so the amendment
takes out that mandatory
provision.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you secretary that
means our for that I truly
appreciate it and I I believe
there's a lot of of school
districts that are that really
appreciate these moments as well
I'm can you explain to me moving
forward will the flexibility
remain is this man if they if
that if the school wants to do.
First third and fifth grade.
Does this what does the
amendments on this bill allow
them to do target first third
and fifth grade.
Mr Chairman I think it does that
yes thank you for we basically
said it had to be whole screen
and that also is gone.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
at Senator for that if they want
if they school wanted to target
their lowest performing students
but they did not want to mandate
that they're valedictorians
attends does the amendments
allow that flexibility.
Well Mr chairman it's now back
to a voluntary program I mean if
you want to do extended learning
you can if you want to do K.
five plus you can there's enough
money at the end free to do both
you can so it's back to the
districts deciding what they
want to do.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator if they wanted to
target just the at risk students
are able and Terry Lee opting
out or if they choose to
participate do they have to be
all in great.
So Mister chairman.
It's both of these programs are
essentially extending the school
year their calendar reform
really is what they are so this
does not allow you to pick and
choose students if you want to
do that then do a summer school
program do before or after but
these both of these programs are
designed to extend the school
year so you can't you can't
really you know pick and choose
and say we're just gonna have a
class with the students from all
of these other classes that's
that's summer school it's not
these programs.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator for explaining that
this's calendar reform and
although I do believe that the
flexibility is necessary and I
suppose so thank you for that as
recently as this morning before
the amendments were known at the
local level and I know they were
negotiated by folks that speak
on behalf of the school boards
and superintendents.
The districts in my area which
are rural which are are Ag
producing areas June did not
want this bill and it's it's so
the amendments were necessary I
still am that is just stressing
to you and two others were
listening that what folks want
in Albuquerque and what they
want metropolitan areas extended
days you know there wraparound
services at the school site is
not what people want universally
in the rural areas already are
pretty many people many
educators in the rural areas go
choose education as profession
because it is a hundred eighty
days are hundred ninety days and
at whatever this brings us to
because they also farm and ranch
they leave their homes in the
dark they return home in the
dark they do their chores before
the sun rises they do their
chores after the sun has set
they need their summers these
are communities that are deeply
involved in four H. and FFA
because they are preparing our
future farmers and we they are
the producers and they do not
want this mandate could you
explain how this correlates with
the amendments that have been
made to the land grant permanent
fund it I and I don't know at
the current
and with the equipment I haven't
read them but does the current
changes to the land grant
permanent fund at reform this
calendar permanently will use
those dollars to make it extend
your permanent for everyone.
Mr Chairman representative down
well first of all it's not even
on the floor yet or it's on the
floor.
You know no mean.
The the I'm fairly certain that
what they did and finance was to
increase the distribution out.
And to a put some of that at the
majority stays at the early
childhood and put some of that
towards K. twelve.
but you know these these
constitutional amendments you
know don't really
Direct funds exactly.
No just take early childhood I
mean there's all kinds of uses
of for the early childhood
funding that is not laid out in
the constitutional amendment I
believe for K. twelve it
mentions students that are at
risk of for extended learning
for compensation but that does
not mean that that is directly
going to it that's up to us.
Thank you thank you
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
yous Senator I appreciate your
answer my questions and I just
want to reiterate that I
appreciate your amendments thank
you thank you.
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Stewart for making these
much needed changes I just want
to go on record on saying
something that I continually get
frustrated with in some of the
analysis the LFC states that K.
five plus an ELT increase
teacher take home pay.
I want to reiterate that pay has
not been increased every single
educators and school employees
is working additional time for
that increase so that's just
something I feel has to be said
thank you Mr chairman.
Here Representative.
Others.
Great.
With that Senator Stewart I do
appreciate it's been mentioned
throughout these Google bills on
your collaboration I know you've
done it on several of your
pieces of legislation just in
the past week and I certainly
appreciate working with you and
having worked with you you know
we had
Warsaw as competing bills this
bill and about forty has a one
eighty four
and both were pretty popular in
our respective chambers and
that's what brought us together
and I think we have come to to
a good compromise and what we
have that we obviously are able
to move forward have both of the
bills going through and and pull
you know in the budget I I in
the budget and I and I won't say
happy because I don't want to
assume on your side but also a
happy I don't speak for you
here.
Here
with the way things went so I
certainly appreciate it in our
discussions in the past week and
certainly your insight in your
institutional knowledge on these
issues is is greatly appreciated
I have Representative Baldonado
your hand up previous getting
restless Representative but Mr
chairman I was going to make us
to pass motion.
Okay out all right so well okay
I'll I'll accept it you know
shut up so Representative
Baldonado with the two passed
motion I'll second that
Is there opposition to do past
motion alerts that way cemented
yes miss Mr chairman I'll go to
now.
Okay so do passed as amended
thank you and
okay so will mark Representative
Dow as a no anybody else's and
no.
Seeming everybody else is a yes
okay.
Great so you have a do pass on
Senate bill forty as amended
thank you Senator Stewart and Mr
chairman let me just say that
I've also appreciated working
with you over the last few weeks
these last few weeks the session
always so hard I'm always amazed
when we can actually spend the
time to come together so thank
you for your leadership to I
look forward to our two pilots
merrily walking down together.
Definitely for sure and looking
at them and spending our interim
looking looking at the results
and hopefully they get yes Sir I
think you are excellent thank
you all right so we are going to
go to our next bill now I'm
losing the number.
We jump in numbers two eighty
nine thank you and right.
And so I think we're having
Representative Trujillo put this
on you had an expert Wright
Representative Trujillo yes miss
Marita W. A. R. I. TA.
You're right it's your hand
please if you're in the into
the.
I just found them and then.
There.
All right so Senate bill two
eighty nine as amended please.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
this is a bill I'm caring for
senator Linda Lopez and what it
is is a a bill relating to
public education creating a
division and the public
education.
Department of special ed.
Up creating the special
education act providing powers
and duties changing.
Accountability amending
repealing and acting and
recompiling sections of the New
Mexico over a school act
nineteen seventy eight and
making appropriation.
And what it is is it's really a
bill that.
We structures what special that
is as you know through for those
of you have been and this
committee for a long time and
for those of you who have been
part of other committees you
know that my friend and
chairwoman of Liz Thomson is a
major advocate of of special
education and the inclusion of
of process sees that help
special ed kids show attest to
the fact that she is the biggest
whiner and.
And
Advocate for special ed and we
all know that it is very it was
unbalanced and.
Inconsistent and what this bill
does is it provides some
consistency as well as support
for ensuring that special
education which is not only with
children or children of
disabilities but with children
who are gifted to be included in
a much more thorough and
inclusive process so what I'd
like to do Mr chairman with your
permission is to ask a right now
the two please give a much more
comprehensive
Component or a direct address to
the committee.
Please.
But you're there you go I'm
unmuted I good morning.
Chair and committee members I am
really grateful for the
opportunity to be before you my
name is Ronald where we took
home and I've been an advocate
to and also an education
consultant here in the state of
New Mexico for about twenty
years for native American
children with disabilities my
work has taken need not only in
the state of New Mexico but
Colorado and nationally and
helping tribes and parents
advocate for their children with
a disability so my work and what
this all entails and supporting
this bill is looking at how we
can create I'm you know this not
only having an Assistant
Secretary but then how does that
trickle down into making sure
our our process of not also
accountability because when you
look at special education laws
and you look at IT peas and you
look at the funding in the
budget that goes for those
children I really provide the
failure in our system has been
accountability you know as an
advocate sitting in these
meetings numerous times I am the
one that has to change teachers
just that to write an IEP or how
do we function to have a team
together and sometimes it's it's
one of those things where you're
looking at teachers and trying
to figure out how can I benefit
them but at the same time how
can we do this as a whole I'm
currently I am ending my
graduate program in race and
social justice so this is how we
also look at some of the
disparities that have occurred
here with and special ed and
also being a parent of a child
three children exactly they're
all older now but they were
attending here in Albuquerque
public schools my oldest son had
a disability and all three of my
children were gifted.
So I've seen this work and I've
seen it from the grassroots
level and how do we also
incorporate this not only within
that you know our districts but
also looking at New Mexico PED
because I also find their
strapped and they're limited in
what they can do and especially
when you have laws that say
there's there needs to be
accountability so I'm hoping
with this bill we look at the
key piece here is professional
development but it's also how do
we also look at some of the
specific areas of and making our
autism registry a little more
floral and making sure these
children are getting the budget
but also looking at dyslexia
there's a new definition if you
look at the bill not new but
something that we need to
address because often these
children fall through the cracks
and we're looking at these one
on one audits within schools I
had the great
a couple years ago I don't know
how many of you knew about the
real results and I I had to you
know help work within that field
and we look at high populated it
schools with native American
children and we looked at how to
increase reading scores but
specifically for children with
disabilities so that program in
the way it maneuvered and worked
really looked at IT peas the
writing of IDPs the family
involvement piece and then also
just trying to look at this one
how New Mexico PED was involved
in some of the schools but they
are ways to create the
development professional
development for these teachers
who may need them and I know
majority of you know we're not
only looking at rural and also
the urban areas but I often find
our rural areas are the places
where this is really lacking
specifically I see this with
native American children I know
with the Martinez in Yazzie act
this would be a great benefit
and looking at and addressing
some of the special education
needs and these deficits.
So there was a letter and I
don't know if you received it
from our a lead attorney from
all debt for the Martinez saying
Yazzie K. and he specifically
stated that this bill would
address some of those needs so
I'm hoping as you review this
that one I support it and that
many other advocates in those in
the state also supported but I
also know that this would be a
great step into making sure our
children with disabilities are
no longer invisible there's
there needs to be a visibility
created so that we know that
these children matter and I
think this is a great way to do
that so I'm hoping that we can
what not only push this through
let's just take the extra leap
of faith and step out and start
saying especially with this
pandemic we we are seeing the
deficits but I think this is one
way to create and put this
balance in the place that we're
still looking for so I
appreciate your time I'm very
thankful for being here but I
also ask that we do look at our
children with disabilities and
say they're no longer visible
we're good about trying to make
a visible thank you for the
opportunity but I.
Right thank you Senator Lopez we
do have Senator Lopez you just
came back on.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Trujillo I'm I
don't know and I apologize for
you are in the presentation
and I know I just saw a Ronaldo
scenes her statement so I will
be here to answer any questions
that the committee may have.
Well Mr chairman and senator my
only comment and and I hope
you'll let Senator Lopez also
responded we just started but
this is a hugely important bill
There are so many so many issues
involving public education that
we have not addressed but this
is a huge one and
This is I think an all inclusive
of bill that addresses both
sides of of the special ed both
gifted kids as well as children
with disabilities and children
that are that have disabilities
but are also considered gifted I
think this is an opportune time
to address this the these issues
and the may be Senator Lopez can
talk about the appropriation.
And Senator Lopez I would say
that if you could explain the
bill because we've heard about a
possible effects but we haven't
heard exactly what the bill is
doing so if you could give us a
rundown of what the bill is
doing.
Okay again I appreciate of the
intelligence thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and again thank you
Representative Trujillo the the
bill itself is first and
foremost consolidating
Where we have within the Public
education department officially
and we have been told over the
years Mr chairman that we have a
division of special ed well we
really don't
what this bill does is it
elevates in the structure of our
government from a bureau up to
an actual division within the
public education department
which is very special very
awesome you know for the lack of
course it's it's where it's
needs to be to have a focus and
and and work in bringing
together all of their programs
consolidating what we do with
regards to it working with those
in our communities to have an IP
and inter you know
individualized education plan.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it also elevates the
person currently right now who
is what what the director up
into an assistant secretary
which and Mr chairman members of
the committee elevates the
importance of what this to this
new division officially it needs
to do and as was mentioned also
too we do include our gifted
children within the structure
that we're proposing at this
time of the other aspect too is
that we do have an autism rest
registry that's included within
the bill itself we've not done
this before this also helps as
you know Mr chairman members of
the committee the numbers for
those of our children students
with autism of course in our
communities of course is
increasing.
And this of course I think helps
to give us a better picture and
Mr chairman members of the
committee and there wasn't an
appropriation at at would it was
in the Senate with regards to
million dollars asking for
professional development and
those are built Mr chairman
members of the committee that
several of us have introduced
over the years the us for there
to be professional development
provided for all of our staff
and our schools so that they
understand and know how to work
with children
maybe on the spectrum who may be
out of the playground or
whichever but how do we react as
working with our students so
that would be teachers yes of
course is for instruction but
also for those that are of our
eight educational systems those
who are our other staff members
within the school system within
that a school facility also.
Mr chairman that's just kind of
a brief overview of what this
bill does and that the money was
stripped out because there is I
think over ten million dollars
or professional development I
believe within our our school
budget proposal that we have and
it's it's the hope of course to
that that's how the monies will
be used making sure that we do
provide training as it relates
to our children within the
special Education category.
And the staff is that also for
questions.
Great thank you all for the
presentations are it's okay to
the attendees less there anybody
in support of Senate bill two
eighty nine.
More you will come back up to
two minutes.
Learning chairman role metal and
members of the committee I think
the sponsor for bringing forward
this bill the this elevation of
L. add from.
Zero to division I you know that
that's kind of in our office
stuff but I do know that
The well being of our special
education students across the
state of New Mexico is very
important and needs this type of
hopefully a spotlight that would
shine on a practice and
professional learning around
special education I know.
over the course of of a career
in education in middle school
that that things have the change
greatly and especially in the
area of Oct is in the area of
behavioral.
Needs that students have
it's super important for
educators to remain current in
their practice and pedagogy
surrounding students with
disabilities and so with any a
New Mexico
of which I am the president of
merry par Sanchez we stand in
strong support of this bill and
we would respectfully ask the
committee to do so as well thank
you.
Thank you.
All right Ellen morning L. any
of up to two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
won't need anywhere near that
amount of time Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition and I will
simply point out that special
education has long been a sort
of redheaded stepchild over at
the public education department
we believe that this bill will
strengthen public education in
New Mexico and we are to support
thank you.
Great thank you.
All right.
So go to
Christina if you if you wish to
speak please already have your
hand up Christina.
Morning you have a two minutes.
Good morning my apologies for
the late across the.
I'm sorry I I made a mistake to
Krista I'm sorry.
No worries my name is crystal
director of exceptional program.
Thirty years special educator.
Strong support.
What that special education.
The right child and I truly
believe that our special
educators are more targeted
professional development
opportunities and opportunities
to.
Work more closely with regular
ed teachers in meeting the needs
of students with disabilities
thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to
opposition opposition to send
the bill to a.
All right more in difference
will come to committee.
Me comments questions concerns.
Mr chair I move it to pass all
right so we have Representative
Garrett but I'll take that
motion a minute thank you
Representative directly.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and senator for
presenting this my only comment
is in using money for
Keep your P. date I think we
have to really re visit the
preparation of our general
education teachers what I was
prepared I had one three credit
class and special education and
no exposure in the classroom
because I had worked in
exceptional children's home as
an undergraduate I had that
experience but there was no
serious examination and in one
course you simply can't to go
their so I think that we really
have to work with our teacher
preparation programs so that
teachers have a deeper
understanding and experience of
the range of both gifted and
accept all the exception
allergies and disabilities that
children have so that's just
something I think we need to
look at deeper not today of
course but in the interim thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you sponsors for the.
A great bills that draws
attention to a very vulnerable
populations of students to who
needs
Services I need more than we've
been giving them so I am
delighted to see this elevation
I want to make sure I understand
a couple things and I want to
reiterate.
Vice chair Garrett.
Stole my point I wanted to ask
that you consider not
necessarily amended this bill
but it is not listed in the
description for this division
or the activities for this
Assistant Secretary and that
they do some work with the
higher education department
colleges of education and how
teachers are trained to serve
exceptional students and we need
that we need that cross cultural
converse cross cross silo cross
Department conversation to be
happening to improve teacher
preparation both in the
traditional college event but
also in the alternative pathway
licensure because more than
sixty percent of our teachers
are being prepared in the
alternative pathway in there
especially going to need
information about the complexity
of addressing the needs of our
exceptional students so I I
would hope that the division and
the secretary would address that
my question is for to make sure
I understand anything in here
that is different or additional
than what the euro is already.
This and Mister chair and
sponsor modernizing them of the
autism registries New.
Is there anything else that is
specifically.
Thank.
Mr chairman and Representative
Figueroa I apologize but I don't
know if it was in my hand or
what but you were
there is some technical
difficulties us so you you froze
for a minute but I think the
question was pretty clear is
what's what's what's within the
the what's new with in this bill
that hasn't been part of the
responsibilities previously.
Part of it Mr chairman
Representative Figueroa is
essentially we're also asking
for the to this new division to
monitor.
which it is and it's been part
of your when we talk about the
lawsuit is Martinez verses the
state of New Mexico the focus of
course there was for our are at
risk students and I I called of
course exceptional I have a
gifted student of my son is is
autistic but he's all the above.
I'm so we're asking for there to
be a monitoring so that we can
actually have and see if maybe
Dawn through an audit but that
that's something you this within
this concept of what we're
proposing for us to look at so
this new division will be tasked
with doing that and that's
something that you can go back
and review a look at the past
hello a statute and such it was
not in there before so for me
that is something that is very
very special so that we can
begin to focus and and really
look at to see what we can do a
lot of on oversight.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator I think I think you are
correct this is crucial to see
if we are fulfilling the
mandates meeting the
requirements of our students are
getting the services that we are
funding as the state and make
sure it's being done I would
expect to Mr chair and senator
just see an increase in PED's
budget request in the future
because with the eighty nine
school districts or nine hundred
twenty seven schools one person
deciding what today is going to
date five years just to see them
all so to get that job done to
do oversight is going to take
funding and I think we'll have
to look for that in the in the
coming years budget but thank
you very much thank you Mr chair
thank you for this bill Senate.
Great thank you Representative
Trujillo you had for and that.
I'm I totally concur Mr chairman
and Senator Lopez with all the
previous comments especially the
one about the Representative
Figueroa was commented about
funding you know when I tried to
pass my gifted Bill one of the
reasons that was tabled because
they had funding component to it
is not included in the budget I
was told so the reality is.
The the head is already supposed
to be doing so much of this
they're not doing it secondly.
We as educators they can still
consider myself an educator we
have a we have the training as
Representative Garrett talked
about public education but there
are so many specific things we
are not taught we can just
thrown in there and we're hoping
that we stay above water when
we're interacting with kids.
If.
Many of you oh my god you're all
young but when I was teaching
well when I was in elementary
school.
The public school inTaos was it
in the little main campus and
way across pass the football
field there were three buildings
that's for the special ed kids
were and I always wondered but
why they were there if no one
ever told me anything they were
not part of the conversation
they weren't allowed to interact
with this is horrible we've come
a long way when it comes to
interacting with special needs
kids or children with
disabilities are gifted kids the
you know my last year my last
three years teaching I taught a
bilingual special that inclusion
one two of class at the the
resettlement preschool.
And I really didn't have the
training to do to be with
specially.
Needs kids but I learned that
that the that those kids come
with an entourage of support.
Supporters who will help with
speech and language with a
variety of things and so you a
teacher who is that traded in
the of that has to make space
for all that all the extra
support when they can get it
they have to learn that the
route their classroom isn't
their domain and they have to
learn how to interact with kids
that don't have the ability to
communicate with kids with
everybody else because his have
either speech impediments or a
variety of things that we as
regular ed teachers aren't
trying to interact with or or to
do so that whole process of
teaching and learning becomes
really important and we don't
get that in the warp speed
version of of learning how to
teach and I hope that this bill
will
A draw focus to what's going on
as we move this forward and I
really want to advocate your for
your support in getting this
bill moves forward thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
All right so entertain a motion
on Senate bill I have
Representative Trujillo you had
already excuse me.
Do I have a second all seconds
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa is there any
opposition.
No Mr chairman.
Okay you mean to call your
representative.
I'll also be voting no Mr
chairman.
Okay Representative.
All right others.
Well as everybody else yes okay.
Mr king.
Representative Lente is a no
please.
Yes yes Sir.
All right.
Body else.
Okay.
So you have a do pass the
committee substitute presentable
to eighty nine as amended thank
you Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you all
right.
All right that concludes our
work for today I'm we.
May or may not have a meeting on
Friday depending on what comes
over if anything is referred but
I would take this opportunity to
thank our wonderful committee
for your great work thank you
just to the new members
all of you Representative Lane
Representative Sweetser
representative Lente a
representative for about how to
you know for for for really at
adding your voice in landing
your voice and your expertise
and and your districts voice to
to our committee this year
especially in these challenging
times when we're talking about
schools we're talking
potentially reopening are now re
opening when we're talking about
us happy doing doing our session
virtually I really appreciate
you all being here remaining
professional remaining very
cordial toward one another in
our discussions in maintaining
the decorum I think we have a we
have a pretty awesome group and
I'm and I'm.
Are the proud to have you all in
this committee and work with you
all and have you all as
colleagues thank you all for
that for the great year into our
Committee secretary Linda thank
you so much for everything
you're always here to remind me
when it needs to be mentioned
that it's an amendment or in the
process and keeping me on track
and in check I appreciate that
and that very very much I'm Mary
and Rachel are committee
Analysts thank you all so much
for all the tremendous work and
putting up with endless meetings
with me
and and things like that in my
last minute scheduling at times
are giving you a little heads up
I really appreciate the worst
Done.
Thank Mr chairman I just like to
add thank you to you for your
leadership and also for some of
the positions that you've taken
that have led to meaningful
amendments and that so many of
us across the state appreciate I
didn't have to fight the fight
the way he did and I'm grateful
for you.
Yes thank you.
Thank thank you Representative
Dow I think we have a tremendous
team and I certainly appreciate
like I said all the work it's
it's it's the work of a team and
and certainly if they were just
my ideas they wouldn't go very
far but I think it's a it's a
it's a team effort and things
that we can really rally behind
and I think that's one of the
one of the things that I'm most
proud of serving in the houses
is that we can really rally
around some of these ideas
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Mr chairman I want to thank
you as well and the the taking
in you you bring to the table
because I this is my favorite
Canadian and the I think one of
the things that we do really
really affects the state of New
Mexico but I also want to make
sure that we thank vice chair
Garrett because she has also
added a lot to the table and the
without her putting up those
those signs behind her I would
never know.
What we're dealing with that
more than anything that she's
your your I never know the
cliches but she's your Yang
getting getting to your yank or
something like that.
Something like.
Yeni would.
That's very appropriate thank
you and and certainly thank you
I'd be remiss without mentioning
vice chair Garrett thank you so
much for for making the signs
and and keeping the meeting on
tracking and and all of your
great points that you made
including today I think was a
great example.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
core ones comments you
leadership is in this committee
is much appreciated I also
wanted to mention Randy Piper
the minority and listed a
wonderful job looking at those
for us he's a former
superintendent brings a
tremendous amount of wealth of
knowledge to to what in our our
conversations are so thank you
Mr chairman thanks committee.
Great certainly thank you thank
you to Randy and thank you to
and and to Tony as well on the
majority analysts in our
committee we certainly
appreciate all the work they put
on and in and the information
that they give us to to do what
we do and and
look as smart as we do as well.
All right.
So with that like I said I don't
know if we'll be meeting on
Friday so will recess subject to
the call of the chair for now.
But I appreciate everybody thank
you so much we'll see you all on
the floor.
I.
