Representative Madrid.
Your.
Representative were brought by
it all.
Representative state Sen.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative used with.
Here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Do.
Share here here.
Madam chair.
We do have a quorum.
All right thank you
Good morning everybody
So so today is it is a bit of a
somber day
You may have read that
superintendent more former
public education department
secretary Dr Karen Trujillo
passed away yesterday evening in
a tragic accident and
I I just thought we start off
with with the moment of silence
in our committee this morning.
Thank you all on she was a
tremendous person somebody that
that worked in all different
areas of of.
Our school system and and
maintain contact with me and I
know other members and was a
keen watcher of our of our
legislative proceedings and and
offered her advice and her
incitement inner guidance in the
in certainly what what I do in
the considerations that I made
and and the considerations that
we all made as a body so
You certainly extend our
condolences on behalf of the
committee to to the Trujillo
family
And and all of her friends and
family and loved ones she'll be
greatly missed.
Great thank you on good morning
so Representative Roybal
Caballero has still to twenty
seven please when you're at.
Thank you Mr chair and
Thank you for offering that
moment.
I was.
In that you would thank you I
thank you what thank you very
much so Mister chair and members
of the committee.
I'm here and hopefully Senator
Lopez will join us soon to
present house bill two to seven
and house bill two two seven
requires ethnic studies
instruction for kindergarten
through twelfth grade and
creates the ethnic studies
council and I think it's
important for chair and members
of the committee to go back a
little bit in history
Because I'm I'm part of that
living history and over fifty
years ago I was one of the
founders of to kind of to kind
of studies that time it was to
come studies during it you can
just.
Movement
And we envision that time when
we we're working with the
planned this on legislative
madam and I might mention that
doctor Vasquez who is with us
here today.
And Dr Juan Gomez communities
who recently passed away wrote a
fantastic book and it's called
making a slant.
And I think it's really
important to
to bring this book up at this
point not only because I'm using
a currently in my doctoral
studies but it traces the
ideology in and I say V. ology
and culture of the chicken.
And.
Dating from nineteen sixty six
to nineteen seventy seven Mr
chairman members of the
committee these are critical
years for the foundation of.
What we are now entertaining as
ethnic studies I think it's
important to note because during
that period in the Chicano
movement it was a multicultural
efforts we were pushing for not
just to kind of studies that
black studies women studies
native American studies all of
our ethnic studies it was
important because then we
envision to Mr chair that if we
had ethnic studies beginning in
elementary school middle school
high school and through higher
education we would be able to
create a huge impact in changing
the cycles of poverty the cycles
of opportunity for our
communities throughout the
United States who were suffering
for generations and generations
of
through the cycles of poverty
and so it's important to raise
that to become.
Fifty plus years ago I never
would have envisioned them that
we were.
Still not at a point where we
would have institutionalized
ethnic studies in a manner that
would have helped us pre vent in
my view what we experienced the
past four years under the
previous presidential
administration with the
department of education.
Excuse me.
Which made it more certain than
ever the need for having ethnic
studies education the more we
know and understand our
histories our cultures our
cultural traditions practices in
the mail more we share those.
In the understanding with them
the settlement theories and all
of the histories of the United
States then we're in a better
position we place our our school
children our students in a
better position to be able to
confront.
Mr chair and representative
inequities within the systems
that they are being prepared to
enter on the systems of their
choice so Mister chairman.
Members of the committee I'd
like to go ahead and call on
the first expert witness and we
may have to move things a little
bit around here
So that we can have the room to
bring in the experts that I have
uninvited today and I'd like to
call on first drive me to see me
what is from monument valley
Utah on she received her BA
degree and her master's degree
and native American studies from
UNM.
As part of the first cohort for
the native American studies
master's program and she teaches
indigenous history of the native
American Community Academy.
WB you need to R. I'm sorry.
Is that you are I thank you Mr
chair go ahead.
Please.
Yeah that's a good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am sharing the UNM
native American studies
endorsement
I have been teaching for years
and local indigenous studies
global indigenous studies social
justice academic writing social
and other social studies and I
personally am seen the
transformational effects ethnic
studies courses and content.
It makes it is directly
correlates to positive student
outcomes I think cities inspires
and challenges the minds of
students and also in which is
traditional school subjects
through unique pedagogies that
draw and students social and
cultural capital New Mexico
these approaches approaches
definitely develops necessary
could critical thinking and
civil civic engagement that
benefits local and wider
communities using strength based
approach is necessary in public
education because they help
recover and nourish communities
from the unilateralist education
has not addressed our rich
diversity in New Mexico our New
Mexico communities I think
studies reinvent students back
into local communities in ways
that resources local ways of
learning transmission now it and
sense of belonging and I think
studies classes students and
their communities are viewed as
sources of knowledge in our
local schools colleges and
universities they are affects
the foundation for greater
learning in addition ethnic
studies teachers collaborate
with local community and
stakeholders to collectively
support student learning and
development finally ethnic
studies curriculum and program
is rooted in real world issues
experiences and problem solving
students will have relationships
with New Mexico and feel they
belong to the places Landen
people they're learning from and
when we care for something we
want to take care of it and help
it grow thank you for thank you
the next slide like to call on
doctor said we sat on the.
And Dr not Hannah is an
assistant professor into come
into kind of studies currently
at UNM.
And what he brings is that he
has a wealth of knowledge in
having taught ethnic studies on
the Long Beach unified school
district so doctor Silverman
ahead are you.
You may go on now.
Dr please.
If you would.
So so Representative you have
quite a number of experts on the
B. twenty king some and all of
some of them also be able to
speak during public comment as
well so when I wanted to propose
and I apologize for not doing
this earlier is that we pool
doctor I ring basket out of the
expert testimony and we were in
the drive percent lease.
No not yet.
Dr a mask is will contribute and
public comment public comment
okay.
Right Dr here with us good
morning thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee
my name is Dr city said no I'm
an assistant professor of
Chester city's UNM this bill
provides institutional framework
for statewide implementation of
ethnic studies.
In the K. through twelve schools
in addition the bill will
establish a statewide at the
city's council I speak in
support of HB two to seven today
given my understanding the
positive effects of ethnic
studies on student outcomes in
the K. to twelve systems
programs like these can
contribute to raising graduation
rates among students of color.
For instance in Tucson Arizona
before the program was
terminated students
participating in Mexican
American studies program
demonstrated a ninety three
percent high school graduation
rate the program consisted of
predominantly students of color
its largest ethnic group was
that the non which emission line
has historically some of the
lowest graduation rates moreover
ethnic studies programs
encourage higher.
College enrollments for
historically underrepresented
students the CCS program out of
UNM is already inspiring more
New Mexico high school and
community college students to
seek higher education as such
implementation of ethnic studies
can help raise graduation and
college enrollment rates in New
Mexico also education scholars
have demonstrated the positive
impact of culturally relevant
teaching on the success of
diverse in populations in the
United States this work stems
from examples established by the
ethnic studies by ethics the
scholars dating back to the
civil rights era.
With ethnic studies your New
Mexicans would be better able to
as Geneva again puts it use
cultural knowledge prior
experiences frames of reference
and performance thousand
ethnically diverse students to
make learning more relevant and
effective and I can personally
attest to that as a as
previously of teaching and
creating curriculum for high
school students and ethnic
studies in a state like New
Mexico where the population has
remained ethnically diverse
since early foundations of the
state the statewide
implementation of ethnic studies
research pedagogy and curriculum
in K. through twelve schools
could help position the state as
a national model ready for the
twenty first and twenty second
second centuries were ethnically
diverse populations will be the
norm in the entire United States
as such with the input of it of
the ethnic studies council the
New Mexico public education
department can develop a model
that best prepares young New
Mexicans to critically
understand the past present and
future significance of
ethnically diverse populations
thank you.
The next step we have doctor
Timothy Nelson.
And Dr Nelson is a historian and
graduated from both NMSU and
UTEP's.
He was the racial justice
director at the White W. CA and
then pass out and his work
addresses foundational issues in
African American US US west
borderlands African descent that
diasporas in New Mexico history
through his in depth research
and brought down which
challenges the tri cultural
narrative of New Mexico Dr.
Timothy Nelson.
in place thank you for having
our I'm independent historian
educator New Mexico residents
for over twenty years the lack
of comprehensive curriculum and
instruction she needs the
violence of ongoing intellectual
genocide.
Thank you Jim used to silence
the rating was a perpetual
iterations additional taking
place in these borderlands
because most Christians are
children who are subjected to
intellectual displacement
erasure and oversimplification
of their humanity.
Ethnic studies will provide the
necessary space in charge of
students to explore their
ontological cells here's a
warning.
The lack of ethnic studies is
currently doing serious damage
the void of knowledge is
replaced by poor representations
of culture and stereo types a
quick survey of Santa Fe public
schools social studies textbooks
reveals the deliberate silence.
If not for altruistic reasons
consider Disney Netflix and all
the other major companies that
are in dire need of new content
without ethnic studies New
Mexico will lose the soul that
makes it profitable in the
intellectual economy aside from
the perpetual devaluing of
ethnic people when oil and gas
can no longer pay the bills in
New Mexico culture production
and value will also be reduced
to cheap imitations of itself
ethnic studies is an investment
in the new economy.
That is revolutionizing this
digital age Yazzie Martinez
begin a conversation about
career and college readiness as
we have seen with the public
infection of conspiracy theories
we also need to prepare our
children for world filled with
kids in cages and alternative
facts that.
May come from elected leaders
sadly the books the curriculum
and instruction support
continued mental slavery and you
have a chance to do something
about it such as department of
the station of africana studies
within the higher education
institutions which will
definitely filter into the K. to
twelve curriculum instruction
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
And next Mr chairman final
expert is Dr do see then Lara.
And Dr Duvignau Lara is
currently an associate
professor.
No justice at New Mexico State
University and before that she
was an assistant professor at
the university history
department for three years she
earned her doctorate in ethnic
studies at the university of
California Berkeley and we're
privileged to have doctor just
in Atlanta thank you.
Place Dr.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
for your time and attention I'm
here to advocate for house bill
two two seven my Ph.D is an
ethnic studies from one of the
oldest most recognized programs
in the country my expertise
includes the history of race
relations in the state of New
Mexico and I'm a tenured
professor at MSU.
I'm speaking here is an educator
and most importantly as the
mother of a third grader in the
Los crucis public schools so I'm
invested in education on the
future of education from many
angles I want to convey to the
committee and the public
watching that next of these have
been proven as a way to increase
achievement preparedness for
college and student fulfillment
there's many studies in the
literature especially during the
fat the last fifteen years or so
this bill along with the number
of bills being reviewed that
Stefanics studies and culturally
sustaining education practices
are like other witnesses have
testified is is to build a
future that's brighter for New
Mexico communities.
this is not an easy task it will
take all education stakeholders
to make this shift as a
professor at NMSC I run the
borderlands in ethnic studies
program we're currently offering
a fifteen credit graduate
certificate that's growing in
numbers and I wanted to share
that in particular and getting
requests from public teachers
from California to enroll in our
online program as they start to
prepare to implement ethnic
studies in their state I really
feel like New Mexico can be a
champion and a leader in
implementing ethnic studies in
our schools I'm here in Los
crucis in may twenty seventeen
the Los crucis school board
unanimously voted to implement
ethnic studies K. to twelve I've
been serving on on that task
force since two sep twenty
seventeen to figure out how to
get this moving but it's very
clear to me that we need
resources to build the capacity
to do this one of the big pieces
of work in the
in the uniform curriculum that
teaches ethnic studies and I've
been asked repeatedly by
legislators and administrators
Dr lot of what we buy this and
the thing with the with ethnic
studies the answer to that is we
don't buy it we make it and so
we have incredible educators
already in the state who have
built out pieces of the
curriculum including the
indigenous wisdom curriculum the
work of not got it cetera
however there's a lot of work
that needs to happen and so what
we're trying to do down here in
southern New Mexico we have a
support this year from the
Kellogg foundation to gather
together teachers and students
in writing Institute and so
we're starting to write that the
ethnic studies frame history of
Southern New Mexico this came
from a pilot that was supported
last summer by the New Mexico
public education department
supported my my team of
researchers to work with
educators in southern New Mexico
and ask teachers themselves
history teacher social studies
teachers what's going on what do
you need and what I heard from
teachers is there are less.
And then the books that the
books that they're using is the
same book I was using as a high
school in the nineteen nineties
which at that point was already
outdated so that materials are
are are long overdue for
shifting the other thing is the
teacher prep programs don't
focus on ethnic studies many of
our teachers in New Mexico
receive one multicultural
education class and that's it so
they I I encourage legislators
to connect with the southern New
Mexico league of women voters
they're actually doing a study
to look at teacher preparation
and and the curriculum keys
I want to to to share that the
question has been asked of me
from that the folks in the
Public Education Department
Kenneth next ID's replaced so
she'll studies and that sounds
like a controversial question
but as an expert in the field I
would say yes I reviewed the
current social studies standards
K. through twelve and I think
there's a lot of room for dove
tailing the work with ethnic
studies and what's happening in
education of course I'm eager to
work with K. twelve educators to
see how that would work and
finally ethnic studies is not
just about knowing yourself it's
a field of study that explains
those historical moments when
oppression toward particular
groups emerged and how those
ideologies got solid on the
trainings and circulation right
now committee members such as
anti bias training stereo type
awareness very very superficial
when compared to ethnic studies
these workshops that I attended
a leave people with emotions
like guilt or anger or pride but
without any kind of grounded
knowledge so we have these
feelings but people are really
early quipped and I think it's
now time to move beyond those
feelings and to start treating
our New Mexican communities with
respect and offering a complete
well rounded understanding of
our state I think the creation
of the council on ethnic studies
is key and there's a lot of
confusion between culturally
sustaining multicultural and
ethnic studies and that council
can help answer those questions
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you Mr chair Senator up
Senator Linda M. Lopez co
sponsor of this bill I'd like to
call on her to say a few words
before we go to your public
comment Mr chair please Senator
Lopez welcome good morning good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I apologize if I
start sneezing it's allergy
season so is bear with me if I
do
but I under to be here in front
of your committee Mr chairman of
your ethnic studies you know
this is.
Our first go around trying to
get a bill through the
legislature the course up to our
governor for her signature
but with all of the testimony I
know that was given in Senator
education and I know with the
experts here who have shared
this morning this is so
essential for.
Yes it's essential for our our
children but Mr chairman members
of the committee I think it also
extends itself because the
children will learn and go home
and share some of the
information with their families
so it's a continue one that I
see that I think this will
benefit us in so many ways and
should have been done many years
ago Mr chairman you know back in
the day when I was in school
what we learned about in in my
Spanish class is actually where
I had an opportunity to learn a
little bit more about the
history of us here in New Mexico
and you know the budget that
we're we're brought forward it
was just a small picture as to
where and what Mr chairman
members of the committee I think
ethnic studies it's it's for
Africano studies is native
American studies this all of the
different groups that make our
wonderful diversity here in New
Mexico because we are a very
diverse state and for us to
really have an opportunity for
our children in the future to
learn the real history
I think at you know that the
council itself has a.
to unity you too for something
together to really look research
income for with the curriculum
Esther chairman and this bill is
a hard date of work for us to
start so it's not just sometime
in the future but this will give
us a hard date for us to begin
the process of sharing the
information and history of who
we are here in our state and
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you senator Mr chair that
concludes our our opening and
expert witness testimony.
Right thank you Representative
thank you experts for all being
here this morning so we will go
to our attendees list so I'm
first I will start off with.
Preempting.
So I'll start off with the
opposition is their opposition
to house bill two twenty seven
if so please indicate by raising
your and.
All right.
So we will go to support those
that wish to speak in support
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Give it a second.
All right so we have a number of
people if you would you'll have
up to two minutes but please do
not risk repeat the speakers
that came before you but you
have up to two minutes so we'll
start off with Chris.
Good morning Chris him up to
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning members of this
committee on Chris boson and I
was just a lobbyist for Los
crucis public schools we stand
in full support of this piece of
legislation are we did also
stand in support and the Senate
version.
But we want to ask for a few
recommendations if this was not
done yet as the bill moves
forced to committees.
Are we just the sponsor that
consider the following first.
I special appropriation to
address the need for the
professional development are on
at that studies so nothing to do
with the students and staff but
I actually the professionals
that'll be you know than
strangers the teachers and the
local communities stakeholders
that be involved on all this and
I think the expert the the the
last X. for that presented that
she mentioned about right the
beauty resources and that that
would be
a part off building those
resources and we ask the this
possibly is consider that we are
here to help if needed we have
doctor battles auto down south
that to be more than happy to
get get together with the
sponsor and work together with
the stakeholders on addressing
that if if needed and my help as
well
Mr chairman the second is the
timeline of implementation to
ensure teachers have a solid
understanding of ethics that is
and how to effectively implement
ethics studies in our teaching
drugs if there is some
guidelines that will be very
helpful perhaps that could be to
the council on I don't know but
those are the two
recommendations that we would
like this to consider Mr
chairman and as a committee I'm
also the richest of this for the
net college and in that college
is in full support of this piece
of legislation thank you.
All right thank you all right so
go to where we may.
Morning only mailbox two
minutes.
Mr Chairman good morning members
of the committee thank you for
letting me share by our opinion
I represent the New Mexico
Skordas Association I'm their
legislative liaison and the
school was association
recognizes the value and
importance of for providing our
students the multiple
perspectives to build critical
thinking skills through the
examination of social ethnic
cultural general gender and
historical experiences we
support legislation that funds
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum and
materials that our students to
engage in the work necessary to
address education disparities
among racial groups we also
support allowing districts
develop ethnic studies
curriculum switches satisfies
social studies credit
requirements Mr chair while New
Mexico scored Association was
not named in the bills of the
possible members of the ethnic
studies council we would be
happy to assist to participate
in this work and sit at the
table we support this
legislation as well as the
Senate bill that companion
Senate bill Senate bill two ten
we thank the sponsors that
representative I or about Calero
major what legal office for
present me these bills and we
ask the committee to favorably
could consider this legislation
thank you very much for allowing
us to present.
I thank you.
All right can be no.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good afternoon chair and
distinguished members of the
committee my name is gonna be
don't know data I'm an educated
APS's career metrocentre and PhD
candidate UNM college of
education I support the ethnic
cities bill H. B. two twenty
seven because it provides our
students with the much needed
curriculum and content which is
both culturally relevant and
culturally sustaining the
ability to hear their people's
histories and narratives is
crucial to our students lives
and learning and addressing the
issue the need for change in
rural in regard to the narrative
the dominant culture and using
ethnic studies as a vehicle of
changes is a is a very
amazing of form or method of
doing this as some of the others
have stated that the cities
provide opportunities for
students to perform better
academically as well as acquired
twenty first century skills like
the critical thinking skills
needed to be productive in the
twenty first century economy
these skills and academic
advancement brought up in
various educational legislation
such as no child left behind and
race to the top
however these endeavors of
education reform have not
provided students of color with
opportunities to acquire the ski
hills as well as opportunities
to have culturally relevant and
sustaining curriculum in their
classes ethnic studies programs
have again again provided many
of the skills and opportunities
to students of of color and that
is why we should focus within
our education system many of the
courses provide students with
dual credit opportunities as
well as in in PED score of core
requirements it is also
important because it provides
students with opportunities to
learn how to navigate the
university community college
system this is why I support
this not only as as a student
but also as an educator I see
changing my students every day
as being part of this class are
these courses and I see this
transformative process occur
right before my eyes were icy
students understand more about
their identity and appreciate
the other.
Cultures that are around us
being that New Mexico is such a
diverse state this is exactly
right thank you Sir that was
your two minutes thank.
All right so we'll go to and
again
Good morning you have up to two
minutes please.
A good morning for example thank
you for letting me have this
amazing opportunity my name is
I and I like that I mean it this
year cost president how in high
school today I am speaking in
favor of the ethnic studies bill
as a student who have had first
hand experience Senator Steven
don't credit and taking quicker
as a first generation Mexican
American student it wasn't until
taking office Mexican American
studies the highland that part
about Mexican people
contribution to American history
how we feel empowered proud
encouraged to attend school and
that's for the rich my critical
thinking skills.
It has included that in high
school as Mexico studies course
examine the role the great
nationality coaching experience
the pendant and academic
performance of students at risk
of dropping out.
Implementing the curriculum
would be beneficial not only for
students like me also those not
affected in these classes make a
person more aware of public
record and encourage them to
think critically about the
experiences of of those around
them.
I hope that with me sharing my
experiences with taking at the
study quarter you will see how
this can be valuable to the
future leaders of America thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right so go to change.
Good morning Jamie of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chair and
distinguished members of the
house Education Committee my
name is Jane Martin right now
and I'm a student learning at
Albuquerque public schools early
college academy growing up I
have always believed I am way
without really understanding
what that means I believe this
because I am privileged growing
up those two words are
synonymous this in turn led me
to believe something I'm ashamed
as I thought to be a minority
one had to struggle minority
must be the one struggling to
live in America all of this I
believe still having an
indigenous and African American
grandfather and expanded
grandmother just because I
associated being comfortable
with being white not only has
this please send me on what I
consider to be the wrong moral
pass but I've lost a lot of my
cultural identity because of it
I stop speaking Spanish even
though as a child I was nearly
fluent and now I can speak it at
all I also didn't ask my grandma
about my family's past before it
was too late being able to learn
about ethnicity benefits
everyone and I wish I would've
known that sooner thus I think
house bill two twenty seven can
help other children like me
understand their owners and
their peers are it's instead of
making the mistakes that I did
thank you all for your time.
Right thank you for being here.
Rents will go to New Brandon.
Good morning Brandon Jahrbuch
two minutes welcome.
Learning chairman distinguished
members of the committee my name
is Brandon okay are and I am the
junior early college academy any
former at the city student I
support the ethnic studies house
bill two to seven because the
impact has made on me and my
peers for instance in our
history classes we have not been
taught that you quit and the
natives Andrew Jackson trail of
tears the actual stories of the
indigenous people before
Christopher Columbus's compete
that lotus instead we are taught
that they were on intelligent
and security people we are not
talk about the peaceful caring
smart people that the are the
people who created the numbers
zero and built the first schools
either decided history
threatening studies but we are
not all taught this at St the
truth is in the shadows and it's
our job to bring it out there
and we see just how connected we
really are it teaches us
perspective helps humanize
everyone and helps us understand
one another I support house bill
two to seven because it will
bring the legislative history of
the United States back to the
light passing this bill will
enable us to fight the ongoing
problem of racism in our state
and in our country so please
pass this bill to give us give
us and the future generation the
opportunity to re write the
wrongs of the present and the
past thank you for your time.
Right thank you for being here.
All right so go to Robert.
Good morning Robert you have up
to two minutes welcome good
morning thank you
thank you for allowing me to
speak today Robert fell still
like teach Mexican American
studies as an elective at
highland high school in
Albuquerque is also dual credit
class two unit Q. and that the
decision I am a PhD students and
student into got a to go those
studies at UNM we created
nothing studies program at
highland high school to address
a high drop out rate among the
Hispanic students in the seven
years we've had the program the
graduation rate for students to
take the class is equal to or
higher than the state average
the central part of the success
is due to the collaboration with
the to kind of check on those
studies department which is
function as the ethnic studies
council this legislation creates
the department of proven to be
invaluable and the support for
my students through our
collaboration we have shared
curriculum and strategies and my
students have also been able to
participate in conferences and
other college perspective bodies
the programs and curriculums we
have created shared and
implemented and help students
achieve success in school and
become engaged in our community
students I taught in high school
or not taking my classes that
you and at research is showing
the efficacy of ethnic studies
programs and they should be a
required part of the crew
comprehensive curriculum thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right so.
We'll go to.
Emeli.
The morning Emily.
Two minutes good morning and
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and then we will
do our representative in New
Mexico voices for children and
support house bill two twenty
seven we support the inclusion
of ethnic studies in the K.
twelve curriculum and the
creation of the council to
develop content that's
appropriate to every level of
education.
Providing ethnic studies in our
schools is one step in
responding to the Yazzie
Martinez ruling providing a
culturally and linguistically
relevant education that will
improve the engage in of
students help to minimize the
disparities and graduation rates
and support the success of our
ethnically diverse students we
asked the committee to join us
in supporting this bill today
thank you.
Great thank you.
So coaching actually.
Good morning actually about two
minutes.
Members of the committee an
exciting is emerged in
universities across the nation
during the nineteen sixties as a
result of social reform
movements very quality of racial
minorities.
Research respect is.
She actually bank histories of
oppression in the US as well as
by the intellectual and cultural
resources and traditions of
black Asian she connects and
native American groups fifty
years ago there are virtually no
courses reflecting the
literature art culture and
politics of these racialized
groups was was negative or
hurtful since the conclusion of
the civil rights movement at the
state's program have provided
the means to address racial and
ethnic concerns and the
productive.
Implementing H. B. two two seven
your strength in New Mexico
students understanding of
diversity equality and justice
there will be challenges thank
more complex ways about identity
including their own identity and
history to avoid cultural
stereotyping and become more
productive citizens thank you so
much and please support HB two
two seven.
Thank you.
All right so go to.
Do you.
Good morning Steve you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee Steve ceiling is
government relations director
for any in New Mexico I'll be
brief for the sake of time on
behalf of our members we support
this bill thank the sponsor for
bringing forth the this bill
echo the support of the public
and we respectfully ask that you
vote in favor of this bill thank
you right thank you Steve.
Yes man welcome just many of up
to two minutes.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep I am with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and
for the sake of time as well
I'll be brief The New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
specifically the education team
and the representing the Yazzie
Martinez the Yazzie plaintiffs
in the Yazzie Martinez case
stand in support of this piece
of legislation we believe that
it is a foundational part of the
lawsuit in bringing culturally
and linguistically relevant
education to our students in New
Mexico's public schools so for
that reason we stand in favor of
this the.
Excuse me jasmine thank you for
being here.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is for law
school I'm a PhD student in the
language that are seen social
cultural studies program in the
college of education at UNM
also graduate assistants
comments from studies and I am
in support of this bill H. B.
two two seven aside from having
affects the that are positive
for students in the state of New
Mexico this bill will also help
generate up crucial of material
well curriculum instructional
materials that are crucial
because these are the areas that
must be explored specifically in
relation to implementing studies
and the council will help us
facilitate that process and I am
hoping that you also well in
favor of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
All right we'll go to some tree.
Morning some two minutes
welcome.
Good money chair and committee
my name is Dale G. on tests
problem well of the code I live
in Bloomfield New Mexico to my
parent advocate I support this
bill wholeheartedly for all of
the amazing reasons that the
prior public has said for me and
also for the fact that
the UNM native American studies
program has transformed my life
and my purpose and so I totally
support this bill thank you so
much right.
Thank you.
All right.
Seeing no other hands in the
attendees list I will come to
committee committee members
questions.
Representative Derrick please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and Senator and
staff
I have a few questions
have you spoke or if it's
someone from PED in here about
the social studies standards
because to me as somebody who's
taught
social studies and included
these points okay garden to post
secondary the definition ethnic
studies means the
interdisciplinary study of
multiple perspectives through
the examination of social ethnic
cultural gender and historical
experiences to build critical
thinking skills to me that that
is a fundamental guideline that
should be everything that we
teach not just isolated in a
class but it should be a cheat
sheet.
Strategy and commitment and
everything that we change so
you spoke about integrating that
more explicitly in the social
studies standards which maybe
PED as we working I don't know.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Mr chair could we
move Dr Irene baskets up now for
Q. NA and Dr Soberano knocking
that out.
And that way she can engage with
us and I'd like to call Mr chair
both Dr
now land drive buscas to answer
that are done Representative
Garrett thank you.
Dr Lara go head well we pull and
drive if that's okay Mister
chair.
Yes please doctor Lara.
Thank you I really love that
question I think you're
absolutely right Representative
Garrett does seem commonsensical
and any vetted and and how we
teach everything I was called on
by the New Mexico paid last
summer to be part of a committee
that whose work is reimagining
social studies standards K. to
twelfth so it's kind of an
informal group right now that is
needing that includes educators
administrators ethnic studies
faculty education faculty and so
kind of looking at the existing
standards what's working what's
not working anymore in fact the
standards are fantastic it's
just that we don't have the
capacity to bring in all the
perspectives into the into the
curriculum so that the PED's
very much involved in that and
leading the way in response to
your the marking its Martinez
Yazzie.
Mr chair Dr Vasquez.
Dr ask is here on the.
Mr chair and not just of the
committee I'm sorry my dogs
barking but I did want to answer
that question because when we
talk about ethnic studies we're
talking about inter disciplinary
approaches and that means you
can in bed both curriculum and
pedagogy into particular fields
of study the the history of
political science economics
But there's also the question of
content and this is something
that
some of the PED initiatives and
the office of African American
affairs in the Indian public
cultural center have approached
which is to build ethnic studies
into math science social studies
humanities and literature
because it's also about
addressing content and there's
enough content in all of these
fields and approaches to
learning
that address our ethnic
communities it's just that there
is a lack so for example are you
gonna to come studies has put
together a professional
development series for a high
school and house that is looking
at how you in bed ethnic studies
in approaches to math science
etcetera so there's the there's
the the the point about content
there's a the point about
curriculum and then there's
pedagogy now the question about
is this piecemeal or
transformative I mean is this a
a piece meal reform this is
something that we dealt with
and Senate education there's
nothing piecemeal about ethnic
studies it is an
interdisciplinary
transformational approach to
learning and so if this bill
passes and in fact if the
council is created to conduct a
study about in betting ethnic
studies
that you know that it's not a
piecemeal approach in fact
because it can influence every
aspect of the school from
teaching to learning to climb at
the cultural programming thank
you.
I thank you Mr chairman and
Representative senator and
commentators I just have one
more brief observation and
that's in referring to the
various groups that would be on
a ethnic studies I council no
mention was made of Asian
Americans and there's so much
hidden history of Asian
Americans and our state which
was really illuminated and
comment by the way are Asian
American residents were treated
so I I think that it does need
to be mentioned thank you Mr
chairman thank you
a representative and senator.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of Representative Roybal all of
my at all and the Senator Lopez
for bringing this bill forward
This is absolutely one of the
best bills that we've I've seen
this year simply because.
Because I knew.
The
next ideas and dog as a veteran
teacher you know I always you
know I talked kindergarten
through fifth grade so in fifth
grade we touch New Mexico
history but the reality was that
you know I was able to teach and
in bed what I perceived as
ethnic studies in all my classes
and I was really fortunate that
my school principals allowed me
to do that and I had really good
I think
support from parents but it was
not part of the state of
benchmarks and standards
unfortunately and this I believe
needs to be included I agree
with the representative and vice
chair joy Garrett but is the
inclusion of all of those ethnic
studies
Categories because it is about.
Who we are and will
we what we are supposed to share
with their students that cannot
be whitewashed I think that
This is just something yes as a
member of the house
appropriations and finance
committee that we need to
understand and those of you who
are with me in that committee.
Of here a lot of education bills
and they never get funded
because I think with all due
respect to the the staff and LFC
and HFC.
They're not in the weeds like we
are a.
But what to.
Cation and this is what numbers
they don't look at at what is
valuable for the classroom and I
think that I think Vanessa
Vanessa Hawker is in your forum
L. L. E. S. C. so I hope she
bears with the Rachel good job.
The importance of having this to
continue to move forward and
supporting and engaging our
members those of us who are on
that committee to move forward
in ensuring that ethnic studies
are included in every facet of
public education Mr chairman and
and presenters I can't tell you
how many years and there
probably every teacher in here
has created their own curriculum
because nothing was available it
cannot be their faces brown
hello.
Got.
To be.
Substantive information that
kids can.
Understand and accept and to see
a doctor to see more Lara
mentioned that Mr Chairman she
knows.
And is working with PED and I
don't think I would be a C. or.
The LFC understand the work is
going on so when I hear
critiques not criticisms but
could takes well the PED is not
doing in the thing about it I I
submit that doctor they need to
talk to doctor Lara to ensure
that there is a lot of input
occurring in terms of the
development of these materials
and we have to make sure we get
them to the schools as quickly
as possible we have to fund the
so I will strongly support this
man.
Though.
In the process.
And the in the.
Issues that supported thank you
Mr chairman.
Great thank you representative
Representative Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for a bill.
Amazing bill.
I appreciated in particular
Senator Lopez is comments Mr
chair about learning some of
this in Spanish class that is
what I teach and that is the joy
in the power of age I think my
students learn language what we
study and explore history and
policy and civic engagement and
I see my students come away can
come alive and say I didn't I
didn't know that I just.
become more engaged.
Family that taught in the Tucson
must program for more than
twenty five years so I'm pretty
familiar with that one too and I
think this is a powerful
opportunity for our students to.
Not just understand more of who
they are but I understand more
of how to interact in the world
and to bring bring their
strengths and bring their
cultural knowledge into the
classroom
to share is this is the strength
of New Mexico that we are
building on here my concerns are
are a couple and one primarily
is timing I think rollout
implementation of policy can
destroy a really good idea.
The council who's going to lay
out the steps for making this
happen we have no effective date
in the bill.
So I assume it's ninety days
after signed but it also has a
specific task and the deadline
to complete it by which the
council will be disbanded my
question is Mr chairman sponsors
have you considered putting an
effective date on section one to
be after the council has
outlined the steps because
laying this requirement out on
teachers with out providing the
necessary development and
process ahead of time because
really caused a huge and
successful results that we are
after.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Senator Lopez did
you wish to address this.
It came up in the.
Senate committee as well if.
Thank you Representative in Mr
chairman and Representative
Figueroa those were some issues
I guess you could say some
questions that were asked during
the committee hearing and Senate
education
but quite frankly it was with
the wealth of experience of what
we currently have in our state
it's not going to have to go
back to the drawing board as you
have heard Mr Chairman
representative our colleges of
education have already move
forward with that you know C. N.
M. already has a she kind of
Chicana studies your curricula
and process program I think
there's a lot of of pieces of
the puzzle this is the same
thing I shared Mr chairman with
Senate education there's pieces
of the puzzle that are out there
in the council can bring those
together there's a to your
timeline for this to happen it
doesn't mean that they can't
begin to implement things in
between the the onset of it by
the summer and going through the
process I mean as I mentioned Mr
Chairman was sick the group in
fact Mr chairman if you notice
the L. E. S. C. as part of it
too I'm so we're all involved in
this whole process as to how we
go progressively forward
there's training it's already
happy in our colleges of
education so it's not like
having to go back to the drawing
board yes it will take effect
you know those many days after
if the governor signs the bill
but I I firmly believe that that
there's enough time in this two
years for things to begin.
Put in place and if I also
missed me say Mr chairman also
with regards to professional
development that's a process
that can be recommended also by
the council when we talk about
professional development for
teachers but also for what how
we work with our all inclusive
education in their property
their preparation for teachers I
hope that answers your question
thank you Mr Chairman
representative I at all and
Representative.
And process you had your hand up
so.
Please I mean Madam members of
the committee I just wanted to
add that there has been a
statewide New Mexico ethnic
studies council that important
about a year ago and now has
about twenty five members that
represent all of.
Almost all of the major
universities in the state and
that is now also includes high
school teachers as well as
community college instructors
and part of the charge of this
council is to establish a means
for professional development for
curriculum development and it is
a totally volunteer body that is
already had several meetings
we meet through zone so there is
a model for putting together a
council we have an example of
this it's doable as Senator
Lopez mentioned the council will
have time to speak to do
research and study and lay out
the framework for the report but
we already have a a great
framework that the national
education association has put
together that is also a good
model so what we're really
talking about is sort of
coalescing of the people the
material and the council.
Of course you know under the the
supervision or or
involvement of PED which is
already involved in some of the
work being done.
Mr.
Enrollment or oh I'm sorry.
I apologize Representative did
you need to speak it it would
you yield Representative
Figueroa.
Yield.
Okay.
I think it's for a motion so if
you have further questions
Representative.
Do you on that same point about
timing it is
The resources that we have that
have been mentioned Mr chair and
we have many I absolutely agree
we also have created teachers
like Representative Trujillo
mentioned who are very adept at
building curriculum we've all
had to do it
My concern I think is on page
two and page three of the bill
most of our resources and most
of our experience has been
higher and.
And high school level
and on page fifty now Page ten
where we put in a high school
requirement it says for students
starting in the twenty three
twenty four school year but.
Is missing and and it might be
in here somewhere but unless I'm
missing it there is no such
delayed implementation for the
kindergarten through third grade
in the middle school
requirements to me those readers
if they would go into effect
next fall and I'm not sure our
elementary teachers across the
state would be ready to jump
into that even with the efforts
you've spoken about that are
already in place I'm not sure we
can get that ready so that I
would clarify is my primary
concern
Mr chair and
owl I will let you look at that
as Sanchez as you move this
forward but I think it might
need some language to address
unless you really intend for it
to drop into place next fall.
Last week the data collection I
want to make sure that we
document.
This has on our educational
system as we put it into place
and it would be nice if there
were some language in the bill
about what data is collected as
as this becomes effective if you
tell us thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative thank you.
Mr chair
I.
Have a doctor Lara
will briefly she has it
addressed actually everything
that representative on the at
all brought up and I'd like for
her to just briefly given that
overview if you could just
briefly on where we stand with
the concerns that
Representative Figueroa brought
up.
Please.
In terms of the relationship
with the head.
Representative Roybal Caballero
was in relationship to on the
timing of
what we have in required for the
specifically the kindergarten
and on up I thank you recall
Representative vehicle as and
the concern is whether we're the
cut the conflict between the
rollout and implementation and
where we stand in that oculata
sure we'll just speaking from
Las Cruces public schools they
were very adamant that this
shouldn't just be a high school
or as Dr baskets mentioned only
in history and social studies
but how do we implement this
system wide across subjects and
across grades and so I think
it's a valid concern but at the
same time there are teachers
already doing this there already
are
materials I in all the teachers
that I worked with last summer
and they're all doing some piece
of it but we need to make this a
concerted effort so that they
can become uniform teachers are
writing their own lesson that
night they're translating them
into Spanish what teachers are
doing is sort of sort of a
miracle and so we have all of
this happening already what we
need is legislation like things
that concerts all the efforts
together and makes it
streamlined so I think the
council is part of it but it's
also we need the the capacity to
start to make this accessible in
a website in a in a curriculum
that's uniform so so all the
pieces exist in terms of rolling
it out it's as quickly as we get
the capacity to make this
uniform the work is that it's
happening.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we had a motion by
Representative Christine
Trujillo for to pass
Representative Madrid.
I saw your hand go up and then
go down Representative Madrid.
Thank you madam chair of Mr
chairman I just want to put a
point out that this ethnic
studies definitions of rural
port aspect too and I bring it
up because I'm always trying to
put the issues to the south to
the importance of the
constituents by Representative
in the area I've got a of a
library that's coming to
fruition and I'm actually
focusing more on the ethnic of
books to be in the in this in
this library one of the first so
it's important so we do support
these points because I really
believe is a culture of the
state of New Mexico we're New
Mexicans and that means to
respect and honor our heritage
and I think of this being an
important first step so thank
you for doing this.
Representative go into it's
admirable thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative.
So we had.
A motion by Representative
Christine Trujillo.
Is there a second thank you Mr
chair second by second by
Representative Madrid
so.
Madam secretary called the roll
on to pass.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative gal.
Representative del.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Eli no.
Representative Lara.
Absolutely yes I.
Representative Lancaster.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative our bond company
at all yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
Yes
property Representative
Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative.
Trujillo and please.
By Kieran yes right that would
pressure men.
Yes.
And to to all right by a vote of
ten to to you have to do pass on
house bill two twenty seven
thank you all so much for being
here at the school that I teach
at your school heritage we have
a long standing dual credit
class that that sync stream we
popular with a lot of my
students and especially as I
teach U. S. history they're able
to provide certainly a lot more
depth and insight to the topics
that we discussed in conjunction
with the two classes so I'm I'm
encouraged to hear this bill
moving through and I think that
the fact that so many people are
working on the on the standards
to integrate
ethnic studies and and cultural
studies into the various aspects
of of our social state system in
which you all are doing it's
it's certainly very welcome and
appreciated so thank you all for
being here this morning thank
you Mr.
Thank you members of the
committee and gonna stay with
you but I just want to say thank
you very much is an emotional
moment for me because it's over
fifty years coming so thank you
very much.
All right thank you all.
All right so we will go to house
bill two fifty seven so we'll
still have to be on the floor
eleven everybody
but we're going along all right
so right Representative Madrid
welcome.
And do you have anybody that I
do need to promote.
Anybody that's here from the to
read by Santa are repeated
repair the.
We are are also Joe so dealers
of these available.
But I welcome anybody from DOT
that's out there.
We have.
Have secretary yes we have the
secretary said he's he's here
for you Representative Madrid
and when you're ready please.
Thank you Mr chairman Education
Committee this is something
those minimum for original more
money for years and just give
you a little story about this is
a true story our group in the
same community that this is for
those bills coming to derive but
I find it to be able to take
this for the whole state and
then is that we do have a lot of
roads are still unpaid in my.
Rural areas of the state that I
represent and also would have
undersupplied one of the things
as for use in the past what this
I think is a the possibility
that means to discussion of this
committee because it has
relevance when we discuss the
north is as well I would the
state needs all over a rural
state so I think this is a bill
that would be appreciated House
Bill substitute Committee do I
need to introduce the committee
Mr Chairman the substitute.
Chairman I move the committee
substitute.
Our house bill fifty seven for
discussion.
All right thank you second it
Representative Madrid place.
I ordered Mr chairman has been
uploaded.
So it had been sent out is it
are uploaded.
Share file.
Yes the public.
I'm checking now we have we have
the.
Original Bill we do not have the
committee substitute it had been
sent out.
Mr chair lady Representative
Eli.
As we get it.
I know we get inundated with
emails so sometimes it helps I
can share that was sent on
Monday February twenty second at
three twenty six PM that helps
anybody located in their email.
Yeah that's that's great I don't
know if Linda or merry posted in
the share file to also we have
Representative all quiet and I
would put it up already thank
you very yes great.
Thank you also if you would just
refresh or like Representative
Representative lane said
Monday at about what time
Representative Lente three Mr
chair three twenty six PM on
Monday if ever twenty second.
Okay and I just refresh shared
drive so if you click out in
back in or just refresh it'll
pop up.
So.
All right Representative Madrid
sorry about that but we were
ready.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Education Committee I want you
to understand this was not just
a one versions it's also with my
co sponsor Rebecca Dow coming
from another part of the rural
part of the state so we we share
the same.
Representative is right now in
this will be discussion causes
are bigger would just to go
aspect to this but it can be
done there we go House Bill
substitute for maybe two fifty
seven requiring school bus route
improvements providing a process
for identifying and ranking
school buses routes in the need
of improvement requiring
requiring the use of reclaimed
and environmental friendly
paving materials encouraging
right away infrastructure
improvements during the school
bus route improvements project
so what we're talking and and
and so make sure to for years
us the state DOT being in power
to do something with this
recurring pavement that they
take up we called male and just
put on the side of the highway
as we see these bottles all over
the state the interesting thing
is is that today given our
technology and advancement with
duties abilities they have the
ability of having to put into
some of the users and how that
would work is that the county
would be interface with the
state and in getting this bill
and re processing that.
Are mentally safe and friendly
and then re using that to rural
bus.
Bus routes this doesn't only
mean that it cast a fire does
unincorporated areas like myself
but it also allows interface
with with news about these as
well so it's a big collaboration
and is a discussion but I think
in the end you'll see that it
has viability when so much of
our state has the need and we
have this process that could
begin as of the future rather
than taking input on the side of
the road we can take you over to
the directors of the communities
all of our state to begin the
replenishment we we repave roads
that being said Mr chairman I'd
like to yield to my co sponsor
for any comments you like that
please please Representative
Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you members of the
committee and Act of course
those of us who live in rural
New Mexico know how rough the
road are and how slow the those
buses go and any time that we
have an opportunity to utilize
resources that can be recycled
and can be put to use at a
lesser cost to the state alone
let's across to school districts
it seems like a good idea to me.
Mr chairman.
Secretary of my accent of a
legislative thing I will be glad
to hear.
Business secretary thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Mike Santa secretary
for the department of
transportation and I really
appreciate all of the work that
Representative Madrid and
Representative Dow too for the
department of defense of the
department they're very
supportive
and Representative Madrid asked
me to be here to help answer
questions and he knows I'm gonna
say this and it pains me to say
this but we can't support the
bill in its current form I think
it's a good conversation to have
and I can go into details about
some of the issues that we think
come about this bill we think
it's obviously very important to
have good roads and protect our
bus drivers in our kids and
reduce maintenance costs to the
buses
but we've had discussions with
the representative on some of
the issues in this bill we
support the intent and the
effort and I'll be happy to
answer any questions as to why
we can't support this in
addition Mr chair for please is
a chair Rick paideia is from our
department he's the executive
director over highway operations
if we can be allowed to.
Soon to discuss.
Because he's really the one that
deals with all the last.
Mailings that we provide to
counties and I think she would
be beneficial to have him here
as well but as I said before
very appreciative of our to
sponsors and the support they
provide to our department so the
state stand for questions.
Thank you Mr president if you're
in the attendees list would you
please raise your.
I had just found you and then
your instrument.
Welcome Mr president.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for
having me.
Representative Madrid you stand
for questions.
Yes Mr chairman we're will stand
for questions.
Right thank you Representative
Your hands please wait those in
the attendees list give
directions
those in opposition to house
bill two fifty seven if you
would indicate by raising your
hand.
All right no opposition so we'll
go to support those in support
of.
House bill two fifty seven
please indicate by raising your
hand.
We'll have two minutes to speak.
Just stay here with us good
morning you have up to two
minutes.
Learning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Vanessa levied and I am actually
I'm not a registered lobbyist
supporting of this bill in any
particular manner except for the
fact that I do Representative
Fizer eighteen eighteen T. and
dell technologies and in
particular on page three of the
committee substitute starting
and subsection G. lines the
seventeen to twenty one we're
very focused on the fact that
the wording says before starting
it.
Just before starting paving
rather school bus route
improvement project the state or
the county shall notify and
encourage service providers that
use underground transmission
lines to improve their rights of
way infrastructure along school
bus routes this is incredibly
important language as we try to
connect the state of New Mexico
with broadband specifically with
telecommunication what telework
and tell education so we sat and
strong support we certainly
thank the sponsors for bringing
this legislation forward please
support this.
Thank you.
All right others that wish to
speak in support.
Attendees thank you very.
Thank you for two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman as a
committee member's site first of
All I Want to say good morning
and thank all of you for for the
service for for New Mexico I
know how difficult it is to be
here and there and and do what
to do and that is very much
appreciated I live in the south
valley Albuquerque west side and
it's a rural much of that is
rural area but this bill I think
is a very sensible bill that I
think we would that needs to be
worked one and looked at
I think that that it would be
very beneficial to the safety of
our school buses and the general
public that drive the same roads
and I think the
On consideration should be given
to this bill I do work for the.
Hi way contractors and
Representative them you're in
Santa Fe I'm not Representative
on this bill simply because I
didn't have time to to ask them
if they would support or not I'm
not support this bill so I'm
just speaking for myself I will
say that the contractors
nationally they do a trip to the
report called the trip report
that they do nationally on the
condition of our highways in our
state and other states but The
New Mexico is ranked up for
rural roads last year it was
ranked like the third workforce
roads in the country and I think
it's something that we can we
should look at more seriously
and also the fact that we may be
able to use materials that would
be environmentally friendly and
also perhaps at a cheaper and
less costly right yes as you all
know the price of oil has gone
up a lot of oil is used to build
our highways so so I think that
may be it's it's time that we
look at no turn it if it's not
it is something that one so well
our our transportation problems
but I think we had a look at it
and I appreciate the committee
US hearing this bill and I want
to thank the sponsor in sponsors
for caring this bill and thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members thank you.
Thank you for being here
chairman.
So any others that wish to speak
in support.
All right so we'll come to
committee first on my list
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Madrid and
Representative Dow for the bill
I guess I'm curious as to why
the secretary said he couldn't
support the department could
supported he said he'd be
willing to tell us if we asked
so I guess I feel compelled to
ask thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative I think the way
that the bill is written you
know just kind of go over it's
you know the process it's in
there and I haven't taken a
close look at the substitute I
don't know that a lot has
changed it's asking us to first
of all higher a school bus route
coordinator in which case
doesn't provide any funding or
position for that is coordinator
would be responsible for
providing a survey to all the
bus drivers.
As you know there are thousands
in our state the bus drivers
would then fill out a survey
based on their route as to what
they think the critical areas of
their bus route for for
improvements would be they would
turn that into their
superintendent in the
superintendent and for that to
the coordinator and and then
based on that we would somehow
prioritize based on those
surveys the the top twenty
percent of routes that need
service these are both state and
county routes and then if
funding was a very low we would
be able to work on these routes
and and so that's how I see the
bill reading and how it would
work the issues with that are
first well there's not a bus
routes change from year to year
depending on where the students
are that the public schools
don't really have a list of bus
routes or or keep bus route list
we would be relying on bus
drivers to provide feedback on
the survey and although I very
much value our bus drivers is to
take care of our kids each and
every day how they assess their
route is maybe different across
bus drivers which there are
thousands and so for our bus
route coordinator to be able to
determine are the top twenty
year worst twenty routes based
on a survey I don't think it's
feasible
In addition to what kind of
treatments we would even be able
to do on all of these routes
there's not one simple treatment
for a road so I know there's
been mentioned of buildings and
we were but millions certainly
that could be one but on some of
these bus routes.
Could take different levels of
from.
Preservation or different levels
of reconstruction and so we
wouldn't know that based on a
survey we would have to do some
pretty in depth analysis of
exactly what treatment we would
need for each particular road
you're talking about city road
versus county road verses what
the DOT has jurisdiction over I
just don't see how all of this
is going to work based on the
way the bill is written like I
said I I agree with the intent
but certainly there are some
logistical issues so and that's
just a quick summary and thank
you think question Mr thank you
for that secretary Seneal and
other Mr Chairman representative
the native so I I wondered if it
wasn't basically considered an
unfunded mandate I would take
issue with your comment that
districts don't keep.
Record of the bus routes because
I think they do I think they
have a pretty good feel of the
best friends are but you but you
are absolutely correct that they
do change from year to year
based on where population of
students are but but ultimately
the fact that it's a survey and
and you consider it an unfunded
mandate is that a fair
estimation secretary Seneal Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative yes
unfunded mandate but just kind
of unfeasible the way that it's
written for us to be able to
accomplish I think what the goal
of the pillars.
All right thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative lane please.
Thank you Mr chair I don't I
don't know a lot about the I
guess the.
The highway construction
industry server are these the
type of recycled materials the
that one the department comes in
and and repave scenario they
sort of chip up everything is
that is that materials were
we're talking about.
Yes Mr chairman missed
Representative.
Libya's these are males what we
call the bills that back up all
over the highway that we do we
service all over the state and
then put on to the side it is a
in the process of something
that's been left undone is as
far as what we saw it as is
something we can utilize with
the cooperation is Mr secretary
Seneal said it is a big
logistical coordination and I'm
not lying to this is why I'm
glad to be in front of this
debate because I think we
understand the needs of our
students or if nothing else was
starting to provide empathy you
know and and that's what we need
to realize is that what it is a
big logistical nightmare right
now in the beginning the small
investment to a corner which is
approximately probably eighty
thousand is what they're showing
in the analysis and that's a
fair number but I mean we all
invested put the coordination
coordinate with our PED this is
another important critical
aspects of PED's gonna be
involved.
And it takes of the minds of us
I believe we are put in this
role to look at this
logistically and brainstorm with
our secretary of like Santa and
and the.
R. D. O. T. O. prepare the I
think it's important I'm a
little bit generate about this
because it's something that I'm
really got more excitement than
displacement because I think we
can come up with the I hope I've
answered your question
Representative lane is a D. O.
T. like to respond are welcome
as as well.
Mr chair I think that those
answer my question but I do have
a just a couple questions maybe
that might be appropriate for Mr
secretary in in one of those Mr
chair is how are these these
talents currently being utilized
by the department.
Mr chairman if you don't mind I
would let refer the answer that
he's in charge of the mailings
program if if you just check.
Yes Mr by the.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative plan of course
Representative Madrid well
there's a couple things we do
with mailings right they come
they come off a project when we
come in either of rehabilitated
or reconstructed on that we stop
all those millions we have been
currently recycling about sixty
percent of those million so what
we do is we'll will serve and
crush them into our.
Order in and half inch chips
that we use are featured in
strips excuse me that we use for
chips so program so we recycle
those in that in that manner and
we also have a donation program
in which we donate millions to
the local municipalities they
come forward to our school
number six districts request on
amount of millions to be on
their facilities whatever the
case may be we grant nearly
ninety nine point nine percent
of of those requests currently
we probably donated about two
hundred thirty five thousand
cubic yards and mailings to the
locals we've improved about you
know a hundred seventy five lane
miles I know that doesn't sound
a lot but we talked to county
and municipality even a two or
three mile stretch on some of
those roads is a big deal so
we've been doing a lot of that
as well and then we also use
some in a process we call
Billings over late we're will
screening cleanup settlement the
motion and that will affect down
but ultimately that process
requires first either he another
layer on top or some sort of
still on top page of still would
even work so there's a lot to be
done when it comes to utilizing
millions on we love to donate on
we have plenty as you know and
as Representative Madrid
mentioned we have plenty so we
were or to.
Locals.
And so hopefully that answers
your question Most and for any
other.
Sure thank you I I do actually
appreciate the the comments on
the donations and and the
surplus I I.
As both the legislature but also
citizen I I love to see
different levels of government
working together so I appreciate
that sentiment.
And I think actually you
probably answer my my last
question so with that you back
Mr chair thank you.
Great thank you representative
Representative Garrett please.
You Mr chairman thank you
Representative Madrid for
bringing this
it's important I have I was
confused actually by the
coordinator so that position is
in D. O. T. not PED is that what
this bill is same.
Mr Mr chairman I I guess I can
answer that my understanding
Representative Mr chairman and
Representative Garrett is a yes
it would be a D. O. T. position
the way that the bill is
written.
and Representative Madrid can
correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe that's what my
understanding.
Yes I agree.
Mr chairman.
Secretary.
Representative.
Thank you Mr secretary thank you
Mr chairman saw
itself
is there a division that
addresses a school buses and
school bus route is there any
position that already addresses
that to an extent.
Do you know to a John Cena from
PED please if you can.
I'm sorry Representative.
I'd like to yield to a John C.
to respond to that he's he's
here.
The
this green.
Mr chair I'm sorry I'm I have
just I was listening in on
another committee could you
repeat the question.
Mr Chairman.
Mr saying that my question is in
do what oversight position
Division is there for school
buses and school bus routes and
reporting from school districts.
Chair Mister chair
representative so we do have a
transportation bureau in the
department that's headed by
until you Ortiz he works with
transportation directors across
the state.
Mr Chairman and Mr saying do
they have any review process for
school bus routes and repairs
and improvements.
Mr chair representative I would
have to to.
Check in with Mr Ortiz about
that I know we do get reports
about miles and other.
Other data that we used to
calculate the transportation
funding but I have to check with
Mr to use about whether or not
we actually get reviews about
it's school bus routes.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and Representative
Madrid well I think this is
really important
I just want to encourage you to
talk to.
The bus transportation units and
districts I called Albuquerque
public schools we actually have
nineteen hundred routes and they
have ten thousand two hundred
act stops and may include
everything from a van and to
hire chalet that goes over
unpaved roads so it's kind of a
massive undertaking and so I
just want to really encourage
you to continue work on this
really important safety our bill
safety for our kids for bus
drivers and for all of our
drivers thank you so much that's
all my questions Mr chairman.
Great thank you Representative
for me.
Thank you Representative your
agree Representative
Representative Baldonado please.
Thank you Mr chairman
and good to see secretary Seneal
today
Representative Lane ask my
question I wanted to to flush
out the whole idea of the
donations and I and you that
program existed in.
My question was answered so I
have no further questions thank
you Mr chairman right thank you
Representative Baldonado
Representative Figueroa place.
Thank you Mr chairman my
questions might be for the
secretary good to see you
or perhaps Mr India can answer
it
the session of the bill on page
three.
That requires
contacts to service providers
and encouragement to lay line
Is that already happening is
that already a systemic policy
in the department and if it's
not why not.
Thank you.
Mr chair and representative yes
we did institute a new policy
within the last six months that
any highway project that we put
forward will have consideration
to include necessary
telecommunications as it relates
to broadband and so we're
already doing that.
right now and if the project
doesn't have broadband we're
going to have that in if it
makes sense with connections so
we are institutionalizing that
into our design system right
now.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
brilliant absolutely necessary
and a great idea and I thought
you were already doing that so
the more the better I think.
Mr chair and representative in
this bill you really touched on
a creative idea and
Representative Garrett has
mentioned the complexity
involved and so has the
secretary of if one district has
nineteen hundred routes I mean
this across the state there are
many I would suggest as she did
that you reach out to the
transportation district
transportation directors in each
district instead of the
superintendents to get the
information you need and I think
there might be some potential in
if if the department of
transportation creates the
survey and it's five or ten
pretty simple questions
that is as those thousands of
bus drivers might help.
Armen of transportation flag
some serious issues and in parts
of the state that an engineer or
an expert from the department of
transportation could then go
investigate because bus drivers
are not experts in the field but
their basic observations might
help identify some crucial areas
crucial concerns or things to
investigate in remote parts of
the state I know that apartment
of transportation is.
Doesn't have the staff to cover
the thousands and thousands of
miles of roads that we have the
state every year so if if
there's a way to to pull
information out of them I think
they're really and easily
it supports consideration and
Representative Mr chair I thank
you Representative for bringing
forth that idea.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair Mr
chairman and Representative
absolutely I I can't tell you
how much how important it is
that having the the secretary of
of a state for do you need here
and and require the use of the
red lines to have in charge and
and and give them the
environment to start this even
as you suggested it's a matter
of a massive thing that I
started here but I think you
even started on a small scale
are that way but taking in those
thoughts like you say we have
better more more rules are there
and really in need and we just
got a greater priority of how to
go about it so thank you
Representative Figueroa for your
comments really appreciate your
to your as well I couldn't do it
without thank you right thank
you Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Madrid and
Representative Dow for bringing
this I think it's I think the we
the idea behind this is this a
good idea because I it to
understand the state of the
roads that many of these buses
travel on but I do have a
question Mr chair and
representative did you do to me
I I was looking at the FIR and I
notice that we can get any
feedback from the counties or
for the municipal league
regarding the possible costs
that the those entities what
what
would acquire bye bye by doing
this by by doing this paving
project do you do you have any
feedback from from them on this
Mr chair representative.
Mr chairman and representative
of our reserves question and I
have reached out to the county
of our county particularly just
to get some preliminaries and
there are quite a static about
this idea because they saw it as
a cost effective in cutting a
lot of costs but having this
will so they were there were
more than willing to what are
called collaborate particularly
with the component now that's in
this piece of legislation that
means a lot of logistic work and
that's the broadband issue so I
think that's a good of will
point made of secretary or a.
The elections from please.
Welcome.
Mr chairman and representatives
we we haven't heard back from
any of the counties are any
comments regarding this bill
said I don't want to speak for
them
but
The US could certainly reach out
to them we haven't heard from
them at all.
Thank you for for that
Representative of Mr secretary
and and and chairman I have one
other question is is once again
I had mentioned that I
understand the conditions of of
of many of these roads at the
school buses travel on so what
the what what would up this mill
are do we do but it P. yeah
what it would be meant to pave
roads completely was is
adjustment for potholes what
specifically is is the is the
use of of this bill going to be.
Representative Chairman
representative Lara I think the
the process is it still in the
deciding of how we're gonna get
to the rules that need to be
addressed first and I think the
survey being conducted by DOT is
the best point of of start to
this project assessment in needs
to be really analyze I think
it's an issue for understanding
how we go about addressing I
think maybe a pilot program is
the best way to start this on a
scale that lends it to to see
and learn and develop from
Secretary
If you are to respond as well.
Yes thank you Mr Chairman
representative I think you know
there's only certain types of
treatment you could use it with
these mailings and and I think
the big concern is we are DOT
don't base more prioritize roads
based on surveys we have a
pretty sophisticated way of we
have bands that go out and take
pictures of pavement cracking
and and we do soil samples our
sampling that's the real way
that you want to assess what the
road needs and so although that
survey would be helpful to have
bus drivers eyes and kind of
maybe points in the right
direction we don't base or
prioritize roads on on just
people looking at them in so
that would be our concern is we
wouldn't know what treatments
road would need and whether or
not these millions would be able
to use on that particular road
based on a survey it would it
would be much more in depth and
and we were perfectly happy to
donate these millions to
counties if they can use them we
try and use as much as we can we
recycle them there's certainly
some treatments that we can use
but
the survey wouldn't get us to
that point it in so that that's
one of our main concern.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr secretary I I appreciate
those answers because it's it's
I I want to compliment the the
sponsors of the bill on the this
very creative solution and
looking at the using the the
mailings to help improve bus
routes I think that's a that's a
really creative way of looking
at it and and what I would like
to see is that you know this is
something that's that's that
does need to be addressed it's
very important not only for the
lawn largest city of the school
buses but also for the safety of
our kids and with that I would
like to think out thank the
sponsors for bring this before
thank you.
Thank you Representative Lara.
Anybody else wish to speak
current questions.
All right.
Representative Madrid and and
Representative doubt thank you
so much for for bringing this
forward I think it's it really
speaks to the need certainly we
we've had presentations before
L. E. S. C. about on bus routes
and bus routes in into rural
areas and and beats certainly
since I've been in the
legislature the past six years
is really trying to work on that
problem and then the types of
buses also thank Senator you may
be familiar with with that
discussion several years ago
about equipping our our school
buses in order to deal with that
situation
I did have a quick question if I
may for secretary send of all
about in a can't remember excuse
me if you have but have you
address the potential cost of
using these these mailings is it
is it comparable to traditional
last fall.
Thank you Mr chairman it is less
expensive than if we were to
fully reconstruct.
I wrote and so it is one of the
more cost effective ways but
like I mentioned before you can
only be used in certain
situations so it's not like you
can look at the road and say
we're going to use these
military millions here there has
to be certain aspects of that
road that make it applicables to
use that those mailings and so
that's the difficult part about
this is we have millions we
donate millions we have an
abundance of them but they can
be used in every situation but
we true surely try and maximize
where and when we can use.
And and secretary Santa just
just out of curiosity and
without.
Delving too far into the weeds
what are some of those
situations where these milling
scan or or cannot be use might
be a better way of putting it.
Thank you Mr chairman if if that
is the chair LESC wikipedia to
answer that who deals with them
on a more regular basis.
Mr chairman if I could that's a
that's a good question so
there's there's primarily for
things that we use million
Billings for and I think I
talked to a couple of them are
ready but the first thing is is
we can recycle unused back into
the to the hot mix rice one of
construction project we mail out
of the pavement we can put back
up to thirty percent back into
the virgin next and recycling
that way so that's how we use of
in the construction project we
have also use them to help us
build great right we use them in
the dirt process and help us you
know create a stable structure
in order to pave on so we use
them in that fashion as well we
also question like I mentioned
we question down and we utilize
a mentorship so program we have
a robust chip so program this by
one of the things that M. D. O.
T. is known for and we use a lot
of on their we've had great
success with that and we get to
utilize utilize in that fashion
and then we utilize them on
under facilities on where there
are Washoe Sir drainage issues
that you know the county or this
municipalities and we do have
some dirt roads we use to so we
don't have to go out and create
a lot so it's not really
consider even process what we do
is we haul them out there will
lay him down reader will come in
and create a man I'm basically
creating almost like a black
topper Matt on then we'll get a
water truck on them and then
we'll role metal type them up
but it's not considered a late
on we don't need to mop or at an
emotional oil to all it's just a
matter of leaving the NM down to
send them by adding the water
and and acting on it just
created a service better than
just a dirt road it's not
perfect but it it does help so
those are pretty much the the
main areas we use on our utilize
them in.
Great noted that I'd asked that
me for the benefit of the
committee but I'm particularly
interested in in your row
construction I saw documentary
when I was a kid about the
differences between roads being
built in the United States and
Europe and I was enthralled by
it thank thank you for indulging
me and that I'm in here we are
dealing with that so
thank you
I mean I I will say
representative Representative
Dow is that that we have
and I think admitting some some
issues with this bill the
rollout kind of coordination
between departments
Representative Madrid I think
you'd mentioned a potential
pilot program for this perhaps a
task force to look into this to
bring the departments together
and since you have a eight
Canadian side
maybe if if you wish to explore
that so that we can re here at
in that form that would
certainly be welcome I think we
have I mean we're running.
Close to time this legislative
session but if that's something
you'd be amenable to perhaps I
mean I know the way to of
memorials
and I think we're all aware of
that but transforming this in
some some form or fashion so
that we can really start that
cross collaborative work between
the departments and really
getting this coordinator
Situated and really evaluating
the situation I think I think
would be would be the best route
to go no pun intended
Mr chairman I'd I'd gladly
welcomed except the ideas of
this committee has brought to
this particular DOT it makes it
important for us to all be part
of this process so I'm willing
to you rather than table
electricity going to and
entering what you say committee
during during the summer
continue work on this more with
my co sponsor.
certainly we can we can roll
over the bill if if you do
decide to continue working on it
certainly that we welcome I
don't think we have the
authority to kick it into
interim but we can certainly
collectively raise our voices
and our respective interim
committees in order to do so
through L. E. S. C. I'm
certainly the LFC Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair I guess I
just wanted to say it's so rare
to have somebody bring in as
their expert witness someone is
going to propose their bill and
it just shows amazing and
sincerity and truly wanting the
conversation and the issue to be
addressed so I just want to
compliment Representative Madrid
for that you just don't you just
don't have that very often but
it was it was really
great conversation this morning
thank you.
Know for sure that that is that
is a great way to to sum it up
is is having this conversation
and that's that's what we're
here to do both in committee and
in our interim committees is to
have these conversations to be
Frank about the facts and where
we can and cannot go with pieces
of legislation so always happy
to have that and I think that so
one of the great things about
the Education Committee is that
we're willing to to do that and
take this constructive criticism
and really refine our ideas and
and work with them
so does anybody else wish to
speak.
Okay with that so we'll roll
this over like I said if it
comes back in some form or
fashion in the next three weeks
certainly by all means will be
in contact if not will remember
this for the interim because we
know we have I have had this
before and will continue to have
it and certainly Representative
Madrid we did we really welcome
this conversation in our
respective interests.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary again we really
appreciate your input of San
Juan I can't do this without you
and Representative look forward
to working closely with you on
these over the time thank you.
All right and it's great seeing
you gentlemen this Secretary Mr
Prodi on a Friday and you see on
Tuesdays and Thursdays in our
transportation committee but
thank you all for being here.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of the committee for missing to
just appreciate.
All right.
So we have a little bit more
than an hour before were on the
floor we have two more bills
that we will here so
representative Lente I
understand you're putting on
house bill two eighty seven is
that correct.
Mr Chairman yes Sir all right
Johnson can that be here this
morning so they call then it is
the.
All right.
Tag team thanks so do you have a
do you have experts say need to
promote if they would please the
attendees list raise your hand
there's Jennifer the end and
then it's.
The trees of Gomez and Nancy
Rodriguez please.
Right it's giving it a second.
Or as I always say promoted or
demoted to our panel.
All right one more.
all right Representative Lente
if you would please thank you Mr
chairman so house bill two
eighty seven is a behavioral
health and social services bill
that the the intent is that they
can be provided a culturally
relevant and appropriate way
which is critical for culturally
and linguistically diverse
students and their families this
bill directs a gap analysis in
order to feel we get a better
picture of the needs of students
and the capacities in schools
and communities for providing
necessary behavioral health and
social services including access
to trauma informed practices and
indigenous justice and peace
making peace making models
excuse me.
This task force that is
envisioned in the legislation is
designed to bring together local
experts to do gap analysis and
assess mapping the work will go
up develop any comprehensive
report a short and long term
policy and funding
recommendations making it
possible for the state to plan
effectively and develop locally
responsive solutions.
Of as a representative at of the
many native American children
families and communities in my
district I would miss the
detrimental impacts of
historical trauma discrimination
racism violence lack of access
to health care exposure to
suicide for our children and our
fans and so we must do what is
more is better for our state to
help our students and their
families with early intervention
and other support services by
providing students the necessary
behavioral health and social
support services they needed a
school and within their home
communities services that are
culturally appropriate relevant
and respective of our children's
needs are respectful of our
children's needs excuse me is a
major step forward in assisting
our students and their families
in doing so we will ensure the
health and well being for future
generations.
This is the vision for this bill
all all enough and so in regards
to the probation aspect of the
hundred fifty thousand I'm told
that the money is accounted for
in multiple state agencies
already within their budget
house bill two.
With me today and will be here
to help answer questions again
is Jennifer tree said Nancy to
which at the appropriate time
should questions of be
appropriate we will come to them
for assistance in this
presentation so with that Mr
Chairman we would stand for any
questions.
Great thank you all and thank
you for being here thank you for
the presentation representative
Lente did anybody wish to speak
before we go to the audience
audience briefly give a quick
opening remark.
I apologize Mr chairman again
offer that to them I thought we
were in a little bit of a time
crunch.
We are if they if they could be
and certainly be welcome.
Please.
Hi my name is Jennifer non yes
in thank you I'm glad to see
that the help of I'm from New
Mexico Public current currently
services training and technical
assistance with the Sam so
tribal training and technical
assistance center working
nationally with tribes
communities in American Indian
you have been in New Mexico on
the other the here Health
suicide prevention and crisis
response for over twenty years I
was drawn to this work in part
due to my own experience of
losing family members to
substance abuse and suicide
early intervention in behavioral
health is key to early
prevention and better health
outcomes fifty percent of all of
the various health issues
developed by the age of fourteen
seventy five percent by the age
of twenty four in our New Mexico
you they're not only at risk but
are struggling the twenty
nineteen New Mexico youth
risking resiliency survey shows
that forty percent of our high
school population.
Statewide report feeling sad or
hopeless during the last twelve
months for two weeks or more in
a row well the date is a bit
older for middle schoolers in
twenty fifteen the Y. R. S.
reported over sixteen percent of
middle schoolers survey has
seriously thought about killing
themselves and nine point four
percent actually attempted
suicide middle schoolers
children aged eleven twelve and
thirteen our own children.
Nationally we see many tribal
communities and communities of
color working on prevention and
early intervention efforts that
combine evidence based practice
within a culture as prevention
framework promoting resilience
for cultural connection the
honoring native life program is
one such model statewide strives
to do just that these efforts
can be easily augmented by
schoolbased health programs that
provide an easy and early entry
point for service provision and
early intervention for our youth
population in New Mexico could
be the model to lead nationally
culturally appropriate service
provision is important to
developing report connection is
supporting resilience however as
an example less than three
percent of all independently
licensed behavioral health
providers in New Mexico are
American Indian in our American
Indian youth have the highest
rates of suicide attempt and
completion by race or race or is
that this city in New Mexico.
And while our children are you
our students are struggling it's
important to remember that our
children do not have inherent
deficits our systems do in our
systems need to be repaired to
provide robust culturally
appropriate support to our low
are used to thrive and shine
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for allowing me
time to find some remarks today
thank you representative Lente
for bringing this legislation
forward.
Three others for brief remarks
yes good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Theresa Gomez and I am from
the problem this last and have
been involved in behavioral
health arena for approximately
fifteen years with a focus on
policy and policy implications
for native Americans and tribes
nations and pueblos.
I serve as the director of the
honoring native life program
which missed nine yes just
mentioned the program is housed
within the University of New
Mexicos division of community
behavioral health the honoring
native life program was born out
of the clearing house for native
American suicide prevention act
which was enacted in two
thousand and eleven.
In March of two thousand eleven
the New Mexico state legislature
passed legislation creating a
clearing house for native
American suicide prevention they
agreed upon initial home for the
clearing house was the a native
American behavioral health
program at the university's
community behavioral health.
Division the staff and
stakeholders believe that
honoring native life was a more
appropriate and culturally
relevant name for the program
given the subject is often taboo
or difficult to talk about with
tribal communities the honoring
native life program is just one
example of an initiative to
address both the needs.
Of our native use and families
and communities during the past
eleven years honoring native
life program has gained
extensive experience working
with native use communities and
tribal members and providers as
well.
I'm however though and
unfortunately the issue of
suicide in native communities
continues to be a devastating
public health disparity in our
state behavioral health
conditions such as depression
PTSD anxiety and substance use
disorders are prominent risk
factors for suicide.
The same conditions also affect
native American students social
and emotional wellness and their
ability to focus on their
education.
While the honoring native
license program our primary
focus is suicide prevention
intervention and post vention we
are working in a variety of
arenas to help fill those gaps
particularly to build tribal
capacity in behavioral health
programs to reduce stigma and
normalize conversations relating
to mental and behavioral health.
As we've all witnessed the
pandemic has brought on new
challenges more youth are
staying home they're isolated
with consequential lack of
positive social support and
greater success susceptibility
to depression and anxiety
virtual schooling is not
universally accessible leaving
students and monitored regarding
risky behavior including
victimization the pandemic
restrictions just meant
diminished opportunities for
support for healthy
relationships other and other
support services that may be
available in a school setting.
Separation from and destruction
of cultural and familial
activities is also impacting our
students ability to learn.
This task force would not only
identify gaps and needs it could
potentially identify how
programs such as the honoring
native life can support youth
families and communities with
culturally relevant services Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I thank you for
providing me the opportunity to
share my perspective and think
of thank you Representative
let's see for bringing this
important legislation forward.
Thank you Nancy please briefly.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Nancy Rodriguez and on the
executive director of the New
Mexico Alliance for SchoolBased
Health Care many of you will of
heard me come before you
requesting support and funding
for school based health centers
that our organization has as its
mission to support all school
based health services including
culturally competent school
behavioral health and social
services so our organization is
supporting and has been advising
on the creation of house bill
two eighty seven we believe that
healthy children are those that
are most ready to learn and that
the social determinants of
health are also the social
determinants of academic success
we know from our work with
school based health centers that
they often have waiting lists
for behavioral health services
and that was before the tidal
wave of need that has been
created by the pandemic and that
is only seventy nine clinics
across are very large state we
need the gap an asset analysis
laid out and H. B. two eighty
seven to determine where
expansion of school based health
centers by it telehealth mobile
school based health centers and
brick and mortar campus clinics
should be brought to bear and
also so that we can look at
other initiatives to provide
school behavioral and social
services there are a number of
existing planning efforts that
are a collaboration between
state agencies and nonprofit
partners for example the
expansion of Medicaid school
based services beyond students
with IEPs that PED's ten million
dollar behavioral health grants
and many other initiatives but
we need those efforts to be
efficient to non duplicative
culturally competent so that
they can be successful and we
think that this gap an asset
analysis and a task force made
up of community organizations
such as those that you're
hearing from today would best
make that possible so to best
serve New Mexico's children we
need to know our strengths and
our gaps in our organization The
New Mexico Alliance.
For SchoolBased Health Care
believes this bill will enable
that and lead to better access
to the behavioral and social
services that New Mexico
children need to thrive so we
thank you Mr chair
Representative Lane T.
Representative Johnson who
couldn't be here and members of
the committee for considering
this opportunity.
Right thank you all for being
here.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for questions.
Awesome all right so we'll go to
the attendees less before coming
to committee on those and
support please indicate there
and wish to speak.
In a moment.
All right let's say you have up
to two minutes good morning
Melissa good morning good
morning chair members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the Aussie
plaintiffs may also Martinez
case with the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty strongly
supports house bill two eight
seven behavior health mental
health and social services are
key components of a basic
sufficient education access to
these critical services is
important for student academic
legislation access and quality
of life the judge in the Yazzie
Martinez case found that high
performing schools have strong
non academic supports including
counseling social workers nurses
and school based health centers
yet many of our schools had to
eliminate social worker a nurse
positions due to the lack of
funding and the services that
are available are usually
fragmented under staffed and
under funded our children needed
the SpaceX supports in normal
times but much more so during
the pandemic and in the
aftermath House Bill two eight
seven will system state to
identified gaps in services and
funding to develop a plan to
provide students especially low
income native American English
language learners and students
with disabilities access to
culturally appropriate behavior
health and social services the
state needs a plan to support
our students to be successful
for all these reasons we urge
the committee to pass house bill
two eight seven thank you.
Right thank you Melissa.
All right so go to Emily.
Emily welcome good morning you
have a next thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am and we will have
representing New Mexico voices
for children to stand in support
of H. B. two eighty seven.
Access to social workers and
counselors can mitigate the
impact of adverse childhood
experiences which can be harmful
to the lifelong health of
children and and this can also
improve graduation rates for
students.
In light of the COVID nineteen
pandemic student access to
culturally appropriate health
behavioral and mental health and
social services support will be
more necessary than ever before
for child well being as many
more children have experienced
hardship and trauma over the
last year for these reasons as
well as the others mentioned
today we support HB two eighty
seven and asked the committee to
the support of it as well thank
you.
Right thank you.
All right Jesmyn.
Morning jasmine you have two
minutes.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep the
and right now I am standing on
behalf of the tribal education
lions
it's a group of
native American professionals
education advocates tribal
leaders tribal community members
teachers
Our members of our native
American communities in New
Mexico the tribal educationalist
and in strong support of house
bill two eighty seven access to
social emotional and mental
health professionals services
and our public schools is much
needed eight Americans have some
of the highest rates of suicide
in our country not a let alone
in New Mexico
and
having access to the services
and school better situates our
students to become successful
and close that opportunity gaps
for our students who are lacking
these services and can therefore
be able to to
Can therefore be able to
participate and get the kind of
education and have the kind of
educational outputs and success
as their counterparts in school
are seeing as well so for these
reasons as well as the reason
stated before from the experts
and our sponsor we stand in
strong support of house bill two
eighty seven and kindly ask the
committee to pass this
legislation.
Thank you.
All right Norman.
Good morning Norman you of up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and thank you
to the Sanchez on Johnson and
for Representative Lente for
bringing this thing up.
I'm I a my name is common with
the the former governor for the
pueblo of Zuni I now work at the
university of New Mexico Center
for native American health as
the tribal relations liaison I'm
also a great grandfather
grandfather father also a mentor
and the student I want to
address the issue of the house
bill two eighty seven from my
experience back in two thousand
and ten when there are multiple
communities that experience
suicide amongst through use in
particularly Mescalero we had
some in the room and also in
zoning it was heartbreaking to
try to find resources available
not only locally regionally in
our county but statewide and
having found on one of those
tribal leaders during the
initial two thousand and ten
legislative sessions about
creating a clearing house and so
it was very fruitful to have a
clearing house created in two
thousand and eleven which
actually Sponda honoring native
life a program that Teresa Gomez
is in charge of.
So it's with the experience that
I talk to say.
The health of our children is
not only on.
if in the end academic setting
but it also is in their daily
lives we need counselors we need
case workers we need support
beyond the academic work our
children are not suffering as we
are now seeing during the
pandemic as schools services are
not being extended into the
lives of our children working
remotely so I stand in strong
support of house bill two eighty
seven as has been stated by
other witnesses here.
And I urge the committee to
support this thank you very
much.
Right that's right two minutes
Norman thank you so much.
All right.
So we will come to committee
okay I didn't ask about
opposition I think I did their
opposition to house bill two
eighty seven the attendees.
All right seeing none.
Committee members Representative
Trujillo please.
Yes Mr chair
this is the bill that's been a
long time coming I think that at
the the presenters did an
excellent job in in framing the
concerns that are.
Of part of the of the issue I
think that
We continue and and I know it's
some I some backup guard.
Need to ignore.
The plight of minority.
Kids who are mice I think that
if we if we don't move this if
we don't provide the resources
that are necessary to address
the real needs that are
occurring we're gonna hurt
future.
I believe that the Mr G. guess
miss miss miss not yes and all
of the of the presenters of
should very very well the
concerns that are occurring.
In country as well.
The communities are.
Strongly support this bill and I
encourage all my colleagues to
vote for it thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chair and I wanted
to stand in strong support of
this legislation as many of you
heard
I've had several professional
careers and one has been as a
clinical social worker early on.
That was the life I was going to
pursue.
And professional life I was
going to purchase you Mr chair
however I it was my very first
set of.
Work assignments had to do with
Working with families and
resources with abuse children
and it was a very difficult
first.
Work experience professional
work experience one in which
Great till however my point here
being Mr chair and
representative that it was very
apparent early on in line on
whole life actually that.
Everything we do in our
professions no matter what the
professions are must be
culturally relevant to what we
do in order for it to be
successful that's across the
board in every profession but
particularly so when we in our
educational system because as we
all know our children go from
our homes to our educational
system and.
They go from their homes
communities into the educational
system.
So they go in this whole
children representing those
families in those communities
and those traditions in those
practices and everything that
goes with.
Their community and cultural
relevance as a beam and so Mr
chairman and and Representative
it is absolutely imperative.
That we not separate.
These important culturally
relevant.
Practices and professions and
what we do from from the persons
that we're working with and that
we interact with it has to be
predominant in all that we do
and all that we believe.
And and how we carry out our
professions it's gonna be woven
it's a it's a way
of weeding process and has to be
woven so that on the
technicality of all that we do
incorporates yes these
approaches so it's not just
changing the way we do things in
our minds that include creating
those approaches Mr chair if not
then we continue Mr chairman and
members of the committee to
contribute to those social
emotional.
Economic and other on it I I
hate to column issues because
they're not issues their
experience that our children go
through and we don't.
Break those down and and
And bring our and lift our
children ultimately our
communities so Mr chairman and
representative I stand
wholeheartedly I was one of the
sponsors of.
A bill awhile back that would
have required as a result of is
yes the lawsuit would have
required that our schools
incorporate
Adequate relevant social
services in our school systems
and so this is fully aligned
with that approach and I fully
support and encourage all of our
members to vote in favor of it
thank you Mr chair.
Jerry moving.
Thank you Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Representative for.
Yes together quick question
Representative Lara had an
almost identical bill that got
stopped and House Appropriations
and a previous year this is
really important are the
sponsors able to dedicate your
in your money
if necessary to make sure the
bill is funded.
Can't do you know that answer
that question at this time Mr
Chairman representative I was
told that the bill appropriation
of a hundred fifty thousand that
that money is already accounted
for in multiple state agencies
budgets and has already been HB
to.
Okay thank you very much.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Gary even if that
wasn't the case my understanding
with the the junior money is
also that if it's a standalone
bill that it could be funded
through junior my as well so
long as a hundred fifty thousand
once there so either way House
Bill to good safe junior could
be covered.
All right Representative
Stapleton please.
Mr Chairman I was going to do
what Representative Trujillo
started to do which was to.
I think you ought to do fast and
I'll take the second mistake and
that is a on behalf of my
constituents Teresa Gomes that
that that is fantastic so that
was just what I was going to
suggest Representative Stapleton
before I accept that motion that
I do want to thank you all for
bringing this forward and and I
I I just want to go a little bit
further with the body I mean I
think those of you that have
been on this committee before
those of you that have served
with me one of the things that I
think is super important about
the work that we do particularly
in education and and one of you
all not mistaking who mentioned
it is that
You know healthy schools healthy
families healthy communities are
all intertwined and interwoven
with one another and certainly
our job is the Education
Committee is really looking at
all of those aspects and and I
think
As a as a body and and certainly
my role as chair of the
Education Committee is that you
know trying to look and be in
tune with all aspects going on
in terms of our our state
government to to better suit our
students and I think this is
this is definitely one of those
ways to bring this information
to us the legislators that are
involved in in in education and
that information so that we can
drive policy that's really at
the needs of our students all
over the state of New Mexico so
thank you all for bringing that
forward
we have a due pass motion by
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative Stapleton is
their opposition to the two
passed motion.
Going out on a limb here
opposition all right I'm seeing
a lot of shaking hands all right
so you have to do pass on house
bill two eighty seven thank you
Representative twenty for
putting it forward thank you all
for being here thank you.
All right thank you last but
certainly not least.
House Bill two eighty nine.
Reporter good morning Mr
chairman I am so glad to be here
this morning with everyone
to house bill two eighty nine
what it does is it provides it
read Representative Trujillo
before I'm so I'm excuse me for
interrupting you but so so when
you've been talking you've been
going in and out your audio and
then it's been a look it's been
a little bit low so if that
happens again maybe by turning
off your audio or changing your
background or sorry to any of
your audio turning off your
video tends to help with your
your connection issues so we
won't take offense
Please.
I understand I'll just turn off
my beautiful tells back scenery
background is that better no no
offense to taps yes.
I before I forget I have
Rachelle floor eight Fiori who
is going to need good it did as
well as Gianna Kotler.
You could raise your hands
tional.
I.
Secretary of state that okay.
And we are.
was there another.
It was supposed to be Ashley
long ourselves for.
And actually as well yes yes
Sir.
Thank you.
All right so we have about
Lou thirty five minutes before
the floor.
Okay I won't I won't keep you.
Waiting.
House bill two eighty nine
provides contingent faculty the
necessary economic reprieve and
I emphasize reprieve that
they've needed for decades due
to under invest our workforce
and this is how it'll benefit
college contingent faculty and
the students okay.
It outlines a new set of rights
for non tenured faculty a
minimum wage of five thousand
dollars per assignment it
it finds reasonable assurance to
allow for unemployment benefits
it guarantees payment when
classes are canceled without
sufficient notice it also but
The report provides a notice of
course assignments with enough
time to adequately adequately
prepare and plan.
It offers economy that honors a
professional and field
experience by allowing them to
select course reading materials
and that access and they need
access to call the forces
including office space not
living in a closet or a buggy
and it offers it should offer
them libraries and professional
development now we have about
one.
Point three million workers
throughout and that seventy five
percent of college.
I'm sorry today over seventy
five percent of college fact a
point three million workers and
the tenure track that's a little
a long.
I mean a huge group of people
and colleges you know as I was a
state president of AFT at
AFL-CIO the biggest concerns
that.
Came toward.
Were from and junk faculty who
felt that their work was
acknowledged but the but the.
Hey was inadequate and and it's
still continues we've we have
gotten this road before in
different areas through
collective bargaining and sweat
thanks to no avail I think
colleges may have maybe working
in good other areas but this is
not the I think more colleges
are taking advantage of our
adjunct faculty and the I think
it's time that they.
We feel the respect the work
that these people do and put
their money where their mouth
this is supported and ice up
vote to Rachel Fiori followed by
Jonathan of your I mean John
Cutler if you will real to me
yet yes please of course that's
an order I do I just have to
make an announcement that I'm
being called legislative bill to
Senate and so vice chair Garrett
are you there.
Okay okay.
Okay.
Okay thank you.
Please.
So it'll be of.
Michelle.
already.
Representative yet yes she yes
she is petite.
I'm here yourself please mess
your eight.
Hi my name is Rachel Fiori I am
the director of higher education
organizing for A. F. T.
While this is a national
problem.
Mexico is not New Mexico then
New Mexican residents
that teach in higher education
institutions are suffering
greatly there's a few things
that I think
Are along the lines of a
misconception I have to the
college professor is and who in
I'm trying to faculty member as
I'm as stated before over fifty
percent of all colors is being
taught by people that are hired
on a per course basis these are
people they hold the same
degrees the house they hold that
they
And on their own.
Their professional licenses
research and pedagogy in their
feet their current fields and
every three months they are
faced with
the fear that they can't pay
their bills because they don't
know if they have a job or not.
Of those that you've and do you
teach as adjunct faculty.
Over fifty percent of them are
looking for full time employment
and
As a little bit of an anecdote
for every tenure track posting
in the country at any college.
Four to six hundred applicants
applied for that one posting
it's a broken system.
Twenty.
Even operating within the broken
system.
I think just a lack of education
about the way these in addition.
And so.
Some of the safety nets that are
even.
Available such as unemployment
insurance feel adequate for
these people due to a lack of
understanding by the
Eight eight.
People are denied their
applications because they
believe that they.
They have an employment matter.
This letter is is.
yes scheduling notice that you
have you might have a position
your job community can't you can
lose your.
Have you heard you can lose your
course for any number of reasons
up to and including the number
of students that have enrolled
the work load of a full time
faculty member.
anything I say all of this to
say students are paying the same
tuition regardless of what the
employment status of your
teacher just they're teaching.
Fifty sixty kids in a class that
paying the same amount of money
and they're making a fraction of
the same wages as a person and
the classroom next to them and
it's just simply unsustainable
for people to live their lives.
if he did a national survey and
people that try to make their
living full time.
Equity one third of the
respondents make less than
twenty five thousand dollars a
year annually placing them below
the federal poverty guideline
for a family of four.
Fifteen percent report being
able to comfortably cover basic
monthly expenses.
Fewer than half of survey
respondents have access to
employer provided health
insurance and nearly twenty
percent rely on Medicaid.
About forty five percent of
faculty members surveyed have
put off getting needed health
care including mental health and
sixty five percent for go dental
care all together.
Forty one percent struggle with
job security reporting that they
don't know if they have a
teaching job until one month
before the beginning of an
academic year.
For three out of four contingent
faculty employment is only
guaranteed from term to term and
a plan for a secure retirement.
is mostly out of reach for
faculty with thirty three
percent saying they don't see a
path for themselves.
Thank you Mr.
On the presentation okay
Representative Trujillo I do you
have anybody else that's
present team before we go to
public comment yes it's a ugh
Gianna Cutler.
just a reminder that we have to
be on the floor in twenty nine
minutes so try to keep it short
thank you.
Good morning by chair members of
the committee my name is
Jonathan Kotler I'm a native New
Mexicans who attended my high
school and in my undergraduate
degree in English UNM I love the
university having studied and
worked there for much of my
adult life.
By title is temporary part time
faculty although I've taught at
the university for over twelve
years in the honors college I
teach interdisciplinary classes
and would urgent politics law
writing creative writing and
public popular culture.
I also do work as a freelance
editors to make ends meet my
contracts at UNM are for a
single term at the end of each
semester I wait to see if and
how many courses I'll be asked
to teach the next semester my
questions are contingent which
means in Romans are too low my
questions can be cancelled up to
two weeks from beginning.
I have never since I began
teaching in two thousand three
employment in the summer for the
month of June and July I have
never had a paycheck.
COVID has taught us anything as
a community here in New Mexico
is that life is not stable
however as an adjunct professor
at cope with financial
instability for my entire
career.
My students do not know that I'm
an adjunct to what that means
they expect pay for and deserve
the same level of instruction
that they get from a tenure
track professor but they get it
at a much lower hourly rate.
The current national debate for
a fifteen dollar minimum wage
underscores the need for a
couple wages and we see a great
disparity across main campus and
especially across to the branch
campuses and added more and four
thousand dollars for course on
main well it branch only twenty
three hundred while students
status and per credit cost.
Many contingent faculty work
their entire careers you can
University repair classes on
staff find sources and a for
professional development
ourselves hours to grading
working one on one with students
in writing dozens of
recommendation letters for
scholarships study abroad
programs and further education
this level of devotion and care
we have for our students well it
sounds of our contracts and
makes math in calculating an
hourly wage based on the work we
actually do almost ludicrous.
Faculty what I have stabilized
where we can protect our yearly
course load for to pay our bills
year round and the for our New
Mexican families are stability
is passed along to our students
making their years and you know
what I'm sustainable technical
and better.
Thank you vice chair members of
the committee.
Thank you very much miss Cutler
Representative Trujillo do you
have any other people to testify
yes miss actually long.
Okay miss long please keep it
brief as we now only have twenty
five minutes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee just want to
thank Representative Trujillo
for bringing forth the bill on
this is a long time coming with
that obviously FTE New Mexico
supports the bill and we stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Madam chair I just want to add
and you all know this because
that brought this issue up in
many variations over the past
few years but the reality is you
can we have to stop taking
advantage of adjunct professors
they need benefits and they need
decent pay we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative will now go to
attendees I want to remind all
of our attendees to be very
brief try to do less than two
minutes we're going to start
with those opposed to house bill
two eighty nine and then we'll
go to those in favor you are
opposed to house bill two eighty
nine please raise your hand out.
Okay just give me that couple
seconds.
Okay I will start with Kathleen
the body.
Kathy.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Kathy Lee body executive
director of the New Mexico and
committee unity colleges the end
of my C. C. as opposed to house
bill two eighty nine as written
primarily because it would be
cost prohibitive.
We value our continuity part
time faculty members many of
whom work full time in their
field and share their expertise
with part time on a part time
basis with students at our
colleges we do review
compensation levels with your
institutions when a stab us our
salary schedules for these
important faculty members we
support conversation around
appropriate conversation and
working conditions many of us do
so already through collective
bargaining.
Around the country I'd like to
point out that part time
salaries typically very by
discipline in community colleges
the average rate for liberal
arts and social sciences faculty
is about sixteen hundred dollars
for course for the hard sciences
it's approaching three thousand
dollars for course and sometimes
a very specialized disciplines
like engineering it can be as
high as six thousand dollars or
more per course.
In support of the Sanchez effort
we believe this topic warrants
for careful examination before
establishing a minimum wage rate
and we think the sponsor for
opening the door for that
conversation thank you.
Very much our next speaker is
tied Trujillo.
Hi yeah thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is tighter
Hill I am the executive director
of the New Mexico association of
community colleges at the other
varies counterpart and I echo
pretty much everything she had
said war you know we just want
to think that what we think that
this probably warrants more
discussion during the interim we
appreciate the concerns and and
and look forward to having more
discussions during their during
the interim on this so.
Thank you very much our next
speaker is mark Survey dress.
Morning madam chair members the
committee marks a rather on the
next council university
presidents good morning
Representative Trujillo and I
just wanna let you know first
off this is not an opposition in
terms of compensation for
faculty staff all of our faculty
staff the council has concerns
with that that there is no
appropriation in this
legislation but it does request
it does ask for to study us at a
wage of five thousand dollars
per credit hour course so if you
have three credit hours per
course that could be fifteen
thousand dollars
statewide that could be an
impact of roughly about a
hundred forty six million dollar
increase in terms of what we
would need in our budget in
order to cover that should also
create parity between tenure
faculty and non tenure faculty
and so in order to achieve that
parity you can get anywhere up
to four hundred million six are
million in order to do that.
and so that could be anywhere
from a thirty percent increase
in tuition for all we have to
three hundred for about four
hundred percent increase in
tuition or your branch campuses
and again I would remind
committee all we receive and are
for your sector is state
appropriation and our second
largest appropriations tuition
and we definitely do not want to
raise tuition in terms of that
amount I we also are concerned
the anti donation clause terms
of providing and paying for
services that are rendered I
also appreciate as long as
comments and so I and thank you
everybody's comments that
there's a number of things that
I think because what the
property so that we need to
discuss and I and then with that
said the out is that we can like
we said there is no
appropriation in this
legislation I also think the
sponsor particular time to be
with me this week I'm again I
and I just again the council
will continue to provide
support.
Your time is up.
I next is downers are.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee out of respect for
your time I represent the Santa
Fe community college we echo the
comments you've just heard the
the annual cost to the community
college this bill would be six
million dollars and we
respectfully oppose but
understand and appreciate the
intent of the sponsor.
Thank you.
And with that we will move to
call attendees who would like to
speak in favor please raise your
hand if you would like to speak
in favor of house bill two
eighty nine.
Anybody like to speak in favor.
Okay I see no hands raised art
so committee we will now go to
questions from our committee.
Please raise your hand if you
would like to ask questions.
Committee no questions okay I
see no hands raised.
Is there somebody who would like
to make a motion I'm.
Madam chair.
Okay is there a second.
I second the motion so we have a
motion or a do pass and a second
I'm going to ask our secretary.
Sorry I'm gonna ask our
secretary to call the roll
secretary if you will call the
roll for the vote.
I do not.
I don't know.
Representative Chatfield
Representative Chatfield
Representative Dow
Representative Dow
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Gleim no.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative for Volcom bye at
all.
Representative.
Stapleton.
Yes I'm sorry I'm here on madam
secretary okay my vote is yes
okay.
Sure go back to Representative
Madrid Representative Madrid.
Representative Sir no.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Garrett.
by a vote of six two three.
It's a new path.
Thank you at Representative
Trujillo you have a do pass.
I want so much.
Thank you for your work today I
understand that we do not have a
meeting tomorrow morning at
eleven AM I am sure you're very
disappointed
and with that will in today's
session and see you in seventeen
minutes on the floor thank you.
Okay no more pretty panels.
Well yeah I I'm gonna be.
Are they going to set us up with
the.
With
I guess where we put the number
and I'll be typing in the title
okay thank you.
What you know other voting on
twenty two of Representative I
know they just passed it
unanimously.
Undress before they called me
yeah that you know something he
text me he says how are you are
getting in there and I sent him
the thing I hope you got in
there.
You got in yeah.
I would have cried my eyes out
of fight would have I presented
it because the person who helped
me was Karen Trujillo
it's like.
Jack.
There are.
Thanks everybody okay we'll see
you Monday.
Okay I'm.
Okay on closing the meeting and
if on the US economy with that
she'll call us yeah
yeah it's just all of a sudden
it went very fast over there did
it was going very slowly and
then somebody passed and it's
just all.
Okay we'll talk later I.
