Representative Christine
Trujillo here.
Vice chair Garrett here.
Chairman here we do have a
quorum.
All right good morning everybody
it's nice to see you all from
just a few hours ago I hope you
rested somewhat Senator Stewart
Senate bill forty two as amended
place thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee good morning to
everyone Senate bill forty two
does two things.
It increases the E. R. B.
employer contribution from its
current fourteen point one five
percent one percent a year for
the next four years.
At a cost between twenty eight
to thirty million a year.
Additionally.
It continues extends our return
to work program for another two
years to twenty twenty four.
The teacher return to work
program originally was set up in
two thousand and one it was set
up to help rural schools of of
find the hard to find the higher
positions math science ESL and
special ed it sunsets this year
so superintendents have asked
for an immediate extension on
because there seems to be a
number of retirements that they
think are going to happen this
year up more than normal so if
you do the return to work you do
have to pay into the retirement
system currently at ten point
seven percent and you do not get
increased retirement benefits
from that the employer also has
to contribute and you have to
wait out a year so this bill
increases our employer
contribution by one percent the
next four years and extends the
a return to work for two years
and that is essentially the bill
Mr chairman I can talk a lot
more about why but I will wait
for the questions.
All right thank you Senator
Stewart so with that we'll go to
the attendees Celeste so those
in opposite we have some people
jumping the gun there the lower
the hands all right so do we
have opposition on the attendees
less for Senate bill forty two
amended opposition on the
attendees list please indicate
by raising your hand.
All right so we will go to
support and support for Senate
bill forty two as amended please
indicate by raising your hand.
I'll give it a moment.
Thank shuffles okay so.
Once I call your name you'll
have up to two minutes.
Willie Mae welcome two minutes
good morning good morning Mr
chairman thank you I appreciate
being here again Mr Chairman I'm
telling A. R. T. so I represent
the New Mexico school board
association as their legend
provided lays on one of our top
priorities is it educator
recruitment and retention and we
support this legislation that
keeps all school personnel
deployed and we support any
legislation keeps all school
personnel deployed and invest as
we can increase salaries and
that invested budget for school
personnel because our long term
goal is becoming regionally
competitive with their teachers
this bill extends the current
return to work program for AARP
members for two additional years
and as you know public schools
represent a significant portion
of the Arby's membership many of
our schools continue to struggle
with educator vacancies teachers
are retiring and according to
the twenty twenty educator
vacancy report the largest
number of vacancies were for
educational and instructional
assistant positions along with
elementary school teachers and
special education teachers the
return to work programs are not
provided school districts with
an additional pool boys which
again with which to recruit
qualified teachers and and and
assist in Philly many vacancies
New Mexico school board
association Representative
supports this legislation and
just this thanks to sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you
Senator Stewart and thank you
committee for allowing us to
voice our position.
All right thank you for being
here all right so we'll go to
stand.
Good morning standing of up to
two minutes welcome good morning
Mr chairman members the
committee stand rounds on behalf
of the school superintendents in
New Mexico and the coalition of
educational leaders we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward they will help
because our education retirement
system to be in a better place
financially it's an important
move we also want to thank her
for extending the sunset clause
I'm back to L. for two more
years to ensure that we can fill
of the instructional vacancies
that we anticipate will be our
current members the committee we
ask you to support this and move
along a hundred and want to
start the sponsor for bringing
this forward thank you right
thank you all right so we'll go
to Terry and Roger or is it
Terry or Roger or ball.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Roger career and I'm here is the
volunteer state president with a
a RP New Mexico.
I speak for over two hundred
forty thousand eighty RP New
Mexico members A. R. P. New
Mexico is a strong supporter of
Senate bill forty two this bill
is one of A. R. P. New Mexico's
priority bills for twenty twenty
one.
And we'd like to thank the
sponsored Senator Stewart for
bringing this much needed bill
forward thank you.
Right thank you so much Roger
all right so we will go to
Russell.
Good morning Russell you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Mr chair thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak this
morning of Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Russell Goff I do executive
director of the New Mexico
association of education towers
on behalf of the socialization
we stand in support of Senate
bill forty two.
We believe increasing employer
contributions by one percent
year over four years will have
an impact on the solvency
unfunded liability the fund
thank you again for your
consideration and thanks to the
sponsor for bringing this
forward thank you very much
great thank you Russell.
All right John and okay sorry.
Thank shifted somebody else
command now okay.
John you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's John
direction with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and Senate bill forty two
as amended is one of our
memberships top priorities for
this legislative session both
for our active in in classroom
educators and our retirees the
Senator has done a great job
shepherding this legislation
through the Senate and we want
to thank her for that hard work
we don't want to repeat what
other folks just said but we do
want to underscore some other
they have been mentioned yet
this bill is critical for
helping New Mexico's credit
rating it helps protect the
retirement fund from market
downturns and at the end of the
day this is just good public
policy so we do like the other
folks in support urge your yes
vote today during committee
thank you for your time it thank
you.
All right we'll go to sherry.
Good morning sherry of up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chair then and now
members of the committee my name
is sherry dots and and I retired
after thirty one years as a
school nurse and I joined us
city different retired educators
association and the New Mexico
association of educational
retirees
SB forty two.
Of will help of my myself and my
co workers we contributed to
this program when we were
working with the expectation
that we would receive our
pensions when we retired and we
continue to help to preserve the
program for our future
educational retirees we
appreciate the efforts of the
board of directors up to
continue the sentience and we
think as Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chair for allowing me to
speak and CBRE a does stand in
support of SB forty two thank
you great thank you for being
here and excuse me for
mispronouncing your name sherry.
All right we'll go to merry.
Good morning merry you of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning and I certainly
will take the full two minutes
that chairman and members of the
committee any New Mexico of
which I am the president of
stand in strong support of this
legislation and we'd like to
thank the sponsors Senator
Stewart for bringing it forward
thank you very much.
Thank you Mary.
All right so anybody else wish
to speak on the attending
schools.
All right so we will come to
committee.
Members.
You all are chomping at the bit
yes I just move a do pass is a
great bill.
So we.
Well all right so we have a due
pass by Representative Christine
Trujillo second by
Representative Roybal Caballero
is there any opposition to the
do passed motion.
All right so Senator if you have
a do pass the Senate bill forty
two as amended okay well thank
you are so good morning break
for me and.
Appreciate you guys definitely
have a nice rest your day you
too thank you all right.
okay.
So next on the list Slee I
wasn't quite prepared for that
swift of the motion
So we will go to Senate bill one
forty four do we have.
Senator up.
Kaelin's and.
C..
All.
Demote her to our panel all
right Micaela hi
I'm not seeing.
Senator in.
The audience thanks for the
attendees listed should send.
I do see the center okay great.
Right.
Everybody VRA there's sunny.
Morning morning Senator good
morning Mr chair good morning
members of the Education
Committee all right so we're
back
So we've heard the bill
I understand there's an
amendment is that correct
Senator
Mr chairman I you're correcting
the course so we're here on
Wednesday what we did is we have
listened intently to the members
of the committee whether
suggestion got the amendment in
on time and this is what it does
is that includes service if you
could hold off if I could have a
motion to discuss the amendment.
I move the amendment all right
all seconded thank you all right
senator please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the Education Committee so in
essence we're here on Wednesday
we listen to the intent and the
our advice of the Education
Committee and we're trying to
move of one forty four with the
emergency clause forward and the
amendment medicines would have
to have services and it also
takes care of a technical
cleanup if I could Mr chair
members of the committee briefly
are referred to either some of
the work to Ben Fisher our to
our in in privative talk about
west
their thoughts are on the and
then of course we would go to
the committee for questions
right member may wish Micaela
please sure thanks Mister
chairman Senator so the
amendment before you it changes
the definition of and technology
in the public school capital
outlay Sectionof lost to match a
similar bill house bill one
forty one that was see can do
though a similar thing trying to
expand the use of that thank
funding it PSCS see so now the
deficit to two bills are the
same that compass both hardware
and services
it's a good amendment my when I
think Representative Garrett and
her team of representatives been
working at broadband as well as
regional into the LFC for
helping us all come to a
consensus on this language.
Mr chair I don't know of setting
would like to to speak briefly
on the amendment or if we could
just to see if there's anything
else that we've master that he
would like to have.
no pressure setting Mr chair
thank you the only thing I would
add is that the amendment also
miss the.
Education network portion of
Senate bill one forty four to
fall under the ad tech portion
of law so that it doesn't stand
as a separate program but is
Campos under the at tech
program.
Actually Mr chairman Sonny sorry
we've decided we're gonna we
didn't do that and this
amendment but we may take care
of that at its next step in the
HSC.
Okay.
Senator any further comments Mr
chairman members of the house
Education Committee I just
really want to thank you for
your courtesy the respect and Mr
chairman I really appreciate the
way that you've treated me
through this this committee I
just a totally appreciate that
thank you.
Course try to have the utmost
respect for all of our
colleagues in this do a good job
with that Mr Chairman.
Thank you senator so we will
come to committee questions on
the amendment anybody.
Not so talkative bunch this
morning.
All right motion on the
amendment removes the
Mr chair
for about four adoption
a prisoner sorry great option
yes thank I thank you member of
Boko in a second by vice chair
representative Lente did you
have a question or you gonna try
to get rid of the movie Mr
chairman okay awesome is there
any objection to the adoption of
the amendment.
All right seeing none we have
been amended Senate bill
We're back on the bill as a
whole further discussion.
Okay now it's not an option.
I'm
sorry thank you
Yes this to Representative
Roybal coming yet oh so we have
to do passed motion on Senate
bill one forty four is amended
by Representative Figueroa
second by Representative Roybal
Caballero is there any
opposition to the do passed
motion.
Seeing none Senator you have to
pass the Senate bill one forty
four as amended now thank you so
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Education
Committee yep thank you LESC
have a nice rest of your day
everybody.
All right so.
moving right alone.
House memorial eighteen.
So we'll switch our current
bill.
House memorial eighteen
Representative Figueroa.
I lost my square there you are
okay everything shifted
Do I need to demote anybody to
our panel.
You Mr chair I believe doctor
Representative that kind of love
my team this is here and merry
are they would raise their hands
so you can find them.
Yes.
All right so they have been
brought in Representative
Figueroa when you're ready.
Thank you I'm having trouble
switching my share file this
morning I think.
I think the internet is a slow
and fuzzy as my brain all thank
you Mr chair thank you committee
well we're bringing house
memorial eighteen to you this
morning and it was brought to me
by a broad coalition of
advocates in education.
recognized in the a person who
is passionate about our teacher
recruitment and retention so
this is a bill to look at those
issues to put that as the
primary focus hold it front and
center during interim and until
the deadline of September first
twenty twenty three And identify
and make it a strategic plan so
that New Mexico can be proactive
instead of reactive to the
issues around our teacher
pipeline.
The strength of the memorial I
think is that that addresses
teacher pipeline a recruitment
and retention at multiple points
along that pipeline where we
tend to lose teachers.
Mr chair and committee because
this is an Education Committee
I'm gonna skip all of the
information that we know because
we hear it over and over again
about the teacher vacancies in
the state about the difficulty
we have finding and holding on
to teachers
past fifty year mark.
This is the committee that
understands those issues better
than any other so skipping that
portion.
Maybe going right here questions
to address.
The memorial itself I'd like to
let.
The two expert witnesses speak
briefly
all right Mr chair.
Course remember may wish to take
over.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative you know and
all the committee members good
morning one of the S. my name is
Rebecca bloom Martinez and I'm a
professor of bilingual and ESL
educations Department of
language literacy and
sociocultural studies in the
college of education and human
sciences at the university of
New Mexico.
For the past four and a half
years I and my colleague Dr
Christine sams have led a group
of bilingual professors from
NMSU and I'm.
W. and M. H. U. N. UNM
collaborative project funded by
New Mexico higher IT department.
Pipelines for bilingual
indigenous language and ESL
teachers our work has included
the following objectives one
aligning bilingual and T. cell
programs for possible transfer
of credits under this objective
we have streamlined and
integrated courses for the
elementary bilingual education
door Smith.
We've also developed a matrix
between New Mexico PED's
educator preparation program
requirements our own goals The
New Mexico bilingual educators
competencies and the in tasks
standards which are required by
our university we've also
identified areas of expertise in
each university for future dual
enrollment across the different
universities.
Our second objective has been to
establish bilingual educators
rising chapters at each of the
universities involved.
Schools.
We are also preparing and
recruiting indigenous language
years.
The fourth objective is
development of under an
undergraduate elementary
bilingual teacher license and
degree the purpose of this
objective has been to cut down
on hours and costs while also
preparing students in a rigorous
teacher education program in two
languages all of this has been
done to recruit more money.
It just language teachers and.
So L. teachers.
Our collective work has resulted
in over one hundred students
will have passed revenue the
required test for bilingual
teachers additionally over a
hundred and thirty indigenous
language teachers have received.
In curriculum development and
pedagogy the language is
represented in those teachers
are keris Tijuana Mexico one K.
one Navajo and Apache.
During our work together we have
discovered any.
Such as most universities have
lost available faculty in have
not moved to replace them if we
don't have the faculty then
there is nobody to prepare
future T..
There's a lack of understanding
and commitment from
administrators about my lingo
Education there's agency
advisement and Miss
understanding of bilingual
education by college university
advisors.
There's marginalization of
bilingual education programs
within teacher education and
there are no such targeted
scholarships for bilingual.
Language teacher candidates.
The stipends offered in
different districts are often
very low.
It's been a difficult for us to
bring these issues to the
attention of decision makers at
all levels at the college level
at the university level at the
level of PED's.
For this reason we're supportive
of house memorial eighteen
because it would further the
work that we have already begun
and bring important stakeholder
voices to these issues such as
college administrators faculty
with expertise in these fields
superintendents from both urban
and rural districts tribal
leaders teachers parents and
students importantly it also
calls for New Mexico PED and New
Mexico AGD to work together to
study the issues and to develop
plans that both entities would
support.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mary.
Did you wish to make comments
more.
Yes I did thank you
again good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee and
sponsor of the bill like to
thank you for bringing it
forward.
as you know my name is Mary par
Sanchez and I am the president
of the national education
association in New Mexico but
prior to that becoming president
I have worked in public
education for three decades most
of that time as a middle school
classroom teacher.
In a title one school with
students and families that live
below the poverty line I
attended UNM and New Mexico
State University and I am a
traditionally trained secondary
teacher I support house memorial
eighteen because of the broad
scope of the work in creating a
task force that is comprised of
the higher end of to division or
department and the public
education and educators across
these categories to holistically
study the education workforce
shortages training mentorship
and on going professional
development.
If we structure our teacher
education.
An employment practices to
support.
Classroom and administrative
practices that are that support
culturally diverse students we
will be better able to support
the success of our students.
House memorial eighteen will
support the work of the public
at departments teacher ecosystem
because it looks at the entire
pipeline for both traditionally
and alternatively trained
teacher ed programs the focus
will be structure in teacher
education programs and on going
professional development.
Of the four educators who
We want to support and teach the
wonderfully diverse and rich
students in New Mexico's
classrooms.
I received a master's degree
from New Mexico State University
and public school administration
in two thousand five under a
program created from a
partnership between Los crucis
public schools New Mexico State
University and the United States
department of education I was
part of a cohort of thirty five
teachers
who received a specialized
administrative degree in
leadership in border rural areas
our focus was supporting
students who are culturally and
linguistically diverse with or
at risk of learning problems my
area of expertise is in school
structures and classroom
practices that support students
in these groups.
As an educational leader with
the training and experience I
have had I know that educators
in New Mexico must be trained in
supporting culturally and live
within request and
linguistically diverse students.
Who may be economically
disadvantaged and may be at risk
for learning problems because
these are the students that are
in New Mexico's classrooms and
all of our students will support
will be supported by educators
In these classroom so I want to
thank you for allowing me to
speak before you today and I'm
happy to stand for any questions
thank you.
Right thank you all for being
here Charlie good to the
attendees less Representative
Figueroa.
Yes share please do all right
thank you all all right so we'll
go to the attendees list those
in support of house memorial
eighteen please indicate by
raising your hands if you wish
to speak.
All right jasmine.
Morning jasmine you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yet but and I am standing in
support of house memorial
eighteen on behalf of the tribal
educational Iran's also known as
the T. eight the T. A. supports
creating a task force to take a
comprehensive look at the
teaching profession and most
specifically the native American
teacher pipeline as we all know
it only takes one teacher to
make a lifelong impact on a
student.
As a native American and as
needed reckon people it is often
extremely rare that we have
experience with it with the
teacher coming from one of our
own communities who understands
our culture our history our
languages and our norms
and this is.
And this is extremely rare New
Mexico public schools as only as
needed wrecking teachers only
make up about three percent of
the overall teacher population
in our public schools New Mexico
state public schools and when
native American students make
about make up about ten percent
is not more than that in our New
Mexico public schools so we are
in strong support of this
legislation we think that it's
head is our needing to
collaborate with the AGD higher
education department and we are
excited about what this
legislation could really do for
our communities and our teaching
profession in New Mexico to
increase
more folks in our teacher
pipeline and we think the
sponsor for bringing the
legislation and we urge the
community to pass thank you.
All right thank you jasmine.
But.
In the state of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee my name
is Patricia Jimenez laid them on
the project manager for
transformation cation New Mexico
and a retired teacher I have the
honor of working alongside our
expert witnesses and would like
to just add exclamation points
to what they have shared so
eloquently.
The educator community is very
appreciative of all the
scholarship opportunities
available to rebuild our New
Mexico teacher workforce but
that is only half the work there
is also money to ensure our
higher education and the public
education leaders and experts
engage in discussion and
research to revision teacher
education programs and to fill
vacancies especially in critical
areas as was discussed such as
bilingual education indigenous
language education special
education and diesel.
Transforming to questions thanks
Representative Figueroa for
sponsoring house memorial
eighteen and stands in full
support we also think this
committee for your hard work to
ensure excellence and
opportunity in education for all
New Mexico students thank you
Sir.
Right thank you for being here
all right so we will go to New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
education.
If you would please identify
yourself and you have up to two
minutes welcome.
It good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria equipment
and training with the New Mexico
Center on one.
And also a member of the legal
team for the Ozzie the next in
the house C. Martinez lawsuit on
behalf of the New Mexico Center
online poverty schools supported
this measure for reasons given
here today in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit the judge
recognized a constitutionally
sufficient education includes a
fully staffed quality and and
diverse teacher workforce this
is perhaps the most critical in
school resource for our students
particularly for the students
identified in the for student
groups addressed in the ruling
but the shortages of our state
the shortages our state faces
are well known as the Sanchez at
this memorial will bring
together subject matter experts
and stakeholders to look at the
overall teacher workforce needs
and develop recommendations to
increase the number of teachers
overall and that reflect the
diversity of our students for
these reasons the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
supports house memorial eighteen
and just a committee to pass
this measure thank you so much
great thank you Melissa.
All right.
I don't see anybody else was.
Okay Norman.
Good morning Norman you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee I want
to thank the sponsor for.
Providing this bill my name is
Norman clear to get the former
governor for the pueblo of Zuni
I currently work at the
university of New Mexico Center
for native American health and
as a grandparent you know as a
parent.
As a teacher a mentored also a
student my journey has been an
arduous one although it has been
fulfilling the fulfilling part
comes when I'm able to engage
with.
Teachers that understand my
culture and have the same
background from where I have
originated and so it really.
It is important that we look at.
Who is educating our teachers
and how those teachers are
actually using their education
to teach and to become mentors
especially role models for our
children the success of our
children is based on those who
actually teach them.
To become successful and to also
become contributing members of
our communal native indigenous
populations from where they come
from so for all that has been
said I stand in strong support
of this bill thank you very
much.
Great thank you for being here.
All right.
So we will come to committee.
Committee questions comments
concerns representative Lente
that please.
Thank you Mr chairman if you
don't mind I'm just stay off
video on hands and then with
issues this morning
did just a just a couple of
comments really I want to first
thank Dr
The Martinez for all of her
worker expertise in matters like
these I I know that a lot of
these issues we talk about them
very frequently now especially
me being in this committee and I
appreciate all the discussion
and bringing this these issues
to a much larger discussion
platform because these issues
are extremely important for for
many folks and maybe for folks
that that don't live the
lifestyle that many native
American children and and people
do can go often up.
Misunderstood and and for lack
of better terms not appreciated
and so I appreciate your work
drive for everything that you've
done and I know that the work
that you have done thus far was
funded a the last time we had
you money and I think that
brings to light Mr chairman and
committee members another focus
of this very committees that
having to to fund something as
important as this with junior
money again having to go out
there shake the bushes rattle
our our cups in hopes that we're
going to find some monies scrape
up the change to fund these
types of important initiatives
is again I think unfortunately a
large slap in the face and a
disregard for diversity here in
New Mexico especially as it
relates to the education of our
most vulnerable students in New
Mexico so again I I appreciate
that but I think Mr chairman and
members of the this committee
what what what this is come to
now as a memorial is again
unfortunate because it's turned
into a memorial as opposed to a
bill because once again we
cannot kept the funds that we
need to adequately fund these
types of initiatives and it
comes down again to Mr Chairman
something that you mentioned
earlier this week in terms of a
re prioritization of how we as
as NATO as as legislate tors in
the Education Committee can
bring to life that we have a
number of great policy
initiatives a number of great
initiatives that span different
diverse populations of our state
but if we cannot get them funded
in the way that they require
adequate funding.
Then then what we do and why are
we even part of this committee
if we have no voice here after
once it leaves this this
committee so again doctor bloom
Martinez Mr chairman and members
of this committee I I I I fully
support this initiative I hope
that we can all support this as
well but when it comes down to
funding aspects let's let's
let's make some changes thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of this committee.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Figueroa
yeah I just with Representative
Lente is house bill eighty five
I hope the Sanchez said the
advocates will
look at that and also from the
Senate it's it's Senate finance
but I hope that
that Senate pro tem Stewart and
Representative Figueroa well
look at it Senate bill one forty
eight because
there's a lot of really
serendipitous overlapping
and I think we're learning in
this committee that as we build
the momentum and work together
on these common initiatives that
it becomes a very powerful
statement of policy so thank you
for bringing this forth Mr
Chairman representative and we
look forward to just to really
make really transforming
education our state to benefit
each and every student thank
you.
Thank you Representative Lara
please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Pieratt this is I
I I I have to concur with the
with the with my colleagues so
representative Lente and and
Representative I Garrett you
know this this is very very
important work that's being done
here I I I fully support that
fully supporting the house
memorial unfortunately it's not
a bill I wish would be a bill
may I have do I do have a
question regarding finance so
Mister chair and and
Representative is our the our
and maybe this is an answer that
New Mexicans can can answer for
me but you know a a where were
we gonna be for funding or is
there no funding for the task
force as far as per diem and
mileage concern for to to pay
these individuals are cops of
these individuals for
participating in this R. R. AGD
and PED do we have a certain set
aside that they can accommodate
this for Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for for a great
question and committee I have
to.
I own my mistake in this process
in it this is not a bill.
Only because.
I didn't realize the drafting
office had a different deadline
I knew about a mid point
deadline passed which we did not
introduce bills but I did not
take this to our drafting office
before their internal deadline
that idea that I was not aware
of so please don't look at this
memorial and the.
It's it's.
Thanks for lasts because it's
not a battle.
Court for that I consider it in
any way less important than a
bill this is the intent of this
is to bring all of the size and
stakeholders to this task
because it is so so important
with respect to to finance
The COVID in our analysis says
in the confirmation we have with
PED and AGD is this falls within
the scope of their work.
And should be able to be
absorbed in their budget but
there is now specifically to
your question Mr Chairman
representative there is no set
aside for per diem and mileage
for the folks who are working on
this task force.
Your muted Representative.
Are you on my apologies thank
you Representative Egolf Brian
and Mr thank you so that that's
that's what I'm afraid of is
that if if we were when when we
passes bill out of this
committee and the process it's
going that I would he for this
process to get derailed on a
technicality.
Because there isn't any of
funding or for for for
compensation for the people for
participating in this and and
you know this is such a great
effort I I I really like it I
support I am going to vote for
it but I just I just want to I
just have that concern and doubt
it I just don't want to get
derailed online.
Thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for your memorial
and I do it you know I do I've
been in your placement for and I
feel very strongly that
memorials to have a very strong
voice and place and what we do
especially the type of memorial
Mr chairman and representative
that you're presenting to us
today and I'm in total agreement
with all my colleagues for me
and the reasons why this is so
very important but I also Mr
chair would would say that this
task force and the work that
Should be valued
they should be given an
incredible value it's a test for
institutions to step up as well
because we've been saying over
and over and over again how
important it is to have.
Teacher preparation teacher
certification teacher graduation
increase our.
Teachers across the board in
order to be able to address the
culturally and linguistically
linguistic Lee and relevant
education that we saw the
results in in not Yazzie
Martinez as being.
Totally
disproportionate and creating
further gaps in educational
attainment for our students
especially our low income and
the low income.
Culturally
and linguistically enhanced
students not at risk but enhance
and somehow we have to Mr chair
on funding the way.
To fill those gaps and I want to
thank
Rebecca bloom team as we've been
on this track for a long long
time and she's on her efforts
and others are totally dedicated
to seeing us get through this
and so when I say Mr chair that
it we have to hold our
institutions accountable because
this is a perfect example of now
with PED and and H. U. D. the
institutions can leverage on can
assist can can increase the the
funding mechanisms to help
support the continuation and to
carry out this effort on to its
fruition and so
we can't allow our institution
to continue to trigger programs
as
As the services are supportive
or a secondary or as
supplemental they have to treat
our what our efforts in
institutionalize them
and make them part of our just
regular business doing business
as an institution we have that
obligation and this is again I
think I think that we do have
Mister chair on the full
cooperation and support of the
EPD and HPD and I have complete
faith but now I think that we
need to really find a way to end
the funding issue is very
important find a way for
institutions to incorporate
within their funding processes
on a recurring basis on a
recurring basis support for
these training programs and for
these
partnership programs.
That will ultimately increase
are on teacher
Enrollment and graduation and
our new teachers in our
workforce and that's what's so
very important so I hope that
they're listening and I wish
that we would have to stop
coming in and support programs
to our institutions and be
recognized as on hold
contributory and valued and
significant
Pathways to creating success for
teach for students ultimately so
thank you Mr chair and and
Representative for this memorial
it has a lot of weight we're
going to make sure that we hold
everyone in the involved in this
process
I I know that they're gonna be
accountable and they're gonna be
responsible I understand that so
I look forward to how the task
force will the reporting
mechanisms of the task force and
how we can then support our
continued effort to
institutionalize these efforts
thank you Mr chairman and
representative and everyone
thank.
Thank you.
Question.
All right so Representative
Lente please Mr chairman I would
would be passed now second that
Mr chair right so we have a due
pass her percent went that
second by Representative Roybal
Caballero I was going to thank
you for bringing this forward
Representative Figueroa I did
have a couple questions before
except that motion quickly so I
see that in the recording and
while the request for data and
the request for transmission of
the reports of this work group
all include legislative finance
committee is that true.
This areas all right was there a
reason why Representative and if
I'm mistaken please let me know
but I do not see provided
finance as part of this
committee
in its complexion was their
reason for leaving members of
the legislative finance off of
the committee.
For the task force issues names
are.
Okay
also the task force itself.
You know just a consideration of
the task force was was large and
unwieldy when this was first
drafted the task force Mr chair
was actually at thirty three
persons so it took some work in
negotiation to get it down to a
more workable number you'll
notice that the subcommittee so
as a break out to do work on
specific tasks.
You can have non task force
members and I believe there was
an assumption that we work in
LFC at that level.
Thank you for that
Representative I mean I would
suggest that they be part of the
whole because as we heard the
finances in education go hand in
hand and one thing that I've
learned from being a member at
least in in our current
structure I should say being a
member of the legislative
finance and the the legislative
education study committee is
that and I think it's come in
various ways that we're working
on separate issues simultaneous
simultaneously and in different
ways and I think having more
synchronization between
membership between all these
different in our see it's super
important to try to try to shore
up the narratives and the policy
and the finances as exists and
in our current structure
But but I would just leave that
for your consideration
Representative Figueroa I think
that's that's important in our
in our current time but I
certainly I appreciate all the
work that you all have put into
this and with that I will accept
the motion is there any
opposition to the promotion.
All right so you have a do pass
on house memorial eighteen thank
you Representative thank you
experts.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee.
All right so finally members
we're winding down
said the school year that's also
wishful thinking on the
legislative session so.
As far as our future committee
is like I said we're kind of
winding things down will here
for Senate bills that are going
to be starting to be read out
so please keep a watch on the
website for our agenda of course
will be posted the day before at
least impossible changing time
so if there time changes all
certainly announce it on the
house floor or anything out of
the ordinary because I can see
up Representative Eli is yawning
State that's what happens when
we have one four sessions and
eight o'clock meetings so and so
please be aware of that things
may start to change as we start
trailing off our committee
meetings and we spend more and
more time on the floor but
anything out of the ordinary so
I you'll be in the agenda will
be in the gold Rod it'll be
announced on the floor.
So with that we will not have a
meeting to Morrow I think House
Appropriations Representative
Sweetser is having our our
junior hearings right
and and actually thank you for
that Mr chair I don't think
we're having any hearings
everybody really follow the
guidelines set forth and in the
we we had a preliminary look
look in there seem to be no
issues I think that'll be
announced today so so yeah I
appreciate that very much oh no
no that's that's awesome news so
so yeah I guess we have a floor
session at some point tomorrow
but awesome we don't have to go
everybody did their homework and
did it well we'll get a.
so no questions comments
concerns have a nice rest your
day will see you on the floor hi
everybody.
Thank you Mr chair.
Have a good one.
