Representative Torres Valesque.
Representative Vincent.
Yeah.
Vice Chair Garrett.
We do have a quorum.
Please.
Good morning, uh, Mister
Chairman. Good morning to
members and uh.
With the Senate Bill 201 is
amended.
What we require the public
education department to develop
an accountability and an
evaluation plans.
Approved by DFA.
L E S L E S C.
And out of sea for initiatives
funded through the public
education reform Fund.
The build also moves the
submission deadline for public
education.
School support budget requests
to September 1st in line with
all other state agencies.
Currently funding for 6 major
initiatives uh public education
department in
House appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
bills.
2 and 3 are contingent on the
enactment of the bill totaling
82.5 million.
For the next 3 years and uh Mr.
Chairman members what this
addresses is so.
You have uh the support for
students who are onhoused.
Of
Oh,
secondary education, literacy
training.
third math achievement, 4th
support for attendance for
success.
in the 50s so innovative
staffing strategies.
And then the school improvements
for transformation with a
totaling of 8eses within 3
years.
Mr. Chairman, members, so we
also have uh
Um
Sonnylo from the L of sea as an
expert witness, and I will yield
to him with your permission for
a few comments and.
Information on the legislation.
Please, good morning.
Thank you Mr. Chairman of the
committee, um, Senator Gonzalez
covered the bill, so I'll just
be here.
Right.
You all stand for questions.
Assume so. So we'll go to the
audience.
So
Uh, folks on Zoom, if you're
here in support of Senate Bill
201. Please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
that populate folks in our
audience here with us, if you're
here and support of Senate Bill
201, please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak,
right? And if you want to line
up behind the presenters, you'll
have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
stand rounds for the uh school
superintendents.
And the coalition of Educational
leaders.
We support this bill very much.
We think as this moves through
the process we're hoping to see
the 80 million uh moved north of
that, but Mr. Chairman, we need
this enabling legislation.
Make that happen. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. So
we'll go to our person online.
uh, Kirsty.
Morning Christillo of up to 2
minutes, please.
Kirsty, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes. Good morning.
Can you hear me now? We can,
please. Great.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Kirsty
Tyson. I'm the director of K-12
education at the Lannel
Foundation. We support Senate
Bill 201 as amended. Having
multi-year budgets would create
for better planning and
development of programs
utilizing per funding. Past
appropriations that have been
non-recurring only for one year
provides challenges to
sustainability, building
capacity, and potentially
impacting a program's potential
to be successful.
Having more stable longer term
funding will provide a new way
to think about budgeting and
planning.
This bill also includes includes
accountability and reporting
requirements to be developed,
which aligns with the Lanel
Foundation's transparency and
accountability values. We urge a
due pass. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. All right, so
we'll go to opposition folks on
Zoom if you are opposed to
Senate Bill 201, please indicate
by raising your hand if you wish
to speak.
folks are in our audience, if
you're here to speak in
opposition to Senate Bill 201,
please indicate by raising your
hint. All right, Greg, if you
would go in the presenters,
you'll have up to 2 minutes,
please.
Mhm
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
against Senate Bill 201. I'm
Greg Frost at Assistant
secretary of Education at the
Public Education department, and
I do want to thank the senator
and the LFC for taking time to
hear our concerns. They've met
with us multiple times, but we
still have concerns and don't
think that this bill is needed,
um, most of all, we are already
doing this work.
We submit with the public school
support request information on
the evaluations that we will do,
and the research base for the
interventions that we're
proposing and um
We don't get feedback from the
LFC if that's something that is
wanted, um, then, then we can,
we're happy to collaborate and
and to receive that feedback
from the LFC from the LESC and
from DFA as well.
And our other concern is that it
is tied to a large
appropriation, $82.5 million and
if the bill were to not pass, we
would miss out on that $82.5
million for important work such
as attendance, math, and school
improvement, and we want to make
sure that uh regardless of what
happens to the bill that the
agency receives uh the funding
to do that critical work. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you. All right, so
we'll come to committee,
Committee questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation,
Senator. So,
My understanding of this is that
Pretty much the
Oversight would be taken from PD
and would lie.
through consultation through the
um
Department of Finance.
Eliy and the Alex, is that
correct? uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator?
Mr. Chair and representative.
Uh, the bill would
Provide more guidance, the
feedback that
Um, Greg had mentioned in his
comments, it was.
Memorialized in this process and
All these agencies would have to
agree on essentially what the
measure of success is, how the
department will be measuring it
across the 3 years of these
pilot programs and what the
expectation will be at the end
of the pipe.
And thank you, Mister Chairman
and thank you, Sonny for that
because sitting on
The house appropriations myself.
I like the idea.
That
These funds would be set aside
to address and work with some of
the uh interim work plans.
Of the LESC.
As I've mentioned several times,
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I do
think that the LESC are
interim education committee
needs to have more of a place at
the table when it comes to
building the large budget that
we do for the schools.
I think Mister Chairman and I
think Senator, that this
provides oversight for that, so
that we, we talked about
legislative we attend, we talked
about legislative priorities.
I think as it is written here,
That it does provide the
legislature.
More oversight of these funds,
is that your understanding too,
Mr. Chairman and Senator.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Baca, that is.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, um.
Senator for that. I, I, I
believe that that is what we
need to do because as we
identify and we have legislation
that's brought to us through the
interim.
I am really pushing and really
will stand strong on that it be
um
Basically committee endorsed
legislation, so these funds that
can't be used and utilized with
oversight.
For priorities that this group
does in the interim, I think it
should happen like that.
I think that we, I mean PED has
You know, their funds, they have
that, but I do really believe
That this will help us to do our
job, to get more funding and to
do it more effectively, and
really, as we said before,
really get the input from the
appropriators and the
policymakers that are outside of
this, and so, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I support your bill.
Represent cave.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator,
uh, for bringing this forward. I
have um
I have a few questions and um
And they're relevant to a
concern I have, and the concern
I have
Um, Mr. Chair and senator is um
the multiple levels of
oversight. Uh, I think we have
Mr. Chair
of our departments, uh, we have
checks and balances, and they
are associated to either policy
or their associated to um
funding or finance uh related
issues that within every
department, um, it is part of
the what I call the standard
operating procedures, SOPs.
For
like the military refers to to
them, um, and they are Mr. Chair
and Senator, um.
Embedded and then we as the
legislators are the ultimate
oversight in my viewpoint, and
we have, in this case, the
legislative education study
Committee, which is the, in my
view, the ultimate oversight or
um education. And so, um, I have
Um
When, um, my first question has
to do with um
I, I see that.
The
purpose or the intent.
As outlined and I can't find it
in the bill itself, but it talks
about approving instruction.
Is that, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator, the portion that's
relegated to LESC.
Um, because I, again, I don't
see um
DFA or LFC
approving instruction, uh, it,
it just doesn't.
Make sense to me.
when we have LESC, uh, as the
body that we look to.
For
Education related matters, and
they include instruction and um
the guidance actually, LESC
provides guidance.
So, um,
That's a question.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I'd like to essentially give
an example of a
Entity that you all rely on each
year, which is the consensus
revenue estimating group.
So this is a group of executive
and legislative agencies who
Basically come to consensus on
what the revenue number is that
the legislature uses. That's
sort of the same vision behind
this proposal, which is to have
Bo LESC, LFC, and DFA providing
instructions along with PD on.
What
The measures of success are
going to be for these
appropriations, how the
department is going to monitor
and track progress.
And then whether or not
In the course of studying these
initiatives, there should be
changes to what we're measuring
because of
findings that we've
discover in the process of.
The 3 years.
Um
I just got married and I, I
think about.
You know, we have a, have a
stepson who goes to mom when he
wants something, and then he
goes to Dad. Dad you on
something and goes to his dad
when he wants something.
And I think it's really
important when we all sort of on
the same page, um, particularly
when it comes to
Very important, like in the
future, buying a vehicle.
This is, I think, a very similar
concept where
Uh, we don't want.
Finance and education, pointing
fingers and having different
ideas about.
How these appropriations should
be used or how, what the measure
of success should be, um,
The bill simply just says that
all of these groups will come to
agreement on what those
instructions will be.
So that the agency can proceed
with study.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Liu.
Um
Within the public education
department.
I believe, and I'm not sure, and
I don't know if Mr. Chair uh
will allow that.
Yeah.
I'd like to know what the checks
and balances are in terms of
what Mr. Lu just um identified
as how appropriations are used
and what the measures are in
place to evaluate those
outcomes. May I have um
The deputy secretary answer
those questions. Sure, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Greg
Frostad, assistant secretary of
Education at the Public
Education Department and
representative, are you asking
presently what checks and
balances.
are in place for evaluations of
Mr. Chair and um deputy
secretary. Yes, if they relate
to what Mister Low just
mentioned, uh, concerning how
appropriations are used.
And then how, what measures are
in place to evaluate that
they're being used
appropriately, um, and in
accordance with the legislative
intent.
So there, there are multiple
measures that are used. The
first is the language in HB2
itself that appropriates the um
the funding, so we're always
making sure that those that the
appropriations align with the
language in HB2. And then during
the interim, we will often work
with.
LESC staff and LFC staff, uh, to
create presentations and present
to the interim committees on
the, the work that we're doing
to inform the legislators on how
the appropriations are being
used and um and then lastly too
for, for instance, for our key
performance indicators, we meet
regularly with uh or we meet
with DFA LESC and LFC to make
sure that the major
that the agent that what the
agency is being measured on, um,
that we're all in agreement on,
on that and um and review the,
the progress, um, and LFC does a
good job in when we report to
them getting back to us and, and
we work together to make sure
that the reports are accurate
on, on how we're doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, deputy secretary.
So for me, your response.
is indicative of what I said
earlier about departments having
their own internal.
Uh, mechanisms, but they also uh
interact.
Um, with the key.
Uh, bodies such as LFC in this
case, um, that you mentioned and
and um aligning with the
language in HB2, which in my
view are um and and then of
course, working closely with
LESC and how all of that, um,
ultimately is measured and
evaluated so that we go into
each
Inim and then each year with an
idea of how we're performing
overall in terms of
Associating the budget.
With
The standards that we're
expecting, Mister Chair, and,
um, panel. So,
My concern is that we're
creating too many levels.
Of oversight.
Unnecessarily.
Because if that's already
happening and there really
hasn't been any major, um, I
haven't seen and we've been
dealing with this since I have
been elected and took office.
We've been dealing with
Appropriately
Placing
These types of um
Oversight, levels of oversight
is placing them appropriately
and not
Stacking them, um.
Unnecessarily. So that's, you
answered that part of the
question. So the other major
question that I always ask, and
as it relates to PED.
Is that
We know that throwing money
Um, in response to Martinez Yazi
isn't the answer.
Only answer.
Oftentimes when we have a Mr.
Chair, uh, entities such as
The finance related entities,
those that are charged like LFC
and and DFA involved.
In my view, they see things as
they relate to, obviously.
With their responsible for. In
this case, um, finance. So it's
difficult to have them involved
in.
And I'm not saying they don't
have the expertise.
I'm sure they do, Mister Chair.
However,
It's different when you have an
Public education department that
is actually charged with um the
education of our students but
also fulfilling the mandates of
uh Martinez Yazi.
There has to be a blending, and
I think PED has that blending
within its um it's own internal
mechanism. So,
Uh
One final point, um.
Mr. Chair and um
panel and that now that you're
there deputy secretary, is there
a particular office within PED
that is charged with aligning um
the budget.
The funding with
What uh Mr. Liu indicated a like
um with the making sure the
appropriations are used
appropriately and then second,
that measures are in place to
ensure that.
And, and if so, what is, who is
in that and how many individuals
are working in that department.
So Mister Charon Representative,
uh, the
It is, it is really not one
particular office that works uh
through that once an
appropriation is made, then our
finance team looks at all of the
appropriations and uh works to
assign who will be responsible
for a particular appropriation
and um
That work happens with the
policy office that we have as
well as um the different program
offices and then it is the
responsibility of the deputy
secretaries to ensure that the
um that once an appropriation is
assigned to their teams that the
appropriation is used
appropriately.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you deputy secretary and
all the panel.
Um, again, I think I'm, I'm
gonna close with just a final
statement and that is that I
believe the guidance is in
place. We have the structures of
the measures, the oversight, um,
Capacity within how we're
operating now, um.
And including obviously LESC
because LESC is, is, um,
Oh, I believe is our uh
connection to um to you and to
higher ed. So, um,
With that, I'm gonna listen to
the uh rest of the, the
discussion, but um I just see
this as an unnecessary uh
additional level um of oversight
that's not necessary. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Represent Sheffield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
I'm fairly blessed to sit on the
legislative Finance Committee
and I've seen this, uh, bill
several times.
Not just once.
Maybe not twice, but maybe 3
years.
time
And uh let's talk a little bit
about where it came from.
Uh
A few years back
There was money appropriated so
that our schools could have a 5
day school week, which many of
us did not want.
And uh did not accept.
So when that 5 day school week
was not using the funds that
were appropriated, those funds
became a
Uh, recurring.
It's a source of revenue.
For the public
And, uh, reform fund, which was
created to hold those funds that
were appropriate. You tell me if
I did wrong, son
it was created to hold those
funds that were not used by uh
on the five-day school week.
So
Pretty soon it became just a
source of.
funds without oversight or
designation uh for use by PED
and they, and they use them.
And they used them.
They were all gone.
And uh this is the year that
that fund has become depleted.
So this year they came and
asked.
For more funding.
And now they would prefer to not
have oversight on that
additional funding.
And uh I didn't really think the
funds should continue to be
used.
I thought that it was created to
catch that overflow, and I think
it was the money that was in it
was not used for the purpose
that it was appropriated for.
Uh, if somebody approved that it
was not me. I didn't, I didn't
see that, uh.
I mean, I didn't hear about it
till it ran out of money.
And now we're asked to
re-appropriate funding for it
without oversight.
And uh that's contingent on this
bill.
Now 3 times at least during the
LFC we have seen the structure
of how that money would be spent
if we appropriate it and give a
little refill to this fund.
And uh we've talked about it.
We've
Argued about it and we fought
about it and
Uh, we've come to to down to
this the structure that would be
set up by this bill.
And I'm OK with that. It's not
my first choice, but I'm OK with
that.
And uh
If we put that money in there, I
would like to have oversight.
And if it doesn't have
oversight,
And I'm OK with not putting it
in there.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chairs, uh,
So, uh, I would ask you this.
anything I said that was
incorrect.
Mr. Chair, Representative, you
give a good. Thank you, sir.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this bill,
um, and I do, this was something
that went through the interim.
It was talked about, so it's not
something new and it shows the
value of having betting during
our process where you get
Uh, the LFC analyst and others
looking at it. Um, one thing
that I will say, um, and this
maybe for Sunny. This is a real
cross agency collaboration and
DFA analysts are involved,
analysts are involved.
Because it's specifically
addressing education, LASC
analysts are involved. Do you
think that will help improve the
quality of the data, because
over and over again during Lt
seaweed inadequate, incomplete
data, and so it was hard to make
some of the decisions because of
the day, do you think this will
help address that.
Mr. Chair and vice chair, I
think it will, um, when Greg
described the process in which
PE receives an appropriate work
is essentially spread across
multiple bureaus.
Um, you, you heard in your LASD
evaluation of teacher
residencies.
But it was a $60 million
appropriation in the legislature
made last year.
That
The IT department and the
educated quality bureau.
Exactly
Have a methodology of connecting
the teacher residency funding,
the questions they wanted to
ask.
With the evaluation at LAC
wanted to do.
even just matching candidates
with their student masters was.
much a nightmare, so I think
having a process in which all of
the responsible parties for
funding and policy and study and
the implementers all in the same
room at the beginning, saying,
This is what we want to study.
We want you to have your process
in place.
And this is the best way to
ensure you get a representative
sample so that we can
Ascertain whether this was as a
step in the right direction.
I carry.
because that's one reason why I
think this is a vital, um,
I also appreciate you mentioned
the alignment of the timeline.
Um, some people thought it was
September 1st was pretty early,
but that's when budgets are due
now. So thank you for pointing
that out.
Um, and then what I've heard,
um,
From Superintendents and charter
school leaders is the 3-year
design.
Um, because they're not planning
for one year, they're planning
for 3 years. They're getting the
feedback from
Uh
This, uh,
Cross Agency Group.
And so there can be corrections
along the way. There can be
evaluation and that's progress
monitoring we progress monitor
our readers, now we're progress
monitoring our programs. So I
think this will be um an
effective tool which probably
LLC and LEOC will come back and
look at doing that again. So
thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this
forward.
me
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you, Senator and, and
Sunny. Um, I, when, when this
first came out, I was really
concerned about a certain
verbiage that said in
consultation with LFC and LESC.
Now that that is corrected, I
really, because I really liked
the whole concept of it, um, so
because I do think I do like uh
has Sonny described, um,
everybody coming to the table,
um, and, and, and making
decision and then defining what
success criteria.
looks like. Um, we have to do
that in the classroom. Our
students doesn't know if they're
successful if we can't correctly
define what success is. And so
when you have all of the
stakeholders that are in there
and the ones that um that that
do this on, on a daily type of
thing, um, defining what success
criteria and giving you time to
work it. Um, I think the way
that we have funded so many
different initiatives in a in a
uh request for ref uh or
Uh, reimbursement type of, of
thing on a, on a yearly basis
it's so hard for all of the
districts to be able to plan for
the future because they don't
know if they're going to qualify
for this money next year. So the
3 years is a huge uh benefit to
me because they can actually um
plan for 3 years and then be
able to modify and show that
success or possibly not, and
then we're done, you know, we're
not gonna keep doing this and
And if, and if what we thought
was gonna come from this isn't,
then you either stop it, tweak
it, do something to do something
about it instead of keep going
and uh before it ever becomes
something that's permanent, so I
really, I really like this and I
really like that, um, all of the
stakeholders are in
collaboration and not just, and
not just one, so I think this is
amazing. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. A question from
representators Velas.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, and, uh, sponsor
and Mr. Liu. I, I do have some
questions. Um,
And uh it may be that you
already addressed them, um,
since you had already started
when I came in late.
Um, first of all, it seems that
the um
Let's see, what are we calling
it the DFA.
had been working with the LESC
and the LFC.
About 2010, and I wondered, um,
I think that was the last year
that they were working together,
and I wondered the reason for
the separation. I know when I
was writing my Hispanic
education, uh, status report. It
was very helpful to consult with
them, and there was a lot of
data that was available there,
um, and so I'm wondering like
why the separation at that time
or does anyone have that answer?
Mr. Chair, representative of
attempt to answer your question,
um,
I'm not entirely sure what all
the.
Reasons might have been, but I
do know that.
As Greg described, we have an
annual performance measure
negotiation process that happens
between.
TSA and LFC.
And
Um, as you are probably familiar
when you have negotiations on
measures of success with an
individual, particularly if it's
a student, right? They may have
a tendency to want to only use
measures that they have direct
control over.
And so when a measure to
Look at the performance of 4th
grade students on a reading
assessment is a
Goal for the department and they
don't have direct control over
it.
There may be a hesitancy to use
that as a measure and there may
become a rift between the two
agencies on
Be accountable for something,
having appropriations applied or
cut as a result of some of those
negotiations, and so I think
naturally these systems.
Create friction with each other.
But I don't know if Senator
Gonzalez wants to add to that.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and uh.
Some
Um,
let me just share something with
you I think.
Oh
The 30 years that uh that I have
been here.
And also with 30 years of
background in education, and
then I served.
0 16 years in this committee on
how and uh one of the things
that that I have seen.
That I really appreciate Sonny
mentioned the keyword, the
consensus.
And uh
What is really interesting when
you know, first of all,
With uh education holding the
strings to almost 50% of the
budget for the state.
That is, you should have as much
as possible.
To the highest level of
accountability.
But what I have seen.
Yes, and I learned this through
house appropriations when I was
here, and then also through
Senate Finance and also through
LFC.
I
When the consensus group reports
to us.
And that is the different
agencies from the finance part
and the the economist, you know,
from the groups.
What's really interesting.
They present to us.
And there's questions.
But there is no disagreement.
In the recent final to her.
They have agreed
And uh just recently, you know,
uh, uh, from a public ag and I
saw that this last week, we met
several times, and yes, we
agreed and yes, we disagreed,
but the important part is having
a discussion, having, you know,
what are we looking at and how
do we want to go with this, and
I, I think there was a lot of
value to that. That's the first
time that I have seen.
Through education, bringing
more.
Of that path of just a
consensus.
And uh and there's nothing wrong
with that. The other part is,
uh, our hands won't be tied
forever, you know, if this
doesn't work in 3 years, let's.
Really
Look back and
and maybe we might find out that
uh that it's really working very
well, and we might even have to
add to it, but the part is so we
have been trying to very
different uh strands, very
different strategies, and it
still hasn't gone this to
exactly where we want to be, but
the most important part is um
when you have that tightness of
communication that, you know,
this partner knows what this
part is doing and this part, and
that way when we're talking
about
Huge parts of funding,
especially when it comes to
education, then also we have to
recognize that we do have
But a decree with us that to.
You know, um, however, we work
with that, we have to work with
our remedies to satisfy them.
And you know, in line parallel
working with that, and I
remember for years and years
that
You know, that we've worked
with, we had the Zuni lawsuit,
we finally breathed out into
place through the heats for
capitalley to districts, so, uh,
you know, there there is
history, and then, uh, I guess I
have already given you uh an
idea of how old I am, but uh,
way back, um, you know, when I
started, um, the entire budget.
was with DFA.
Public education didn't have any
of the but then he transferred.
You know, to public education
department.
You know, so there's, there's
always change, but you know, the
important part is so.
That consensus, and if it
doesn't work, we can continue
working with it and and uh see
what other.
we can address this, but uh we
do handle a lot of funding, Mr.
Chair, um, Senator and Mr. Liu,
it sounds like y'all have been
thinking ahead about how it
might work a little differently
this time, and there are
different people in places with
shared experiences and so um I
do hope that it works out. Um, I
also hope that as the
discussions are held or as the
work is done, that the house
education and the Senate
education.
Committees will be involved in
making decisions and it won't
just be um outside of our realm,
but that, that we will be
actively involved in in making
financial decisions and, and
education decisions,
and said that's exactly.
Um, I do have another question.
Um, I, I was, I was really
interested, of course, in what
you, what was included in the
FIR.
Around the Martinez and Yazi
lawsuits, um,
And I, I just want to stress
that although um Martinez is
and, and I'm not sure about
Yazi, but I imagine as well
Martinez is a school, uh,
finance lawsuit.
That we've always said that it's
not just about money.
Um, and representative Royal
Caballero had it, uh, again,
very accurately, um, that
The money is, is a concern, but
there, there are things that we
have asked for that don't
require money. And so, um,
Well, we are a little concerned
about the money piece or or and
I say we, I shouldn't say we.
I don't think because um I was
not a plaintiff, um.
But
Where the money has gone is a
concern and I think that's
public now that a lot of money
has been put into education in
the name of Martinez and Yazi
that could not be accounted for.
Um, so with um
With the significance of the
amount that was put in in with
the significance.
Of um of this of these lawsuits,
um, I think, uh, Representative
Chatfield's comment is, is right
on as well and that um I think
everyone wants to know where
that money, not maybe not in the
past that we can't find but as
money is put into uh the budget
on in the name of Martinez Aazi,
um, we would like to see some
accountability. We would like to
see where the money is, has gone
and and how it has been used.
And, and
In the evaluation.
It would seem important that
Um, things not just be done, so,
so that there's the money, but
there's also some initiatives
that were mentioned here that um
none of the plaintiff groups had
any input into and so, um, some
of the advocates and plaintiffs
didn't know that these
initiatives were coming out
until they came out and they
were not done in the way that
they had been mentioned in the
lawsuit or intended in the in
the lawsuits in the trial,
sorry, in the trial.
So, as we're looking at
evaluation, you're talking about
evaluation. Um, I hear a lot
about the financial piece. I'd
also be interested in looking at
the qualitative piece and, and
knowing how that's going to be
evaluated between the three
entities, um, outside, and and
the other question I have is
that you're talking about in
consultation.
With the LFC and LESC, and I'm
wondering if when you're talking
about the LESC if you're talking
about the staff.
Or if you're talking about the
staff and the interim committee,
if you're talking about our
legislators going to have any um
input in any of the um
assessments or um
Decisions. Um, so,
Uh, I'm just, um, that would,
that would be my, my questions.
Um, how carefully have you
thought through about
accountability and what is our
role?
As the house and Senate
Education Committees or the LES
the interim, and maybe that's a
discussion I have with.
With you, Mr. Chair, because I'm
new on this committee, and I,
and I don't quite know how it
functions in the interim around
issues like this important
issue.
Um, so any information would be
very helpful. Thank you.
Yeah, I guess that's something
that I can answer. I just
recently chaired the LESC is
that the interim is really meant
around studying, so we have our
staff that is permanent staff of
the Legislative Education Study
Committee, who will get
information.
For us and then ultimately bring
it to the LESCO as members in
order to to vote on as a path
forward. Um, so keep in mind too
because it's um
Bipartisan bicameral, and we
have 10 voting members, so it's
the 10 voting members that will
make the vote, but it's in
consultation with our advisory
members. So, um, all of us tend
to be uh at least advisory
members, um, others are voting
members, um, in the interim, so
that's something that that we
tend to work out in the interim
as far as standing committees.
This is a standing committee, so
during session, the standing
committees vote on that
legislation. So just like we did
with committee endorsed
legislation. This is legislative
finance Committee endorsed piece
of legislation, um.
And we are here to vote up and
down on it um through the
interim is when we do that
evaluative work. We look at the
data, we make decisions on what
direction we should point our
staff and what direction we
should be going for.
Ultimately this, so all of that
is kind of practice.
During the interim, and then
this is the game where we decide
yes or no, what are we going to
implement or not.
I'm sorry.
In the Senate, yes, because it
was bicameral, so it's in
conjunction with our partners in
the Senate, like, um, Senator
Gonson is here.
All right.
Thank you folks. Uh, what's the
will of the committee? Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I will do
pass on uh Center 201 with the
preemptive, right, so we have to
do pass motion by second by
representative Chatfield, um, as
amended, Madam Secretary, I call
the roll, please.
Oh yes,
yes.
Let me get some hard here, yes
Chatfield
representative Garcia. Uh yes.
Gonzalez.
Yes.
Representative Coola.
representative. Yes.
Representative Maribal Moya,
yes.
Representative for about
Caballero.
No.
Representative Collins.
was
to assess.
Yes.
Representatives.
Vincent, yes.
vice chair Garrett. Yes.
Yes.
All right, 11 to 1. You have a
pass to.
Mr. Chairman, members, thank
you. Thank you.
Right.
Oh,
Senator.
NFL 280.
That's.
It was the first.
Oh
Right,
Senator, welcome back to the
House Education.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Mark Murphy. I'm the
representative from Rosville
District 59.
Um, my good friend, uh,
Representative Baca calls me the
rookie from Roswell, and I'm not
presented in front of your
committee and I'm very pleased
to be here. I have with me the
uh bill sponsor, Senate Bill
280, uh, Senator,
and also uh Colonel David West
as an expert from the Mexico
Military Institute. Um,
Senate bill, um 280 adds the
Mexico Military Institute, which
was formed in 1891.
To the list of constitutional
special schools eligible for
funding from the public school
capital outlay program.
Mimi's unique situation as a
private educational institution
that cannot bond and charges
tuition does not lend itself to
the state local match funding
calculation and mechanism.
Given that New Mexico military
institute does not have district
property valuation. The phase
two formula would be impossible
to calculate.
Additionally, the school does
not have the ability to go out
for geo bond for funding.
However, the school does charge
tuition as a source of revenue.
Which none of the Mexico
districts are constitutional
schools have.
Um, I'll now turn it over to uh
Senator Wiesel.
Mr. Chairman members of the
committee, it's good to see a
lot of familiar faces up here
and I'm glad each and every one
of y'all are serving on the
education committee on the House
side. I am on the Senate
education because I do want to
ensure that all of our kids are.
educated to the best of our
ability to get it done.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I think our rookie
member right here did an
excellent job of.
Passing on to what the what the
needs are for New Mexico
military institute.
And so uh, you may not know
this.
They do have a prep school right
now in Roswell.
And this takes in 7th, uh, 6th,
7th, and 8th graders.
So whenever we're looking at the
overall population from
6th 7th and 8th all the way
through 12th grade, it's over
49% of those students are from
New Mexico.
Whenever I'm saying 49%, we have
to take into account that the
9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade
students do come from out of
state or some other country in
the world.
Mr. Chairman and members.
Without state capital funding.
The Institute has to self fund
on improvements with the female
cadets that are there now that
are participating in sports in
particular that are.
Housed in the dormitories there,
it is imperative that we get
some funding to help with.
say softball field.
Things like that, coaches for
the girls' volleyball and
basketball teams.
Uh, well, that's not
improvements, but you see where
I'm going with this, we have to
update bathrooms, that's very
important.
And without being part of,
excuse me,
Unless we make the New Mexico
Military Institute that
constitutional Special School.
They kind of are up against the
wall on getting these jobs done.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee at this time, I would
like to let my
Expert witnessed Colonel David
West have some.
Comments to the committee as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, thank you for
hearing us today. Again, has
been spoken, uh, this just is
another tool in the toolbox for
NMI still requires some matching
funds, so we still have to come
up with that, some assessment of
facilities, depending on the
match source.
Uh, but, uh, this certainly aids
the institute in being able to
address some key issues with
facilities and
As a senator mentioned with
particularly with the idea of
female participation, we're
right on the edge of Title 9
issues and so that's something
we want to address as well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman's members will
stand for, uh, questions.
All right. Thank you so much. So
we'll go to folks in the
audience. So if you are here in
support of send a bill to 80 on
Zoom, please indicate by raising
your hand.
is that populate folks in the
room or you here in support of
Senate Bill 280.
All right, so if you would
please, you have up to 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Vince Martinez. I'm not here on
behalf of the electricals or
price data as a beat up bull.
alumni of the Mexico Military
Institute and in full support of
this measure. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. All right, so
we'll go to, oh, good morning.
Hope you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales and I'm a
proud born and raised citizen of
Roswell and an educational
advocate. The immi plays a vital
role in Roswell and the state of
New Mexico, serving as a premier
educational institution that
prepares students for success in
high quality, high quality
post-secondary pathways and
leadership roles. As the
nation's only state-supported
military junior college and high
school, Ney provides a rigorous
academic environment combined
with structured leadership,
training that fosters dis
discipline, critical thinking,
and resilience. The institute
attracts students from across
New Mexico, the nation, and the
world, contributing to Roswell's
economy and cultural
diversity.immi strong academic
programs, including dual credit
opportunities and partnerships
with top universities, ensure
that graduates are well prepared
for higher education and
competitive career fields. To
ensure that Nimi continues to
provide high quality education
and leadership training, it is
essential that the school has
access to capital outlay funding
to provide.
building and construction
updates to modernize its
facilities as allowable by the
PSCOC. Naming must maintain
infrastructure that meets the
needs of its cadets and supports
its rigorous academic and
leadership programs. Many of the
institute's historic buildings
require renovations to enhance
safety, technology, technology
integration and energy
efficiency, allowing Nimi to
have access to capital outlay
funding is not only a potential
investment in MMI's
infrastructure, but an
investment in the state.
its future, supporting
education, economic development,
and national competitiveness.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Thank you.
Right, so we will go to
opposition folks on Zoom if you
wish to speak in opposition to
Senate Bill 280, please indicate
by raising your hand.
Folks in the audience, if you
are in opposition to Senate Bill
280, please raise your hand.
All right. We'll come to
committee Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
we've, we've heard why Nimi
needs us. I want to talk a
little bit about why we need
Debbie.
Uh
And I
Everybody knows I'm a rule. I
come, I come at it from a rural
perspective, but I think a lot
of this but also apply to folks
in in the city, you know, in our
little schools there might be
sometimes one graduate.
Or up to 5 graduates.
My wife's oldest child.
6'7, but he doesn't play
basketball. I mean, he plays
basketball, but that's not his.
Driving forces he was academic.
Some of y'all met him. He came
by here the other day.
Uh
If, if he would have graduated
valedictor in which he would
have of any of our smaller
schools small rural schools.
Um
It probably wouldn't got him a
ticket very far, but uh he
He graduated
Uh
top of his class of near me.
Uh, he was accepted to West
Point, turned it down.
turned it down and went to
Georgetown.
Graduated from Georgetown.
Went on to get a law degree from
Duke.
Uh, went to work for Chris
Christie first day out of
school.
Uh, has gone on to do great
things.
We had another child that uh
That uh went to Mimi.
Uh, was accepted.
Uh, as Aggie.
Yeah
Oh, Texas.
Graduating as an engineer.
Which that's one of the top
engineering schools in the
nation.
about some other kids who have
done really well, they didn't go
to Mimi though.
Uh, my point being, uh, for a
rule child that
is an academic.
Uh
Amy gives them a place to go.
If you just
If you graduate from a smaller
school, you might have done just
a good job, but it's not as re
and it doesn't get you the
mileage.
At a place like Nimi does. It
doesn't give you the
Yes.
Get in a place like
So I think it's an important
school to our state.
I think we need it for a variety
of reasons.
And uh I think we need to help
them help us.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Other question,
folks.
Thank you, Mr. Chan, nice to see
you, Senator.
And um I want to commend you and
getting all your signatures on
your sheet.
I'd like to go back to that and
I in the house that practice, I
think when I came into the
house, you all were in this
practice. It made us work hard.
Uh, to get support for our bill,
so I really appreciate that you
um had got the signatures. So,
uh, Mr. Char and, and senator
and Representative and um
Colonel West. Thank you. Uh,
thank you for your presentation.
I have um
Oh
Many ties to this institute, um,
Nephews.
Having gone to uh
attended
And um,
had the privilege of being able
to visit many times.
The campus haven't been able to
see the growth yet.
And look forward to doing that.
I do have a few questions.
I asked a lot of questions when
we were there many years ago,
um, I was a brand new
legislator.
About um
The financial
Support of the institute and how
they received it, and it was
explained about the tuition.
But I'm curious to see whether
um
The
Office of Finance or I don't
know what their office is called
now, um, has created, I know
that we offered feedback and
I wanted to know if you've
created um a, a donor or giving
program of the alum.
And their families to help.
Um,
Create a continual source of
regular monthly revenue coming
in, which was one of the
suggestions that was given of
the I think it was in 2013 or
2014. It had to have been one of
those years that we were there,
and um and I, and if so, how
much of the
Other um uh funds that you
receive, including tuition, help
leverage.
Um
Or make up the majority of your
um costs.
Right now.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Representative Royal
Caballero, as y'all are aware of
each one of.
As as the legislative body gets
to.
in a no scholarship, and that is
an ongoing thing.
Not necessarily endowment, but
it's every student that we
nominate and they do have to
fill out forms for that. They
do.
Uh
Their forms are submitted and
then.
It's
It's a wonderful thing that we
get to do.
To help our local students.
And there's many other.
Ways that money is raised at the
institute and at this point I'm
going to let Colonel West fill
you in on all that is going on
there.
Thank you very much.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, uh
Representative on your question,
there's about 800 scholarships
there at the Institute now.
Some of them are difficult
though, uh, so it's uh if I will
uh.
Ranching child from Quay County.
Let's say,
and so there's not many of those
and so we don't, we're not able
to, to use all of those, uh, our
group just met last week
actually to assign those
scholarships to students.
Uh, so that when they go on
spring break, they can have a
wonderful discussion with their
families about a scholarship
they have coming for the
following year. As far as the
funding is what it represents is
somewhere just shy of about 10%
of our overall revenues.
Uh, between 5 and 10% depending
on which scholarships which
years. The no scholarship, for
example, that you all have so um
supported over the years is
close to $2 million of those
dollars and in fact uh has
helped us uh push the
percentages of New Mexico
resident students from in
roughly 30%, almost half of
those that student body.
Uh, by providing a no cost
option to our young people of
New Mexico, you have to maintain
the 2.0 GPA and you have to have
a C or veteran deportment, which
is the court cope.
So with that, Mr. Chairman
Representative of Stanford for
the question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Colonel and Senator
for that response.
Just to further clarify one more
point on um what you mentioned
that.
The scholarships comprise 10% of
the overall.
revenues and then you.
What was the $2 million that you
referred to? Yes, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Representative, it's the
Know scholarship portion.
Yes, it's, it's really the
single largest one that we have,
but a number of families, as you
asked, uh, also do contribute to
either trusts.
Or annual giving for
scholarships as well.
And um thank you for that, Mr.
Chair.
What is the um
Um
The overall budget of um the
institute.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, Ma'am
Representative, it's roughly 402
million a year, something in
that neighborhood.
My CFO's not here with me today,
but have those numbers. That's
fine, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Colonel and um
The 2 $42 million is the annual
approximately annual budget.
How much uh the the um
tuition.
Um
How much of this is tuition
generated.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative, I believe that's
in the neighborhood of the 10 to
15% somewhere in the
neighborhood, we can get that
exact number for you.
Thank you. And one final
question related to that, um,
So if it comprises 10 to 15%.
What makes up the remainder, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative, it's quite
frankly, uh, one of them is land
grant permanent funds, that's
the biggest piece. NMI is the
2nd largest beneficiary behind
the public schools. It's called
the common schools. They're 86%
of that fund.
So the there's 21 beneficiaries,
the other 2 of us are fighting
for that last 14%.
And Emma is the largest uh
behind all that. The other, of
course, uh, source of revenue is
legislative allocations, so
House Bill 2 has NOI and
included in that as well for uh
ING instructural in general and
athletics.
Um, and the, uh, you have a 1.2,
I believe in there for the no
scholar.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, that gives us a
good idea and it was important
to note about the land grant
permanent fund.
Um
Because it's associated to what
the request is to do. So thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Zoom.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for
being here, Senator. So good to
see you.
If we both have to leave, I
thought we could call you to
share the meeting.
Um
I have a couple of questions.
First of all, no one doubts the
value of the school. That's not
really the issue at all. Issue
is how you go about getting the
capital outlay. The other two
special schools get 1.35.
of the land grant.
Um
The institute gets 0.36, so it's
a little bit different. Can you
tell me the breakdown? How many
students, how many are in the
middle school, how many are in
the high school, and how many
are in the junior high, the,
excuse me, the junior college.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, Ma'am
represented the breakdown is we
have 965 beds on the post
proper. That's for junior
college and high school.
Historically, that's been about
50% junior college, 50% high
school. It flips back and forth
to 48 so and then uh currently
as we're building up the
intermediate preparatory academy
for 678, the target on that one
particular facility is 220
students.
How many students are currently
in high school and how many are
currently in the junior college.
Yes,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative in the fall we do
the 3rd, 3rd Friday count just
like everybody else does, so
it's 782 total students as we
started to ramp up the IPA. We
only had 6 and 7th grade, so we
had a little over 70 students in
that school for, for that uh
one.
And then um the balance was
about 710 or so for junior high
or for junior college and high
school, and again, that would be
split roughly 50/50, so about
350 of each.
Thank you, Mr. Rippon.
Uh, thank you.
Um
Another question I have, you
mentioned the preparatory middle
school. Does the Institute
anticipate or plan on
establishing any other middle
school campuses around New
Mexico outside of Roswell, in
order to
build up student efficacy for
entering the high school.
Yes, Mr. Representative Madam
uh,
or sorry, Madam Representative.
The answer to that question is
yes. Uh, when NMMI tests are New
Mexico resident students out of
10, 7 don't qualify at grade
level.
Uh, so we have an issue, so
we're trying to reach down and
those more formidable years, 6,
7th, 8th, to prepare them for
that greater rigor of academics.
As you heard just 3 weeks ago,
we sent students to
All over the place in West Point
or two great colleges, Columbia,
University of Pennsylvania, just
happened a few weeks ago.
Uh, so yes, the opportunity is
there to and we do not house uh
the middle school students. It
is a facility that's
Adjacent to Enemama but not on
the property, so we're not
putting junior college.
Adults with 6th graders. They're
over a ways and there's
obviously a, an issue with
putting army uniforms on a 6th
grader. So they wear a polo type
uniform and then they go through
the classes. They do interact
and interface with cadets.
And cadets go over there and
they come over to the cadets. So
it is building as you put it,
madam, uh, advocacy for the
institute.
To to allow them to understand
what the institute is about.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Charon and Colonel then,
would you anticipate getting
capital outlay, more capital
outlay to expand the middle
school program.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, yes, we will
certainly look for those
opportunities um when they come.
It's hard to tell you what that
is right now, right? Because we
have one, so.
Right. Thank you.
Um
Mr. Chair and Colonel, so.
You know, the capital process
has this did, has this been
presented to the public school
Capitol Ola Committee over the
interim was just discussed.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that
representative, it has, there's
a little bit of history to this
and the other special schools,
uh, I've been with the school
for almost 20 years and I was
part of that process back in
about 2011 of my memory serves
me correctly. That's when the
other special schools came onto
that same option, and we were at
the table, uh, we were not
invited to finish that process,
uh, but that's what part of what
we're here for now.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
Mr. Chair and Colonel, I guess.
It seems like there would have
to be some kind of unique.
funding formula because of
The multiple sources of fun of
funds.
And the multiple communities
served.
Of of that approximately 710
high school and junior college
students, what percentage of
those are New Mexican as opposed
to other states and other
countries.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman and
representative that goes back to
that 50 roughly 50% or 49, and
we anticipate that being over
50% next year.
I understand your question, uh,
so certainly we'd have to look
at any uniqueness in that, in
that funding formula.
OK, thank you. Thank you.
Represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator and
Representative and colonel.
I was just wondering like, I
know that Nemi is like that
bright shiny star, we're all
proud of it.
As you ran this bill, what did
legislators and stakeholders
and, and the, the folks from
Travis County have to say about
this bill.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Vincent as far as the Roswell
area goes, we do look at it as
the shining star in our
community, uh.
The cadets there.
They become part of families
that are located there.
These families that do that are
the ambassador parents, a lot of
these students that do come in
from various parts of the state
or other countries, uh, they.
They welcomed them.
As far as what
The legislators are saying about
all of about this particular
bill. Let's see, it was passed
out of Senate Senate
unanimously, then it was passed
out of Xenop finance unanimously
and then it passed the Senate
floor unanimously.
They understand the importance
of having
A school that's available that
is recognized across.
The continent
Allowing these students.
And there is a 98% graduation
rate from the Institute, I need
to point that out.
But these students are getting
probably one of the best
education in our state and then
that opens up the doors for them
to go wherever they want to
after that.
Not only academically but as far
as the sports athletics part of
the ghost as well. So yes, I do
like to brag on the institute,
you like to say the thing
representing Murphy so it's an
integral part of our community.
And, um, the, uh, the cadets are
seen all around town. I, I, I
will certainly, my family, uh,
uh, acted as an ambassador
family, so we got to know many
cadets over the years, actually,
yeah, my
first home that I bought just uh
uh after getting out of college,
it was just a few blocks from
the institute, and so, um, it is
truly uh a bright shining star.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Representative.
Colonel, have you ever, do you
remember the name Dylan
Reynolds?
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
do, uh, West Point graduate as
well. He's in in the artillery,
that's because he's too tall to
fit in the tank, but he's, he is
a US Army member and certainly a
family of Friodoso and so very,
very familiar with the um now
Officer Reynolds.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Colonel for that.
I watched that young man grow up
from a little bitty kid and I
remember him, all he thought
about was Nimi.
And
As long as I've been going back
and forth to, to Roswell, we're
78 miles away.
I just see the professionalism
from the kids that walk around
with pride.
And they
Their uniforms or perfect, and
they act like ladies and
gentlemen in the public.
And whenever I found out that he
was going, I knew that he was a
special.
He was just gonna be special. I,
I, I don't even know, he might
end up being the president of
the United States. He's that
special, Mr. Chair.
But
When he graduated from there.
And I saw what how his life
changed so much. He's always
been a good kid, but it just
changed and he went to West
Point and graduated and now I'm
just a huge fan of his and I
always tell him, you know, make
sure you tell everybody you know
me from Lincoln County, don't
ever forget me. But
I think you're very blessed to
have Mimi in your district.
And
You know, with what has gone on
in, in Lincoln County with fires
and floods and all that stuff.
And you say things about prep
schools.
What a great place to put a prep
school is in Lincoln County,
where there's some mountains and
stuff, just wanted to throw a
plug in there. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. All right, if we could
just stick to the bill
representative.
To
I don't have any others. I did
want to ask a couple questions,
um.
About this, um, so it's my
understanding you will receive
money from the higher education
department as well. Is that
correct?
Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do. We're
part of the higher education
department.
And, and so one of the things
that um higher education had
mentioned in their analysis of
this was starting to discern
between
the junior college and any sort
of other activity. What are your
thoughts around that? Yes,
Mister Chairman, so higher edd
has what's called a space policy
in their funding of capital
projects. I was involved with
that back in '06, 07.
And definitions of what is uh
funded space, so it is an
example of the pit at UNM
generates income.
So they tend not to support
those type of projects.
And end of mine because we are a
special school, we have high
school and and college
integrated when we redid, for
example, Cahoon armory, which is
our sports complex. Uh, we had
to actually go in and assess
what percentage was ING teaching
for high school, what percentage
was junior college.
So it's just something as we
mentioned before in the funding,
if you will, formula that we
just have to navigate and and
develop, Mr. Chairman.
And so the other thing.
With public school capital
outlay is that there is a local
match.
What do you anticipate the local
match being for any sort of
public school capital LA funds.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's kind
of the rub for us because we
don't have a taxing authority,
so there's no way to levy up
attacks against the local
populace. So like the other
special schools, they have the
same situation. They're not
taxing authority to my
understanding as well. And so
there we have to use whatever
other available funds, whether
it's fund balances, whether it's
a geo bond with severance tax or
or other allocation legislative.
allocation, etc. That's how we
would have to do that local
match, Mr. Chairman.
So utilizing.
Some of that $42 million you had
mentioned earlier.
For the local match.
For any of these initiatives
you're looking to improve? Yes,
Mr. Chairman, so we're talking
about some projects that are,
let's say 10 to $20 million.
Uh, this is just another, as we
said, tool in the toolbox to
help us get to over that hurdle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All right, I don't have any
other further questions, the
will of the committee
who's representative,
Mr. Chairman, right, so we have
to do pass motion by
representative Lara, a second by
Representative Chatfield.
Because you weren't recognized.
But.
All right, uh, Madam Secretary,
we call on on do pass motion,
please.
represent.
Representative Chatfield.
Garcia.
Yes
Representative Gonzalez.
Corona.
Representing ladder.
Yes.
Represent Maripal Moya, yes.
Resent Roval Caballero.
Yes
Resentra Collins.
Represent Torres Valesas, yes.
Representative Vincent. Yes.
Represented
Vice Chair Garrett, yes.
OK. Yes.
unanimous due pass at a House
education. Welcome back.
Mr. Chairman, members, thank you
all very much for hearing this
bill, and I do have to tell you
something. I was sitting in the
back of the reason I was
laughing, I was reading.
what was going on up here, some
of the worst that came up, I
found very
comical it's a lesson to members
to speak distinctly. All right.
Thank you all very much.
They can work on their cursing
as well.
Right.
To Senator Figueroa also.
A former champion of house
education.
Mhm
Good morning. Welcome back,
Senator. 345. Good morning. Good
morning committee. It's always
good to be with educators.
Yes, I was introduced Deputy
Secretary Amanda Bell here is
the expert witness.
If you all get technical, but
Senate Bill 345 does two things,
and you see on page 2, line 24,
the first thing.
And it puts in
It's already in practice that
licensure can't be by testing or
by portfolio. We've been doing
that for a couple of years and
we'll continue to do so in the
future. The substantial new
language is on page 5, and that
is truly new, not something we
currently do. Um, and that is
reciprocity for our
instructional support providers.
We have teacher reciprocity, the
paragraph where
mirrors that paragraph, but it
will allow reciprocity for the
educational licensure piece for
instructional support providers,
and most of you know that's
everything from coaches to
counselors to psychologists, to
occupational therapists.
Um, it's
Important that we recognize
those educational licenses from
other states to allow folks to
get to work faster in New
Mexico, but I need to be clear
and not um let you think that an
occupational therapist working
in a school in Colorado, for
example, would be able to come
here and work. The other piece.
That we haven't figured out in
New Mexico is the medical
arrestciprocity.
We don't have all of our
compacts figured out with all of
these states for the medical
part of their licensure. So
anyone who needs dual licensure
to work in a school.
The educational license and the
medical license.
Well, in the case of this bill,
only have reciprocity on the
educational piece,
unfortunately, but when we get
our compact membership figured
out.
Then this will be a super
effective paragraph of Mexico.
With that, we can stand for
questions.
All right. Thank you so much. So
we'll go to folks online if
you're here in support of Senate
Bill 345, please indicate by
raising your hand if you wish to
speak.
I don't let that populate folks
in the audience, if you're here
to support, I'llenate Bill 345.
We speak. All right, if you all
would please line up behind our
presenters. You'll have
2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Greg Frost at Assistant
Secretary of Education for the
Public Education Department and
we stand in strong support of
this bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward. We
still have not only a shortage
of teachers in the state, but
also instructional support
providers and anything we can do
to make sure that our students
are able to receive the services
they need to be successful in
school will help our academic
outcomes, and for that reason,
we support this bill. Thank you.
Alright, thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, Lily
May Ortiz, Legislative liaison
for the New Mexico School Board
Association, and NMSBA supports
the legislative action to
promotes educator recruitment
and retention, and that helps
districts retain and recruit
teachers. Bill 345 provides for
the use of a standardized
portfolio option for obtaining
licensor. It also grants
licenses to experience and
structural support providers
licensed in other states. This
initiative would increase the
pool and diversity of teachers
who could obtain licensure and
then be hired to teach our
students. We support this bill
and we ask you to move it
forward as well. Thank you.
Thank you, right.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name's John Dich
with AFT New Mexico will not
repeat anything that was said by
the prior two speakers, but we
also support this legislation.
Thank you.
All right, so we'll go to
Matthew. Morning, Matthew. You
have up to 2 minutes.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Matt
Paul with Public Charter Schools
of New Mexico. Um, we find this
bill to be a very prudent move
in expanding our teacher
pipeline, so we support it.
Thank you.
All right, thank you.
All right, so we'll go to
opposition on Zoom. Is there
anybody that wishes to speak in
opposition to Senate Bill 3.
45.
populate.
folks in the audience, is there
any opposition to Senate Bill
345?
Not seeing any.
Committing
Represent Vasquez.
Mr. Tay, um,
And uh my former representative.
And um deputy secretary, I just
have a question for
clarification on page 5.
On line 13, it says a local
superintendent may require a
mentorship period for the
license if the local
superintendent deems it
necessary. Um, are we talking
about a new local superintendent
coming in or who would be
getting the mentorship?
Madam Madam,
Mr. Chair and representative,
that would be a mentorship for
the candidate receiving the
reciprocal license.
So some different kinds of
licenses need a mentorship
period and that's determined at
the local site. Got it. Thank
you.
Represent Buck.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for bringing this
forward. Uh definitely for this
group of uh employees there are
definitely the unsung heroes of
this.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, my
only question would be,
And it's not a question of my
support because I support this.
Currently for like the as folks
come over for reciprocity.
There may be some different
Um, not only classifications,
but also titles, and I know like
in New Mexico, Mr. Chairman.
And uh Madam Senator, is that
like for our early childhood, we
have a classroom resistant, and
then we have requirements that
go above and beyond that.
For early childhood providers,
is that correct, Mr. Chairman
and Senator?
Madam Deputy secretary.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, there are a few
that have additional
requirements for working with,
for example, pre-K, and so we
would have to look very
carefully at the person's
licensure coming in, um, through
reciprocity, and that would be
done on an individual basis.
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you.
Um, you know, for that, because
I think that's, I'm, um.
That could be, I think like for
this, you know, there's a, you
know, a teacher.
He is a teacher, but a classroom
assistant coming over is maybe
you're gonna have to basically
look at rather than the title of
the
License coming from another
state, but many of the
responsibilities that they
provided.
In their previous district
because they're they're not,
they're not gonna be alignment
and the area of early childhood.
Could be somewhat problematic,
so it, it could be, and that's
what's gonna be, who, who would
be making these uh
determinations about that, Mr.
Chairman and Senator regarding
specifically the early
childhood.
And also our students uh
I guess, sir, the, the, the
proper term specialist
assistants are those that are uh
tied to students, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
that is going to be essentially
the same offices that review
licenser reciprocity now, but
because we have done as a state
really great collaboration and
alignment between the early
childhood and our K-12 system.
Um, there's licensure experts in
both of those departments that
will be working together, and
they will, as you said, Mr.
Chair, and Representative,
they'll be looking at the scope
of work.
That that person was licensed
for in another state, um, in
addition to the title, because
as you say, titles were
instructional support
professionals are wide and
varied. So they're going to have
to look more deeply than they
do, um, but both of those
offices have licensure um both
of those departments have
licensure officers that will be
looking. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, Senator,
and I think the only thing that
is that
It may be just like we did for
other reciprocity from the
states when we talk about
teachers is that we have like a
provisional or temporary because
there may be specific training.
And or in New Mexico that may
have been acquired and so I know
that when we looked at the
teacher reciprocity that came
through before.
They were able to be, you know,
given a, a license.
For a certain amount of time.
Until those requirements were
fulfilled and so
Specifically say that so I don't
know and I don't remember the
name of the lot of the bill that
we passed through a few weeks
ago regarding teacher
reciprocity, it gave some
timelines.
I would make this moves forward
to look to see that we're if
we're giving teachers 2 years to
get their license, we're given
our support specialists 2 years
or 3 years that we we don't have
the situation that I described
where
We're kind of dragging this out,
so I, I want to be fair with
that, and so I, I don't know,
um.
I apologize, I would have given
you the bill number, but I don't
have it.
But that way it just makes it
consistent because right now,
there, I promise you there's
gonna be additional
requirements, Mr. Chair.
And I just want to make sure
that if that we're providing a
consistent timeline.
For them to obtain their full.
License and talk about like said
this doesn't necessarily talk
about a provisional license for
that, so, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
thank you.
Or is it?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, welcome back. Um,
um, quick question, what exactly
is a teacher portfolio. Uh,
teacher portfolio requirements
to be included and criteria for
evaluation are established in
rural and let the expert take
you through the pieces and
parts.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and
representative Mirabel Moya, the
um teacher candidates, so at
teacher preparation programs,
and this has been for the last
couple of years in the
transition, um, have the option
of um taking either a end of
course practice exam or uh
completion throughout the series
of their teacher preparation
programs, completing a
portfolio.
Um, for their graduation, and
then there are requirements for
certain licensures for taking an
actual test as well as the
portfolio.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so
the portfolio is it, is it like
um oh, what was the?
That's that thing that I had to
write.
The national board, uh, yeah, so
I mean, so, so it's, it's, yeah,
dossier. So is it something
similar to uh a dossier is it,
or, or is it uh other uh other
courses like uh what exactly
it's just a different way
because I guess I understand
that some people don't test
well, um, and, and, and those, I
mean, I had to do it because I
was an alternative licensure
those tests are no joke. So, so,
uh, and especially getting the
science endorsement that's,
that's quite fun too.
So Mr. Chair and
ative um, I think comparing it
to a dossier is a very good way
for those of.
Those folks who know what the
dossier process was, yes, and we
were in uh collaboration with
the PPSD that is in statute and
um the higher education
institutions for that. OK. Thank
you. Thank you very much.
And I don't have anybody else on
my list. What's the will upent
Garcia, please turn on your
microphone.
Yeah
microphone representative.
it.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
I thank you for bringing this
forward because it
Really would help uh teachers
that are coming that may come
aboard.
sooner than later or.
go somewhere else.
But um
My question would be, uh, we
have teachers that uh
people that come in to assist.
educational system.
And
They're given a certain period
of time to get their license and
when they don't pass the exam,
you know.
And after a while there.
They're not able to teach.
Because um they couldn't get
their license, but going through
this other system, the
portfolio.
And if they do well,
Uh, within their, um,
At the college level and were
able to get graduate and say
that you're ready to teach.
Uh
Would they be able to use that
even though I know the teacher
that went through this uh system
and
failed to uh pass the exam a
couple of times, but that person
The portfolio and it was uh they
did well with it. Would they be
able to use that instead of
going through the.
now
Yes, chairman and Representative
Garcia, the answer to that
question is, um, there are some
licenses that actually do
require a an examination, so for
example, elementary teachers
need to take the reading exam
and then they can also use the
portfolio for the other
components, uh, that you are
speaking of, yes. OK, thank you,
that clarifies a lot of things
for me. Um,
The second question that I have
is, um, we have teachers um that
are coming from outside of
state.
But we also have teachers that
are coming outside.
United States.
Uh
How, how do they fit into into
this um.
Uh, because I don't see any
mention of them just teachers
coming from us.
Outside of the state, but we do
have
coming from
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Garcia, we are bound by some
very strict federal rules that
are related to a J1 visa, um,
and so we follow those rules for
out of country, um, teachers,
um, who wish to obtain
licensure, um, and they are
typically coming with teacher
licensure that we accept during
the period of their J-1 visa.
There are some other cultural
exchange programs, um, as well.
That we follow the rules of
whatever cultural exchange
program that it is. This bill
primarily Mr. Chair speaks to
how we will accept reciprocity
from other states for um the
educational specialists.
Thank you.
I don't have any other questions
here.
Thank you.
The will of the committee.
Mrs, we would do best, right? I
do pass motion on Senate Bill
345, seconded by Representative
Mino Almoya.
Oh, dare I ask
the opposition to the motion.
Opposition.
OK, you pass. All right, thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you committee. All
right, we'll see you on Friday.
I.
I think we have a.
