Representative Lara.
Representative Lara
Representative Lente.
There.
Representative Madrid.
Representative R. Volcom bye at
all.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative chair here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo I'm here.
Vice chair Garrett more.
Chairman.
We do have a quorum.
All right thank you madam
secretary good morning everybody
so we're gonna go ahead and get
started house bill one sixty
three
Representative Maestas good
morning did you have anybody
that we need to call from the
attendees list for you thank yes
thank you Mr chairman of hotel
about.
Only if you could raise your
hand.
You will be my experts more from
us I think New Mexico.
Warning.
The by over.
Thank you.
All right so when you're ready
house bill one sixty three
please Representative.
Thank you Representative Madrid
please.
Thank you chairman thank you
members of the committee this is
a a bill but does need more
money this is Representative
when we just came to me and
brought me to and I liked it a
lot so I'm gonna give a report
and then will lead to the union
dues the amendment correct.
Representative my as well Mr
chairman did not know we're
going with the bill that came
out of the okay well so this is
an act allowing the financial
management to count as an
elective in the six six grade
through the eighth grades
amending graduation
requirements.
We require one half you of a
financial management prior to
the graduation as the storm
alerts turned over to.
My representative Representative
this is please.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
cosponsored Majid so this is a I
think an exciting bill as you
know financial literacy is
mandated every high school in
the state every high school has
it it's in the curriculum it's
You know it's certified by pad
but a few years back as you
recall Mr chairman members we up
tweet the statute to make
financial literacy qualify as a
math credit it did two things
one enhance the the curriculum
of the of the financial literacy
classes but also allowed folks
to get that half half semester
of math.
You know within that within the
requirements what this but only
eleven percent of the students
are taking it unfortunately so
we want you know in the midst of
of our economy and and
developing entrepreneurs and
having folks have good credit
ratings in their early twenties
and said of dragging themselves
out in their late thirties early
forties
Like a friend of mine the this
will mandate a financial
literacy as a requirement to
graduate and and what it does is
it it doesn't change the
curriculum it's consistent with
house bill eighty three that
came out of this committee Mr
Chairman what it does is it
doesn't require that four and a
half years of math it rolls into
the four years amassed nothing
prohibits a student from taking
five or six.
It's a math and it just takes
the credit away from
requirements so and now instead
of for math and seven have
requirements it'll be for math
with seven requirements with
this being one of the
requirements also it tweaks the
statute in the in the middle
school and puts financial
literacy as a as an elective in
middle schools and
And and we use the term Mr
chairman of financial management
of the teenagers that were up on
scientifically polled were more
apt to take financial management
and financial literacy for
whatever reason but that's we
can talk about that today are
down the road but we think that
it's time that we join the many
other states to to require as a
graduation requirement financial
management and with that I'll
turn over the of the expert and
up organization that spear
heading this bill of I think New
Mexico.
Tell me what.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is TM
of the on the field director for
thank you Mexico I just want to
thank you for the opportunity to
highlight a few things about the
importance of this legislation
I also wanted and knowledge of
the fact that many of you have
already expressed your support
for this concept and other
committees and on the floor we
want to thank you for four
that support as we hope to
continue to gather momentum on
this throughout the session last
year we produce the report about
predatory lending in our state.
And during that research we saw
how important it is for everyone
to have a fundamental
understanding of financial
matters and how that applies to
their everyday lives
as Mr chairman places mentioned
we've seen this work in other
states twenty one states require
some form of personal finance or
financial literacy for high
school graduation and seventeen
of those have made requirement
in the last decade.
In three of our neighboring
states of Arizona Texas and Utah
also studies show that students
who take these financial
management courses are more
likely to have a checking
account some tired savings and
are also less likely to take out
predatory loans and they also
shift from high costs to lower
cost credit and student loans
it's also a great way to address
poverty by bridging some of the
gaps between lower income
students and their wealthier
peers to tend to have more or
easier access to financial
management courses for that type
of information in their
households and quite often what
we hear is that what ends up
happening is that some students
take on what they learn actually
in these personal finance
courses and they take home and
share with their families and
with that Mr chairman members of
the committee I conclude my
remarks thank you very much.
Thank thank you Representative
Maestas two and closed.
Will stand for questions thank
you Mr chairman members.
Great thank you all for being
here so we will go to the
attendees list
I haven't said anything yet
Miller has.
All right so the attendees list
we will go to opposition first
opposition for house bill one
sixty three please indicate by
raising your hand.
All right so we'll go to support
then fear here in support of
house bill one sixty three
please indicate by raising your
hand if you wish to speak.
Given that a moment.
So he'll have up to two minutes.
Stand good morning welcome.
Mark this chair members the
committee stand around for the
school superintendents
association we certainly
appreciate this concept this
bring brought forward and we and
we do support financial literacy
and our curriculum however that
Mr chairman that we supported
you're a graduation bill which
got into the more part of points
that I think this probably needs
to be wrapped in and that is how
do we balance all the requisites
for graduation and how do we
surely elective credits are also
supported and so Mr chairman we
would support that this bill but
we would certainly support an
interim work to try to sort all
that out of Mr Chairman move
toward the graduation bill
efforts you're making thank you
so much.
Thank you stand.
All right so we'll go to Serra.
Good morning Surrey up to two
minutes welcome the morning Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you I'm surface Gerald
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce chambers in full
support of this bill we think
the sponsor for bringing it
house bill one sixty three
proposes to equip our students
with some of the lifelong skills
we want all New Mexicans to have
financial literacy skills are
incredibly important to get
people to know how to achieve
financial stability and
independence and self reliance
that come from that.
Learning courses that teach the
skills for graduation or as
early as middle school make sure
more of our students are
prepared for success as the into
the work force whether that's
immediately after high school or
later on so that they can be
armed with the knowledge they
need to if we can manage that
become homeowners if they choose
some children of their own to
school and you ready for
retirement one day in the
distant future so we are to
support this important piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Sir.
All right Doug.
Good morning thank you up to
minutes welcome good morning my
name is Doug line item and I was
the chair of the mathematics
department at Santa Fe prep
where was also the economics and
personal finance instructor.
I'm currently a partner at
Longview asset management here
in Santa Fe in here testify that
teaching personal finance is a
fantastic way for kids to get
the math skills that they need
as well as putting in a
practical context and if we want
to let our state of generational
poverty that we need to find a
way to help give kids the
financial literacy skills they
need to navigate our modern
economy because if you're fund
finances essentially for
language and if you don't
practice it we don't teach it
kids will learn it they walk out
in the world financially
literate which means they can't
if function effectively leaving
all of us worse off thank you.
Thank you.
All right Rhiannon.
Good morning or in any of up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for allowing me to
speak my name is Rhiannon Samuel
and I am the executive director
of the county New Mexico the
economy is a grassroots
nonpartisan nonprofit that seek
out common ground solutions to
New Mexico's.
I'm an economic opportunity
issues we stand in support of
this bill because we see that
financial literacy in New
Mexicans is of the utmost
importance to ensure economic
opportunity amongst all of us
where we have rapid a rate
unders and a lot of financial
mismanagement if we can get
ahead of that and teach our high
schoolers what it means to save
and invest and use their money
wise the better off we all are
as a state thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to Linda.
Good morning one day of up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you I'm.
Good morning my name is Linda
Wilson and I am a high school
teacher here at Albuquerque
public schools and have taught
personal finance for the past
six years I believe it's the
most important class that I've
ever taught many of my students
throughout the years have told
me how much they have learned
and are even advising their own
parents on financial matters
sharing what they have learned.
Students are not learning this
information at home so it is
necessary to make it a high
school graduation requirement
twenty one other states now
require a personal finance
course to graduate.
I believe that is the key that
will provide our young people
with the tools they need to be
self sufficient and productive
citizens in our society this
will help sustain New Mexico in
the future and make it a better
place to live high school
students already are required to
take an economics course in
order to graduate and this
course does not teach enough for
the personal financial
management skills that students
need if this bill is passed
allowing an economics course
account for personal finance and
nothing will change and New
Mexico will continue to remain
at the bottom of many less
please make this a mandatory
requirement currently I know
there's a problem with that
semester course and balancing it
for graduation my class is a
year long course thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Right we'll go to Sylvia.
Good morning so be a welcome.
Up to two minutes morning thank
you chair Romero and committee
and Sylvia representing
approximately eight hundred
eighty eight you W. New Mexico
members.
And reiterating much as part of
the in order already we support
the financial management
component of Greg for graduation
in H. B. sixty three.
Everyone.
Especially young women of color
frequently in lower wage jobs
needs to be savvy about
budgeting negotiating loans or
mortgages and preparing for the
inevitable rainy day or
retirement.
A consumer financial protection
bureau study supports such
education for economic well
being.
The financial literacy has been
offered as mentioned only eleven
percent of students in rural sh
and acting financial management
as a necessary requirement will
be a lifelong benefit.
To both your students and our
state.
Hey you know W. New Mexico
request your endorsement for
this requirement thank you.
Right thank you.
All right Meredith.
Good morning Meredith welcome
you this morning and.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Meredith
Meijin speaking on behalf of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico as education chair and
I'm also speaking as a lifelong
educator who can speak first
hand to the importance of having
financial management skills
first as an educator I want to
tell you the state that are
thirty six of my thirty eight
years of teaching was at the
higher end level and students
who are in college often had to
drop out because they could not
manage their finances and we
need to make sure our that as
our fundamental of our society
is that students know how to
think critically and have the
skills necessary to function in
a complex society and global
economy the other speakers have
said very articulately why we
need a financial management
class we think thank New Mexico
for all their research and we
thank the sponsors for bringing
forward urged the committee to
support this legislation thank
you very much bye.
Thank you man.
All right so anybody also wish
to speak in support.
All right we'll come to
committee for stimulus as
Representative Eli please.
Thank you Mr chair
I I appreciate the.
Representative measuring and
gentleman last spring this bill
I I love having discussions
about personal finance
although I guess we call
financial management but but
I've always which is as personal
finance and I think these are
really important concepts for
our students and I know talk
about it then in this committee
have talked about on the floor
in some members are probably
tired of hearing me talk about
this but I don't think it is.
It's low hanging fruit but in a
good way because I I think it's
low hanging fruit that we can
implement in a very inexpensive
and and very efficient manner
that's going to make a real
practical difference for
students I do have a just sort
of a a practical question.
As I understand this Mr chair of
the languages being added within
the mathematics section for
graduation requirements and it's
saying that a one half unit
shall be a financial manager of
course are we saying that.
Does this one half unit
satisfy a half a unit of the
required mathematics courses
there is this to happen you in
addition to for mathematics
courses.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative lane up.
It's it's four units a math so.
So the financial literacy
courses now qualify as a mask
credit but you don't have to
take it so so you're correct it
doesn't it would take up one
half unit of the four current
units of math but as I mentioned
in the opening nothing prohibits
students from taking for half I
I would have those those in math
students are going to take that
out of two that those other hard
math courses in addition to this
course here.
Thank you Mr chair of the German
most of so yeah I'm and I I
actually don't have a problem
was making financial management.
Our personal finance a
requirement for graduation that
that to me actually make sense.
you know it it you want to talk
about things that can help a
student not just escape poverty
but but there's a question
literally change their the
financial treaty of their family
I mean the the the type of
concepts that are in personal
finance are those kind of
concepts and and and I think
there's this misconception that
you know a lot of personal
finances sorted for like the
Wall Street eight people and
that's just not true that there
are so many financial.
Management concepts.
That apply to each of us and and
if at the age of eighteen you
can learn to live on less than
what you earn you're gonna be so
far further
ahead in life you know if you
can learn about something like
what was the difference between
buying a used car and and
financing a brand new car what
what are the differences if if I
do that for me for the next ten
years of if you can understand
how to do say something as
simple as a federal tax return
something like a budget because
I know this talks this this has
language in there about budgets.
about credit about interest all
of these things are are are
practical things that I think
students.
Understand that these implicate
my wife's the rest of my life
for as in you know in a
announcer to find learning
center in there and I have made
a hard time connecting that so I
appreciate the bill.
Should the discussion I I think
again this is one of the the
practical ways that we can
actually make an impact on our
students and and I think you
Representative Madrid chairman
mastering this bill.
Thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representatives my dad is in my
Estes for introducing this bill
I wanted to just to recap a
couple of things and remind that
remind everybody that over the
course of the last at least
since I've been elected and then
I think prior to that the
generation prior of which
Representative Maestas has been
part of and the legislature in
the reform of capping a small
Lente
In in the reform effort to stop
predatory lending one of the
elements that we were very
critical about including in
those reforms was the need to
include financial
Literacy and financial
management within those reform
efforts and I think the last
reform effort of twenty
seventeen included that that
component I'm not quite sure how
it's rolled out but it included
it in the reason Mr chairman and
and Committee it is for the very
reasons that have all been
articulated by those that
support on its strengthens the
capacity to be able to
understand the finances your
finances in order to be able to
protect yourself against such
practices so I bring this up
just as a reminder but also I
wanted to talk about real
quickly how effective and this
financial literacy has been in
my son's life he's thirty three
now and he was introduced to
financial literacy in the sixth
grade middle school and but he
had been introduced just to
business because he helped our
family my husband and I and our
very small business efforts that
we had as he was growing up in
school and we always would put
him in charge Mr chair
representatives of handling that
the cash flow money bag and his
dad taught him how to make a
sale and then how to give change
and he jumped up and had a
tremendous interest so when we
he got to middle school you went
to a
A magnet school and it
specialized in language but also
in financial literacy and he
learned in his class.
The basic foundations for
financial management he then
pursued his degree and and I'm
just you as a finance major and
he now is one of the top sales
consultants for one of the
oldest companies in the nation
yes is on independent
business country.
Independent contractor when he
drives me crazy Mr chair
representative on because he's
managing he wants to manage us
the roles are reversed now he
wants to protect us because he
understands the importance of
being in limited income.
The income and how best to
protect our interests now based
on those factors Mr Chairman
representative and also he spent
a great deal of this time
consulting with just what
Representative Lane referred to
those that have it income but
not sufficient disposable income
to be able to do.
All of the things that someone
with wealth what has the
capacity to do but can still do
it in a different manner and
that's really important and I
listen to his pitches as he's
talking on the phone I watched
him do the webinars with his
clients Mr chair and I'm amazed
at how he's able to a system
because his approach is he's a
social entrepreneur he doesn't
want to build wealth
for himself he wants to build
wealth in order to share it
amongst those that don't have
that capacity and so that's an
important element and he learned
this since sixth grade and it
was a requirement for his for
his.
To be able to move from middle
school to high school and he he
got his own checking account
learn how to manage is on on
bank account and if it is an
incredible absolute necessity
for our students to have on this
as an as a requirement.
Because as we all know
the economy and what we do with
in in our economy however way we
participated is what dictates to
a large extent how we position
ourselves so Mr Chairman
representative thank you so much
for bringing this forward and
full support however way we can
work with our educational
institutions to be able to
assist them in weaving this into
the many other areas of
curriculum development that they
are weaving through I'd be happy
as a former special education
teacher and current
educator to be able to help them
however we we can't so thank you
very much appreciate and full
support and I hope that my
colleagues will for this today
thank you.
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you Representative for bringing
this forth I supported in
principle but I do have some
questions
on page nine it says that for
students entering the ninth
grade in twenty twenty one to
twenty two which is the coming
school year they're required to
take it already eighth graders
are doing their next step plans
and so this would have a serious
impact on plans that students
are already making for how they
will do their schedules can you
comment on that.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative Garrett no that's
great that's a interesting
perspective because I actually
wanted to say.
Those students entering their
sophomore year you know
but yeah you're right I mean
those students that are on the
ball you know they have that for
your plan but but the but it is
in every single high school
curriculum
I think
Most of the classes I believe
are geared towards junior
seniors I could be mistaken but
I think it's reasonable to make
a half credit adjustment since
it doesn't affect Mr chairman
Representative we are it doesn't
affect the units required it
just up and it already qualifies
as a math credit I'd like to
started this year.
I think it's reasonable to start
this next year yeah if we pass
it to you know if this gets
signed into law in late March
school starts in September that
for years to take it.
Mr Chairman representative how
would this affect the number of
teachers that would need
training to do this if it was
required of every student.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative here that's a
great question I mean it's some
some more schools got on the
when we did the the law back in
two thousand seven requiring it
in the curriculum some high
schools on the ball they
implement it right away.
So I schools took took a few
years
but now it's in every single
curriculum.
Most high schools have that one
champion or two champions that
that that have mastered this
subject matter but that would be
up to the leadership of pad the
superintendents and the
principles and and I have
confidence that they can
That they can do a growth this
curriculum for the students.
Mr chairman and representative
thank you.
I think it's cool casual to say
that because seven or seven
elective credits there's no
problem I know myself I took a
calculus of in my summer school
between eleventh and twelfth
grade so I could get in
journalism and music and and we
have students who
You know their schedule is going
to be challenging to put half
the credit when there's not
another have credit and when we
have other emerging classes like
computer science could you
comment on that.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Representative you're not an
interesting question I'm I'm
you're much more familiar with
the.
The curriculum that I am so I'm
not sure how many half half
units there are in the
curriculum
But I do know that I think this
is consistent as I recall with
house bill eighty three.
that required that economics
last financial literacy course
as I have credit so.
Those students would have to
make an adjustment I suppose but
they're not in high school yet
and so maybe those super
organized tunes that you're
referring to have a four year
plan already in place leaving
the eighth grade.
but I think up I think the
leadership in the race schools
can.
Can can make it happen and and I
do need to make it happen I mean
we're the poorest state in the
country.
We have some of the our largest
areas of poverty in the country
we're struggling with up with
the small loan the small loan
act for years there is a market
for that small loan act I have a
client that they got in a car
wreck his truck is is destroyed
because they got T. boned.
We're fighting with the
insurance company because I'm
trying to tell of the insurance
companies only going to give you
the market value of your truck
he bought a year ago and paid
cash seventy thousand dollars
cash for a truck.
Given the risk of on the road I
mean there's just other ways to
manage your money this is this
is a relatively sophisticated
guy.
every student in the state must
master the subject matter and as
fast as possible so that we can
climb out of this economic abyss
that we find ourselves in.
That's my my position Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative so in
principle I support this I can't
supported at this time because
as Mr rounds included we we
really need to look at the
overall structure of high school
and I feel before we do that
which were planning to do and
the inner to put in another
requirement as opposed to an
elective at this time I wouldn't
be constructs so I support the
intent at I possibly would
support requiring it but I feel
and how we look at the overall
structure which we passed in the
house but was rejected by
Senator education I feel it's
premature to add something that
we might have to redo
in restructuring so I totally
support the concept I think it's
good but I think with out
putting it in the context of the
overall high school planning
it's premature so I'm sorry to
say that I will be voting for it
but I will be supporting the
concept thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lara please.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Representative Kerry addressed
many of the concerns that I have
of thank you for a gentleman for
for bringing this bill I think
it's a good idea I see the
necessity for it I really really
believe that this is something I
should be that expanded to more
students but what might might
might be thinking is and now I'm
just I'm in work mode now is are
we are we receiving or the
school district's gonna receive
additional funding for
instructional materials we have
to purchase more books for for
the students and maybe that's a
partial for Rachel she's along.
She isn't Representative sorry
we'll see if she is she's on her
way back she's between
committees now thank you Mr
chairman Roger Lara I would
imagine I would imagine so
And I'm not you know you would
know how that works better than
I I would imagine so the up.
The eligibility three which
which is spoken about which I
hope and work towards making a
reality of is a big left in a in
a state like this with the
citizen legislature financial
literacy.
was placed in that bill starting
in twenty twenty two.
but it is in every single high
school curriculum by law every
single high school has it now.
We just need to require the
students to take it.
But thank you thank you Mr
chairman my assistant and thank
you Representative Mr chairman I
I I I I agree it's already taken
now as a matter of fact we
purchases materials last school
year because they were they were
under the the the mathematics
was under the adoption for the
secondary so we we adopted that
recently and right now the
school districts are going
through a yeah let language arts
adoption.
And we're we're we're finishing
up that process and you know we
already have we we we anticipate
I anticipate spending millions
upon millions of dollars to get
these materials to the students
and if we are to add another
costs I'm not saying that and
and please don't get me wrong
you know I think this is good
and I think this is something
that's necessary but I'm
thinking you know the as far as
school district which is our
concern for instructional
materials were already limited
as that is we are scraping the
bottom of the barrel you know
we're we're cutting hearing
sitting there and doing the the
what we stand but I'm I'm afraid
or I'm concerned about our or
the district budgets when it
comes to adding an additional.
of course where we have to
purchases materials and I know
I'm I'm looking at that at it
from that level but it's still
very important because sometimes
we have to make sacrifices and
something has to give over
something else and I would hate
for a for for us to have to cut
back on something else here I
eight by adding these new
additional materials to do to to
the to the course.
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr minister Representative I
know you didn't ask a question
but if I may the the banks and
credit unions really came
through when it became an
elective and I've develop
financial literacy curriculums
help with teacher training
material.
And so
So I think that that those
institutions will play a large
role in speeding up the process
with regards to training and
curriculum.
Keep that in mind thank you
thank you thank you for that Mr
chairman and and and and I I
appreciate that but that you
know that does that we since we
did the adoption last year for
math for the secondary.
That we we've already purchased
materials are already publishers
are publishing a material what
I'm concerned about if we're
going to require it now instead
of us having to purchase are you
know do you know one point three
million dollars with the
materials for just the high
schools as an elective now we
have to double or maybe even
triple that amount of we're
going to include all students at
the high schools so that that
that's my concern with that and
and I don't believe that that we
receive funding for.
As far as instructional
materials for the adoption of
these additional financial
literacy materials so that said.
Representative Maestas Mr chair
you know I I agree with the with
the settlement vice chair I I
like the concept I think it's
very important it is being
offered now I would like to see
it expanded I think it's really
important that you know said
some points for me regarding the
the the loans in the landing and
I think that's really important
but however I I just I without
the the assurance that we that
we as a school district are
going to receive additional
funds to purchase these
materials I don't I don't know
why I can support this bill yet
thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you representatives.
Thank you Representative Dow
please.
Thank thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill and I had the
opportunity in in the work that
I do I I interface with a lot of
in terms and one of the interns
that come to mind during the
presentation identifies as
African Americans can that be
part of my family's household
for six years we spend a lot of
time talking and what he did not
know how to management he was
the first family to go to
college he received a
scholarship to go to a four year
private college received an
excellent degree was very quick
restocks and you know just after
the election we are talking
about all of the social justice
requirement all of the equality
of all the the opportunities
that that we need to address and
we talked about what makes
things right moving forward and
all the opportunities that your
receipt three a private college
and he even had he had
scholarships he had at the
requests all all differences is
that he had he and and we talk
about he believes in
redistribution of wealth you
know what makes it right this is
why I always opportunities but
no one gave me financial
literacy so even though he even
did work experience all through
college she accepted every
credit card application was
offered he accepted every loan
at this college tuition loan
that he was offered and she
graduated burdened with that.
In addition to that he ended up
he is now working very well rate
is high hi Management it's
telecommunications company and
ended up taking a job it didn't
even require a degree so he's
not even applying his degree in
his work but like most Americans
yes yes almost twice the debt
that most in the average
American has around forty
thousand dollars in debt she has
substantially more than that
because was offered to him and
when that was offered to him he
took it and so when he was with
my family he read books like she
was so eager he wanted to learn
he wanted to do better he wants
to take generation right
durational property he wants to
thrive and she read books like
rich dad poor dad and and you
know stop acting rich in the
intelligent investor and and he
has turned his life around and
he would say the investments
that government maybe and you
have the investments that we're
making him work for not simply
because this is the only words
simply because he had no idea
what to do with the
opportunities that were being
four CM or how to maximize
opportunities and so I
definitely support this bill
it's it knowing how to manage
money and to avoid debt and to
avoid predators and and all
along the way selfsufficiency is
number one is the number one
thing that separates folks that
are able to generate wealth and
retain wealth you have to spend
less money than you make to
generate wealth and so it even I
want to that some of the deposit
is around the cost you
curriculum because I mean our
educators and our administrators
and our superintendents and our
school boards Representative the
average American that also have
debt and may not understand the
resources and so it is shocking
to me that anyone would spend
one penny on financial literacy
curriculum literally every bank
literally every investment firm
offers free financial curriculum
in fact the government has
created.
Financial literacy so curriculum
for are you you can go to why
for why dot at dot gov those are
federally funded programs you
just download the curriculum
it's all free FDIC dot dot gov
has many smart mean there are
there are multiple resources I
light use entrepreneurship
because it's an interactive
thing were used these are all
free curriculum that are
available and there are you can
just do a Google search for you
financial literacy and you will
find just a Marian from everyone
from Edward Jones to just take a
bank and they're free and
they're available they provide a
curriculum in some cases they
provide the instructor and so
especially when we're doing
community schools especially
when we are adding extended
learning and summer these this
cake K. twelve plus.
It's time it's time it's time to
set our children free from
generational poverty and to give
them the tools they need this is
when knowledge is power is most
key and I I want to thank you
for this bill and let folks I
know some folks to the
superintendents association are
listening there's free
curriculum has been money on
this but I I'm really looking
for the voting on this bill
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair I think my my
issue was resolved thank.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero for a second time
briefly please.
Thank you Mr chair.
Excuse me I forgot to mention
this real to two points very
briefly
the success of the program of
the curriculum that I described
on the that my son was
participating in the reason why
it would and I mentioned it was
a magnet school it was so
successful is because it was in
partnership with the business
community and the credit unions
and community banks in the area
they all contributed all of the
resources the sample checkbooks
the ledgers at that time it was
still we were still working on
ledgers and and physical ledgers
they provided all of the
background material that
everything it was in partnership
what was it it was Senate doc
the school partnership and they
provided everything that was
necessary so that was one way in
which this very poor school
district that was offering this
and that had Amendment school
was able to incorporate it and
make it successful in the second
point I wanted to make is that
I've held community fears in my
district.
On the subject of financial
literacy in order to protect our
communities against predatory
lending practices and guess who
stepped up to be in partnership
and help co sponsor the credit
unions the community banks the
small business community
and merchant associations and
others because it is incredibly
important especially for low
income I would love to have
people living wait earning a
living wage
in in partnership with all of
these other ways in which we can
strengthen our our families and
finances and and overall economy
are we will get there but in the
meantime we have to protect our
families against these predatory
practices and it begins with our
children because they're they
they're they're most both will
in.
following the into these
practices if they're not well
prepared to look out for the red
flag so I just I'm I had
forgotten to mention that these
are two very important ways in
which our small business
community has stepped up in
partnership in order to be able
to strengthen our children thank
you so much Mr chair for
allowing me the second point.
Thank you Representative.
Further questions.
Okay so so I had a few questions
thank you representatives for
bringing this forward I think
that you know we we certainly
when I was going through house
bill eighty three and in the big
ten that on the bus high school
changes this was certainly one
of the issues that that came up
most often was is financial
literacy aspect
So so I mean I do have concerns
like or vice chair Garrett had
mentioned about having a
lingering half credit for maths
because you have stated we had
melted into a house bill eighty
three which is true but we put
it in
alignment with economics because
you already had three and a half
credits there so it could be
substituted you wouldn't have to
have a lingering half credit in
order to fulfill for mass
Their so so that was the reason
why and I think
as as become clear certainly
through the education community
Committee and and community
right is that we often talk
about what students should or
should not be learning I agree
that that they should be
learning and given the the
choice of of financial literacy
and and I had a question to that
extent for your expert with the
but so it so in the bank New
Mexico report was there any
mention of I know you'd
mentioned other states and
financial literacy but was there
mention of other tangibles or
externals that students have
access to in terms of their
their
A company meant I should say I
think I've heard from a lot of
members saying you know so that
they can engage practically with
finances was there anything in
the report as far as programs
for students externals for them
to engage in financial literacy
not just the class in the
curriculum.
I'm in the report we didn't
mention specifics as far as of
those programs that you
mentioned but it's it's
definitely you know something
that we wanted to dress as far
as a broader application other
than just personal finance in
the course but no we did I
mention that in for
specifically.
Because because I I I do think I
appreciate that answer I do
things an important aspect a
couple years ago there's a
there's an awesome programming
in Albuquerque and the
surrounding areas that give seed
money to
Students in need
in the area and it's done by
prosperity works so they give
seed money and open a bank
account for students
when when they're very young I
think I think it's when they're
born and so that they can start
accumulating interest but they
also have something tangible to
be working with right and that
their family can watch this seed
money grow and and it.
Can be used for all sorts of
things way off when they they
turn eighteen
and I had worked with the
organization it it'd been
auditor Keller at the time now
more of Albuquerque that sponsor
kind of the task force around
this issue about how we can
scale it up so so the the
treasurer's office was working
with us in partnership in order
to create these accounts for
students at the treasury we had
a bill two years ago
they didn't make its way through
and and in order to scale that
project up for the state of New
Mexico in order to have that CD
for
for newborns in the state and
then being able to to have that
as a mechanism for for not only
the students but the families to
watch it grow grow grow and
continue
to utilize that money and and to
have an open bank accounts
because I I think we're getting
it part of the problem by trying
to say our students really need
to take a course like this and
and I and I agree with that
sentiment but by the same token
I mean I think families are
really forced into a lot of
desperate situations that no
matter how
I think understanding they are
Have to put themselves in a
position to make very.
Very important and very wide
reaching decisions and I think
that goes beyond just really
understanding the financial
mechanisms I think it's
something that we need to
address not just on this stand
in terms of educating them but
also in terms of setting them up
in order to pass kind of like
Representative Roybal Caballero
mentioned right is is a living
wage for people for example
to be able to to stand up on
this issue and to be able to to
really utilize the mechanisms
that they are are are given with
yes
So so I I mean I think that's
important one other thing I I
would say is
As it currently stands
Representative you mentioned
that this is an elective right
currently
Have you have you.
Looked into or talked to anybody
perhaps at the department that
would kind of guide you into how
this would be scaled to amass
credit.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Romero was you
know its it qualifies today as a
math credit so the the the
curriculum as it stands now is
is a.
You know is is was good enough
to qualify as a mass grave but I
have not I have not spoken to
Outside of my local school board
members and things like that I
have not spoken to to the
leadership of Petr the
superintendents association but
I would note in the FY are
provided by
You know by the.
By the education department
It says that the.
You know and I'll quote it is
estimated that additional cost
to serve high school students
would be minimal so I think
there's there's a pathway to to
get there by the leadership of
head in the superintendents.
And Representative I appreciate
that however and I mean I'm not
speaking to the finances some
talking about the practical side
of having our our teachers were
convert their curriculum from I
mean you're you're saying it's a
mask credit but in the statute
currently shall be offered as an
elective so it may have been
adopted by some districts of
some districts could offer it as
a mask credit but they would
have to meet the content
standards for math so they would
have to develop the curriculum
and presented to the Department
in order to get that mass credit
but currently it stands as as
not lacked if I think
implementing this for next year
even though the schools may have
this program already because it
does say I mean you're certainly
right in that they shall have an
offer financial literacy as as
an elective
They would pass these districts
in the schools would then have
to look at their overall
curriculum for net financial
literacy match it and make the
case to the department that it
meets math standards in the mass
content standards and I think
that's where the rub is really
going to be is is making that
case for in the school districts
having to do that by next school
year I think is the is the
issue.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative Romero no that's
a great point I believe that
that's the case now I believe
that that's the case now if you
look at page eleven line to this
is current law this is current
law financial literacy shall be
offered as an elective so every
high school in the state has it
by law and then if you look at
the the math of.
If you look at the math portion
of it.
Age nine.
You know that the for you units
of mathematics are required to
graduate on page eighteen and
nineteen current law and find
that it finds financial literacy
course or department approved
you know education course that
meets a mathematical at academic
content and performance shall
qualify as one of the four
required so you're right there
may be a financial literacy
course in a current high school
that doesn't qualify but I
believe once we change that
statute I believe it was five
years ago Representative McQueen
did that it's my understanding
that all financial literacy
courses currently in the high
schools to meet that standard
but I but have not verified
that.
So so we do have PED to weigh in
on that I was hoping
Watch out you're getting cold
called PED.
On.
C..
The committee.
I don't know if if you were
listening in on that I know I
got just cold called to input to
from the audience but would you
be able to address that.
Absolutely I'm actually trying
to verify that right now and
I'll see if I can get back to
real quick.
Okay
I I I think the the the real
issue in my understanding of it
is that the elective credits do
not have and do not meet the
same standards as as as mass
credits do and and this was kind
of the the route that I was
running into for our house bill
eighty three right is is where
to plug in classes and what the
standard is going to have to be
for each of the post classes
right and and I I I just think
the implementation date is is
difficult I mean we're going to
be in the middle of and I think
that's that's been been made
clear unfortunately by our
members on the opposite side
because you know I was right
there with you and that's fine
and it amended the the on the
bus high school bill to include
this in because it is important
and I think this is certainly
something that we've looked at
doing
but I think requiring an
implementation date to get
schools to Scranton literally
scramble to get their programs
up to amass credit standard only
for us in the interim to look at
the sweeping changes where that
may all be scrapped I I think is
is is a difficult sell to be
doing at this time as as much as
I sympathize and I think all the
other members sympathize with
with the aspects here I mean
this is going to be one of our
big topics during during the
discussion and certainly
everybody on the on this meeting
and everybody on the attendees
listed there in the public is
going to be part of those
changes.
All.
I don't know if the needs you
had an answer to that because I
finish my comments.
Yes Mr chairman I thank you for
that sorry so yeah I'm just
trying to permanent role
implementation it would be if
it's definitely a local
insurance office will have to
determine that.
Actual implementation.
Does that answer your question.
But it but it would have to be
Department approve I guess my
question is it would have to be
Department improved approved if
they are all our to make this
switch is that right let me
verify that I'm very sorry Mr
chairman.
You're good to needs some truck
bring in another voice I don't
know if if Joey from L. E. S.
C..
Try that.
Showing.
Hold called yes I don't know if
you might be able to help us
with that sorry Mr chairman I
don't have information on that
but I can not only for analyst
and Denise might get an answer
faster sorry.
Okay no worries.
You know everybody scrambling.
Mr chair.
Representative Dow yes and so
did we in two thousand.
Nineteen did it when we change
the curriculum standards didn't
we take away the curriculums the
school districts obligation to
use PED approved curriculum and
school districts can use local
they can make their own choices
about curriculum purchases as
long as a light aligned with the
curriculum standards benchmarks.
Yes and I think yes no no and I
think I think you're getting
more specific into the question
that we're asking here
at what level does it need
department approval I mean I
would say that if it needs
department approval it's
difficult
it's it's similarly difficult if
you're asking in a short amount
of time right before the next
school year to to have this
internally as well at at at a
school site to make the switch
consent we're mandating at on
the schools in order to do of
ten has his handout familia
stayed ten good morning the
morning Mr chair can help you.
We can't
you Mr chair on my read of the
bill I'm I'm on page one of the
bill and the very first
subsection under twenty two
thirteen one is that the
department shall require public
schools to address department
approved academic can come to
performance standards
my by my read of that in the way
that PED is generally done
things in the past as they are
ops performance standards for
specific courses and so so going
back to the it option of the
next Gen science standards for
example there there was a
little bit of fiasco where where
PED sort of.
Adopted course contents
standards that were not
completely aligned with the next
Gen science standards and then
went back in and just completely
adopted the NDSS by my reference
to them so that's sort of a.
Applicables example to this type
of work you would have to do to
opt.
Civic course content standards
for financial literacy but and
I'm the department would have to
approve any course that that
comes forward as part of those.
That's sort of purporting to
meet those academic content
standards.
Okay.
Right so so that you would have
to be department approved I mean
I I think that speaks to to the
issue about getting this for
next year because I certainly
respect the urgency in doing it
I just think so much is in flux
and and have a difficult time
doing that in such a short
amount of time and unfortunately
for districts I mean I think
that's why we a lot of other
bills that are requiring certain
changes to move to an additional
year out it's for everybody to
okay we adjourn in March if this
gets signed it's perhaps eight
four April and then they have
more than a year in order to
roll out these changes get
things approved get their
teachers up to to where they
need to be and everything
getting getting going from there
so so I I think that's where
kind of the nitty gritty of
these these these girls get in a
tangle and I think need needs
sorting how because I certainly
agree with the idea
put forward and and it's
something we're going to be
talking about me and our for
sure but thank you all for
bringing this forward
You know if you all had any
closing comments on.
Thank you Mr chairman members
great conversation pre sheet the
time this morning
hi financial literacy was
mandated in state law back in
two thousand seven every high
school shall offer financial
literacy for for the past
fourteen years and I believe it
was five years ago that it was
that it qualified as a math
credit and like the gentleman
said.
You know everyone is is geared
towards making that that
curriculum qualify so I would
like to keep the momentum on
this topic and not a.
And I ask that the that that the
bill move forward if if if the
will of the committee deems that
appropriate thank you Mr
chairman I really appreciate the
time Mr Chairman representative
passed.
Okay on second thank you
Representative data that do pass
by Representative Dow a second
by Representative Baldonado
Representative lane you are
muted did you have something
before except that motion I was
gonna make the same motion I
wasn't quick enough Mr.
Mr I were to take our.
So we have a substitute motion
to table does not need a second
so madam secretary if you call
the roll on a table in motion.
Okay.
Retable a motion Representative
Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield no to
table.
Representative dial no to table.
Representative Figueroa no to
table.
Representative laying.
No to table.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Calero to table.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes to table.
vice chair Garrett.
I'm gonna say no to table.
Chairman.
Yes.
Forty nine.
So that motion has failed will
go back to the original motion
made by Representative Dow and
seconded by Representative
Baldonado.
The rolling to do past motion
madam secretary
thank you.
Representative Baldonado yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative hello.
Yes please.
Representative Europe yes.
Representative thank yes.
Presented Lara.
No.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative who are both
covered at all yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
No.
Representative vice chair
Garrett.
Explained.
Chairman.
No.
Nine two four.
Great thank you have a do pass
Representative on house bill one
sixty three thank you all.
Members of the committee the
gentleman.
Course so we had Representative
care to explain about please.
I thank you Mr chair again I
just want to repeat that I
support the concept but I think
it has to be carried out in the
context of a thorough overview
of high school curriculum time
at timing and putting a bandaid
on to the high schools at this
time so that's why I voted no
thank you Mr chair.
Representative Sweetser thank
you for the Sanchez got up I
appreciate just a moment I've
been trying to text my daughter
is a junior in high school have
you had financial literacy
because since it's been offered
since two thousand six you
should have and I knew she had
mentioned that I just got her
response she said I think it's
the alternative to taking
calculus next year as a senior
those are pretty
different.
Objectives and I and when I just
got that I felt the need to sure
because we've we've got to get
this a little bit a line more
quickly I don't think financial
literacy ought to be the option
to calculus all I just wanted to
share that thank you Mr chair
for the moment.
Great thank you all right so you
have to do pass thank you
everybody.
All right so Representative
Madrid has no choice but to stay
with us so we'll go to Senate
bill one thirty one
Senator Stewart are you in the
attendees list if you would
raise your hand please.
This
see Senator Stewart one one
click.
All right Senator Stewart Madam
pretend good morning did I need
to pull anybody out from the
attendees list to work with you
today.
I know you don't Mr chairman
thank you all right when you're
ready please.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee of the Senate bill one
thirty one does to a technical
issue.
currently so this deals with our
capital improvements act also
known as Senate bill nine
Representative Chatfield and I
worked together last year on the
bill to do some improvements and
then in the special session in
June we had to repeal that bill
because of funding issues so
this bill
corrects we have current
language and the law that states
the calculation for the two mill
levy contribution from the state
should be based on the average
of prior year total program
units on second and third
reporting dates but that's not
how we do it.
And we even passed a law several
years ago to use that prior year
so that districts would no more
so would have more certainty on
this funding so it would correct
the technical issue and
reprioritize here final program
units that was also when
Representative Chatfield spill
of the second issue is that of
those the capital improvements
act mill levy of is not supposed
to be based on discretionary
program units so that was also
part of Representative chat
feels bill and my year money
last year and so this just
corrects the technical issue and
insurers that we use capital
improvement act for a units that
are not discretionary that said
it's to kind of boring technical
issues I just listen to your
financial literacy debate so
nothing exciting like that just
have to fix the statutes and I'm
ready for questions all right
thank you Senator Stewart so we
will go to the attendees list
those in opposition to Senate
bill one thirty one please
indicate by raising your hand.
All right so we'll go to support
support for Senate bill one
thirty one.
We'll give it a second.
All.
Good morning you have a two
minutes welcome chairman thank
you very much stand rose for the
state superintendents I also
serve on the public school
capital outlay oversight task
force this is a matter that was
brought to the task force we
want to thank the pro tem
sponsor for bringing this
forward indeed this is technical
correction that would be
explosive out the unit she's
talking about the discretionary
well I used to come to mind
first or things like K. five
plus in that case some district
opt in many districts opt out
the state gives and on on
warranted advantage if you will
to those districts who have
opted in the intent of Senate
bill online or that the capital
improvements levy is to be
across all programs and the
court oncology units within that
and so I agree this provision is
necessary and we urge the
committee to vote in favor of
this bill thank you very much
Sir.
Thank you.
Others in support.
All right so we'll come to
committee that and committee
comments questions concerns.
Random thoughts.
Motions.
Mr over do pass check it.
So we have a two passed motion
right maybe there's a robot
carry it out I assume
Representative Lara is that what
you're getting at.
Yes Mr chair that's correct okay
I'm gonna give you the second
there sorry Representative
Chatfield
Is there any discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
past motion.
I see none Senator Stewart you
have a do pass on Senate bill
one thirty one thank you thank
you so much thank you for being
on education everybody.
Right so we will go to.
Senate bill one forty four so we
have Senator Campos three
hundred attendees list would you
please indicate by raising your
hand please.
Senator Campos over.
The wall.
Makayla I'm assuming there is
here and all right.
Okay.
And then labeled LFC staff
member.
Approach to the panelist.
All right.
So.
It's funny.
Welcome you three Senator Campos
Senate bill one forty four when
you're ready please.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the Education
Committee of course it's great
to be here with you today as you
listen to so many of the
educational issues that continue
to that we deal with as we move
forward in dealing with
education particularly under
some of the more restrictive
conditions during this pandemic
with me today of course is
Micaela Fischer and also send a
little with the legislative
finance committee and so if I
may I'd like to begin with
Senate bill one forty four with
the emergency clause and in this
receive the extensive hearings
during the intro.
but in essence this bill expands
the authority of the public
school capital outlay council to
provide grant assistance from
the public school capital outlay
fund for broadband projects.
Students teachers and
educational resources to the
internet for school work on a
school campus or in a remote
learning setting the bill also
requires public school capital
outlay council to develop
guidelines for a statewide
education technology
infrastructure network
unnecessary technology projects
for education additionally the
bill includes As indicated the
beginning of the regency because
and again this bill is endorsed
by the legislative finance
committee if I may some of the
uses for.
The available resources that we
have today and I'm gonna go
through two or three things very
quickly a number one of course
with the public school capital
outlay council this would give
the public school facilities
authority the ability to develop
the guidelines in order to
expand the use of capital outlay
for broadband in related.
Wirth with our state as we all
know a little forward that our
young people today are
definitely having problems
particularly in some of the more
remote areas in securing if you
will broadband accessibility and
even the use of devices in a
very effective and efficient
manner with Chromebooks and
other things in small
communities and some of the more
remote areas.
Today we have about nineteen
thousand students are live in
areas with existing broadband
infrastructure no household
internet subscription and I'm
just trying to express the
enormity of the gravity of the
concern the problem we have
before us about forty five point
eight thousand students who live
in areas outside of current
broadband reach.
But they can only access that if
you will possibly through a
smart phone or a cell phone just
basically for texting and some
of the are very basic services
and then also there's about one
thousand four hundred ten
students live off outside of
adequate so broadband coverage
and some people talk about well.
Let's go ahead and tie into
satellite but to go ahead and do
that that would be very cost
prohibitive and the reason I
bring that up because as we move
forward right now we're really
dealing with a lot of the basic
connectivity issues in in our
state and of course so it would
do if we did something like
satellite internet that would
cost about twelve hundred
dollars per year and with the
number of students should be
over a million dollars so I
bring these points out because
as we move forward our intent is
our.
Continue to develop if you will
the year of the broadband and
within that we have several
pieces of legislation that are
out there working to do our best
to combine if you will the best
practices best resources and
ensure that we do get broadband
to not only are our our children
but also to our businesses so I
bring that up because as we move
forward we're hoping that the
The governor would support if
you will about a hundred thirty
three million dollars that has
been talked about to move into
the area of broadband and
technology of course that's
going to be for the services
combine that with something like
the public school capital outlay
in the public school facilities
authority expanding the
guidelines and of course all
this is going to be are not
only.
Under the auspices if you will
of the public school capital
outlay council of but it would
be very carefully scrutinized
and watched as we move forward
so many of the details as we
move forward we talk about again
the year the broadband talking
about our federal resources
talking about how this is going
to come together thank you of
all of it is how do we organize
how do we use the existing tools
in order for us to move this
forward when we really talk
about the essentials they're
changing our lives here in New
Mexico and of course across the
globe but we into this the fate
particularly after the passing
of of COVID nineteen is that the
connectivity issues will
continue broadband in the way
that we use technology
definitely has changed our lives
and that's the way we're going
to continue to live so we need
to have all the tools in place
that are possible for us to move
forward so that Mr chair members
of the committee
I don't know if the individuals
who are here with the LFC would
like to make a brief comment
there there neither here to
speak in favor or opposed to the
bill but they're here to go and
find if you will technical
assistance and then from there
Mr chair will go to.
Important to the that you
recommend thank you very much Mr
chair members of the Education
Committee.
Thank you senator and enough
Micaela sunny you want to make a
comment or you just stand for
questions.
And.
Hello Mr chair should say we
would be happy to stand by for
questions thank you.
Mr chair thank you great no
pressure all right so we will go
to the attendees list before
coming to committee those in
opposition to Senate bill one
forty four.
Indicate by raising your hand
place.
All right so we'll go to support
support for Senate bill one
forty four.
For the second all right so
Willie Mae.
Good morning only many of up to
two minutes please good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm really more cheese
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico scored Association
and I thank you for allowing us
to present our position New
Mexico scored Association
supports and has continually
supported funding for the
systems for broadband is school
safety programs that are
administered via public school
capital outlay council of New
Mexico school boards ciation for
membership passed a resolution
to this last December at our
virtual conference to expand on
eligible activities covered by
the pope so capital outlay
counsel to an include equipment
to get schools online the
definition additional language
in this bill to include physical
hardware and Services remote
learning is is extremely
critical Mr chairman within the
current pandemic environment
Senate bill one forty four will
allow the public school capital
we counsel to make much needed
awards to school districts
Representative hardware and
educational resources this
legislation opens up eligible
activities to provide more
comprehensive services to our
school districts we support this
addition we think the sponsor
for bringing this forward Mr
chairman and we ask favorable
consideration by this committee
thank you.
Right thank you.
All right so we will go to the
camera and.
Good morning Cameron you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Cameron Graham I'm a
volunteer at the gate with a a
RP New Mexico and it's a hundred
and forty eight thousand members
in the state.
A. R. P. stands in support of
Senate bill one forty four.
A. R. P. yield use high speed
internet to be honest central
telecommunications service and
nationwide is supporting efforts
to make reliable affordable high
speed internet service
universally available.
We are currently supporting a
number of bills in this current
legislative session that have
that as a goal the importance of
high speed internet to our
educational efforts has been
demonstrated during the COVID
crisis.
A number of A. R. P. members are
grandparents who are raising
grandchildren and dealing with
all of the issues around
education and the need for high
speed internet there's no doubt
this is Linda calling I need.
Kaman I'm sorry right.
This bill enhances that
availability in schools and for
that reason we're in strong
support of it and we thank the
sponsors for bringing it forth
in this session.
Right thank you.
Rents will go to stand.
Morning setting up two minutes
thank you Mr chair members the
committee stand rounds for the
cost of education leaders and
school superintendents of the
sponsor we want to thank for
bringing this forward and I
believe perfectly outlined the
critical nature of what we're
challenged within our schools in
New Mexico of Mr teas perfectly
stated our positions also please
state dept of what she presented
to you and urged the committee
to vote affirmatively for this
very important legislation thank
you.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to Steve.
Good morning Stevie of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Steve C. I. as
in India New Mexico government
relations director on behalf of
our members we stand in support
of this legislation and thank
the sponsor for bringing it
forth.
Of the pandemic has highlighted
the achievement gap and the net
quality of our school system.
But it also has underlined the
gravity of the digital divide
that keeps our most vulnerable
students from learning.
We know that thousands of
students especially low income
and rural students lack devices
or internet access.
Also a recent survey from the
public school facilities
authority.
On that twenty two percent of
the state's public school
students lack internet access at
home.
In up to sixty percent of
students in the state's most
rural areas.
In addition thirty two percent
of the state students did not
have access to their own
devices.
You know like a computer or
smartphone.
The pandemic has changed our
world no doubt right high speed
internet access has become now
today a necessity as opposed to
an option for students working.
We respectfully ask the
committee to support SB one
forty four thank you.
State.
All right any other that wish to
speak in support need in the
schools.
All right so we'll come to
committee for stimulus to is
Representative Garrett plates.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Campos of for this bill
and and for your on going
support for education for years
I support this bill I would like
to suggest one wall addition
because House house bill one
forty one addresses a lot of the
same things years goes beyond
that choose to talk about
networks but in section on page
three.
Section one
I would ask you to consider when
it says education technology
infrastructure means physical
hardware one forty one in its
section of our services and and
this was vetted
by numerous bodies just because
in education technology
infrastructure it often goes
beyond physical hardware
includes things like hot spot
sent and other things so that is
my only suggestion for you to
consider and that's because I I
think house bill one forty one
did extensive research or that
but I do support your bill.
Thank you.
Thank.
I'm sorry Senator Campos you're
breaking up there no that's fine
of Mr chair and and course so
again that Representative here
and I really appreciate the
expansion in terms of some of
the the conversation and
how we can improve the the piece
of legislation one of the things
that is included in that would
be within the public school
facilities authority developing
if you will those guidelines
of that innocence could also
include those services so
there's a couple ways to address
that a of course through the
amendment process as we move
forward or what we could do as
we make the recommendations
directly to the public school
facilities authority it sure
that within those services that
they're tied directly in there
and the reason I say that
because of that some of the
suggested guidelines we're
already talking about the wifi
networks for talking about
transportation bus
transportation and how we can
better hi and if you will the
network ensuring that we do have
hot spots on on campus and then
from there of course all that
ties directly into those
essential services so it's a
combination of possibly doing a
cat I doing the fiber but also
time and if you will the wifi in
the network.
instruments that would be part
of the services that would be
provided again what I'd like to
do if I could Mr chair and
Representative Garrett is to.
Defer quickly to our LFC staff
to see if they are what have the
other is a suggestions and again
I really applaud and appreciate
you reading through this to our
office make this a better piece
of legislation to chair.
Thank you that's my only
question Madam chair.
Please so Senator was can
address something Senate.
Mr chair reserve committee thank
the only question that I propose
is that it's typically not a
best practice to.
Is that Services socially for.
Recurring cost it be more
appropriate in our view to
provide general fund
appropriations for recurring
things like services hence the
use of public school capital
outlay funding for the school
hardware things that taking that
out necessary would be more
appropriate use in that case but
about the only thing I would
add.
Thank you so so I I just had a
quick on that point is PSSA
would they be constrained to
strictly hard infrastructure
however or would it be more
expensive than that hard
infrastructure.
Thank you Mr chairman I then
like to defer to our sentiment
hell and then from there I would
like to respond quickly Mr
chair.
Course.
So.
Chair I don't know if you have
the FIR for this bill in front
of you but it just a headset
it's this is language in this
bill limited to infrastructure
to heart equipment may provide
some examples of what that might
look like on H. four FE FIR
includes you know like
everything from laptops to quit
that might be connected on a
school bus to provide mobile for
students so it's a pretty wide
range of equipment that it is
physical stuff.
So
and and again I with the course
defer to the representative for
What what her wishes would be as
we up attempt to move forward
with this piece of legislation.
The intent is to ensure that we
do have the hardware to provide
connectivity the second part we
deal directly with services
within school districts and
again we're not looking to find
or to offer an unfunded mandate
the issue with the how can we
get those services as close to
those areas that do not have
those today so again I thank you
for again to the Representative
for
direction thank you very.
Right.
Representative Garrett please.
Mr chairman and senator I'll
connect you offline it's just
that it looking at broadband one
of the major issues is that the
hardware is the connective itty
that goes beyond the hardware
and so representative Sarinana
worked extensively with the LFC
and
The
public school capital outlay on
that issue so I'm supporting
your bill but I'll talk to you
about that offline
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
a representative and.
We're very concerned about the
connectivity will continue to
work on the hardware of the
services and then from there of
course with the federal
resources they're coming down as
we deal with Iraq we with the
CAA resources with the cares Act
resources for independent there
is going to be a lot of
organization needs as we move
this forward and so I I just
truly appreciate your your
vision of course the concerns
that you have regarding services
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for your.
Thank you senator so
Representative Sweetser plates.
Thank you Mr chair and good to
see you senator and house said I
think my question though is for
the analysts we did passed house
bill one forty one out of this
committee unanimously that work
first and then sixty six to one
off of the floor and the very
first thing that caught my
attention on the FIR is your
bill conflicts with house bill
one forty one so I guess I would
like to know from the analysts
the conflict thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Sweetser and and referring
directly to the LFC analysts.
Mr chair and Representative
Sweetser it did not conflicts in
the way that they're you know
antagonistic but they do seeks
to both expand the use of the P.
SCO C. at tech for.
in the in slightly different
ways and mostly as as
Representative when services
are.
Senator compasses Bill that LFC
endorsed is not they're they're
pretty similar the other virgin
different difference is that.
Yes if they to develop
guidelines for regional.
That works for a tech as well.
The thing else in this.
Mr chair Representative the the
conflict I think really comes
from just the verbiage in the
definition if council service
where to look at both of these
and have to implement flaws if
they are passed.
The wording in each of the
definitions would essentially be
difficult to implement at the
same time simultaneously so
that's the only reason why
there's a label conflict in that
you would have to determine if
they both pass and were enacted
which definition to use.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chair I think that's where we
are in the session we have built
moving on both sides that are
really good but have had some.
Some issues and I guess Mr
chairman for your guidance on
some help with that but thank
you very much analyst I
appreciate that and and again
thank you senator.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative other
for the questions.
So I would like to address that
because we have looked at on the
house so version of of what's
trying to be done here and and I
mean the process for for picking
the language I think we are
definitely at that point that we
need to be very precise and
certainly where the Education
Committee here I'm in need to be
discerning about that I think
Representative cared for example
going about on the software
issues that I would really like
to see addressed before moving
this bill forward on to its next
committee here the Education
Committee because it says this
has some pretty broad
implications were at that point
in the session but we still
have.
You have time to get these these
two
bills and proposals kind of
Marietta and aligned with one
another so I think we would like
to if you could have that
conversation Senator Campos on
with Representative Garrett
Representative Figueroa
representative Sarinana on their
house bill one forty one to kind
of come up and shore up that
language around software and
that responsibility is there us
that would certainly be
appreciated and we can get on
the the amendment and and all
those proposed changes
together and kind of fleshed out
so we can have have that hearing
as soon as possible but I would
like to to hear this again and
in the Education Committee just
as a note Senator Steinborn are
crossing over we do have a
twenty four hour deadline for
amendments
so so if you all could work on
that in and get that into to our
secretary as soon as possible
but I would like to have that
discussion
Committee Representative Garrett
please.
Mr chairman and senator I think
this is something we could
probably do today I'm a contact
of Representative Sarinana and I
believe she worked with
Rachel guttural on LA S. C.
and I'll get in touch with them
immediately after the meeting
and I talked to them and we'll
get back to you and try to do
this today so Mr Chairman would
this be able to come back on
Wednesday if we get it done by
tomorrow or by the end of the.
I was gonna say it can come back
when state if you want to want
to have it next Wednesday but no
I know what you mean Friday for
sure I mean our our committee
secretary goes home at five
hopefully we can get something
in I and
are certainly very very early by
eight o'clock in the morning the
next day but I like to get from
our committee secretary she
doesn't work into the wee hours
like we do it a lot
or at least doesn't get paid for
it anyway I should say so
attention is by eight tomorrow
morning that's fine.
Thank you and that so does that
sound amenable and we can
certainly here this promptly on
on Friday.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the house Education
Committee it definitely does and
that's the whole purpose of the
process as we move forward I
would be better in creating
legislation come up with a
consensus building and and again
who is serving as the people in
New Mexico and so within this
very grateful of course to the
concerned and the expeditious
approach to try to come up with
an amendment that definitely
would make this piece of
legislation better.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you members of the house
Education Committee.
Sure well said Senator thank
you.
All right so we will roll this
till Friday.
Our next Wednesday
Representative care I don't know
But on Friday all right so that
concludes our business however
before we go everybody I just
want to point out that are
wonderful provided money
legislative assistant and our
committee secretary is her
per day to day Linda happy
birthday thank you for
everything you do for us it's
you make a sign thank you thank
you very much everyone.
Thank you are just happy
birthday thank you someone like
you to have the legal right with
our that's just want to get us.
With that if there aren't any
more questions comments or
concerns will recess till Friday
yeah the recess right by
everybody have a nice rest of
your day take care.
Mr chair I.
By.
I
please okay.
