Representative chat fill
representative itself
representative good here
representative hit a
representative lane
representative
representative madrid
representative married balmaria
here
but a horn.
Representative or ball cover
your at a seventy
representative.
Chairman.
Vice chair
I mean chairman
german
garrett here
and with that we'll start with
their first bill which is house
memorial twenty
study the class size reduction.
All right thank you madame chair
good morning members so this is
the memorial for our legislative
education study committee to
study classroom sizes this has
been an issue that several
organizations that they did see
in the crowd and hopefully we'll
be speaking in favor of today
i'm had brought bills forward to
this legislature but have been
in rules and we've also had
offline conversations about some
of the struggles that we
currently have in terms of our
lack of teachers or lack of
space in our different districts
in order to meet them reduce
class sizes because I think that
would be
um a goal for everybody however
since we are currently building
that teacher pipeline since
we're currently working on these
issues
we thought it best in most
prudent to
have our legislative education
study committee conduct that
study through the inner own
about where those deficiencies
might be
in order to
help facilitate it look at best
practices and look at.
What national and international
even trends are as far as
classroom sizes so with that
madam chair or we would stand
for questions oh lastly I I have
any armature from the
legislative education steady
committee with.
Or anything elia see related for
the interim thank you madam.
Thank you mister chair are with
that we're going to go to
audience
if you are against this memorial
can you raise your hand.
If you are online and against
this memorial can you read.
Now will go to support for the
memorial can you raise your
hands if you're in support.
Okay we will start on this side
nickno.
For.
Please share with this good
morning i'm not i'm chair
members of the committee my name
is mary are scientists and i'm
the president of the national
education association in new
mexico also a twenty five year
veteran middle school teacher
from last christmas new mexico
educators in new mexico and
across the nation believe that
reducing class size is the
single most important variable
to.
Quality teaching and learning
in addition to the overwhelming
evidence that class size matters
in the early grades there are
many studies that link smaller
classizes in the middle and
upper grades to hire math
achievement lower drop out rates
and fewer disciplinary for
referrals and we know in the
post covered.
Classroom
students need that interaction
more one of one interaction with
the
teacher in the classroom so we
are strongly support house
memory of twenty
vote in support thank you
thank you anybody else on this
side of the room okay go to the
site and will do stand roll one
to start with.
Thank you matter members the
committee good morning.
I'm not enjoying the window.
Manager class size is something
that has been a continuing
discussion
was a case we made it smaller
player sizes
representatives said
as importantly as the chairman
share we also have staffing
issues that are confirming is so
it's it's important there would
study how you ballot.
And and as we invest in the
mexican portion we have the best
all that investment and what are
the best places to go I think is
merc par such as indicated madam
chair
there's a case we made the
elementary lower protector and
you have that understatute
that smaller class sizes produce
verification that I would
also suggest that a middle
school there are significant
accounts uh cases to be made
that is you as you individualize
and make better relationship
between and str.
There will be capacities and so
it's always important to do the
study final form out of the
chair
which trust the legislative
education s.
Kind of interesting works
that out all of these pretty
intricate pieces they can help
advise you as we go through the
enter on what the best method.
We'll accord to working with the
committee on that over the
internet i'm sure we urge the
the.
Thank you next row.
The.
Yeah mandate good morning maybe
tourists education or farm
drifter for thinking mexico and
former elementary classroom
teacher and we support this to
memorial for a couple of reasons
first because i've soon
achievement and second for
teacher recruitment and
retention so first of all we
know it's more classes help
children I as a former teacher
my largest class was a class of
twenty six fourth graders on my
smallest class was a class of
fifteenth graders I can't tell
you the world a difference not
just for the students but for me
as a teacher I felt better I was
that my best I was less tired
and more currently I had more
time to engage with families and
their students I built strong
relationships and we know that's
important we know that's the
best strategy for fighting
chronic absentees which were
really you know we have a
problem with in our state right
now it's the best strategy
relationships and that can
happen when you have smaller
classes.
The second piece is about
teacher record recruitment and
retention
you won't know that we're losing
our teachers they're overworked
they're overwhelmed so many of
my friends have walked away i'm
no longer in the classroom we're
losing good teachers we have to
be able to keep them in our
classrooms we have to improve
their working conditions they're
overworked and I can tell you I
was less than the classroom just
less than two years ago the
pandemic changed our kids they
are they're just different and
society is changing them there
used to be
there used to be entertained by
their phones and their
technology and it's really hard
for teachers to get their
attention and keep them engaged
and like it's even harder when
you have large classrooms so
we've got to be able to one how
persons with achievement and
help our teachers so that we can
keep them and not only that but
we have to change the narrative
about what it is to be a teacher
and if you ever if you're on
social media and you see the
means about the tired teacher
tired nobody knows what it is
teacher tired and that's true
but we have to change that
narrative nobody's gonna want to
become a teacher if all they
ever hear that teachers are over
worked they're underpaid in
their tired so we've got to be
able to get the best teachers we
can in our classrooms and the
best way to do that is to
improve working conditions thank
you thank you a perfect example
of a two minute testimony.
Not sure members the committee
of charles good marker ought to
registered lobbyists for any new
mexico we originally bought yes
on this memorial.
Our members know that the
memorial itself actually isn't
really need it to determine
whether or not the current class
I system works cause it doesn't.
That being sadly applied to
sponsors for moving this
memorial so they're hopefully
others in this body will gain a
better understanding of the need
to reduce class sizes any new
mexico so rebate educators a few
key concepts from that we asked
in it if they agree with a
statement current class size
maximums work well students do
receive the help they need to
succeed the response eight point
four percent agree with that
statement that it works well
seventy eight point three
percent said they disagree or
strongly disagree.
I blumped teacher noted students
who have ips or need extra help
do not get what they need number
how hard I work that's just not
enough time there's just not
enough time to spend on small
group intervention especially in
the large class in now move
order teacher wrote I have had
after thirty two third graders
on my own where I could not help
students who were struggling
with certain content along with
making sure I was following ips
at the other standards in my
classroom there's also to
concern trying to find adequate
seating
finally sound fatima to one
cannot when teacher can not meet
the needs of twenty five plus
students when there are so many
than you'd help we are always
being told how the covered year
had such an impact but nothing
has been done to reduce class
sizes so we can actually help
those students make gains thank
you.
Is there anybody on sundays
okay seen no more in the room
will go to the zoo and we can
thank covered for zoom actually
our first person is emily and
mute yourself your first
think you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
i'm and more well dollars new
mexico voices for children and
we stand in support of house
memorial twenty i'd like to
think chair remarried all of the
other sponsors of this memorial
we know smaller classizers will
allow educators to give more
individualized attention to
support the needs of each and
every student and research
indicates this can really
improve our students outcomes we
appreciate that this memorial
will lay the ground where to
make adjustments and reduce
classizers in our state so we
ask the community art today
thank you.
Thank you emily and now we'll go
to at least.
Yourself.
Good morning madame terror men
and members of the committee
this is a lease of the attorney
with the new mexico center along
poverty and for all the reasons
giving her today already we
stayed in full support of this
memorial and the concept of
reducing class sizes in general
the only thing I add to its
already been said is that
in addiction to the benefits of
more class sizes been well
documented
it's that is particularly true
for the students at the whole of
the yalty matinus lawsuit.
And the correctly dedicated
several peters in its findings
regarding how reduced class has
our part of a constitutionally
adequate education we know it
works and we earned the
committee the past is memorial
thank you.
Thank you lisa is there anybody
else online who'd like to
testify in support.
Ok I don't see anybody else to
go to committee a representative
middle.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative i'm when one
hundred percent support of this
as a high school teacher i've
had I have classes that are
thirty four kids teaching
physics and I have classes that
are fifteen and needless to say
the fifteen get a lot more in my
attention especially when we're
dealing with hard
physics concepts of so they they
get a lot especially with you
have a class of thirty four and
may be six or seven of them have
ips it is very difficult in that
amount of span of that that time
in order to individualize all of
that so so what I love about the
studying it.
And during the interim is I love
how deep you guys in the lc go
and and you help us find
solutions because there are real
issues with it would be nice to
just redo some wall and not have
any other issues but we do not
have enough teachers right now
and some of our schools don't
have the room if they needed six
extra classrooms they don't have
any and nobody really wants to
be put in a in a portable
and holders you know those kind
of things so so that that we
have to start thinking about
different solutions there are
real problems to this it is not
a simple fix maybe there might
be too teachers in a classroom
if they don't have an extra
classroom maybe we can you know
we have to start thinking out of
the box we cannot keep doing the
same thing we've done we don't
have the same kids in our seats
that we've had for let you know
from five years ago so we can't
keep trying to educate them the
same way so I i'm i'm really
excited to really delve into
this so that way we can find
solutions to to some of the
issues that come up so we can
solve all of it thank you
representative is the
representative representative.
Medium chair thank you very much
representative I do have a
couple of questions regarding
the memorial first and then
some.
Items i'd like to discuss on
page two at the bottom of it
we're talking about the turnover
rights for kindergarten through
twelfth grade teachers and it's
increased tonight I do realize
that a lot of it is due to the
pandemic that we had there
but talked to me about this so
even though some of these
teachers are going a different
way
why do they not have any
classroom experience I thought
that they had to do an
internship first before they
went on to a question as that
been changed
madame chair and representative
is
not that anything has changed
but if you're an alternative
license you don't have to have
prior experience you get a
classroom of your
all right madam cheer thank you
very much for that response what
is the optimum size that you've
made a represent what he think
is the optimum size for any
classroom
madam chair and representative
his el I mean that's hard for me
to speculate I mean obviously I
could give like an ectotal
evidence but that's part of what
the research is about like what
these optimal class sizes would
be for elementary middle high
school um classes like inclusion
classes
lab classes for example where
space and the utilization of
spaces at a premium so it's it's
it's really hard to speculate
because i've had classes of
thirty five students and it's
been incredibly rich in terms of
having discussion for a social
studies class versus a class of
fifteen where our students
constantly felt like they were
on the spot to chinean for every
little thing um so it it really
depends and and sometimes it's
based madame chair and
representative on on the
educator as well ok will that
brings me to another point then
I guess whenever you're talking
about some classes.
Do need to have more students in
it than others so
with the local board have any
say in how many students with
the recommendation of its age
prince boulevate school making
the recommendation okay we can
accommodate this many students
but in this classroom we need to
decrease the member students
madam chair representative is
all I mean this being a memorial
and not a bill we're not
prescribing anything other than
looking into the research to
like represent me about moya
mention is try to come up with
these solutions if it is
something that I think you're
indicating towards local control
then possibly if not then that's
also a possibility but this is
two study that issue and I
understand the study of it don't
get me wrong there I do
understand the stury of this but
in the ultimately if this
memorial comes back in its made
into a bill and we are
recommending that the class size
beater decreased would after
this
so called bill next year
probably comes about would there
be any local control over making
the determination because it
does have to come from the
teachers and the madam chair and
representative as well I mean
will cross the bridge when we
get there because this is just
the memorial for the study and
certainly you're invited to that
study to go through the research
with us.
Okay.
Is there any data madame cheer
and representative are doing the
comparison between the smaller
schools in the more dicker
schools as far as class size is
there something in the works
right now as it already been
done.
The.
Right
apparently
breaks computer madam answer
that
you can
chair and represent it if we
cannot so I don't know I
deferred to greg
so I I was kind of confused you
who has actually given me the
answer my question and in the
madam chair we do not have that
information that you're asking
for as far as data.
Okay that's something we can
really get to in the study and
okay madam chair and where i'm
going with this we do have.
A large number of smaller
schools that are on a four day a
week schedule which I fully
prove on this more rural schools
and ultimately I feel that those
class sizes are gonna be of a
smaller size.
And those are the schools that
are excelling so it does make
sense that we do need to reduce.
In the broad scope of things the
smaller class size
let me turn over here to my dog
earth pages
at my glasses back on
this dead one of the nalaces
that was done by it and mexico
higher edit department.
It is stating through soared
southwest outreach academic
research
let's see than twenty twenty
three there were seven hundred
and fifty one teacher vacancies
and that that's quite
astonishing.
But in two thousand and twenty
one there was over thousand
teacher vacancies
and the biggest one was for
special ad and I understand that
the
the particular area.
It is beneficial war to the
students in any other classes I
believe the special ad
department and that is an
astonishing number of when we're
talking at seven hundred and
fifty one teacher vacancies so
if we didn't go to class a
smaller class sizes doesn't
follow suit that these
schools will need to recruit
more teachers to come in
in madame chair representative
yes which is part of the issue
that we had with.
Because as we're trying to build
the teacher pipeline were not
quite at the point where we can
have enough teachers to relief
fill
those roles in our school
because if you take my class and
cut it down in a quarter wall
then you're going to.
You'll need another science
teacher for all the students
then you're gonna.
All those classes for those
stude.
That's something that we
continue and have continued to
build through different
initiatives
at the legislature.
Madame tear thank you very much
for that response representative
I know that we have overhead of
our budget now does go to
education and that.
Extra money is coming again from
an interest rate out of my part
of the world the oil gas
industry the record revenues
that have been coming into the
state is very important for our
education and I hope people
always remember that because
that is what pays the wages and
builds the schools
so madame chair and
representative whenever we are
talking about
probably needing to hire more
educators to fulfil what we're
trying to do here to decrease
that classroom size we're also
talking about added salaries
we're talking about expanding
our schools are we going to have
the sustainability to be able to
get all of this covered cause
we've seen were all the money
has been going it's.
Withdrawing it there and who
ever can kitchen the fastest
gets that money so i'm i'm kind
of curious how are we going to
get that covered
madame chairman in
representative as well I guess
if we were ever in a financial
pinch like we've seen before
we've seen the education.
Would be up to us as the
appropriat.
We prioritize putting our money
in education is that else.
We'll madame chairman
representative statutory we are
required.
To give each and of our students
a good education and with what
the bill that we pass day before
yesterday I think it was day
before yesterday i've lost track
of time but it is it's
imperative that we do
up the proficiency of our
students that are going through
our educational process which
includes through twelve and then
not to hire it if this route
they choose to go
I am not going to try to throw
stones at this I am not against
giving teachers the dollars that
they deserve
but they will come and time
whenever
the golden goose
does get roasted of code.
Couple years ago there was a
problem that we had with one of
the schools in my area dexter
elementary school it's one of
the newer schools that has been
built in my particular district
and whenever that the elementary
school was deemed uninhabitable
for these young kids and the
teachers and the step that was
there they removed over to the
junior high and high school and
these students were put in
closets as classrooms spare
rooms out in the hallway so
whenever we are talking about.
Decrease in the size of the
classes these schools are going
to have to make room for more
expansion of their schools.
Is this going to work hand in
hand whenever saying we need to
decrease the size of classroom
regular need more teachers and
we're also going to have to make
expansions here is there some
way that we can tile of this
together to get this done
I think that needs to be one of
the problems that is the dressed
when we have this memorial cause
I think it is a good memorial in
in madame chairman and represent
the zell certainly I appreciate
you know your support for the
memorial but those are all the
things that we look for in
like how can we we've talked
about this as a public part of
th.
Rate space requirements for pre
kindergarten are.
You know stations for ex.
Things like that so this would
definitely be a part of of that
study on and p.
Bills that w.
Pipeline issues if that's.
Certainly.
And get there until we have.
Into what the needs are across
the state
it madame to thank you for that
response because.
One expected is going to tie
everything else in to what we're
trying to get accomplished here
so thank you for your response
is madame chair thank you.
Thank you representative
representative thank you madame
chair and thank you chairman I
rise and support this memorial.
And my thirteen years of the
classroom teacher and eighteen
years as it is in an
administrator i've interacted
with tens of thousands of
students I have a value it and
observed hundreds of teachers
and i'm gonna tell you what i've
learned in those thirty one
years
the best indicators of students
success in achievement are not
the curriculum.
It's not the teaching strategies
it's not more time.
And in start also more days.
In my experience the best
indicator.
A quote will make a student
successful is a relation with
with the teacher.
If you students that are here
and you adults that are out
there if you look back to your
favorite teacher the one who had
the most impact on you they may
not have been smartest they made
out of had the best content
information but they knew how to
motivate you they knew what your
strengths were they knew which
your weaknesses were then you
had a differentiate and make
sure that your needs were better
so I think that we need to
really look at that I think we
we need to go back and we need
to say you know I think is our
is our students moving forward
we've got to get back to the
basics.
I think we've over complicated
education in some ways I think
that we've tried to figure out
that there's some magic board or
some
quick fix and it's not a quick
fix it's gonna take hard work we
have to allow our teachers the
time to teach our kids without
all this other requirements we
have to allow our students to be
able to build as relations you
know currently.
I think for secondary schools I
think based upon her in status I
think it's somewhere like the
daily loaders around a hundred
sixty kids
recently errors thing hundred
forty five maybe for language
arts and that's a lot of kids
and I think that we really need
to take a look at it and i'm
also going to get a minute you
know
i'm an also emphasised middle
school.
Because at the time where our
students are needing the most
support both academically social
emotionally in their facing the
greatest challenges we can have
lose that that teacher
relationship quality of that so
i'm very interested in and
seeing the study i'm very
interested in seeing.
You know what comes about it I
kind of think I know how it's
going to end.
I think I know what we're going
to find there and as we say I
think that is going to be our
responsibility then as
legislatures as how do we
how do we address it how do we
fix it.
How do we find it so I I do
support this mister chairman and
representatives of brought this
forward.
I thank you for this and I I
rise in support
representative goodola
thank you madame share I think
you for these memorial I said a
little kidder I joined all that
experiences of everybody here
trying to teach some class mad
for instance with students who
are four years behind
m
I believe that is to his war
behind in math and trying to get
them an extra month by
themselves to try to remedy many
of that and loose in an elective
is that we're seeing that we can
do for as I don't believe one
those extra month classes to
remedy I will live in
intervention in the context but
that's very difficult to be that
when you have where you don't
have that time or of the space
um also but I have a couple of
arm
I don't know a questions request
I don't know there's some
schools in our inner state
horribly old so even twenty six
on fifth there is not about so
much about the number about the
space so that's another team
that I think we need to consider
that that area also to should
experience
I e m I would rather have thirty
students with a teacher who has
all that certification that took
class of fifteen with substitute
teachers for a whole year so can
see that that resources that we
have so based on those resources
what will be that
recommendations we can just
change everything in one year
but what will be a one step that
we can do study like next year
like this is what we need maybe
this is a first step second step
things like that though I will
appreciate you have those
recommendations
i'm also concerned with various
more classes
as much as I like class at
diversity and and and tracking
is not something that we can
have with buries more classes
I remember when we started
owners how you bring my school.
I I had a classroom with fifth
students and I went and
advocated to find her stood
instead of having my class
because that want that will be
tracking and that will mean that
a birthday part that we need so
those were my comments that
thank you for for these water
you're gonna be putting together
I appreciate it and i'm looking
for what to see these results
thank you think you're sure
representative to have had ever
my questions have been addressed
thank you madame chair.
Representative chat field
thank you better sure I can't
let this pass without saying
something about it i'm thinking
of become famous for saying that
smaller class size was the key
not more days and I truly
believe that in I I look forward
to seeing the results of this uh
this study to see if it bears it
out I would have a little bit
something to that in in our
smaller schools today
they have smaller class size but
it takes a super star teacher
because they might often times
teach.
Three grey dells of the same
subject they must might teach
two or three subjects in several
graveler levels at those
of those same sir subjects so
the teacher has to be really
at their best you know it's so
it takes a great teacher but I
truly believe that individual
attention attention to each
student is the key to help them
just get that good start it
takes to start moving forward on
any subject and I would like to
throw out their one thought this
mollor class size and some
interest as if if it's
impossible to hire enough
teachers if it's impossible the
house
the space to split the class and
in mum to different areas e a
serve a lot today so if you have
one highly qualified teacher
teaching a class in multiple
one or more ease in that class
and understand the subject
matter that can help those kids
that need special attention in a
way you have cut that class size
down because you are giving the
attention so that's just a
thought of something that might
be thrown me into that study
that I don't know how
i'm not the expert it would no
outgo about doing that study but
I think beat putting an ea into
the.
Into the mix not only does it
help the kids get more into a
vigilized attention but it's
right it grows up more teachers
right for the system so so I
think there's multiple benefits
in the added I really support
this and i'm excited to see the
outcome thank you manager
representative royal bar cover
yet
thinking madam chair and thank
you chair and all the sponsors.
I was ready to support a bill
but this is a much better
approach because then we can
have some substantive.
Research and and data of the
more of that available although
there's of wealth of it already
available indicating that the
successes of small classroom.
Smaller classroom I would like
to make a
couple of suggestions I don't
know if you were called but a
few years.
In the lesc
guided by
senator store we had a lot of
presentations
from.
Educators around the world
primarily in european countries
can't remember all the countries
that came but they present it on
their successes various on
various topics and that was very
helpful because sometimes
we don't as a nation we have a
history of missing some
opportunities.
I'm not quite sure what I mean I
think we would take it would
take a whole wealth of research
to try to understand why
but there are successes in
education around the world in
particular madame chair and.
Sponsors and though in less see
I would last that you look at
insteady.
Um the successors and medical
and latin america.
Those children are migrating to
the united states and they are
madam chair enriching our
classrooms.
With their culture with their
language.
But they're fine short
in advancing in what they
already coming to us with is
advancement in math and
scientists.
Because they're having the
teachers for obvious reasons we
don't have enough bilingual
teachers.
These students are being tracked
into areas.
Um qualifying them as quote and
called at risk and setting them
back rather than.
As in enhancing the classroom
with billing will teachers that
can understand.
The methodologies and their
understanding of math and
sciences when they come here.
And that means the this smaller.
Classroom size will allow I
think for more of them more
attention being put to those
students.
The more importantly I think we
need to look at the successes of
why these students are when they
come here to the united states
within the second third with
whatever great they are in the
fully understand the canceps and
the methods and the patterns
associate it with math and
science.
And they're eager to share that
but they just don't have the
language capability they're not
being understood that so madam
chair I wish that you would
include and and and an elioc is
to look at that.
Look at those countries to see
how and they have departments of
education that it's going to
require the study person the
researcher to understand spanish
fully in order to be able to
interpret.
The successors of their
educational systems in these
countries.
That's a challenge because we
don't have necessary in my
opinion
staff enough staff that are
equipped.
Ourselves by linguilly to be
able to handle
these kinds of changes that I
think we need to have in our
school system because these
children.
I think we're missing where
we're denying them
inadequate education may not
providing the resources for them
to advance when they already
coming to our classrooms
advanced so to suggestion madam
chair and to eliasi thank you
thank you and I just have a few
questions
mister chair looking at
inclusion classrooms adequate
staff in i'm as a former
urge general education with a
inclusion you know twenty six
sixth graders eight with special
needs having I was lucky I had a
full time inclusion teacher
but if we can include that
because we really have to see
where we're spread to thin and
then a variable as shifting
demographics for those of us for
example on the website of alba
kirky were expanding with lots
of homes so sometimes clashrooms
suddenly get larger because
there's no time to build a new
school when you have five
hundred new apartment buildings
with one to three children so
it's just something that I think
we need to be aware of and then
something that came up that's
not on this study.
But mister chair do we have any
studies on the alternative
license procedure.
Like because that's that can be
half of the teachers and some
districts a third in some have
we studied that like when you're
getting your alternative license
do you have a mentor teacher
from the program and a mentor
teacher from the school how is
that working.
And I realize this is a little
off topic but we've been talking
about the quality of tea chain
is the number one factor
veteran chair representative are
you asking if we have
if we have done research on how
that's being implemented or on
what the requirements are
the requirements and
implementation you don't have to
give a lengthy answer but have
we looked at it systematically
yet
madam sure we have not looked at
systematically yet that is on
the work plan for the intern.
Thank you great to hear it's on
the work plan
that's my only questions and
without all
her emotion of emotion from
thank you madame charlie to make
a most produce house and
household royal twenty madame
care second
we had a second from
representative made about moya
is there anybody who objects to
a dupassing no objections you
have a passed house memorial
twenty thank you very much
and well we're changing chairs
and over the house but when
forty two we'd like to have our
students introduced themselves
and students when you introduce
yourselves
please stand up with start on
this side if you can stand up
tells what school you're from
what your great is and speak
this is where you can practice
your learning of speaking loud
and clearly so we cannot hear
you
my name is robin hitterson I am
a shouldn't have been doing
personal magnet and I am in
temporary.
Ah my name is kind of correct.
The.
The.
Alright well welcome welcome to
house education alright we have
our students on the same I
imagine you all are for this
bill coming up as well so if you
would tell us where you're from
and your name please
um
see
how school
battery fish
on more family high school.
Welcome to house education
appreciate you
all right so representative
hockey be hill house bill one
forty two please thank you very
much mister chair members of the
committee
you usually infamous words is a
very simple bill.
What we are asking
is for the appropriation of
state money as a as a
reimbursement to our soft moors
to take the psat.
A second time as juniors if they
have scored over a thousand on
the test I would like to
now introduce my expert this is
walter brad for it.
Walter is a
soft more at valley high school
he's also a constituent and he's
here with his grandmother and
his mother money are also
constitution they brought this
issue to me mr chair members of
the committee because a lot of
our students are losing the
opportunity to take the test
again get a better score and
therefore qualify for
scholarships like the national
american scholarship so
that's it for me i'm going to
turn it over to walter who will
also give you a brief statement
as to why we're here and why
this bill is necessary please
welcome.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is walter
bradford and so the issue is we
as a.
In new mexico we take the psat
as soft mores which then does it
make us eligible to earn
scarship money because we would
have to take the sat as juniors
to earn national merit national
spanish mark and corporate
scholarships from our tesco's.
And with that.
All right thank you all so much
so we will go to well our folks
online if you wish to speak in
favor of house bill one forty
two please indicate by raising
your hand on zoom for our zero
members so that that populate
for a moment i'll go to the
audience here if you're in sport
of household one forty two on my
right hand side please seem to
keep by raising your hand if you
wish to speak all right students
will start off with user you
have up to two minutes welcome.
My name is.
Yeah.
In the process of searching for
colleges.
One of the biggest parts and
that is.
Thank you
wish to speak.
Please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Share committee members
according to research for
website called teachers.
Average job.
Thirty eight percent culture
dropping out there financial
proble.
This is out of the people forty
to start in the first place so
that's already a lot of people
that aren't allowed to access to
her education that i.
Graduate.
There's forty five percent.
The average of that.
Great.
Thank you others are wish to
please man you up to two minutes
welcome.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Being to take a spam on test
that isn't dependent on great
well so called.
Yeah.
What I received.
What beautiful opportunity of
a lifetime for anyone actually
the students who regret not to
get more effort so this is
through a right not to be in the
full best.
Being able to show everyone that
I got sort of scarships for my
pieces will hopefully motivate.
Students.
Get more scarships.
Meaning that.
The.
A big problem.
Yeah.
The.
We should be able to give.
As.
I was long with having more
choices.
Great thank you others on my
right hand side that we should
speak in sport.
Or eight will go to my left hand
side those who wish to speak in
sport
right stand you would you have a
two minutes welcome
thank you members of the
committee for falling really
proud of these valley
being a proud of value bikes you
get in nineteen sixty nine
was fifties two years ago
this german
has we don't have a position on
this number one as an
association because I so i'm for
the school super tables and the
course of education leaders but
i'll tell you this as a super
temporary twenty seven years and
the maximum we did a lot of
incentivisation
had a special amount of time
in the house schools as we
brought out advanced placement
class then that we can still
advise both student side and
also the teacher start by the
way to see if that had impact on
the opportunity students had as
they moved forward in the simple
answer is yes so much chairman
this thesis is good this is a
good thing to look at and we
support this concept and I
support this concept final point
mr chairman you're gonna say
more than this amount of money
off of household.
Think about that is a better
invest in suits foreign set
thanks for
thank you others on my left
inside the wish speaking sport
please you have up to two
minutes welcome good morning mr
chair and members of the
committee i'm dominication of
this advertising manager at new
mexico kids can we support this
bill and urge your support in
addition to our support we hope
for a future work every junior
has the opportunity to take the
psat for free the psit is an
incredible cost effective tool
to help identify talent among
low income students the psint is
a critical tool for students to
access scholarships and
procedures institutions the psit
is one of the necessary steps to
being a national merit finalist
we believe no student should
face limitations in accessing
this exam nor the opportunities
it on marks due to their social
economic status thank you.
The.
Great thank you others on my
left hand side the wish to speak
in sport.
All right anybody else that I
missed in the room they would
wish to speak.
Alright so we'll go to our zoom
members so crystal
good morning crystal you have up
to two minutes welcome.
The.
You'll need to a mute there you.
The.
But we still good morning can
you hear me we do you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Are you able to.
Good morning I just.
I'm getting.
And now we're not i'm sorry.
Are you able to meet we are now.
But not now
okay awesome I apologize for
that are you I am very proud of
our victims that are there
today.
I'm very think for that are
valley bikings are there today
to support this bill
I met with walter earlier
this semester and his concern
was that.
Valley students were not getting
the opportunity to take
advantage of the national
american colorships and so i'm
definitely in support of any
funding that the students can
receive throughout the state and
to support especially those
schools that have a demographics
where the the financial need is
great.
The.
Cool thank you.
Alright anybody else online that
was speaking sport.
The.
They don't see anybody else.
All right opposition and can't
remember if I went to opposition
but is there any opposition in
our audience or online all right
seeing none will come to
committee representative
thank you mister chair thank you
sponsor for bringing this
forward thank you are students
did a great job
I just want you to know that
university of california did
away with accepting looking at
SAT scores a number of years ago
they that frankly it they looked
at what their student's
performance was over their high
school year and they found it to
be really ridiculous that they
would even look at sat scores
that being said eastern their
lotting universities that still
look at those most of your
ideally still look at those and
it's important to get in a large
sate for at this to the land of
foundations attention a number
of years ago we just started
piting for kids for kids who
wanted to take those scores so
do I believe in this absolutely
should we do it yes it's the
cost minimal yes actually I
don't even know what it costs
any market at you know sponsor
with a cost to take the ps
eighty
mister chair not representative
eighteen dollars yeah and that
can be a lot for some students
in some families so a the point
is you shouldn't have to pay for
that now you're right it's a
very low cost for this state and
thank you for bringing the sport
and that I fully support this
this bill thank you represent
care
thank you mister charit and
thank you students were here for
you so it's great to see all
here thank you for coming today
thank you for speaking in a
great job my question is why are
we only going to reimburse those
who get over a thousand points
because when you go in as an
eleventh grader you don't know
what your score is going to be
but I feel like anybody who is
on a higher education path who
wants to seek to.
Oh qualify for the national
merits colorship I would like
them to know they're going to
get paid for that effort
regardless of how they score so
can you tell me the reasoning.
Thank you mr chair
representative garrett
truthfully when this bill's
first brought to me kind of late
in the legislative
process leading in the intern
leading up to the session and so
we cannot determined that once
the scoring factor as a a way to
perhaps pair down the number of
those students that would
qualify so that we could make
the appropriation more paladable
to try and see if we could you
know get this in in some former
fashion this year and then do
exactly what you're talking
about representative and
increase the scope from there
because you know i've your
hundred percent right mr chair
representative garrett anybody
who wants to take this this test
the second time should be able
to especially with what's at
stake so i'm i'll defer to
walter though mister bradford to
see if he has anything to add.
The.
Covered it
right
and I would just add mister
chair as we always say when we
see high school students here to
know how all you have to be to
run for the house.
It's twenty one years old so
some of you are probably not
that far away from being able to
replace us so think about it
and I will just add how many
people in the panel are former
national merits scars.
I know
didn't realize representative it
was to flex
subtle flex
I
was expecting
anyway thank you very much and
water thank you for your
advocacy we really appreciate as
is another lesson I think to our
students don't ask a question
you don't know the answer to
representative as well speaking
of which
miss determined thank you very
much in representative my sister
was and I had to lower the bar
from my three brothers okay
mister tear mister chairman and
representative at my vehicle I
see that this is not recurring
experience can you tell me why
it's non recurring and it does
not show up also in our burger
that we just passed so helped me
tell me out here mr chairman
representative exal exactly
due to the reasons previously
stated the timing of the request
and trying to being a former
member of a hfc myself trying to
see if we can wiggle somewhere
in that price nice to get in
there being as we were so late
to the game but mister chairman
representative he's all that
those two arm points of the
those who aspects of the bill
again would change and I I do
want to add mister chairman
members of the committee I these
these students are so tenacious
and smart and under a hundred
percent partnered with me
already to figuring out this
issue and if we are unsuccessful
this year with this particular
bill we are very much looking
forward to starting the issue
again in the interim.
And i'm speaking with those
agencies there involved and I
I mister chair represented his
el cannot wait to continue to
work with the students to really
give them a course and how the
new mexico legislative process
works including the budget some
people pay a lot of money for
that knowledge mister chairman
representative
but we're gonna we're gonna
teach a class on it for free so
that's where we are with this
mister chairman sounds like that
might be directed at you
and I would say if anybody could
explain our budget making
process in detail I would
certainly appreciate that
I think all of us really would
miss determined they can yeah
you're exactly right throw it
all in the part and see what
comes out mr chairman
representative do you happen to
know or maybe you're expert
witness might now.
What is the average score
crossed state does everybody
have those speakers.
Mr chairman representatives
all these are all genziers so
i'm sure someone already has it
nine hundred nineteen
i'm reading here on the analysis
that there was fifty thousand
one hundred eleven to mexico
students
that took the test in twenty
twenty two twenty three and left
those there was right at fifty
five hundred that were juniors
and of those juniors about
thirty four percent scored edit
thousand or higher
I understand what you're doing
here
i'm concerned about the
appropriation I do want to be
able to help these kids because
whenever there have been a to
take that the second time they
are eligible for those
scholarship programs the
students down in my area mister
chairman and representative that
are part of the artist of public
school system
I wish all schools had the the
never lence of what we have done
therefore students.
They get scholarships that are
donated by a local
business they have for quite
some time
and it gives these kids the
opportunity to be able to go on
with their life whether it
through college or through a
technical school.
And all they have to do and
return for the scholarship
is to do community service.
So it's continuing to help that
cycle in that particular area to
show these kids what it's going
to take to be able to be
successful unfortunately
that's not the case then a lot
of schools around here but I do
want to think these young people
for being here yellow breath of
fresher
and hope to see you back you're
real soon thank you very much
thank you miss german and thank
you representative for bringing
this forward I I do support this
and
mister chairman I do also growth
my colleague and friend
representative garet is I think
you should be open to ull
students based upon the the
maturity level of it many as
folks that there's a different
mindset between your sophomore
year where you're kind of
figuring things out in your
junior when you start thinking
forward as well I do support the
fact that that they have another
opportunity as a preparing for
you know the planet for
scholarships entrance into
college is so that is something
that I have definitely would
support
mister chairman and the
representative and I would
actually put the secretary of
education why so walk into the
back here one of the I think one
of the other important steps
between that secretary is.
What currently do we have to
support or probably possibly
prepare students to take the psa
from the state do we have any
resources any websites any kind
of creaking themselves as a
state we we have a students may
have access to
sorry mister chairman on the
thread miss secretary I think
that was directed at you
certain.
The chair members can be
repeated
yes we have guidance of coming
out of pair.
We have seen some success with
students knowing.
But also presidents that are
going.
Source of data and information
and how students can go and.
But thank you mister thank you
secretary of milk and I I think
that's important piece of the.
Back when I was in high school
many years ago we took the act
and the call the book to
actually help you prepare for it
was it was a you know paper
binded about this big to prepare
for the act so I guess my
question really is is that if
the state of work talking about
helping our students to you know
beat the odds in and in graduate
from high school and from
college at a higher level we
also had to give them tools and
so that may not be the focus of
this bill but I do think moving
forward we need to take a look
about is how we prepare our
students so that they do have
more opportunity in access to
these scholarships thank you
mister
represent chapter.
Thank you mister chair
I just wanted to just for the
students out there just a quick
brief course in the in the
budget the budget is worked on
all your we're start about
couple of months from now and
will work throughout the year to
to get the lfc framework then it
comes to the house and we we are
appropriations will do the
appropriate house appropriations
house built too the budget is
hospital too then it goes over
to the cynic the senate dire
gathers it all up and put you on
what they want takes out what to
want and then they still it back
to the house for concurrence so
right now we've already done the
framework throughout the year
it's left a house appropriation
so it's gone from us
it's been at the senate the
senate has done pretty much all
of their work I suspect within
the net and the next two three
days it will come back to the
house for concurrence or it's
just cut it's a very late in the
process I totally support to
speel
and if you don't receive a
miracle I will look forward to
working with you on it next
year.
Alright
represent good.
You do pass much better present
I heard representative zell
first of all security colorado
on a due pass motion house bill
one forty two please.
What
reps for yes the percentage of
his out.
Yes.
Yes
yes
our rates are by a vote of ten
to zero you have a due pass on
the house bill one forty two
thank you thank you mister
chairman members of the
committee and that will be back
next year all right we
appreciate it thank you to our
students for testifying him
being here i'm committee members
this is our last of maybe our
last meeting so what i'm going
to do will recess subject to the
call the chair if anything
changes all making announcement
the agenda will go out but at
this point we don't have any
more bills to consider but like
I said it will recently subject
to the call chair
enjoy your free time should we
have it thank you members missed
representative
if this might be our less
reading subject to the call of
the cheer I just want to think
the staff for the job that
they've done and all the members
for the work that they have done
they thank you
