Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow here.
Representative is now.
Representative.
Representative agora.
Here.
Representative Gleim.
I'm here and Mr chair
Representative Chatfield had
message saying he was I think
he's on the web in our link if
you could passion and thank you
thank you I will.
Representative Eli.
Here.
Welcome.
Representative Roybal Caballero
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
Here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garrett.
Chair.
Here.
We do have a quorum.
All right good morning members I
hope you enjoyed our first joint
session with the Senate and it
was informative for you and your
constituents
Representative Chatfield did you
have something before we begin.
I just a little trouble getting
on one to say that I'm here.
All right so so you may you may
in asking questions you may have
to speak up a little bit your
voice was a little faint
So we will go ahead and get
started so
Our vice chair house bill twenty
two grow your own teachers act
do you need anybody to be
summoned from the attendees
list.
Health Canada.
All right more being.
Promoted.
Or demoted whichever your
perspectives.
Okay.
Representative please house bill
twenty thank you.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you members of the Education
Committee it is my greatest
honor to introduce amendments to
the house bill twenty to grow
your own teachers acts dollars
shipped today are.
Instructional aides are
educational assistance are
thousands of professionals and
para professionals that work in
our schools in a variety of
capacities and are are actually
among the lowest rate of our
school employees
Workload and many of our current
teachers are former educational
assistants and aides and this is
our best group of people all to
grow our teacher pipeline also
these workers come from the
communities and the
neighborhoods where our schools
are so many of our educational
assistance our speakers of
Spanish of Navajo Candace this
maze and that's why to me it is
so important to support them and
becoming certified teachers that
can make up the difference is
that our schools need so this
bill house bill twenty two
expands the eligibility for
those who qualify for the grow
your own teachers acts
scholarships we started this
program when we passed in and
twenty nineteen.
Our educational assistance with
the cost of getting our teacher
license formerly.
United States Sen this changes
are this that they just have to
be authorized to work in New
Mexico this is is something that
became evident right after the
bill passed we have to work in a
public school situation for at
least two years to be eligible
for the scholarship and they
have to be enrolled in or
accepted by a public
undergraduate teacher
preparation program in the state
and they have to have
demonstrated financial need for
the scholarship so bill responds
to the challenges we've had an
implementation and I might add I
think over three hundred people
around the state have benefited
from it.
Expands the definition of who
can be eligible some people have
the title thank you educational
system so now this expands to
people who work with students
for two years regardless of that
specific title since districts
use different terms for a
similar position again it
authorizes people who are
legally.
Eligible to work in New Mexico
whether they have a green card
or they're on a path to
citizenship it also continues to
grow professionally
as long as there is a minimum of
disruption and and they may be
required to make up that time.
Now the additional amendment
which came to my attention from
the governor's office is that
sometimes people Representative
can we stick to to the actual
bill and then.
Then we'll go to the because
we'll have to move to discuss
the amendment so Cisco.
And then we don't pass the bill.
All right.
Awesome so
What we will do is if we wish to
move into the amendment all
entertain a motion Mr chairman I
move that we move the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Great thank you representative
is I think that was
Representative Lotta with the
second if.
Hearing voices correctly so
Representative Gary please if
you could read the two oh two
number for us please.
Number is.
Wait one second.
Three.
Okay.
Two one nine three nine two
point three.
All right so should be on the
top of our share file for
everyone okay.
Representative care to explain
the amendment please.
Yes requires public schools to
grant professionally to
educational assistance to pursue
teacher preparation course work
if they meet certain conditions
and those conditions near the
requirements within house bill
twenty two except that they do
not have to demonstrate
financial need or be a recipient
of the specific scholarships and
the governor's office approached
me about this because someone
fell out of eligibility because
our financial situation change
and they wanted to continue
being able to take the lead to
finish their degree also the
amendment has some cleanup
changes the settlement language
from the statutes in this bill
that were outdated are related
to the implementation of
increased requirements for EA's
license to work in title one
programs in the early two
thousands so it just means.
Educational system in.
Has worked for two years is
authorized to work in the United
States they can also take the
kind of leave scholarship act
and the clean up language and
that's that.
Representative.
Can I ask are.
If I think Canada family if you
would like to add anything or
Chelsea would you like to be
just available for questions.
Mr chair representative Garrett
thank you I don't have anything
to add all be here on the line
if anyone has any technical
questions.
Thank you.
We stand open for questions Mr
chairman all right so we are on
the amendment so discussion on
just the amendment.
Mr chair of the amendment great
thank you Representative
Figueroa.
Second by Representative Lente
is there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment.
All right see none
Representative guarantee have an
amended bill so has still twenty
two has been amended
and I assume you're finished
with your presentation so we
will go on to the audience all
right so I will start off people
jumping the gun before
instructions those in.
Opposition to house bill twenty
two we'll start off with the
opposition.
All right Sen mix it up keep
everybody in the attendees list
on their toes.
All right so we'll go to support
is there support for house bill
twenty twos Amanda.
All right.
So.
A good amount of people I see
some people remember you need to
have your first and last name if
you have an organization name
please put the name of the
person who is representing that
organization also please be
brief in your comments and not
repetitive of anybody that may
have gone before you so with
that T. J. Trujillo.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is TJ to
remote or registered lobbyists
for western governors university
western governors university is
a nonprofit online university
for funded by the western
governors recently we.
Enter into a MOU with western
New Mexico university to
engage in a partnership to help
expand their online education
opportunities for students in
New Mexico one of the markers
that was identified was we want
to jump in and help educate work
teachers online throughout the
state this is an excellent
opportunity this particular bill
we strongly strongly urged
committee to pass this and thank
you representatives for engaging
in this discussion.
Great thank you.
All right madam secretary.
Thank you so much chair I am a
guest and I am the acting
cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico higher education
department I would like to
express support on both behalf
with governor Michelle lu Han
Grisham and the agency for H. B.
twenty two you have already made
the important decision to
support the scholarship program
in the past and now
Representative Gary education
leaders and advocates have
collaborated to expand
eligibility so more New Mexicans
can qualify and we can continue
to increase the number of
educational assistance and
instructional aides pursuing
passed to teacher licensure just
a quick data update your
investment has supported nearly
one hundred fifty scholarship
recipients and we expect that
number to surpass two hundred
fifty after this semester great
teachers great great students
and expanding the scholarship
program of support educators in
our children thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you madam secretary
all right so we'll go to
actually long.
Good morning actually.
When you Mr chair members of the
committee I will try to be quick
when originally passed in twenty
nineteen to grow your own
teachers act did not anticipate
that specific job titles would
be exclusionary additionally
continued support an eligibility
expansion of this program may
help lessen the chronic a number
of teaching positions in New
Mexico public schools which are
vacant.
As noted by the legislative
education study committee this
type of program has shown
success with recruiting and
retaining diverse teaching
candidates there's a clear
demand for this program since
twenty nineteen approximately
three hundred students have
received support from the
scholarship program with that my
name again is actually long with
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico and we stand
in strong support of the bill
thank you chairman great thank
you.
All right we'll go to stand.
Mr rounds good morning.
Earning Mr chairman thank you
very much stand rounds on behalf
of the New Mexico school
superintendents in the college
of education leaders we see
we've stood in support of this
concept since two thousand
nineteen we believe the language
included here and is going to
help us continue to open the
stream and remove on unintended
blockages that we have and we
urge the committed on cyber
thank you right thank you.
All right we'll go to John.
John good morning morning thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor are we stand in strong
support of this measure odd not
only supporting our educators
represented by if T. and and and
NEA I also are representing that
tens of thousands of workers
around the state many of whom
have families with children in
our in our schools who would
very much benefit from this as
well so thank you very much
committee members right thank
you.
All right Kathy.
Good morning Cathy.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Kathy Lee body executive
director of the New Mexico
independent community colleges
the MICC stand in support of
house bill twenty two we very
much appreciate the expansion of
the definition of school
employee we would ask that you
consider in addition to
including students enrolled in
undergraduate teacher education
programs that you also consider
students enrolled in alternative
teacher licensure programs many
of our community colleges offer
the first two years of the
teacher education program but in
addition they offer alternative
teacher licensure programs and
this would provide an additional
passed for the students thank
you very much.
Thank you Kathy.
All right.
Right good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and Rick we
have representing the.
Can them and the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we
wholeheartedly support house
bill twenty two as amended as a
clear pathway to the teacher
pipeline thank you for your
support Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you.
Denisse.
Good morning to needs.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I
introduce us US policy analyst
with PED standing in support of
HB twenty to on behalf PED we
thank the sponsor for bringing
the bill forward we hope this
will encourage more people to
join the teaching profession
thank you.
Great thank you.
All right we'll go to mark.
Morning Marc.
Morning Mr chair March vero the
executive director New Mexico
State University president this
also want to just reinforce each
other's sentences secretary rod
Regus I also want to thank the
governor for leadership this is
something that our deans and
directors are because of
education had concerns with back
in two thousand nineteen and the
amendment and the bill addresses
concerns of professional Lee
along with expanding others to
be able to take part of this
scholarship so with that we sent
a Mexico councilmember State
president stands for this thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you.
All right.
Really make good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am the only
may Ortiz legislative liaison
for the New Mexico school board
association and the association
has educator recruitment
retention of preparation is one
of our top priorities for are
legislative sessions research
indicates grow your own programs
have shown success when
recruiting and retaining
candidates this bill expands the
scholarship program scope and
allows educational systems to be
included to include also
employees who work directly with
students for two years so this
extensible teachers and that's
what we like and so The New
Mexico's Cooper association
supports this legislative action
and we ask you to consider it
favourably thank you Mr chairman
right thank you.
All right so we'll go to Ellen.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chair Ellenberg
steam from the Albuquerque
teachers federation I appreciate
the sponsor and I think this is
a fantastic bill and I think the
amendments only make it better
we whole heartedly supported
thank you very much.
Right thank you so much so that
was it for the attendees list
will come to panel
Anybody.
Representative Chatfield please.
Remember please speak up a
little bit thank you Mr chairman
again you have a.
Are you know.
Yes the see more great be owned
by I look at how much we need
teachers in the state of New
Mexico and my only question is
the artist says must demonstrate
financial need I say that this
bill gives other opportunities
such as professional lead to
these systems and I think
there's a lot of young mothers
that are.
Their children go to school and
they just go and working as an
educational system again in
there and I think you know maybe
maybe I could be a teacher and
they've got a lot of the
qualifications already under
their belt so I'm wondering if I
why do why would they have to
demonstrate the financial need
in order to get that leave and
get that time is actually going
to be a teacher especially in
the circumstances were in that
work we really really need
teachers that the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chatfield the
financial need is only if they
want to apply for the
scholarship but if they worked
as an E. eight and they don't
have financial need for two
years then they're eligible to
get the the leave from a
position of a of an EA or
instructional aide they can have
the benefit to have that
professional we this bill is
really directed at people who
have been school employees for
two years.
Thank you Mr chairman your.
All right further questions from
the committee.
Okay Representative is L.
please.
Mr chairman thank.
Thank you very much.
Representative.
Excuse me as it once last.
Rectus Representative Garrett.
This is going to be consistent
with schools throughout our
state or will there be some
different well as whether or not
a time needs to be made up how
are you going to ensure that
everybody is doing the same
thing.
Mr chair and representative
great question.
This is working out not only at
a district level but is school
level
I know that in Gallup the
University of New Mexico branch
campus actually worked with the
school district to offer courses
like on Friday afternoons and
weekends so there's a lot of
creativity and how school
administration and district
administration implements it
it's something that we can't
dictate how an individual school
district works it out but from
what I've heard and some of the
surveys that miss Canada took on
it is working but there has to
be communication I know in my
own school for example I and II
EA wasn't and this program
because it didn't exist yet.
She had problems getting I'm not
doing her duty after school in
order to make to her classes on
time so this bill really asked
that it administrative errors on
their part working with people
who are doing this program a to
mutually benefit each other so
it it's not a one size is going
to work in every school and
district but it has to be worked
out I hope that answers your
question.
Will you kind of made it a
little bit more money you're for
me because if one school is
allowed to do one thing and then
another school district does
something else and then.
The school district in the San
Juan area does something else
how are we going to be.
Able to say no if if there is
another school district let's
take for instance like Arthur if
they go down this route are the
guidelines going to be in place
for any sort of consistency on
how.
How this is going to take place
and that's my concern over
everybody should be toward
treated I understand that not
all school districts are the
same and I have said that many
many times but as far as Pyle
following the bill and the
changes that you have in this I
really feel like it should be.
More guidance from PED over what
should take place there.
And if there are exclusions may
be something to go to be Indian
riding us for those late of sep
exclusions.
I thank you Mr chair
representative.
Hasn't really been a problem
that I've heard of of course I
don't hear anything as as the
bill out there.
It worked out very
serendipitously around the state
and I would imagine that if
there was a problem on either
the school delivering the
teacher education program
would be and and contact or they
would go to PED but as I
understand it has worked out
well and the guidelines is to
give the leave and that the
person receiving the Lee may be
requested to make up the comp
time okay okay.
Well if districts are using the
title to funding to support the
the certification
Could be misconstrued as being
double dipping.
And representative is there is
either racial or Chelsea can you
answer that question.
Mr chair representative is
there's no requirements in the
bill currently for school
districts to provide any
financial support
how the scholarship is currently
administered is there's an
appropriation to HSD de and then
H. U. D. has some sort of
formula where they distribute
awards to the institutions
Maybe
Representative Garrett mentioned
in her comments about some
cleanup language within the
amendment and she was tying that
to title one requirements
can you maybe clarify your
question if that doesn't answer
your question will it depend on
how the school uses their title
to funds.
For that individual to have a
scholarship it they're going
into schools going to pay for
and.
I just want to make sure that
there's no discrepancy here as
far as that title to money gets
used.
And
I just it.
I just don't want any school to
fall under.
Scrutiny by anybody by alleging
that there might be the
possibility of double dipping
especially if it's for the same
course at the.
Individual has already taken so
I dunno that's.
I'm just very concerned there I
just don't want any.
Anything to come down on the
school district if this certain
person is trying to better
themselves okay.
So the concern is still there as
far as I'm concerned one other
question that I do have
I'm.
Because we are trying to expand
our early childhood education
why doesn't this includes those
particular people.
Representative Mr chairman.
Question.
Mr chairman and and
Representative
Address specifically outside of
the public school realm and easy
eight who's serving as an eighty
eight and a public school all
pre K. program would be eligible
the early childhood education
and care department has lots of
strings of scholarships and
there's other resources for
someone who is working outside
of the public school system at
this time.
And I don't know if Chelsea are
Rachel if you want to add
anything to that.
Madam chair representative as
the representative mentioned you
teach scholarships and
incentives scholarships that are
made I'm sorry I can't hear you.
You have.
Representative sorry about that
you have teach scholarships and
incentives that are funded
through the early childhood care
and education department we can
get you more information about
those scholarships but they've
been funded through both CYFD
and PED in the past for folks
that are working in pre K.
settings to get credentialed in
the early childhood world so
there are other streams of
funding as a representative
mentioned.
This is on top of what we're
trying to accomplish here then
I'm assuming is what you're
saying is that right miss
cultural and Representative.
Mr chair representative as an
additional scholarship
opportunity that's intended to
take folks in in particular in a
school setting.
who might be interested in
becoming a teacher who have been
working with kids to transition
them into a teaching license and
what I would say is you have
multiple multiple opportunities
for different types of people
that you guys have been funding
that attempts to recruit folks
from different different sectors
different
Types of jobs into the teaching
profession and to get credential
so I wouldn't say it's
duplicative I think you just you
have a.
Multiple strategies you've been
implementing over the last few
years to try to grow your
teaching force in your early
childhood education workforce.
Mr chair and representative miss
schedule thank you for that so
what you're saying is it is
going to be in an it's totally
someplace else in the PED rules
or statutes.
Okay.
That's correct okay thank you
very much for your responses.
Thank you so much Representative
so before I go to Representative
Figueroa for a motion on this I
would just like to say that I
appreciate Representative
Garrett all your hard work on on
this
this initiative over the past
few years I think it's it's it's
certainly has been long overdue
that we recognize and try to
assess to all employees in our
school in the system in their at
their
continued education and and
their role in recognizing their
important role within within our
school you know I tell that
story a lot of of my wife is an
educationalist assistant
when she started out in
education and and being in that
role she was able to work with
somebody that was a great mentor
to work and utilizes a lot of
the same thing she was taught in
that role by the teacher she
worked within her capacity now
is a is a fine arts teacher and
and I think that's true among
staff a lot of our school
employees that are so important
to on the daily functioning of
our school in the success of our
students so really appreciate
your continued efforts in
bringing this forward it's it's
a really awesome initiative so
with that Representative
Figueroa.
Mr chairman I move in and do the
estate do pass.
Right now all right so into we
have an enthusiastic two passed
by Representative Figueroa a a
second by Representative
Sweetser
Madam secretary if you call the
rolling to do past motion plays
for House Bill twenty two is
amended.
Representative.
Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dow all.
Representative dal.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Gleim.
Yes.
Representative Ladda absolutely
yes.
Representative leads to.
In and do the estate yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Absolutely yes.
Representative thankful ten.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yep.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Garrett sure.
Yes.
The.
We have thirteen to see how all
right I noticed thirteen two
zero you have a unanimous do
pass on house bill twenty two is
amended thank you
representative.
The half of all the recipients
in future recipients.
All right so with that we will
go to house bill one twenty
eight.
So give everybody a moment to
pull that all this information
up on share file.
so we have Representative
Sariñana.
Returning star representative in
the audience can you raise your
hand please so we can pull you
into the meeting.
All right.
All right good morning
Representative is everybody here
that is a part of your
presentation Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman yes I have
two expert witnesses and they
should be raising their hands
Munoz Capellen Julie Garcia.
All right Marty SQL if you could
raise your hand please.
Right.
Saving may I say I appreciate
the call Representative when
you're ready house bill one
twenty eight.
Right good morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
am representative Debbie Syriana
and I am here to present house
bill one twenty eight.
schools are expected to be a
safe environment for children
but it seems like it has become
commonplace to see news stories
involving the rest of teachers
were being charged with sexual
abuse and misconduct involving
their students these arrests
make people realize kids aren't
as safe as we'd like them to be
when we send them off to school.
Child abuse including sexual
abuse of students is rarely a
coincidence and for some school
house predators it becomes a way
of life.
Left unchecked these predators
can leave a trail of molestation
that stretches across many years
and countless student lives.
For some of these repeat
offenders finding a new job is
the best way to stay one step
ahead of their past some of them
on before raising suspicion
while others depart only after
accusations against them have
player.
These educators and abuse are
often help by school officials
who let them quietly slip away
when allegations arise.
This practice of passing the
trash finally has our undivided
attention and it must be
addressed.
House memorial fifty seven
requested that New Mexico PED
convene a task force to identify
issues of concern regarding the
investigating reporting and
documentation of ethical
misconduct within the public
school system.
The task force was to develop a
strategic plan to address these
concerns including discussions
of hiring practices training
practices reporting practices
and policies additionally the
task force is to was to study
potential legislative changes to
existing statute pertaining to
ethical misconduct among school
staff relating to investigating
reporting and statewide
processes partition disciplinary
action.
The vast majority of educators
take seriously the
responsibility placed on their
shoulders shoulders for those
that plan and.
And that and eight students down
the road to abuse to include
sexual abuse they must be broken
they have broken a sacred trust
and we must do everything we can
to make sure they never set foot
in another school.
This bill is a recommendation of
the task force.
And Mr chairman I'd like to
defer to my expert with witness
is for additional comments.
Please which expert which you
might have go first.
Julie would you like to start.
I'll start.
The two.
The New Mexico Public School
Insurance Authority has been
experiencing an increased number
of claims and increased severity
for molestations by school
employees this this bill really
it goes to a couple things one
it changes the school personnel
act so that allows principles
and super or superintendents to
let other school districts now
that someone has had an
allegation of sexual molestation
or sexual misconduct it also Inc
expands the definition of school
employee to include school
volunteers and school
contractors like school bus
contractors so that all all the
people involved in the school
environment or not required
required to report.
And that's.
Anything else you'd like me to
say Representative thank you
know Mr chairman thank you Julie
how about Marty you want to add
anything from this year.
Mr thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I I am general counsel for the
New Mexico public school
insurance authority of Richard
Alario could not be here today
because he is in the you see a
budget advisory committee
meeting or else he would be here
both the the the prior executive
director Christine Chavis and
Richard and myself up spent
quite a bit time with the house
memorial task force which I
would say did very very good
work had extensive meetings and
really looked at a lot of these
scenarios and
of the bill that's before you
was a was a product of a lot of
thought for work in time looking
into the situation
unfortunately last year's last
few years we've had a number of
very high dollar
settlements that we have to be
paid out based on educator
misconduct some very unfortunate
so I believe really strongly
that this bill with the
increased responsibilities
regarding background checks
disclosures but especially
training of staff with regard to
their rights to to report it is
going to make a huge difference
for us in terms of preventing
this type of misconduct in in
the bottom line in the best
interest of students to protect
them
I know that there is no funding
to in this bill with regard to
the need for training but the
authority has a volunteer to
assist in that area and I guess
the only other thing that I
would I would mention at this
time that needs to be considered
eventually is that presently PED
only has two investigators to
look into misconduct across the
state and I think eventually
that issue really needs to be
addressed by by your body but
but now.
For the last this is a very good
and strong bill that I believe
is going to make a very big
difference in the lives of
students educators and the
proper operation the public
education system I cannot speak
more highly of the bill nor can
I minimize it all the work that
to that took place to get here
so thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr spell and Mr
chairman with that a stand for
questions.
Thank thank you representative
so we'll go to the attendees
list is there anybody in support
and wish to speak on house bill
one twenty eight.
What rates are.
All right so go to Willie Mae.
Welcome back.
Thank you Mr chairman good
member Mr good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee lily more teas
representing the New Mexico
school board association Mr
chairman and members we support
this legislation NMAA BA had are
executive directors said as a
representative on the task force
and we clearly appreciate a
place of the table on this
conversation and and be part of
the good work that resulted well
the bill increases the
responsibilities administrative
requirements of our
superintendents and will also
require additional policies to
be double belt by school boards
with out any additional funding
we feel the intent of this
legislation and the best
practices that will result to
create safe environment
environments for students is
critical and should be
implemented in our schools and
so with that we support this
legislation wholeheartedly and
ask for favorable consideration
by this committee thank you Mr
chair great thank you.
Welcome back good morning Mr
chairman thank you very much Sir
Mr remembers the committee stand
rounds for the school
superintendents and education
leaders in New Mexico I sat on
this task force and I would
indicate to the committee this
is an actual piece of work to
mitigate a lot of the risks we
have with our predatory habits
by those of my try to come in to
our employees it allows us to
our champion the issue of
reducing the past the trash
issues that occurred is starkly
we believe the lower the
liability and we think that the
way this is put together will
allow us to articulate with both
the insurance authority and also
the public education department
while as we work to mitigate
these risks this is good this is
good legislation we urge that
you supported thank.
Thank you all right Jerry.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name is Gerry
modest on the policy analyst for
the New Mexico office of the
Attorney General we stand in
support of this bill our office
has been involved in several
cases that have shown the gaps
in our system an oversight that
result in tremendous amounts of
trauma and fiscal loss to school
districts while also seeing the
positive rates of collaborating
with teachers and administrators
to root out child abuse and we
think the sponsor for bringing
this important legislation that
we believe will strengthen those
positives thank you.
Right thank you.
All right is there anybody in
the attendees list that wishes
to speak in opposition to house
bill one twenty eight.
Since opposition.
Very good morning this morning
my name is Anna Marie Luna and
I'm the acting director for
protective services with the
children youth and families Mr
chair and members of the
committee the children youth and
families department has concerns
related to this proposed
legislation I'm in this while we
absolutely believe that children
deserve to be safe
in all settings particularly we
hope in our school settings and
we support the training in this
bill the background screening on
this legislation and does.
Expand the
Requirement and the New Mexico
children's code under thirty two
eighty and requires that the
reports are transmitted to law
enforcement and the department
the department and this
legislation being children youth
and families department so will
require us to investigate
reports against adults who are
not parents right now are
already is to investigate and
the abuse and neglect related to
parents or guardians the impact
to our agency would be
significant and terms of
staffing to be able to do the
intake for those reports as well
as investigating thank you Mr
chair members of the committee.
Right thank you.
Sir anymore opposition.
All right see none will return
to the committee is so
Representative Trujillo please
the.
Thank you Mr chairman
this is a bill that so long time
coming when I served in the
state school board I we talked
about this many many years ago I
served for eight years as an
elected member I
also work with and heard from
Julie Garcia and Mincio about
all of the issues that we were
being brought up regarding the
Negative behaviors from teachers
and school administrators and
what I wanted to say was that.
I appreciate the title of the
bill because it says school
personnel not to
Not just teachers and in the
past there was always this.
Need to say that it was teachers
that were acting out and
Initiating all these negative
things
those of us who have been in the
school system for many years I
taught for twenty one they've
been involved for many years.
It was always a range of school
personnel not just teachers so
it's important to know that
we're we're talking about
passing the trash.
It involves a lot of people and
some people would never suspect
so this is really critical to
ensure that the we have
oversight over who is
interacting with their kids
making sure that we don't.
place them back in spaces where
kids are are vulnerable thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative next on
my list Representative Ladda.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to to the to the presenters and
I want to thank our
Representative study I know for
bringing this bill for this is a
really important bill that I
think is going to address many
issues that we have in in our
schools but I do have a question
though is you know sometimes we
have contractors that come from
outside to work within our
schools and they're not
considered of employees so is
there any measure of you thought
of a way that outside.
Contractors are coming to work
in the schools are can report to
the school district or a or have
background checks done on their
employees prior to coming into
the schools Mr chair.
Thank thank you Mr chairman I
would like to defer to my expert
witnesses.
Mr chair representative the bill
includes contractors and
requires contractors to also
have them go through training as
well as background checks so we
did include contractors in in
the bill.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative study on a one
other thing I want like to
emphasize is that the at the
that people who do come to apply
the school districts have to pay
their own background checks so
that wouldn't be a burden on to
school districts thank you Mr
chair thank you representative.
Great thank you and and it in
the bill in the bill languages
page agents including
contractors and much of the
language miss Garcia mention and
then on page nine near the
bottom is contractors
subcontractors laid out on page
nine of the bill Representative
Gleim.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill my first question it's it's
just a minor point but I I just
want to bring to your attention
Mr chair so we look on page
eight.
paragraph B. as in boy E..
The the new language range the
children youth and families
department and a law enforcement
agency and so this paragraph.
What is saying basically is if
I'm let's say I'm a school
volunteer and and I make a
report to CYFD or law
enforcement agency that that
those agencies have to send me
notice within five days that
they're looking into of the
report which I think is a good
thing but but the language that
I would would suggest is it says
the children youth and families
department and a law enforcement
agency I think maybe to work or
much better because I think what
the language actually implies
that I have to make a report to
both of those entities before I
get noticed back.
That a report is being
investigated and I know that one
of more frustrating things is
when you make a report to an
agency and then you don't ever
hear back and you don't know
whether they took it seriously
you don't know whether they're
they're acting upon it so that
would be I guess my my first.
Question or suggestion and not
and maybe Mr chair they have
some feedback on that point.
Mr chairman I'd like to defer to
my experts this is again.
Mr chair representative I think
that would be a good idea either
the intent all along was that
the report would be made to
either agency and that the two
agencies would then coordinate.
Thank you Mr chair yeah that's
up one and I think it's just the
way that we can kind of close up
a loophole there that that
wasn't intended to exist
and then my next question is how
would Senate president
Representative Lane if I if I
may interrupt for a moment so
you know we do have the twenty
four hour rule for substantive
amendments however I see this as
relatively benign and I think
it's a it's a good suggestion
and doesn't change the scope for
interpretation of the bill
so I would defer to committee on
moving if Representative Gleim
if you could move that as an
amendment
So Mr chair I would I would move
that on page eight line nineteen
it be amended to read youth and
families department or a law
enforcement agency.
Mr chair great so we have a a
proposed amendment for
discussion and it's changing the
and two one four on page eight
one nineteen so that it reads
youth and families department or
a law enforcement agency so
discussion from the committee
on.
This amendment this proposed
amendment.
Okay.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment.
Okay.
I see none you have an amended
bill changing that and to one or
thank you Representative thank
please continue.
Thank you Mr president you
interjection I think that was
helpful and then my other.
Question center around Page ten.
If we can look at.
The new subparagraph the.
As an editor.
So my understanding that when we
just get some confirmation so I
don't go down a rabbit trail
here might my understanding Mr
chair.
Is that the one of the main
purposes are themes of this bill
is to try to
protect our students from having
contact with either employees or
volunteers that have acted
inappropriately towards students
in the past or really any
children doesn't have to be
student and is this concept of a
pass the trash is that correct
Mr chair.
That is correct Mr chairman.
Thank you for that confirmation
and and so when we look at this
definition of the coal
misconduct by.
School employees or volunteers a
contractors I think it captures
that gene and that purpose but
my my concern is.
If we look at the first
subparagraph one in line ten.
Still on page ten.
Is I think it introduces the
concept that the different than
what the theme for the purpose
of the bill is and what it what
it basically says that at the
core misconduct means and then
it uses this phrase
discriminatory comments.
And so my understanding of the
law is discrimination is usually
based on a practice or action.
and not so we words that a
person may have said and and I
don't see any time limitations
that in within this subparagraph
so my concern for teachers
specifically would be if I was a
teacher or school employee at
this provision would concern me
because we're not talking about
comments of a sexual nature or
moral turpitude it just says the
security comments or practice
based on and then it lists
several items and so I would be
concerned if I have you know I
tweet out there when I was
eighteen years old
that this could be used to to
not only
Require that I'd be found of
guilty of misconduct or
misconduct is actually provision
later that requires other
employees to than report me so.
Mr chair I would appreciate some
some feedback on this concept of
discriminatory comments it seems
that that's a lot different
thing than what the bill trying
to produce.
Mr chairman I defer to my expert
witnesses.
Mr Mr chair representative.
I believe that the issue and
discriminatory comments would be
an issue that would Madam fall
into the investigation of PED to
determine the relevancy of those
comments to the
potential ethical ethical
misconduct.
Mr thank you Mr chair can can
Mr.
Excuse me Mr chairman Mr rest
well.
Please go ahead you can feel
free to interject when when the
representative differs.
Okay so I I I I I.
I understand the concern here
but I think what we're trying to
capture is comments that are in
inappropriate or improper that
that need to be raised and and
then
You know allowing the
investigation to to to occur so
in in a case where a comment is
made that
Is questionable.
That Madam dot com type of
conduct would at least there'd
be some duty to.
To investigate it or to
mention it a refers to it in
order to see what's substance it
has because sometimes these
things grow from comments that
are inappropriate and and in New
Mexico into something so much
more substantial so I think that
was the intent behind that
language and certainly not all
comments are going to rise to
that level but but that would
suggest here is to to make sure
that these comments of concern
are reported to the authorities
to allow it to be investigated.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
know within this idea though we
when you talk about comments
that that rise to levels of
conduct and that really which
talk about is then you're
talking about a practice.
And and that's the traditional
concept that's embedded in the
law when it comes to
discrimination is a pattern or
practice or physical conduct or
something of that nature does
all make sense to me and and
those there are very important
and they need to be part of this
bill.
but if we just read the plain
language of the bill
which is what a court would do I
frankly they don't really get
into the intent of the
legislature and less there is
ambiguity about what the words
mean but here I don't think
there's any ambiguity it it says
the ethical misconduct means.
Discriminatory comments.
and that in of itself is an
ethical violation
so I I have real concerns about
that on behalf of you know
teachers and any school employee
or volunteer
and again I support the bill the
theme of the bill is great and
so it just struck me as I was
preparing for this morning this
this concept of discriminatory
comments seem to be out of place
with what this bill is trying to
do so those are my my comments
Mr chair thank you.
Thank you representative.
All right so you do not have any
other members on my list what is
the will of the committee.
Mr chair I move it to pass.
So we have to do.
Senate okay okay a second by
Representative Garrett that's
fine Representative is L. you
wish to ask questions make
comments.
Interviewed Mr chairman I
apologize I could not get my.
Computer to go right but I do
have a couple questions just for
clarification.
In reading through the bill
I have to find the right one
there is a definition and
Representative US hearing Jana
and Mr chairman there is a
definition for a student but
throughout the one seeing.
There is.
A definition for child but
there's not one for student and
throughout your bill I am
funding.
The court is stating.
Child or student and then a few
more pages over its student or
child can you tell me what the
differentiation is there.
Why why are we putting in.
One or the other and walking
them out.
Mr chairman I would defer to my
expert witnesses again please.
Could you repeat the the the
question again Representative.
Mr chair representative mistress
cabal yes I will throughout the
the bill I am reading and
especially in the native
language that was proposed for
this bill there is no definition
that I can find of a student
unless I'm missing it but all
this new language it says
contact with children or a
child.
Can you different tell me what
the difference is between a
child.
Student and why is consistent
throughout this bill.
and a real good example is the
first one I ran across was on
page T. and
line nineteen.
Fondling a student or child and
then you go on down
inappropriate online twenty four
inappropriate sexual contact
with the child or student line
twenty five or to induce a child
or student.
Why are we making it one in the
same.
I I I I believe I I remember I
looked at that Representative Mr
chairman and I I felt as though
the the term of the child
student was interchangeable and
in I I I understand your point
but I think that that.
That that the terms are
interchangeable and I I always
look at other
statute us on this I think
that's the way it's used in
other statutes student.
Okay Mister chairman
Representative Mr spell
if you'll turn to page thirteen
of the bill.
One seventeen and you can take
it all the way to the bottom and
is talking about the child or
the student child or student
from the student but then you go
on to page fourteen.
Line eight.
And it's saying it.
Inducing in a child to engage
with the student and that
particular.
For B. drive there there's been
added to this bill.
And then again we on page
fifteen online eleven
unsupervised contact with
children.
Still is not included there and
then online twenty it's the same
thing.
Child student is not included
there I'm just kind of curious
as to why we are not being.
All the way through on this.
And.
On page seventeen on line is his
contact with children.
Mr.
Curious why we are not of making
this work it's either one of the
same.
And line eight page eighteen is
the same way there.
Mr chair representative I
believe that I could set it I
think the terms are
interchangeable but that
sometimes sounds like something
that could be the privative I
don't know if there was a a
purpose
behind it other than I think we
we given what the mention of
students and child children in
other statues I think that terms
right changeable but believe
that could be could be is
sufficiently address on us there
is any thought process behind.
excluding students and certain
seconds statute but not others
for the.
And director good job could you
provide some some clarity and
all this.
Mr chairman and and
Representative I think you want
to take a really close look
there are instances where you
are trying to protect students
within a school from somebody
who may have had inappropriate
contact with.
A student or a child so somebody
who isn't part of that school
and so I think the term there
are reasons why you were using
the term student or child in
different places but it meaning
many did it take a fine tooth
comb through the through the act
and make sure it's being used
accurately in each of those
places but I would just probably
have a.
A reason why you are using this
to different terms in here.
Turner students.
Mr chair representative
miscarriage that's all I think
it does work right if you.
And like I said I I can't find
it right now but I do agree
where there was a definition of
the child but there's no
definition of a student so I
think it warrants.
A closer look at this.
Mr chair representative.
Mr as compelling as scheduled
thank you for your responses.
Thank all knows no thank you
representative is out I think
being that this is part of a
Pretty lengthy process so it's a
lot of by and I think that
we have an issue where
we can certainly go through the
bill and I'm sure that there are
instances where it is clear may
not be clear
By if we can hold off on
accepting the do passed motion
to we get some clarity on on
this issue I think it's a it's a
good issue to bring up in the
distinctions why is there in
some cases and why it may not be
there so that's something that I
think in the in the meantime you
all can spend a little time
clear clearing up to making sure
that that all is ship shape and
what the definition is because I
think it's a it's a good gray
area we need to make sure that
we get that part of the bill
straightened out before we pass
it along but if you could do
that as soon as possible we'll
be happy to schedule it again
Representative and bring the
amendment S. applicable in in
the should we look and really
say that there is and then we
can review it and
Representative.
Right thank you Mr chairman.
Representative please Mr chair
if I Mr Lovell and Misco chill I
I do have my bill.
Mark with all the where there is
a discrepancy there between
child and student I would be
glad to meet with them and the
bill sponsor to see what we can
do to get this problem
straightened out thank you very
much.
Definitely no I think the
committee recognizes the
importance of this piece of
legislation moving forward it's
super super important if we make
sure we get those distinctions I
think it would be really to the
benefit of the committee
especially moving forward that
we have that sort of clarity on
distinction between child and
student and when and when not
appropriate to use one of the
other it would be at a good
education for our committee as
well so I think that's a good
distinction.
but thank you represents are not
if you would just keep us all in
contact so we can like I said I
think all of us recognize the
importance of this and want to
see this move to a forward as
quickly as possible because this
is a lot of good work.
You Mr chairman okay thank you
thank you thank you excellent
thank you.
Right so we will move.
For.
To the house bill one seventy
one.
Everybody with your wait time
share file.
We can open up.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary.
Right she is being promoted.
Good morning representatives do
you have an expert here to join
us.
Yes Mr chair Ellen burns Steen.
Okay bring her on as the
panelists I appreciate it.
All right so we have everybody
here Representative Ferrary
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
committee this is house bill one
seventy one and it's providing
for program units for license
school employee certified by the
national board for professional
teaching standards and as in our
legislative education study
committee we've heard for many
years how important it is that
we recognized and also
Reimburse or or to motivate
people with higher salary
opportunities if they get
different certifications and to
have that
means of
permit.
Promoting their education and
their certifications and we've
done that for teachers now we're
looking at also providing that
for counselors and other
certified
Within the school system but and
what this is.
Does that the bills before in
committees suggested that we
exclude administrative positions
so there's not that concerned
this time as we taking care of
that in this bill with that I'd
like to introduce Ellen Byrne
steam as my expert.
Ellen.
Thank you Representative Mr
chairman members of the
committee we've heard this bill
before and I want to just say
thank you to Representative
Christine Trujillo for carrying
the bill several times some of
those times the bill passed the
house and the Senate and went up
to the governor but was not
successful as
In terms of passing into law for
those of you new to the
Education Committee national
board certification is very
rigorous process for an added
credential and the credential is
not like going to school and
getting another degree
what I tell teachers and others
often is that when you go back
to college to get another degree
if you got your first great
you're probably going to be
successful.
Three.
With the about your practice and
like that I'll board certifies
is that you are excellent at
putting your knowledge into
practice as measured by rigorous
standards in your field several
years ago a counselor in APS
called me and said I just became
certified by the national board
for professional teaching
standards how come I'm not
eligible for the same salary
differential as teachers and
that's when we went to
Representative Trujillo and
asked if she would possibly
sponsored a bill that would
expand the definition of
teachers to school employees.
And what I assume is the
National Board will continue to
add other school employees like
counselors and social workers to
their certification process
that counselor has since left
the district can as of now in
the National Board directory
there are zero nationally board
certified counselors
and so one of the things I'd
like to point out in terms of
the FIR is we are very
interested in it as a state in
honoring this credential but the
likelihood of additional
counselors adding to those
numbers disproportionate to
teaching it teachers is very
unlikely.
The last point I want to make is
as we pay attention in public
education to social emotional
learning and the needs of our
students as a valuable
foundation for learning we are
learning that we must value
counselors and social workers
and nurses as much as we value
teachers as partners in the
learning process for every
student so I hope that you will
be able to support the idea that
counselors and other school
personnel who are added to the
National Board list should be
valued as we value nationally
board certified teachers thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
and but that will stand for
questions.
Thank thank you so go to the
attendees list those of you in
support of house bill one
seventy one.
Actually please good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on for the sake of
time
again I apologize and if you're
confederations echo a doctor
burns Steen basically set are
still very eloquently and with
that we stand in support of the
bill thank you so much.
Great thank you any other sport.
So we'll go to opposition the
attendees list any opposition to
house bill one seventy one.
All right so we'll come to
committee.
Questions comments concerns from
committee.
Okay.
What to pass.
Mr chair from Representative
Trujillo second by Roybal
Representative Roybal coming
into
still no questions okay so
before except the motion I I did
want to ask a question as to why
administrators are excluded from
the from this bill.
Mr chair all defer to my experts
Ellen birds do.
Mr chair members of the
committee in past debates there
were concerns about whether or
not and administrator who was
certified as a national board
teacher or
in any level who became an
administrator was
Still.
I guess the concern is that
they're no longer teaching and
because that was a concern in
the past one of the things that
this bill did was take away that
concern
I think it had to do with the
FIR and if we allow nationally
board certified teachers to go
into administrative positions
and keep their differential as
it flows through the SCG that it
would increase the cost
my personal opinion is that
nationally board certified
teachers become good principles
because they know teaching and
learning so well but we really
wanted to take away that concern
so that the immediate need which
is to ensure that other current
School personnel serving kids
like counselors could be
acknowledged.
And
Representative and Dr Bernstein
I mean that is part of the
source of of my concern and it
raises you know I I a couple
concerns that I do have because
I'm probably this issue is
probably second or third on the
list of money most discussed
topics with
educators looking to become the
administrators because we have
in in you all I'm sure well
aware we have a bit of a
compaction issue in terms of our
top paid teachers and those that
are nationally board certified
in our entry level
administrators so this has
become and I feel that a lot of
calls now and in the past I six
years.
Serving as vice chair and chair
of the Senate the Education
Committee about this very issue
and whether or not it's
a good decision for
educators that are experiencing
maybe level three they hold
their national board
certification today take that
next step to becoming an
assistant principal at a school
because then they would lose
their their differential and
then their pay is is comparable
except when you become that
assistant principal it's the
responsibility
really ramps up so so I I
totally understand making the
the financial decision to
exclude this from the bell but
that's that's where it rubs up
against another one of of my
concerns about us in this
committee really being relegated
to a policy committee is that
we're not able to make these
financial considerations are in
in light of us not having that
sort of of oversight so when it
comes to the policy certainly
endorsing at but I think he even
still is the is including
administrators
is a good way to go as far as as
this bill is concerned because
like I said until we at the
legislature start solving the
the compaction issue
this will continue to be an
issue for for many good teachers
like you said Dr Byrne Steen
looking to become
administrators and hopefully
good administrators as well.
So so with that
We did have a due pass motion
from Representative Christine
Trujillo
the second was slipping my
Representative Roybal Caballero
is there well madam secretary
cultural please call the roll on
this just for fun we have time.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes madam chair yes Mr.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative del.
Representative Dow.
Representative is that all.
Representative is now.
Madam chair.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lang.
Yes.
For.
Representative Ladda.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative to provide cover
handle yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes ma'am.
Representative Care Act yes.
Representative easy now.
Yes.
All.
All yes your call.
Chair.
Yes.
Fourteen.
Two zero all right you have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
one seventy one thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee and
my experts Dr.
Thank you for asking yes thank
you great thank you all.
All right so that concludes our
business for today
can I I I I thought I was saying
if people are paying attention.
An attention as always when I
saw the reaction from
Representative lot as well so
just testing you all like
Representative Trujillo likes
madam.
I represent that I do we need to
summon anybody.
Mr chair of though Dr I have a
doctor student in Dr Torrez
available.
All right if you all in the
attendees list would please
raise your hand.
I do not see them on the
attendees side Representative.
But that's what Mr chair we can.
I can we get.
I'll bring it all right all
right representative you have
house bill one hundred so I did
not mention that but I'll give
everybody a second to
Pull it up on our.
Share file and then can you read
that two oh two number for the
amendment for us please.
Yes Mr chair it's two one nine
four nine nine point one.
Right everybody has set its up
at the top of House Bill the
file for house bill one hundred.
We got it.
Mr chair I move the amendment
for discussion.
Great thank you representative
I'll second that
All right so please can you
explain the amendment thank you
Mr chair a this amendment as a
result of the of the previous
hearing that we had a regarding
each the one one can read
on the we are proposing changes
to the bill on page one like
twenty were striking contract
with an organization to.
Page two one twenty two we're
starting within and inserting in
lieu of their up and.
On page two lines twenty point
twenty five we are striking and
distribution of funds and in
certain you they're all in
accordance with the criteria set
forth in this section and those
are the changes in the amendment
Mr chair.
All right members discussion on
the amendment.
so I I did have a question can
you explain
because it's hard to do side by
side on our share file on my
screen but can you explain the
page one line twenty when you
strike contract with an
organization to.
Mr chair thank you are they
the state where we are line
twenty correct contract with
that organization so that was Mr
chair that was one of the issues
that we up that floor leader
Stapleton have brought up and it
but she she made this concern
very are clear to me and and I
understand what she was trying
to to address for that because
we don't want to of the the
intent wasn't to contract with
certain organizations intent was
to contract with PED for the
school districts to contact PED
are using that are process to be
able to access is my the access
these funds that's why we are
eliminated that from all from
the language.
also know that clarifies it
thank you representative.
Representative so please.
Mr chairman my.
Okay that's that that that
checking was awesome
to to to to.
Further comments questions.
All right so what is the will of
the committee okay will is for
the adoption of the amendment is
there any opposition to the
adoption of the amendment.
All right see none you have an
amended bill.
Okay so there's a two passed did
Representative result you side
your hand up to do need to ask
questions.
Not right now Mr chairman I will
lower my hand.
Okay we're we're on a do pass
motion so that's why I was
asking.
And I'll second that motion
picture when you're ready okay
thank you so do passed much by
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative Roybal
Caballero
madam secretary called the roll
on a do pass motion for house
bill one hundred doesn't please.
Baldonado yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative chapter.
Representative doll.
Representative Gallo.
Representative is now.
Representative Dow.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes to do the best of the
amended bill.
Representative Lang.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative land dat yes.
Representative Madrid at yes.
Representative our ball club.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Garant.
Representative is that all.
On the vote.
Madam chair of the yes the to
vote yes I can hear you
representative yes ma'am.
Okay
Chair.
Yes.
That the twelve to zero.
All right well we appreciate
your your patience and your work
on this Representative of Lotta
to work with the committee on
the concerns so you have a do
pass on house bill one hundred
as Amanda thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee.
All right well that concludes
today's business for real this
time thank you all I hope you
all
enjoyed the presentation this
morning in your opportunity to
ask questions about school re
opening we will reconvene on
Friday at eight in the morning
thank you everybody have a nice
rest your day thank you Mr.
Representative do you I do want
to have a.
Yeah yeah yeah also I'll set up
a meeting and we can all chant.
Thank you.
