Your Representative Lara here
Representative.
Just
same day.
Here.
Here.
Chairman here.
We do have a right to have a
quorum good morning everybody I
hope you are doing well again
we're gonna start right away
with House Bill three seventy
five so vice chair when you're
ready.
Good morning Chairman good
morning committee I am ready and
I'll be presenting House Bill
three seventy five the charter
school expenditure plan and
after give some opening remarks
my expert witness Matt Paul from
the charter schools he'll tell
you the official name the
charter schools of think of a
new word in the future that's
very polite and supportive
Hild add some additional amounts
of comments excuse me
House Bill three seventy five
simply ask for accountability
and transparency for who ever is
the chartering Authority for
charter school as you may or may
not know there's two authorities
there is the Public Education
Commission or school districts
and charter school can be under
either one of forty and so this
bill requires that a thirty to
provide an oversight and
expenditure plan for the money
retrained from a charter schools
SEG stated position guarantee
distribution and they need to
report it and that's two percent
of the SCG and so that district
for the state charter the PC
chartering they're going to find
this is on page two section F.
and this doesn't start till July
twenty twenty four but each year
that local charting Authority or
the division acting on behalf of
the PC shall provide to every
charter school that it charters
and oversight and expenditure
plan for the money that's been
with kids for each charter
schools generated program costs
that report includes three
things the percentage at amount
of the plan withholding the
details of how the charting
Authority plans to spend that
money to do all the things
they're supposed to be doing as
the you know oversight and then
a budget for the oversight and
expenditures so it's very simple
very clear accountability and
transparency and with that I'm
gonna as Mr Paul to give
additional remarks thanks
Representative and thank you
chairman members of the
committee this bill is just
providing some transparency I
think the representative did a
good job going over I'll just
make a couple of notes is.
One a lot of folks don't know
that the general operating
budget for a charter school that
we give to percent of it away
just for our own accountability
and oversight and that money is
designed for kids the SCG is
there for us to serve children
in classrooms and that's why we
think it's appropriate to have
just some elevated
accountability in what's
happening with this money this
is already happening with some
of our local authorizers they
provide that transparency but
notably we don't have this
transparency with the Public
Education Commission and the
system that's going on right now
that's a little over half of our
charter schools in the state and
so we think setting this the
stage for.
Telling us what the budget is
and then telling us how you
spent it at the at the end of
the fiscal year make sense again
because this is money for kids
as part of the SCG the last
thing I'll note is.
The up to language on page one
line twenty three this is
actually been a source of
confusion in the charter
movement for many years the
first statement in section one
there on lines twenty through
twenty two says that the the
authorizer
that the charter school show get
not less than ninety eight
percent it leaves the door open
for some flexibility there but
the next statement actually is a
little more of a hard line there
so we we replace that with up to
just to allow some flexibility
for the authorizer to say Hey
maybe we we don't need the money
to take two percent maybe it's
one point seven five percent and
every every portion of a percent
makes sense here it is not the
anticipation that charter school
start getting this money back
though it really what we want
are some new conversations about
how the accountability and
support looks like with our
authorizers that would be step
one the authorizer gets to
decide if they each take less
than two percent at the end of
the day so just want to be clear
about that you'll see it kind of
the referenced on that on the
FIR that there could be this
exchange of funds but it's just
not what we're anticipating but
we did want to be clear that if
an authorizer did want to charge
us less they can and I just for
those new to the charter school
funding the two percent is not
new just so you're clear this is
not adding or changing it's just
clarifying that we stand it was
common across the country.
Thank you and with that we stand
for questions Mr chair great
thank you all so much initiative
started that we have a little
bit earlier floor time today
which is ten thirty which is not
typical for a Monday Wednesday
Friday on so if everybody could
keep their comments brief
questions brief as well so we'll
go to the audience or on house
bill three seventy five those of
you online that wish to speak in
support of house bill three
seventy five if you would please
indicate by raising your hand
will hold off on you all for a
moment we'll go to our audience
here in person if you're in
support of house bill three
seventy five on my left hand
side would you please indicate
by raising your hands please if
you wish to speak.
All right we'll go to my right
hand side if you wish to speak
to see one please Sir you have
up to two minutes okay.
Chair members of the committee
of the New Mexico the external
affairs chair property Mexico
the focus again we stand in
support of HB three seventy five
because we have been champions
of transparency of public
education dollars believe us
authorizes two trends report
other two percent with all the
funds are spent is a reasonable
and pragmatic request to support
this bill thank you so much
great thank you is there any
other sport in the room press
the three seventy five.
All right so we'll go to our
online a Sarah good morning you
have up to two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we're in
support and we think
Representative Garrett for
bringing this legislation this
bill is an important
transparency measure for
chartering authorizers and for
education system are charter
schools the families they serve
have a right to know how that
would help funding is being used
to serve their charter community
we also appreciate the
flexibility This bill contains
an changing the charter
authorizers collection of that
two percent of the program cost
if the district or the PC
doesn't need to collect every
dollar two percent whatever it
doesn't mean you should stay
with the charter school where
can be used to serve the
students who generated that
money through the funding
formula we hope these two
provisions will work together to
increase accountability in a way
that translates to our state's
taxpayer dollars being used a
little more optimally in the
service of our charter school
students thank you right thank
you Stuart good morning of up to
two minutes welcome.
Hello my name Stewart being I'm
I'm a current commissioner on
this PC PC I I am in support of
this I believe that we we need
that accountability but I also
believe that
I think the to our school
division at their word that they
haven't struggled with getting
information to the the
commission in order to know how
much money we have spent and
that of that two percent and I
do believe we have a really
diligent board who is a very.
They're trying very hard to be
frugal with that money I'm sure
so what I would really recommend
though.
In in the this document and
others the LFC is given as a
analysis of this and I pointed
LFC analysis to be willfully
skewed and I would I would
suggest that you would dismiss
that article if if during
reading the that that analysis
it it colors charter schools and
and does not allow them to be
shown for the value that they
are so I would suggest that we
don't use that LFC analysis for
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
A good morning give a few
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you paddy
Gibson Public Education
Commission districts seven I
want to thank the sponsors for a
working on this bill this is a
level of transparency that we've
been working on for a very long
time and having it established
in statute as opposed to as
opposed to relying on the
goodwill of parties to abide by
ammo use is greatly appreciated
and is what it should be
expected of an authorizer and we
should be able to be held as
accountable as possible to the
schools that we do authorize
actually do appreciate also the
language for up to two percent
because the war budgeting
process we are absolutely
looking at.
Not having to.
Withholds of the full two
percent and still.
Fully support all the schools
within our portfolio so once
again thank you very much for
bringing this bill forward.
Great thank you so much all
right so we'll go to opposition
in our audiences are opposition
to house bill three seventy
five.
Thank you very please have up to
two minutes welcome.
Members of the committee.
The New Mexico.
I know the association has come
up I hope this is a two of them
were wanting to assist morning
deal with the successes
Department.
And.
Trying to reduce requirements.
For more info
of the most
standing up in the spelling of
the numbers that we thought are
built into the budgets are
already provided to the public.
Thank you any other opposition
in the room.
Our online folks is there any
opposition to house bill three
seventy five.
I see none.
Representative Chatfield.
The best we have a due pass
motion Representative Chatfield
second by Representative
Trujillo is there discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
motion.
All right see none.
Given two thousand house bill
three seventy five thank you
madam vice chair thank you thank
you all right so.
Representative Trujillo if we
could we skipped over you will
come back.
Have an appropriations bill.
All right and so members as this
gets distributed we do have an
amendment I talked to a ranking
member Representative Chatfield
as this had missed the deadline
to make an exception we have a
pretty brief amendment to align.
The amendment with what's going
on in house bill two as I
understand it.
So if you would present the bill
and then we can move the
amendment and go through the
process of the amendment thank
you Mr chairman of this is house
bill one fifty two with simply
appropriates funding to update
versions of the of that provide
this by noon but a certificate
to one billion with that that.
Very short here after my own
heart with the privative I
appreciate it all right so we
will go to our audience so I'll
start off with opposition to
house bill one fifty two either
online or in our audience is
there any opposition if you wish
to speak.
All right see none I figured
that might be the case.
So we'll go to support online if
you would please indicate by
raising your hand back to those
of us.
In the room from my left hand
side those and support that wish
to speak the left hand side okay
please ma'am welcome you have up
to two minutes.
For the public school one fifty
two which is a need to revise.
Representative has insisted for
years for the certification of
bilingual teachers so yes I was
developed New Mexico.
In New Mexico
so we developed by New Mexico.
Our New Mexico tonight SO four
yield House Bill one fifty two.
Thank you so much anybody else
please Sir you have up to two
minutes welcome.
After Walter to that a retired
educator and also retired
university professor and define
we develop for about this was
back in nineteen nine to
nineteen ninety five to nineteen
ninety nine.
And after it was developed in.
That it was actually valuation
that I some some professors that
were from from all over the
country Dr Eugene Garcia and Dr
Leslie Norfleet and doctor and
then I scare the from the
university of Texas seven possum
and it was considered to be a
cutting edge exam.
So I fully support that the
revision of.
Of.
For support because.
One fifty two thank you that.
Thank you for being here all
right we'll go to the next row
those in support.
Wish to speak we'll go to the
next row third full row.
All right anybody in that fourth
for a.
All right Sir in the end welcome
you have a two minutes.
Yes.
Chairman of the board Stacey I
use with New Mexico
We we stand in support of this
bill we know that language is
constantly changing it's fluid
and so I think you this test
makes total sense that we need
to keep up with the nuances of
language and we also we just
want to say that it's a very
important.
We are.
But the US cables that are
available.
Yes that will require from them.
You will learn the new skills in
the strategies that are out
there in teaching Spanish then
we support so again thank you
very much we think the sponsor
bring forth the bill and we ask
that you consider ability.
Which the Essex thank you all
right on my right hand side
doesn't wish to speak in support
please welcome.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee I'm just posted.
Education department of what I'd
like to share with the committee
this morning that is at no as a
result of the by the but
Education Act there has been
appointed by council that
Advisory Council is one that the
public education department
partner with quite a bit and
they have actually provided
advisement to us that we go
ahead and engage and partner to
update what I buy a I wanted to
also to know that it was last
updated and in the two thousand
five two thousand six school
year so it's been a little while
and this would be a good time
for us to updated it is
considered a primarygames.
Education for bilingual
education which is something
that both the legislature and
the citizens of New Mexico are
very proud of and so we stand
and support thank you.
Thank you anybody else on my
right hand side that was
speaking for.
Please Sir give up to into four
years chair members of the
committee
agents on the line on the
director for the center for the
education study the risk
populations New Mexico highlands
university and I'm trying to
that state this time
I just want to share that not
only was it an advisement from
culture Education Advisory
Council but also the leaders LFC
reports specific to bilingual
education mentioned the need to
update prep we stand firmly in
support of this and we think
it's a not only high quality
exam now but will continue to be
in the strong one in the future
thanks so much thank you anybody
else Americans please ma'am you
of up to two minutes welcome.
Members of the committee right
here about to happen
Support of what I can offer that
as of from here assessment
we don't want to lose the
ability to continue to validate
and affirm the languages the
language that's particularly
Mexico.
Talk about.
This committee about this
thinking here to and how some of
us have
summary the.
We're taught how to speak the
language but for individuals who
have that special graduate
Mexico the salaries that and
that's one of the reasons why.
And that's one of the reasons
it's very important to the
consultation axe.
Thank you.
Anybody else Americans I that we
speak in support.
All right so we'll go to our
folks online to sign
Senator morning you have those
two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman and
committee members I am I am
Senator Johnson and I'm
representing the bilingual to
cultural to cation Advisory
Council and we are in full
support of house bill one fifty
two as mentioned earlier we
create we of advised from our
council to create an updated
version of three of us to
include updated ancillary
materials
and in addition
drawing of secure additional
funding for this project is very
important for the continuation
of our continuing our bilingual
multicultural education in New
Mexico so we're full support of
house bill one fifty two thank
you right thank you.
Elizabeth good morning you have
up to two minutes welcome.
Morning this is Elizabeth island
so I'm not and I am an assistant
professor of bilingual education
in New Mexico highlands in
bilingual and T. so I'm also the
executive director for the New
Mexico association for bilingual
education and I am in support of
the house bill one fifty two as
an assistant professor at New
Mexico highlands I oversee our
summer Spanish immersion program
that focuses on preparing and
service and pre service teachers
it to be prepared to be able to
use to.
Get their bilingual sort of well
get there you know be prepared
to take the offer of a private
exam so that they could be
certified in bilingual education
so again just we're celebrating
the fiftieth anniversary of the
nineteen seventy three bilingual
political try to cation Act I
urge you to support house bill
one fifty two thank you.
Thank you Michelle good morning
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chair person and
committee I just I'm coming to
you as a doctoral candidate from
the university of New Mexico who
has taught the course in the
bilingual immersion program in
New Mexico in in the UNM for the
last seven years and we've had a
pass rate of like ninety seven
percent of our students with the
get together with my colleagues
and I really urge you to support
this change in house bill one
fifty two and support
the assessment of our bilingual
educators this particular
assessment is the one that I
took twenty years ago when I
started teaching and while it is
an amazing assessment I think
we're ready for something that
is more
modern and that can continue to
shop shine in New Mexico as as
the leader in bilingual
education thank you.
Thank you.
Very Jeanne good morning you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Mary Jean Lopez view it and meet
yourself.
All right yes my name is Mary
gene locus and I have been
involved in bilingual education.
Rio I urge you to support this
bill to update left rebel is a
tremendously important exam
expand
of helpful in ensuring good
quality and language and culture
for the teachers of bilingual
education Mexico.
Thank you so much.
All right.
With seeing nobody else will
come back to committee we do
have an amendment that's been
distributed can I get a motion
to discuss human.
All right so we have a motion to
discuss the amendment I heard a
second but not from where of
Representative Ezzell.
Questions on the amendment.
He.
I just.
The question on the amendment on
the admin all right
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr the you know that
the amendment does not add or
subtract anything from the
appropriation it's it's just
extensive time to spend it so
what we're looking at an
appropriations right now is does
it increase the appropriation
the and it does not it just
extends the time spend.
Thank you ranking member other
questions on the amendment.
Thank you.
All right so we have a motion to
adopt the amendment second by
Representative is there any
opposition to adopting the
amend.
See none you have an amended
bill all right before we go to
committee I do want to recognize
former representative the most
of us at.
sitting quietly in the corner
but your presence is very much
Mr part of this committee and as
part of the body so welcome
back.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair yes yes is
are pulling a full load of
profinet is that ladies let's
see on not a Mustang one athlete
one.
Eleven one day this is my stand
thank
is the middle but agree total
school staffs
but can only mostly to another
the Cambias this is those mean
safe.
Since of Representative he
Hello of our little middle eco
live a Roybal Caballero yes if
you see in that in this that
the.
Okay good us yes now the
mysterious of it that a state
would that get things done by
expanding the metal
Representative no Solamente Cody
Law School schools that opened a
spit at the school still is in a
of on state okay good us yes
theme of.
Eight glasses Sistema.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to say it's appropriate W.
secretary because Dolly said
that as of this summer will have
the new Spanish framework and so
this can be aligned with that so
I think it's very good timing
thank you for doing this thank
you thank thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Of what it means the Mr chairman
of the thoroughness of.
Prove prove it prove
state your W. M. S. one you'll
give us the I don't know all
right that up with a copy of a
do that'll put it at the apple
stuff out
Yes.
So.
Mr chairman I think that's a
that is a good name for this
bill well for this yes well a.
No wait for me that is true so
I rise in support of this.
Right thank you Representative
better.
Thank you Mr chair of
Representative Trujillo would
you recognize here experts
please.
I'm.
To my right madam chair is my
dear friend and then the in the
sectional bilingual leader in
the state Dr Loretta setasides
into my left madam chair is of
long standing legislator who has
pretty much
pioneered bilingual education
the state of New Mexico
Representative and chairman and
everything else Rep mia.
Mr chair and representative I
just wanted to recognize that we
have the dynamic duo this
Salazar duo.
Audience and I I wanted to
recognize that it is that
leadership in this field and and
her knowledge and her leadership
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Ezzell.
Chairman thank you very much
appreciate you all.
Bring this bill up I do have a
question though and regarding
how long is it going to take P.
D. P. D. to get an updated
examine place.
I'm Mr chair would like to defer
to people in need to respond to
that question please Mr chair
and representative of the our
plan.
to to contract with sports that
can lead this initiative and
then Silvercity and coordinate.
Anticipate probably a year or a
little more two hours because
we're going to do the whole
validation process as well to
make sure that it is an exam
that is worthy of being used to
certify our funding for okay
thank you very much for that
response I know it's very
important to ENMU.
And that a year seems like a
very long time to wait sometimes
Mr Chairman Representative
Trujillo I see that there's no
effective date and place in the
bill so if it's signed it'll be
to the first of twenty three
that it will go into effect is
this correct Mr chair and the.
Representative result of army
guy could affect the kid it
could live with that.
While some.
I was not paying attention to it
I was just saying colleague who
loves horses.
I would defer to Representative.
Okay.
Mr chair members of the
committee it's always an honor
given for this prestigious
Committee up if that's your
question Representative Ezzell
up that is why we do the
amendment to them so presented
the medal we just need more
temple and that's what the
amendment did so allowing a PED
to go out and do what they need
to do get the people in line we
just didn't have enough time so
with the extra time that we have
we don't have to revert that
money back to the general fund
but it goes into the PED funding
they won't take the time they
need to do it hopefully it's
going to be within the year and
year and a half that they've
talked about but that's of the
gentleman you know we get
through doing the.
M. O. use with university and so
forth until we get all that done
and that's why that amendment
and I really appreciate the
chairman of movie that amendment
and the matter which you did
because within the little bit
more time to do that and so
thank you to all the committee
for all of them and that is the
purpose of that and I hope that
answers your question
Representative is that it does
and but it also brings to.
Another question my Mr chairman
and Representative Trujillo
until that does take place
whenever that date does happen a
year year and a half from now
I'm assuming that the exam that
is in place right now will be
sufficient to get the the
teachers certified is that
correct that's correct okay I
just want to make sure on that
Mr Chairman just indulge me just
a minute and I want to thank the
gentleman from highlands up here
just cause us speak slow beings
that sometimes I don't hear as
fast as you do speak so I do
that.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
right thank you.
Representative Representative a
I am I'm I recommended to pass
Mr second I I reckon so we have
a motion for do that.
Thank you bye Representative
little a is there any opposition
to do pass motion.
The line you have a do pass on
house bill one fifty two as
amended thank you all right
thank you all right.
The man
we have Representative Thomson
good morning.
As the two eighty five.
And.
All right so Representative we
do have a committee that being
distributed to committee may I
have a motion on the committee
says please.
I move that we adopt the
committee seven that
discussions.
Of house bill two eighty five
all right so we have discussion
of the committees of.
Motion to have a second second
the second by Representative
Lara so we're on the committee
said a representative Thompson
please thank you Mr chair good
morning members that you want me
to start with that with the sub
changes or do you want me to
start with the bill.
Of we just move the committee
set for adoption because I
assume that's the one that we're
gonna be working from okay we'll
just go on with the committee so
that
So.
Essentially what the committee
sept does is it streamlines
Enforcement language to
precisely align with federal.
Individuals with disabilities
Education Act the idea act it
removes provisions about the
office providing services to
gifted students students with
dyslexia and students in title
to services under section five
oh four at the federal
rehabilitation act because
they're not covered by idea.
Instead the office of special
education would be required to
support and collaborate with
other units of PED to ensure the
students receive needed services
under state and federal law
it corrects the jurisdictional
age range of special education
programs for young children down
to thirty three months that
clarifies the collaborative
state rulemaking process for
special education and replaces
language of the punitive nature
with more standardized oversight
language.
Is here Representative just
asking members to turn off my
okay.
Essentially those of you who've
been around for awhile know that
I have thirty plus years and
special education I did my first
IEP thirty nine years ago at
it shocks me to but there have
been issues with with the
special education system in the
state for for all of that time
and probably before I frequently
feel like kids with disabilities
have been treated as the red
headed step children that are
kind of that are not the focus
of a lot of people so what this
what this bill does is to revamp
special education to make it so
that kids with disabilities are
just as our server just as well
as all kids and and that there
isn't an adversarial
relationship between school
districts are PED and families
and we don't want this to be
punitive this is about improving
the situation so
the Yazzie Martinez I'm sure you
all know that the Yazzie
Martinez plaintiffs include
children with disabilities and
so we're trying to make sure
that we are meeting that what
the judge has requested of us it
would require the state to take
the lead in bringing together
different departments agencies
local school district preschool
programs at higher education
institutions to strengthen and
streamline the special education
process this is a collective
effort and does not assign blame
to any individual department or
secretary for inconsistent
delivery of special education
services instead this is a
shared responsibility among all
of us for needed by the state as
we know many school districts to
a great job of providing special
education
the this legislation aims to
consistently approved services
across the state so all children
receive timely responsive
service.
Is that meet their needs and
families can feel consistently
supported as they navigate the
system and I will let my experts
Okay Mariana Padilla that PED
acting secretary yes is that
still true that is okay.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee it is truly an
honor to always being here with
you and house Education
Committee I am still the interim
cabinet secretary for the public
education department I want to
thank first our our sponsor for
this bill and for her continued
effort to champion all issues
related to our special education
students and families she did
such an incredible job of really
speaking to the bill I will just
highlight a couple of things so
that I can be briefer I will not
go through all of my remarks
again this again this bill is
about elevating our special
education system and making sure
that we're working together
across our state agencies that
includes the public education
department the early childhood
education and care department
the higher read department
department of vocational
rehabilitation and our children
youth and families department we
working together we need to work
together to make sure that we
are providing supports
assessments are happening
quickly that we're allocating
funding that we're supporting
the development of a strong
workforce we need special
education teachers throughout
the state and every school we
know that is an area of our
highest vacancies and then among
educators this is really about
looking at ourselves as state
government and how we're
functioning and how we can
function better to improve
outcomes for special education
students we know that they do
not perform on par with their
peers we know that they graduate
at much lower rates we know that
a third of our students
typically do not graduate on
time this tells us we need.
To do something different we
need to do better all that we
have heard and and consists
consistently hear from our
students and families is that
they see gaps in services
especially at times of
transition that's why this
cradle to career
approach is so important we have
to work together at the state
level this is not about pulling
out special ed this is about
lifting it up elevating it and
ensuring that we at the state
are working together for the
betterment of our special
education students
I will say that a key part of
this is
again to really build our
workforce
and we're not we want to build
upon the great work that's
already happening a great
example of the impact of early
intervention and supports of the
early childhood level is the
night early learning center here
in Santa Fe they really do
incredible work and using the
bright stars that we see in the
system really building on that
and again giving them the
supports and resources that they
need so I'll stop there and
allows got to give a couple of
of
overview of of key points in the
bill and then we'd be happy to
take questions from the
committee thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to all the members of the
committee representative
Thompson sponsoring this bill my
name is Scott Groginsky I am the
education policy adviser to the
governor.
As secretary interim secretary
Padilla mentioned the bills
elevates special education issue
by creating an office of special
education under the public
education department secretary
appointed by the governor which
will increase attention and
transparency of special
education in the state under the
bill the office would provide
more extensive professional
development and training for
school district half
administrators and policy makers
a specific special education
issues.
It would the office would also
provide state technical
assistance to districts and
schools on key special education
implementation issues it would
ensure more explicit and
intentional interagency
coordination among state
departments and agencies within
the public education department
and the school district's early
childhood programs and
institutions of higher
education.
The office would focus on
strategies to recruit and retain
the special education workforce
and the bill would initiate an
educator informed process to
explore differential salaries
for special education staff the
bill would produce more data
driven decision making for
students families schools
providers and the public
including through an annual
state report by the office
including supporting more
comprehensive and consistent
data collection and reporting
statewide and last the bill
would transfer the preschool
special education coordinator to
the early childhood education
and care department would
require an MO you between ECECD
and PED that insure assure
collaboration.
Thank you.
Great for questions all right
thank you so much so we will go
to our audience so if you're
online and wish to speak in
support of house bill two eighty
five you would please indicate
by raising your hand.
All right so we'll let you all.
Sort yourselves in that we'll go
to the audience here on my right
hand side those in support if
you would indicate there is here
in place of so staff.
Please welcome.
Representative two minutes
chairman members of the
committee will meet at the
Representative New Mexico's
boards Representative.
We have the the streamlined in
support of the social education
services for students we
appreciate that but we also want
to call your tend to the fact
that our superintendent of
schools and as well as the
special directors have some
concerns of what this bill to
the funding this into their
concerns and hopefully work
together to get this taken care
of there are people in the
trenches we want this to be a
win win and we ask you to
consider that thank you thank
you others Mr please ma'am you
have a two men folk.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Pat
Senator hill and the deputy
cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico higher education
department I am signing today
for secretary Stephanie
Rodriguez was out sick however
given the importance of this
initiative to our agency into
her I will be reading a
statement from.
The higher education department
is in full support of house bill
two eighty five because special
education and services need to
stem from birth to career higher
education is a vital point in
that continue on however there
isn't a central office to
coordinate higher education and
career supports for students
graduating high school with an
I. E. P. this office will unify
our education agencies and
streamlining the student
accommodation process and
experience a key benefit of this
bill is providing a unified
office to bright provide
services to students with an I.
P. transitioning from high
school to postsecondary
education or career today would
students with an I. E. P.
graduate from high school they
either receive services directly
from the state the federal
government or the college or
university in which the animal
having student data centralized
at the statewide office rather
than individual entities will
enable us to review trends in
the ballot supports that support
students and to help students
succeed at every stage.
Early childhood K. through
twelve to higher ed and through
the work force part of
supporting the student journey
is ensuring that students and
their families understand the
process for learning about
requesting receiving and
modifying requests for
accommodation in our education
system house bill two eighty
five does exactly that and more
thank you Representative Thomas
Thompson part of me and her
fellow co sponsors in bringing
this bill forward and thank you
Mr chair in the committee for
your time right thank you others
in my right hand side that we
speak to support please Sir.
The two minutes welcome
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on the NMAA
skeptics and offers mentor for
the non profit New Mexico kids
camp we strongly support this
bill special education needs for
a more prominent role within the
public education they understand
there's some complexities in
implementing a special education
on this however you believe it's
worth it we have to come
together and acknowledge that
our current system is not
working for most portable
students and their families and
we strongly urge you to support
this bill thank you so much.
Thank you please Sir give up to
ten minutes walk.
Members of the committee Jim
Jacksonville here on behalf of
disability rights.
Disability rights New Mexico we
appreciate the work of the
sponsor and the of the
governor's office of
highlighting the needs of
special ed students.
Recognize the important role
that the PED plays at the
specialist's staff play making
sure that school districts are
in fact providing the services
that children with disabilities
really need far too many parents
do continue to struggle working
with their school district to
make sure that their kids are
getting the specialist services
that they need and especially
cases are always a major part of
the case load of disability
rights New Mexico because so
many families are coming to us
who need assistance in trying to
get those services so we look
forward to a newly invigorated
offices special education I can
really focus on some of these
issues can provide the training
and technical assistance and
support the teachers and
administrators want as well as
providing the monitoring and
oversight that so many families
understand is really an
important role of the department
in the making sure that the kids
with special needs are in fact
getting the services that they
need it really is time is
representative Thompson is set
to embrace the concept that our
kids are just as important and
it's just as valuable and maybe
not as much of a contribution to
our society is any of the other
children and so you director
support still thank you.
Thank you others on my right
hand side that we speak in
support.
All right we'll go to my left
inside those wish we can
support.
Hi please and the critter give
up to two minutes welcome
board chair members.
Elizabeth Groginsky cabinet
secretaries.
Education and Care Department I
want to thank representative
Thompson for her leadership on
bringing this bill forward
specifically the area I'll speak
to is the transfer of the
special education coordinator
and what we will be detail in
that and you regarding
development and implementation
of policies and requirements
establishing procedures and
processes regarding
collaborative supervision of the
six nineteen programs want to
ensure that families educators
and students have access to
comprehensive supports and
ensure that communication
between school districts and the
state government is coordinated
and not due to.
North Dakota the upset
superintendent of instruction
there US transferred the six
nineteen program to the
department of Human Services
because that is where the
majority of children birth to
five we're served whether it was
through childcare whether it was
through home visiting those are
the programs deliver their
Wyoming transfer their six
nineteen program to their
behavioral health risks up grant
program I want to point out this
legislature about this but the
New Mexico legislature in
ECECD's enabling statute said
that we are to coordinate and
align and early childhood
education and care system and
that we must coordinate and
align a system that includes
childcare pre kindergarten early
prekindergarten early childhood
special education and early
intervention early head start
head start and home visiting it
is important that families have
access to this broad and all
encompassing range of supports
the legislature envision that we
would oversee the provision of
these wide services and that we
would ensure comprehensive
educational and health services
to families and their children
five years of age there are over
three thousand three hundred
preschool age children in our
state today that are getting
special education services some
of those are enrolled in our
public schools many of them are
enrolled in our head start
programs are childcare programs
so we want to have a deep in
iterations thank you madam
secretary capital services for
all thank you for please give up
to two minutes good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Barbara B. hill and
cabinet secretary of children
youth and families department I
want to thank Representative
Thomson for the introduction of
this bill on behalf of foster
children throughout New Mexico
standard full support of this
particular piece of legislation
why because it elevates special
education Inc will coordinate
special education for many
foster children who are in our
care children youth and families
department today has an office
of children's rights and
educational advocacy team who
worked.
With who work with us
superintendents and school
districts across New Mexico this
particular piece of legislation
would help coordinate those
efforts so it's not
random in terms of whoever is is
filing a concern with respect to
educational rights in our office
but we can coordinate and
support the fine work that our
local education departments or
our districts are doing for our
children in need.
So with that Mr chair members of
the committee please consider
the the adoption of this
particular piece of legislation
as we stand support to help our
kids in foster care with special
education needs thank you.
Thank you others in that row
that wish speak in support.
All right we'll go to the next
room.
The wish speak in support.
Please have a two minutes walk
thank you good morning chairman
members of the committee my
name's Joel Davis on the
electric chair of the
development of this bill the
council I'm also the vice
president policy chair of
Ellevate the spectrum and autism
advocacy network across the
state this bill does three
important things that
streamlines the process it
collects data and.
It elevates special ed within
vision which is been buried for
much too long and we've seen the
lawsuits and what comes out of
that for not paying attention
especially.
I can tell you about the data
with friends inclusion
personally I have a child on the
spectrum.
You've been in special ed for
quite some time
I know that that is not being
collected because of it to
instances of restraints
inclusion that are not really
been reported to the state this
year the reporting a zero
incident occurred last year and
we were one of the many families
in our group have also had
restraint issues and not been
reported so we need that data
collection often times with the
opposition says that these bills
is that they don't have data to
support what we're trying to do
but that's because they don't
want that that those issues have
been highlighted in the New
Mexico searchlight New Mexico
political report articles on
these issues we really need this
bill in the state to make sure
that our children are getting
what they need and we urge you
to support this thank you right
thank you others in that same
rather was speaking support
please give up to marry Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Alice limit quite I'm the
executive director of the
developmental disabilities
council a couple of years ago
and twenty twenty one are a
wonderful sponsor for the spell
representative Thompson brought
the special education but bill
that program came out of a
collaboration that was started
by Representative Thomson in the
governor bringing a lot of
different agencies together in
different educational
stakeholders to talk about how
we could transform and improve
special education in New Mexico
and the purpose of the on that
of course is to support families
and students as they're
navigating the very complex
special education system and
they have they had to other US
statutory mandates as well in
the bill another one was data
collection around up you what
kinds of services we were
providing and what kinds of
issues we were seen in the
schools and the third was to
work on systemic changes within
the school system what we found
was that we really really need a
we really really need a
concerted effort across state
agencies across the state to
look at all the different
special education issues we see
that families really are to.
Pending on lock to see here to
get really good services so if
you're in a great distractor if
you have a great teacher you
know that's fine but you know
sometimes at schools may be
struggling because they don't
have that resources that they
need and there isn't really
leadership at the top that's
that's empowered to pull of
those issues together and make
sure that these high level
services are being provided
across the state at the same and
so we really support this bill
we think that this is the big at
very important first step to
making sure that that kind of
high level Services are
standardized across the state
thank you very much thank you Mr
right thank you others in that
same rather speak please M. you
have up to two minutes.
Members of the committee.
To get out of one funds
representing disability
coalition and we support the
bill we've complained for years
that as Representative Thompson
says Betul ed is the red headed
step child education system and
we believe that this bill will
make progress really significant
progress in elevating
specialists
In the same rather speak.
Okay we'll go to the next road
as we speak in support.
Maybe the next row
please up to two minutes.
We apologize have a New Mexico I
think you have to the point of
the session I was an elementary
school teacher classroom in June
of twenty twenty one
it was also a special education
teacher every single day I
thought in the students and
educators struggle to navigate
the system and in many ways
Hollywood sign to work against
them I chose to leave working in
special education because of my
frustration with the lack of
resources access to training
overall support I think strong
support this legislation has it
is time the this bill supports
our families as they navigate a
around the curriculum and
supports our educators at the
training every student's
individual needs and more simple
most importantly it ensures that
students in New Mexico access to
the public education system
maintenance there thank you.
Thank thank you all right others
on my left inside those for
conservative up to then.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee CCI is within the New
Mexico and on behalf of our
members and especially those
educators that have dedicated
their careers and their lives to
special education we stand
strong support HB two eighty
five the main reason we stand
and support is because New
Mexico has a greater share of
students receiving special
education services the national
average this bill directs much
necessary funds for students
name the housing markets.
HB two eighty five is a solid
well rated it takes it to heart
the professionals who deliver
the precious special education
services our students need and
deserve.
It provides a training
professional development for
special education person it
supports our educators instead
of leaving them exposed to
punitive actions in doing so.
We can.
We can and should do better for
students we think the sponsoring
for this bill and we consider
and we will consider voting
thank you thank you others in my
left hand side of the hand
please give up two minutes thank
you so much for this opportunity
thank you representative
Thompson for bringing this bill
my name is Laura Speer I am a.
Yes teacher retired thirty five
years teaching special education
and knowing the parent advocate
and I feel like I haven't spoken
in front of people in a hundred
years.
But I am since
will I think the the for too
long specialized special
education students have not been
able to meet their potential
because of the processes that
were in place they were not
robust enough there was no
communication between all of
these entities and it negatively
impacted those children from
reaching their full potential so
I have in support of this bill I
hope you will be too I think
that this bill tax a lot of the
funds that we need in our state
thank you Representative.
Thank you so much so I didn't
see any other hands on my left
hand side in the state all right
so before we go to our folks
online Representative Baca thank
you have and guess he wanted to
do something yes thank you Mr
chairman the agency we say a lot
of what we do here we have to
remember why we do it and so I
do have students are visiting
from are to survive students
from Valencia high school and
also this high school along with
their Sanchez who are gonna come
up and spend the morning with us
and actually hopefully here's
some of the bill's going to be
debater because I do believe we
have an education bill on the
floor of the house I believe so
that may affect their immediate
future.
So I just want to I want to
welcome them to thank you guys
for being here and for party
morning so thank you Mr chairman
thank thank you welcome.
All right so we'll come back to.
Those that are testifying in
support of house bill two eighty
I will go to those online so
you'll have up to two minutes
Katie good morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Katie stone I'm the elected vice
chair of the New Mexico
developmental disabilities
council the co chair of the
developmental disability council
Education Committee the DDC is
in support of H. B. two eighty
five and personally I raise two
kids who receive special
education services in New Mexico
public schools and as you know
some of you I've been a long
time citizen watchdog for the
budget for special education the
special education department in
the PED manages hundreds of
millions of dollars in federal
and state funds and oversees the
education of fourteen percent of
our students that's an enormous
responsibility and it warrants
the leadership role that H. B.
two eighty five spells out we
need that special education
education department to be in a
leadership role to implement the
necessary oversight and changes
that we must have to improve our
student outcomes especially as
we invest more as a state for
our early childhood education
and as we pull our educational
rankings out of the gutter and
we hear the statistics about
education in New Mexico it's
always important to be keenly
aware that special education
students are always even further
behind than the peers we can do
better the one in six students
that receive special education
services in our state and I'm
just so excited to see this bill
I'm very grateful to the
Representative Liz Thomson and
the other Sanchez this is going
to give special education a seat
at the leadership table thank
you for supporting this bill and
thank you for taking my comments
this morning thank you
Kristina good morning you have
up to two minutes off of.
Good morning thank you my name
is Christina Martinez and I am
president of elevate the
spectrum I also have a son with
profound autism.
And I support this bill because
our our students and families
deserve strong state special
education leadership to ensure
things like school and districts
shopping to find an appropriate
program for their children is no
longer necessary thank you.
Thank you.
It was a deal good morning of up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is a lease deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and a
member of the legal team
representing the representative
plaintiffs many us retain this
lawsuit we strongly support this
bill for the many reasons given
here today we like to think
representative Thompson for her
tremendous work in the area of
special education we're also
glad that the executive
recognizes the need to elevate
and prioritize the needs of
students with disabilities this
bill is an important first step
towards giving the students the
education they are entitled to
of course also deserve and we
urge you to pass it thank you
right thank you Jennifer good
morning Jennifer you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative Thomson and
members of the committee please
forgive my voice I'm a little
sick today but this is very
important so I wanted to speak.
I'm here I carry many titles in
part of many of partner
organizations that have already
been names but my most important
title is not.
I've been an artist and game for
almost thirteen years and in the
special education system for ten
my child in our family are the
ones in the trenches we are the
ones navigating the system that
wasn't made for us to
understand.
Yesterday I got to speak with
the mom from Farmington who sent
exited the special education
system over twenty years ago we
shared stories and found that
nothing's changed she told me
how she had to provide schools
and advocate for her son that
would be supported and I sure
how I had to change schools from
my side because the system that
he was it wasn't working for him
anymore after five years of
building relationships and
routines we had to leave and
start over again.
I support this bill because I
believe change comes from the
top and changes what we need.
Families needs don't need to
market shop for special
education services we should be
able to confidently enter public
schools knowing that there is
coordination and consistency
within its leadership and ensure
that our children are valued
thank you.
Thank you.
Brittney good morning for any of
about two minutes welcome.
Thank you so much so I also in
the elementary and special
education teacher myself but I
am also a mom to a child with
severe speech language
disabilities and ADHD this is a
lot of behaviors and
in support of this bill because
my child is one transition right
now
from preschool yet three years
because we got a man early and
he made wonderful progress you
moved from self contained to
general education is making
great progress and he moved to
kindergarten this year.
Something that.
The person on leadership is new
and I don't know how to support
my child and and even trying to
get emergency meetings is taking
on anywhere up in like two
months I.
And my heart just breaks for all
the other families who do not
have the knowledge that I do to
to support their child on it so
just frustrating to know that
you shop around and consider
moving your child again and
again and again just to get
the education they deserve and
so thank you for hearings
comments because every single
child sped gifted you know
nondisabled the reserve for best
education right can receive
thank you
thank you John good morning John
you up to two minutes okay.
Thank you
my name is John around the line
the former chair of the
developmental disabilities
council just to complete the
circle
I believe that my son was the
the the first or one of the for
of the students every step
received physical therapy from
Liz Thomson.
So I was active very active with
my wife and with Patty Jennings
in making changes to the US
special education services many
years ago then there was a long
period when I was not active I
came back two years ago as chair
of the developmental
disabilities council and was
dismayed to discover that many
of the problems that we
encountered forty years ago in
special education still exist
so I do I believe this bill is
very timely and finally
addressing the issues that have
been endemic in the special
education system for many years
the second point I'd make is
that PED alone cannot address
the issues that need to be
addressed if we are to meet the
goals and Yazzie Martinez we
need the participation of many
other state departments that
were listed earlier by this in
her testimony.
When I point out is this a.
The director of special
education although many of them
have done yeoman's work up very
within the that very large
public education department
doesn't have the clout to get
other state departments to
participate by moving this this
state the special education up
to the level of it W. secretary
we are much more likely to see
the involvement of the other
state agencies.
Only I would know thank you have
on those two minutes thank you
so much.
Jerry Lynn good morning you have
up to two minutes please.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jerry Lynn
morning setasides and I am a
teacher at Nina Otero element
community school in Santa Fe and
I work with gifted students
Jennette students and special ed
students I'm also a parent of a
student that went to school the
schools in New Mexico and what's
the special ed students and
needed to support his education
his whole life I am current
acting president of the New
Mexico association for the
gifted and today I speak on
behalf of our governor governing
board and our members for
educators and parents of gifted
students we supports.
This very important bill with
the following imminent we ask
for you to amend bill to eighty
five to strike mention of given
to that
in this bill gifted is currently
run out of the curriculum and
instruction division of the PED
and for the first time in
approximately fifteen years PED
has a gifted indoor specialists
working on gifted education this
specialist Christopher Byron and
the curriculum and instruction
team are currently working to
update the given to grow update
the technical assistance manual
faster improve trust between
districts teachers parents and
PED.
We feel that if gifted education
has moved under the auspices of
the new office of special ed it
might have a negative impact on
given to students across the
state as it will interfere or
cease important work that is
currently being done for these
reasons.
I encourage you to amended bill
to eighty five to strike mention
of gifted at and we thank you
for making sure that all of our
special ed and gifted and
Services happen for our students
and students Mexico thank you
all right thank you.
All right.
So before we go to opposition
will make the announcement for
folks online if you're opposed
to house bill two eighty five if
you would indicate by raising
your hand please all you all do
that this material could I hope
if given that has been removed
we we will discuss all bill
we're gonna get there I'm gonna
take a break for a moment
because I do have a guest my
former government in economics
teacher Mr Houser is in the
audience if you would please
introduce your students and why
you all are here thank you hi
I was there at a teach and how
proceeds to math and science at
UNM I have brought my name's
Grady the government New Mexico
history students up here for
legislative day we were trying
for last week but it was a
delayed through the weather but
they're here and they're excited
to be part of the so thanks for
letting us come in.
Representative Romero of course
welcome to your students.
All right so we have some folks
online that are opposed to house
bill two eighty five we'll get
to them in a moment is there
opposition on my right hand side
that would wish to speak okay
ma'am please have up to two
minutes.
Good morning how's Education
Committee chairperson Romero and
members of the.
Finding lost his mind
representing the New Mexico
council for the ministration of
special education and the New
Mexico council of education
leaders.
Representative special education
directors and as that and felt
Representative eighteen separate
affiliates of educational
leaders in the state of New
Mexico.
The pleasure of serving as a
director for the past twelve
years my can tell you that my
job is to vocation my career
spanned thirty three years and
special education I have worked
every position from educational
assistant all the way up to the
directorship except for one
summer when I drove the car and
pandering posed with the
national education.
I work from private agencies and
public entities and I stand
before you in opposition of this
bill.
numerous reasons why that in
K. M. cell does not support
house bill two eighty five we
provided you with the white
paper outlining those reserves
today I'm going to focus on just
one.
Having a state special education
director who was appointed by
the.
This position is crucial to the
stability of special education
in the state of New Mexico an
unintended consequence of the
gubernatorial appointment is up
people in the department would
require stability in order to be
effective.
There's one thing that I can
tell you is a special educator
continuity bills effective
programs in the state of New
Mexico those relationships are
important for continuity as you
can see we've had I secretary
for years.
Politicizing such a new one and
critical position does not serve
the students with disabilities
in the state of New Mexico thank
you for your time and
consideration and as a side note
I would like to say that and
then sell and and in case as
well as the superintendents
association are willing to
discuss that portion of this
bill thank you.
Thank you so much.
Money welcome you have a two
minute.
Good morning.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Bonnie Lightfoot I am
president of the New Mexico
superintended Association I'm
also president elect of the New
Mexico coalition of education
leaders of which proceed just
mention the eighteenth millions
we emphatically I rise in
opposition of this bill we would
like to suggest that there are
many issues with this including
more worried about having too
many masters we recognize this
position is in exempt position
we support that although we
would prefer a more direct
approach kind like the director
position Indian Education we
think this bill would lead to
confuse leadership we're not
entirely sure the committee said
as a dress for the the village
address of complies with federal
education requirements as well
as a state agency we're just not
convinced that's been addressed
we think that we did duplicative
oversight in this bill as well
you've heard many people online
in this room today talk about
more robust needs for special
education services as well as
greater student outcomes we're
all about that we don't think
this bill addresses that we
would have supported temporary
table we can maybe have some
type of negotiating things that
might make this bill better
because this bill does not
address that thank you right
thank you others in my right
hand side the page speaking
opposition.
All right we'll go to my left
hand side those which speak in
opposition to house bill two
eighty five.
All right well come online we
have a few so Los Alamos public
schools welcome you have up to
two minutes state transposition.
Hello I'm crying I am out the
special ed director at Los
Alamos public schools I'm
currently in my forty third year
working in special education and
have been involved in the data
collection required by the state
and federal government for
special education since the New
Mexico accepted the
ninety four one forty two in
nineteen eighty four so I am
familiar with the data
collection that is currently
occurring I agree that H. B. two
eighty five accurately captures
the challenges that face special
educators today and however I
disagree that this is the
solution to those problems the
bill demonstrates a lack of
understanding of the systems
that are already in place to the
special education division to
ensure that school districts are
in compliance with federal it
with the federal individuals
with disabilities Education Act
I have many reservations about
this reorganization however I
think that the very least
problem that we would face that
this goes into place is that it
will disrupt what is already
under way in the special
education division thank you.
Thank you.
Krista good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you very much
for your time I appreciate it
committee members my name is
Krista Coolidge I am the
director of exceptional programs
for Farmington municipal schools
I am also the current president
of New Mexico council for
administrators of special
education we do stand in strong
opposition of this bill as both
Miss Alaska's and miss crane
mansion there are components to
this bill that we do agree with
however when we look at IDA
requirements and civil rights
and inclusion our fear is that
this bill will continue to
separate special education more
and more and as all of us
directors are famous for saying
all special education students
are general education students
first one of the parents who
spoke in support of this bill
talked about how leadership
changes hearts such a challenge
another talked about the
negative impact on gifted
including it into this bill both
of those are components that I
agree with and I think that what
we need to consider are the
actual root causes and putting
thirty three million dollars
into creating a separate
division rather than addressing
the root causes behind our
shortages including lack of
staff lack of opportunity and
lack of training is not the.
All to the current special
education division it's a lot of
it through the licensure
requirements and other struggles
that we face the school
districts thank you very much
Representative.
Thank you and superintendent
summers good morning you up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman Romero
members of the committee my
name's Kevin summers and the
superintendent of the
applicants will school district
not only do I Representative the
US technical school district but
I also Representative my
colleague to the west this
morning that superintendent Cody
deal from the Farmington
municipal school district I
don't know that there's anybody
in the room or on the call that
is in opposition of the fact
that we believe that more robot
reinvigorated support for
students with special Education
or or disabilities is necessary
however we don't believe that
this bill actually addresses
that act I would urge the
committee to study efficacy from
our neighbors to the north in
Colorado who have passed a
similar bill with with less than
effective result and so during
that time I would strongly urge
the committee the table this
bill thank you very much for
your time.
Great thank you seeing no other
opposition we will come to
committee so first
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee thank you presenters
since we have to clarify I to
run my first IP in nineteen
ninety two so when I speak here
I speak from experience both at
the local state and national
level.
So
Mr Mr chairman
and of Representative Thomson.
I'm a little unclear about what
this position would be I I've
heard it referred to as a
director A. deputy secretary in
a cabinet level person so Mr
Chairman
and representative Thompson what
we.
What is this person and who they
report to.
Mr chair representative Baca
I'll go ahead and answer that
the bill references a director
this is a director position that
would report to the secretary of
the Public Education Department
I will like to quickly address
concerns about of this being an
exact position that is appointed
I will point out that most the
vast majority of director
positions in across state
government are in fact exempt
appointed position so this is
very much consistent with how we
have
appointed director positions for
the throughout the history of of
state government.
thank you madam chairman and and
thank you interim secretary.
I'm not going to I'm not going
to delve into that but I I do
believe that it should be people
based upon quality and their
qualifications and their
experience in this because quite
honestly this is important and
that's why I get very passionate
about it because I am an
advocate for for a person for
this and for students so I'm not
gonna
Madam chair and representative
Thompson how many FTEs will be
created by this new department.
Mr chair representative Bach of
the only position that would be
created would be a director
position of.
Thank you madam chair thank you
interim secretary don't we
already have a special director
State special director.
Mr chair representative bucket
we do have a director within the
bureau of special education
which has been
really identified as a director
position however it is not
elevated as a direct report to
the secretary of public
education department.
Madam chair interim secretary
the the person that's actually
there's been there for ten years
so as far as why not as far as
work with with that person but
that's that's another thing
Now a lot of reading through
this bill madam chair and and
secretary and Representative
talked about activities talked
about the need to create certain
policies procedures madam chair
and and secretary are you
familiar with the team and help.
Mr chair representative Baca I'm
sorry said the team the team
manual the team manual I am not
okay
and I know that you are probably
representative Thompson this
call the tech school technical
assistance manual which already
outlines and does assist talk
about it explanation the
disabilities it talks about the
criteria for determining
eligibility it also talks about
as far as assessments otherwise
for the so madam chair and in
rural secretary we already have
a team metal that does a lot of
what this bill does okay the
next of I want to talk about
madam chair and deputy
secretary.
Is as far as the indicators.
And I'm state performance
indicators do you are you
familiar with those manager.
Mr chair Representative are you
talking about indicators support
agent state agencies no Madam it
and gives probably not a fair
question and secretary the state
performance indicate we're at
the other wars that another
thing madam chair and
intersected list we already have
a parole process in place for
determine and actually
reporting on state performance
plan indicators okay everything
from transition to
other areas of the so that's
another thing that I that I I
believe is already currently in
existence.
Next madam chair and
Representative Representative
Thomson and interim secretary
this talked about developing
policies and procedures madam
chair and
You know secretary we already
have state of state policies and
procedure procedural safeguards
that must be adopted by local
school districts so madam chair
and representative we already
have that practice in place so I
I don't understand the
justification for this position
to actually correct these
policies and procedures when
they are excess exist and they
must be adopted by local school
boards and also turned in with
the idea be grant applications
so that is part of the
requirements that these be done
so I I'm not sure when we're
talking about creating something
that already exists in of in
practice.
Mr Mr chair
these things do exist but
they're obviously not working
you heard a father talk about
this same issues forty years ago
when I did my first IEP in
nineteen eighty four these were
the problems so we can say we
have things in place they're not
working you get calls from
parents all over the state all
the time I created the state
ombudsman program because there
are so many families who are
struggling and we could we could
line up two thousand families
tomorrow to tell you that there
may be things in place but they
are not working they have not
worked for decades and change is
hard I'm the first one to admit
that changes very hard but if we
don't take a bold step forty
years down the road they're
still going to be families who
are going through the same
tragedies that you heard on some
of those comments.
Madam chairman Representative
Thomson you are not so different
we're on the same we're on the
same thing because this as I
said before when I talk about
protecting all students those
students is that have of
disabilities or challenges are
the ones that I fight for the
hardest because I understand
that there's it's not impossible
journey but is very difficult
during so I just want to to be
very clear this I'm not.
I support is an actually
might my questions madam chair
Mr Chairman sorry sorry is now
more why why why this and why
now so
Mr chairman and of.
Representative Thompson interim
secretary.
A lot of what another task is
about reporting of in collecting
of data with demographic data Mr
Chairman are you familiar with
the stars reporting that we that
we do.
Mr Mr chair representative I I
want to clarify this bill is not
implying that these things don't
exist and that they're not
happening that's not at all what
it is including the data data
that you just mentioned the the
all but one data set that's
mentioned in the bill is already
being reported in stars and so
it will continue school
districts and charter schools
will continue to report that
same data just as they are right
now Mr speaker Mr chairman
Representative Baca
so it just went away.
well what I was going to say Mr
chair that PS four years
reported no restraint and
seclusion I was on restraint and
seclusion team at my home school
and we did multiple weekly so we
know that somewhere that data is
getting lost or getting
misinterpreted we just want to
do what's best for kids with
disabilities and Mr chairman of
representative Thompson
Rather than create new policy
here or for this or a new
department I would assert of Mr
chairman and of madam secretary
that we just need to for those
folks are not addresses
districts individually
Mr Chairman
Representative Thomson.
On page eleven we talked about
special education salary
differentials.
Can you almost Mr Chairman
representative Thompson can you
tell me what that section
intends to do.
Mr chair you looking at the the
Substitute because I'm not
seeing it on page eleven.
Yes.
K. twelve visual.
Of thank you Mr.
What we're looking so Mr chair
representative Baca what that
section is referencing is that
one of the the duties of the
office of special education
would be to look at ways that we
can further expand and support
our special education educators
we know that they are among the
highest vacancy rates of
educators so one of the things
that will be looking at is how
do we support those educators is
it how they're allocating and
spending their time do we
support them with more time or
do we look at things like salary
differentials as potential
strategies and ensuring that
we're recruiting and retaining
and supporting our special
education teachers so that's
what that's referencing thank
you Mr chairman I actually agree
with that I would agree that for
hard to fill positions special
education bilingual educators I
do think that we need to do a
better job statewide recruiting
those to serve our kids
And finally Mr chairman of.
Much of my concern with all of
this and part of my.
As an administrator preventing
years.
Is my fear is the separation of
these and moving them away from.
The general colleagues actually
does what what we're told not to
do as far as least restrictive
environment and we talk about
this we're talking about a lack
of communications and I'm gonna
say this sometimes it has been
my experience for my
is that one agency or department
doesn't know what the other one
or even two people within an
agency dependence who talked to
get different answers so my fair
miter Mr chairman and
Representative Thomson is the
ideas and these things in parts
of these bills.
There are things that are very
good my fear is that rather than
help this situation and help our
students and help our staff I
fear that we may be killing
creating only more bureaucracy
and more opportunity that we
have a different approaches and
there's a lack of consistency
and communication between these
two departments Mr Chairman
thank you for.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
thank our sponsors of a very
powerful and important piece of
legislation and making sure we
have this discussion however we
have to get it right and one
goal of this committee is to
make sure that bills are clear
so and and I know that you took
notes because we had some
extremely important feedback
from many of the people who
spoke
I was a general education
teachers in a
inclusion classroom that had a
full time special ed teacher
teaching with me unfortunately
in classrooms across our state
that is not the case so as I go
through this bill you've
identified important points but
important points needs further
exploration so I just want to go
through on the and I'm not even
cover everything but I want to
hit some key points on page
three of the which is lines to
the six and also if you number
I'm a language arts teacher and
a professional editor section be
just needs a little bit of
clarity is highly mobile
students means children and
youth experiencing frequent
moves into school districts it
needs to you need to Adam
schools in the district because
I had kids who were tested for
special ed or scheduled for
testing in the southeast heights
of Albuquerque and when they got
to me in the south west
everything was lost and we had
to go through another year of
testing it's a mess so that
needs to be specifically
included
Even the grammar needs a little
work but including but not
limited to military connected
children migratory children
brings an image of migratory
birds so I don't know of the
proper word as migrant but I had
a problem with that so that was
good on let's see Miss Mister
chair could I respond absolute
okay please so the migratory is
the federal definition okay and
then I I totally agree with you
on the I mean I worked at Hodgin
elementary which had in over a
hundred percent turnover
annually it was about a hundred
and eight percent because of all
the apartments on Montgomery so
so I agree with you on that
Okay thank you Mr thank you and
you know it's intact.
Share and thanks for explaining
migratory.
on page six Mr chair the office
shall develop and provide
professional development
programs and materials for
license cool employees.
You know special education
assistants I I guess I would
rephrase that is educational
assistance working in special
education
Situations because I don't know
if there's you know our
educational assistance don't
always get any special training
to work in a special education
classrooms so I'd rather than
saying special education
assistants I would rephrase it
as educational assistance
working in special education
classrooms or situations it's
small but it's not
down at the bottom Mr chair
section F. three
our business policies that
facilitate effective and
meaningful inclusion and
integration of students with
disabilities and all educational
settings that's huge and that's
a major problematic issue across
the state in that there's a.
It tremendous strive for
inclusion without a tremendous
drive to support inclusion of
chairman Romero is saying his
inclusion teacher is supposed to
be and three classroom
simultaneously so I think we
have to really really get a grip
on that major issue and every
school that I'm familiar with
which saliva schools
page seven need to implement a
practical method to determine
which students with disabilities
are receiving needed education
service that was a little loosey
goosey for me.
a practical method I guess I'd
like it more defined and and it
is included in other areas so
what's a practical method
anyway that was a little bit and
then three ensure that students
with disabilities are educated
in the least restrictive
environment
Representative Bach address that
and again
a less at least restrictive
environment that's.
Properly staffed
let's see on page.
I see.
Well.
Was interesting.
Has on page nine Q. it says the
office shall provide targeted.
Annual training to all school
boards check good governing
bodies of charter schools good
superintendent school
administrators teachers
instructional support providers
other school employees school
resource officers and school
security officers I think some
of this training listed as vital
to all those groups but.
I'm sorry when you talk about
structured literacy for the
school security officers it's
getting a little bit into the
weeds so I wouldn't want to have
a a principal checking whether
or not the school officer got
structured literacy training
which can be twenty hours a
month.
anyway you get what I mean.
There just has to be much
Representative Baca pointed out
our special education students
our first general education
students we have to address
inclusion training as an
inclusion teacher I had one day
of the best training I've ever
received in my entire you know
thirty years of teaching and we
have to get that training so
when you have these inclusion
teacher circulating you know
there's like a basket what's the
lesson plan well here's a basket
in this teachers going among
three classrooms you know we
have to deal with that if we're
going to improve the edge
educational outcomes for
students so I just feel that we
need to have a deeper dive.
On page twelve Mr chair yeah
that we have to look at
different feels I think it APS
ahead teacher gets a three
thousand dollars
different field but nobody else
gets that in bilingual education
I'm just speaking for APS if you
teach bilingual you get a three
thousand differential five
hundred if you have the
endorsement but you don't do it
so so some districts are doing
something but a lot aren't.
and let's see there was one
other area I wanted to
specifically.
Please mention.
page nineteen I I got a little
mixed up about the exceptional
students.
But that was a little unclear to
me one of the analysis said that
it was re categorizing gifted.
I'm not going to go into this
just a little confusing.
And let's see the other thing.
Was on the the dukes Lexia thing
this was in here.
Page twenty two it says
beginning with this is a
beginning with the twenty twenty
four twenty five school year the
department shall insurers.
The results of the screenings
are provided to parents of first
grade students within thirty
days
I think that needs more
exploration of teachers of first
graders have to do that I
station beginning of the year
testing of the additional C.
attesting first graders are six
year olds and within the first
thirty days as a first grade
teacher you're going who the
heck are these kids
I know some people want it done
within the first thirty days I
think reporting to the students
should come at the first parent
teacher conference which is
usually at the end of the first
trimester.
I think teachers to accurately
you have testing and Mr chairman
you have the experience of the
teacher with real kids who if
you just go by the yes and don't
have the experience to know the
child
it's hard to just give a teacher
you know how do you report to
the parent the state of your
your student has this terrible
problem sometimes a first grader
developmentally it's just
learning to read.
And we expect sometimes we can
use dyslexia with.
Developmental goals of a of a
student so those are just some
things that.
that I think we really need to
revisit
like I said our committee likes
to get things right I think this
is one of the most important
things we can do but we have to
do it right and we have to have
the foundation of these powerful
points in place else the intent
the worthy and vital intent of
the bill will get lost and Mr
chairman that all my points I
want to bring up Mr thank you
could we respond please briefly
Mr chair and vice chair Garrett
I think you had some really in
great recommendations which we
will absolutely look that look
and be happy to clarify I just
would quickly like to address
that last comment you mentioned
about the dyslexia screening
this is a requirement currently
in statute that was passed in SB
three ninety eight sponsored by
Senator Stewart this is a
dyslexia screening not a
diagnosis this is a screening
that we're required to do by
statute and it's just to
identify students who are at
risk for
needing some additional support
in literacy that's all the
screening is it's not a
diagnosis and it's a requirement
by statute passed by this
legislature the what we're
trying to do here is just say is
that parents will receive the
results of that screening within
thirty days after it's given we
have heard from parents whose
children have received this
screening they did not here for
Montoya in most of that academic
year was was done and they felt
like those that was a critical
time period where they as a
parent could be doing things to
support their child and so
that's what that's about and.
Thank you you're welcome.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Garrett covered a
lot of the things that I had
marked in my bills as well.
But I'm going to go back start
up page ninety.
The substitute bill in regards
to page twenty page nineteen of
the ritual bill versus a twenty
at the.
ET sept two two.
let's see where is that at this
twenty sep two page nineteen
twenty one
Of.
Can you to.
To make sure I give you the
right numbers here okay.
On page nineteen of your
original bill verses page twenty
of the substitute bill on page
twenty of the substitute.
starting out on New.
Takes a line seventeen with
material is.
You were talking about students
for class but as children with
disabilities according to part
be.
Federal individuals with
disabilities education
improvement act of twenty four
but in your regional one.
Cation proven.
It also includes for section
five oh four of the federal
rehabilitation act of nineteen
seventy three can you tell me
what that part of it was
removed.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell it's my understanding
that the I for is not covered by
the federal individuals
disabilities act and which is
why we made to the change to
that provision in the state
included it as a broader support
a collaborative effort for the
from the department.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you thank you.
Then also on page let me see if
I can find page twenty one this
of.
Proofs of that is going to be I
have to get these in order to
page twenty.
On your regional bill few have
on page twenty of the regional
bill you have the response to
intervention intervention Mr
chairman and representative and
in the new committee substitute
I see that it is removed on page
twenty one can you go can you.
What we agree is why that
particular section was removed.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell yes the this is existing
statute and our response
intervention from what we
understand what we understand
from the public education
department is no longer used as
a as a intervention model so
that's why it's removed from
statute we're proposing from
statute.
Okay thank you mmhm.
Chairman
On page twenty four of the
committee substitute.
Persist page twenty six of the
regional field.
On page twenty six of the
regional field.
Line three line eight you have
use office there but you have
changed it back to Department on
page twenty four.
Line fourteen in line nineteen
of the committee said can you
tell me why that was changed
back.
That's what.
I'm Mr isn't here.
Madam Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell what line on which bills
okay on the committee so the on
page twenty four line fourteen
and the line nineteen.
You have Department starts at
cheap the department and then on
line nineteen H. the department
on the regional on the original
bill on page twenty six.
G. line three.
You save the office shell.
And then online eight page
twenty six Original Bill you
have the office shell can you
tell me why you with the back to
the regional language that you
had which is departments.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell on line fourteen online
twenty I'll start with in in H.
there is that we want to make
sure Representative Thomson
mention the center opening
remarks that the rule making is
done.
Similar to the way it's done now
in PED and so it's the
department as a whole PED not
just a particular office up to
that does the actual doctor of
rules I want to make sure that
was direction you're it Mr Jones
and along the same lines on
Page twenty four of the
committee supplied nineteen.
As the department shall adopt
rules and then the committee
Original Bill said developed can
you tell me why you went back to
using adopt rules yes there are
other provisions within the bill
that discuss the rulemaking
process that we that talk about
the collaborative nature of it
where the office will work
collaborate with other units of
the department including the
rulemaking aspects the.
Elements of the part and to work
together to develop the rule
that's than proposed for final
approval to the secretary.
Okay.
Mr chairman I do have one other
concern or question not a
concern a question.
On the committee set up a page
six it noted on page seven and I
did not is one other area that
next page T. and also lead is
Chriss.
Expedited page six line twenty.
Number two is is expedite
evaluation of the special
education needs of children
beginning at thirty three months
of age skip on over to page
seven.
Line seven hundred number one it
says
children with disabilities
beginning get thirty three
months of age.
And again online Page ten
starting online training for
children with disabilities
beginning get thirty three leads
to transition to public school
can you tell me.
How these children.
Sometimes parents have a
tendency not to see that there
might be something wrong with
their child.
How is this evaluation going to
take place is it just.
Thirty three months of age is
pretty that's less than three
years of age so explain that to
me Mr chair and Representative
Ezzell we start evaluating kids
essentially at birth they get
something called the Apgar it's
kind of a health thing about
that color their breeding those
kind of things I worked in early
intervention for many many years
there are standardized tools
that measure both motor fine
motor cognitive language social
and those those continue
throughout and the thirty three
months two children are
transitioned into
preschool essentially at thirty
six months so you start the the
program to evaluate them at
thirty three months so that when
thirty six months hits
The early intervention services
that they have received have
been
have done enough made enough
changes within the child that
they don't need specialized.
So Mr Chairman representative
thank you for that explanation.
But not everything is going to
show up whenever this tester
first and whenever the child is
born.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell that's correct and that's
why physicians do well baby
checks that's why
school districts do things
called child finds I worked at
for the pro of the Ghana for ten
years and we did a of child I
did teach ability of Laguna
every year that included hearing
screening dental screening
health screening Development
screening and and so we could
kind of work with the families
and if they needed services we
could get them in the early
intervention program.
So Mister chairman
Representative whenever you're
saying services.
Is that going to be up to the
department and the office or is
it going to have hello more
local control to meet the needs
of those particular children Mr
chair and representative they'll
each district you a child will
have an IEP meeting essentially
to discuss what's going on and
then the IEP team will decide if
an eyepiece individualized
education plan our program H. I.
P. team will determine whether
that specific child may need
speech and language therapy may
need a hearing screening may
need physical therapy help in
whatever area of development
that that that that child is
struggling with okay Mr chairman
that really did not answer my
question.
What type of local control will
be able to address this problem
more clearly than a department
head sitting up in Santa Fe.
Mr chair representative as a I
think you and just to get
clarification on your question
you're talking about at the
local level test was involved
and that early identification
and intervention services and
what other services might be
available locally so Mr chair
representative as out of there
are early intervention providers
within communities that provide
these services and work with
families and at the point of
transition into the K. twelve
system are also involved in that
process including with the A. P.
processes Representative Thomson
mention.
Mr chairman of thank you for
your explanation there
Representative we do have lots
of rural areas in our state
sometimes the signs are not
always picked up by the appears
to do live in very remote areas
so this might not come to into
their will well if you want to
call it until that child does
get ready to go to school and
more ups lots of times this.
K. plus three program is not
implemented all of the state so
Mister chairman I'm gonna let
that one go at I think you've
answered it there but I'm also
noticing on page nineteen line
fifteen of your committee
substitute.
The parent or guardian.
It sounds to me like may choose
not to enroll the child in this
price.
Can you tell me the steps that
are taken in.
Mr chair what Madam
Representative is that what line
are you on page nineteen line
fifteen.
Okay I'm so Mr chair
representative Ezzell state law
doesn't require attendance and
tells kindergarten age so it's
up to the I'm I would hope that
most parents would choose to get
their child help when they need
it but they that we cannot force
them to okay Mister chair that
goes back to my point and maybe
Representative in our more rural
areas sometimes as programs at
that very early early age are
not available as it is in the
more the.
Metropolitan area if you want to
call it that and more urban area
Representative Ezzell I I worked
in early intervention in Laguna
and Aqaba in requests and Hey
miss prepped low and Sandia
pueblo and senator Domingo
pueblo New Mexico to be Pueblo
so there are early intervention
agencies that covered the state.
Mr Chairman representative I
appreciate the work that you
have done for these children
three year experience over the
years but we also have children
that do live in my particular
area of the state I'm just.
Like getting southeastern New
Mexico we have to school
children that my ride the past
seventy five miles one way to
get school so it's it's very
difficult so I've got I'm just
gonna leave it at that Mr
chairman that's all the
questions I have thank you for
your reserves and Representative
Ezzell in general in my
experience at least the whole
the the early intervention
programs our home based and
there may be center based but I
went to children's homes no
matter how rural play work.
Okay Representative thank you
Representative Milan Milan.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I have just have
a few questions are really
concerns up so what this bill
essentially create this is
basically going to create
another boss for superintendents
correct.
I'm.
Mr chair representative Maria
superintendents will still work
with the public education
department through the secretary
and will work with this director
specific to special education.
Thank you thank you Mr chair so
currently it's not they already
work with of like they that each
to district currently already
has their own special education
director within their district
right now right.
so my concern Mr chair and and
Representative and and and
experts is that currently we
have like many different
departments that we've discussed
several times and and this very
committee that they don't always
communicate well with each other
and so now we're going to create
another position that may not.
Communicate well with everyone
else and so I don't see how
that's like an answer for this
is creating kind of putting
another chief in in the kitchen
another chef in the kitchen and
instead of
making the current system better
so how how was that how does
that work Mr chair
representative with thank you
for that question this that's
really what this bill is about
is that this office is charged
with actually working across the
system so currently in the
design
the Division within public
education department is really
focused on K. twelve and the
secretary of education right and
and those direct Eleazar
legislative support the charge
of this office is about working
beyond and so that's the
directive of this that's really
the whole point of doing this is
it's elevating the office and
saying you will work on the full
continuum of special education
services and supports for
students and families thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
interim director to cover
signature secretary
us so my concern is why can't we
do all of this stuff within our
current special education
system.
And and and and instead of I
mean my my my my main concern is
I mean your particular position
we've had five in four years.
And so now we're creating
another appointed position.
And is there going to be the
same amount of turnover and the
lack of continuity that just
like the rest it like that but
we have an it is that going to
create another vacuum so to
speak Mr chairman and
representative Marable Maria.
As I said I did my first IEP
thirty nine years ago my son
with autism is thirty two years
old and I have been trying that
whole time to make changes
within the system you heard the
frustration and in parents
voices that.
Something needs to change we
can't just take a baby step
because it hasn't worked for as
Mr Rangel said forty years so we
can keep saying oh well let's
fix it within it hasn't worked
and families are are exhausted
and frustrated and angry and sad
and and under the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit baby steps are
not going to get us through that
but Mr chair I understand there
are some concerns so with your
permission we would like to roll
it make the changes that
Representative Garrett and
others have have discussed and
then come back in Representative
happy to grant the request
however if we could go through
have a somebody else in the
debate I'd like to okay and I I
just wanted to throw that out
there I appreciate that I was
Representative you know only I
still has the floor.
Thank you Mr chair
so so my concern is I have a one
another I think probably my last
question
What does any case included in
the creation of this bill.
Mr Chairman representative we at
three years ago we started the
special education transformation
team we invited all kinds of
people some some showed up and
we did it overs them but we work
for three years on this and
everyone was invited to be part
of it.
Mr chair that so they were
invited but they weren't really
included in didn't have a lot of
input in it because they don't
seem to be supportive of it so
if they were included you think
that they would be supportive of
it.
Mr Chairman representative mayor
Paul my it's kind of a long
story it started out one way and
then they brought in some of the
people and and they kind of fell
apart at the end so we are
willing to work with them but to
be perfectly honest I think that
it's just that changes hard and
it's scary and but as someone
who's been in the system for
thirty nine years as a parent
and as a professional we need to
do something and we needed to do
it thirty five years ago.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Representative I I hope that is
specially since you're wanting
to to roll it and stuff like
that I hope that the NM cases
included I hope that the
superintendents association is
included all the superintendents
because you're also creating a
world a different world for them
and and and I and I understand
why I I I really think that
there is a need I wish that we
could take this thirty three
million that we're gonna use to
create another high paying
position and actually put it to
actually fully staff and and and
and and higher and the our
special education currently but
so so that would be wonderful
instead of creating this high
level positions Mr chair
representative this money is not
going for a high level I mean
that of course that person will
be need to be paid so that we
can attract someone it's all
about training for the entire
school populate of employees
it's about giving responding
resources for the classrooms
it's about improving special it
it's not about one person.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
Mr chair thank you
Representative.
You if Representative Trujillo
thank you oh sorry.
Is to.
But over here.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
my dear wonderful friend and
roommate who based smother me if
I don't get in line.
However.
I have worked Mr chairman and
and representative Thompson I've
heard you for ten years on this
issue and you have been
relentless and frustrated and
angry about all of the things
that are that you said are true
there is nothing that you have
said that is not true.
From
bill however does need work and
again at the risk of dying
tonight I want.
I am glad that you that you all
work to try to roll it over to
work with all the partners
because I think it does need
some fixing but I I would
supported in a in minute if if
those issues that are have been
raised to date have been
addressed because time is short
and kids are getting old and we
are to and and they're too many
problems and I don't have an
issue with another player at the
table but I have an issue with
is that we move this forward and
all the docs aren't in order or
whatever the you know me and the
writing on the sidewalk but the
point is whatever whatever we
can't fix within it before it
comes back.
It's just gonna die and I don't
I don't want it to languish I
wanted to be an issue where
people are with just another law
and nothing gets done.
And and because I love you
dearly I appreciate the fact
that you're not going to some of
the.
Thanks.
Dies tonight Mr chair it's not
my fault.
I think Freud is on the Senate
somebody says something assume
the offices.
All of it.
Yes and and Mr chairman and
members of the committee I I to
agree with.
Mostly what's been said I wish
this were on probation I wish
every paragraph having
appropriation on it I think
that's really what we're talking
about here what.
What what happens we we get it
you know we all have we we put
money in for educational
assistance so that you know
those people really working with
kids would have a decent well a
better salary let me put it that
way but I really think every
paragraph needs an appropriation
that's really talking about how
do we how do we make this system
work we get it's broken we we
talk to these parents all the
time and if these are heart
breaking stories we know it it's
really how do you make systems
work which is what I think
you're talking about here but I
actually think of the systems
and really most of the money
that we're talking about is
federal money that's passed
through to the state I mean
that's really kind of how
special it has worked but it's
not working and that's what
we're getting and I know that's
what you're getting at night I
would consider you know looking
at this legislation program and
procreation slide.
Because I think that's what we
need from home visiting all the
way to you know all the way
through college I mean I really
I really think that's what
you're trying to right I think
that's what you're trying to do
is a systems change here and I
would like to help you on that
but I really think it's a it's a
money issue and how you combine
the funding so that it transfers
with these children I'm also I
guess now the grandmother of
that of a gifted child who I.
You know I saw once hold his own
an argument you know
questioning the authority and
opinions of six adults in the
room and winning at the age of
eight which I thought was a
commendable achievement but I
was alone in my assessment of
the house.
we went for a walk.
But I'm just I'm just saying all
of these kids in our system.
Need this help and we are
desperately I think as a as a
state and as concerned adults
and parents and grandparents
trying to figure this out with
you Representative so I stand in
my full support of your of your
goals and I to I I really think
this is an appropriations bill
but I I will I will and with
that thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative for all of
your work and and your
commitment and your tenacity.
Right thank you Representative a
so in closing will roll the bill
I did want to say a couple asked
one question the have you worked
with our legislative education
study committee team on this.
Mr chair we we have had
conversations with the the LFC
team and we will continue to do
that I wanna also answered
Representative millions question
about working with and in case
and the superintendents I will
say that that I personally meet
with yet partners twice for over
an hour each time we've had
multiple conversations about
this bill I have also told them
directly that we will continue
to work with them on this bill
as I have
Also spoken with
with and in case about that.
I guess part of what I'm getting
at too is that the house is
scheduled to take the
chairmanship of the legislative
education study committee
during the interim and we have a
fantastic at legacy team in
order to look into these issues
and I'll say it now before
committee because I plan on
getting the stakeholders
together is that I do encourage
that when we have substantial
pieces of legislation that we
get them vetted through our
interim process because when we
don't I appreciate the changes
that were made from the original
bill I think Representative
Thomson recognize when she asked
me to sign on to it my initial
hesitation with the original
bill and I think from that bill
to the committee so has come a
long way but as we've heard that
there are still substantial
issues with this and the
potential implementation of that
in order to start working
through those so that we can
have those conversations on the
front end rather than here we
are twenty four days from the
end of the session can you
debating the nitty gritty of
yield on I would prefer these
things go through our alias
cease of conversations to be had
now that we roll the bill I
would ask that you substantively
includes early S. C. staff to
provide that sort of feedback in
that's something that'll
certainly be looking for
when and if we bring this bill
back along with the work of the
superintendents because when we
get to school level in the
granular level it's a school
districts the superintendents
that are going to have to
implement these policies because
we all agree special education
is desperately needed in so many
different ways and
representative Thompson you've
been such a champion of these
issues that we want to make sure
that we get these right for
students and then we can start
moving on to other issues on the
one issue I will say is on page
twenty one that line sixteen
event.
Brought up the multi layered
systems of support
I'm still unclear why there was
eliminated but I would hope that
you all really consider those
sorts of supports I think that
they're on desperately needed
vitally needed for our students
As a part of moving forward that
would be the one particular
issue that I'd like you all to
really look into in providing
because and I'm uncertain as to
its exclusion
but certainly I'm open to having
that conversation so with that
will roll the bill
Please keep us in communication
as we move forward and that
concludes our agenda folks thank
you so roll the bill thank you
**** available today three
twenty two.
Thank you all.
