Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
More.
Representative Garrett your.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum.
Awesome good morning everybody
it's good to see you when did
you have something yes I did
Representative Maestas if you
mail me of whatever it is you're
going to present and then I can
email it to our members.
Thank you very much and it's
just Lynda dot B. R. R. the end
up at AM at.
Excuse me at the and am Lech
that call.
Thank you.
I
good morning everybody I hope
you all are doing well it's nice
to see you all hope you have a
nice Sunday we are going to get
started with hello house joint
resolution one and two which I
understand there's a committees
some of that the sponsors are
gonna be presenting there are
two ways that we can go about it
either adopting the committee
sub or we can continue as usual
and then the motion will be
to do do not pass on
House joint resolution one but a
do pass and house Education
Committee subs to for House
street resolution one or
whatever the motion may be
solely that to the will of the
committee if we want to adopt
beforehand but just saying that
we don't have to as long as the
motion at the and recognizes
that it is C. Education
Committee sub for House Trent
resolution one in whatever the
motion made be.
Okay because this I first time
dealing with the committee seven
this committee almost across
but.
All right.
So we'll go ahead and get
started to Representative my
Estes please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
honorable members of.
This is how house joint
resolution one if I may Mister
chairman if we could a adopted
for discussion purposes at a
minimum.
There was a snafu coming out of
my committee my apologies to the
committee on was they got word
out last week the committee so
it is essentially a claim true
depiction of what happened in
house commerce due to a clerical
error I submitted and it a new
correct committee report.
And and so all move it for
discussion purposes some of the
committee some for discussion
purposes.
I have a second.
There is one thank you thank you
Representative Trujillo.
Go ahead Representative Maestas
thank you very much Mr chairman
honorable members it's a joy to
be here this morning on this
beautiful day thanks for having
us first here on a Monday I'm
joined by Representative
Mart√≠nez the co chairs up.
Are co sponsors rather
Representative Thomson and
Representative Lewis are also
signed off on this this bill
we're very familiar with that in
this committee and the house and
we think that the state and the
rest of us are educated and
comfortable enough with this
proposal that will get to the
voters after the session and how
straight resolution one proposes
a one percent increase from our
permanent school fund
specifically earmarked for early
childhood educational programs
are permanent school fund was
created prior to statehood
The Congress of eighteen ninety
eight allocated twenty one
beneficiaries one of those
beneficiaries which makes up
about eighty five percent of the
funds tradition is our common
schools are common schools at
the time were grades one through
eight basically and then of
course it became one through
twelve in the early seventies it
became K. through twelve we want
to
expand on that.
And take one percent for early
childhood programs as you know
children zero to five when this
was first proposed we did not
have an early childhood
department when this was first
proposed I think the fund was
hovering around nine billion
dollars but now the fund exceeds
twenty two billion dollars and
what I'll do Mr Chairman just
kind of briefly hopefully not
bore you talk about the the fund
and this and the strength of the
fund then I'll turn over
Representative Martinez and our
experts this morning and then
stand for questions well as you
know Mr Chairman we we think we
take five percent of the fund
and the argument is is the key
you can go higher than I you can
go higher than I but that's not
the case if you look at the the
resolution in the constitution
we take five percent of the
average of the preceding five
years five percent of the
average of the last five years
which actually is six years you
know once we get into the fiscal
year so for example for this
fiscal year what we're spending
now we're taking five percent of
sixteen point seven billion
dollars sixteen point seven
billion dollars but the fund
today is twenty two billion
twenty two.
So when you do a when you
actually do the math we're
actually taking if I may three
point eight seven percent of the
fund three point eight seven
percent of the fund was the
January first monthly
distribution based on what the
fund was December thirty first
and what the distribution was in
a monthly transfer of of funds
from the investment fund to the
general fund three point eight
seven so there's no question
that the fund can handle an
additional one percent and
continue to grow and continue to
far exceed inflation so I'm
gonna just deal with three
arguments that have been made
historically number one is that
this agency number that you
would damage the corpus of the
fund or that you would the
permanent funds no longer
permanent that that just simply
does not hold water if we were
to add one percent to the annual
distribution distribution real
time would hover around you know
four point nine you know maybe
five percent it would be six
percent of the average of the
last five years the fund rose
eleven percent annually.
Number one does approximately
seven percent seven point five.
Through financial investments
but it also grows approximately
four percent each year through
an influx of cash from the State
Land Office the last two years
that cash inflow exceeded nine
hundred million dollars so we
are a actually distributing less
than the cash going in much less
the growth from
the of financial and management
essentially global stocks
Mexicans have been proud and
tremendous stewards of this fund
in nineteen fifty seven we
founded the state investment
council in the early sixties
where one of the first states
that allowed our permanent fund
to be invested and and and stock
market in two thousand fourteen
as you recall Mr chairman the
people change the constitution
up removing the fifteen percent
cap on international investments
and so this fund has grown up.
Far exceeding the distribution
so it up if if if we want gender
and number two the net the next
most popular argument which I
agree with it it's generational
equity that how dare you cheat
future generations of for this a
current generation it's actually
just the opposite under current
distribution we are cheating the
current generation we are
cheating the children of New
Mexico for this mythical future
that that will never arrive
under that argument the future
will never arrive if that
argument maintains itself in
perpetuity the fund rose eleven
percent a year the distribution
hovers around four point one on
average.
And so the that the the the
future
gets up the current generation
is getting cheated if we were to
the general social equity if we
were to just hire mathematicians
and and do a generational equity
distribution it would it would
hover around seven point four to
seven point eight annual
distribution and lastly Mr
chairman the when this proposal
finally does become law it will
of your mark approximately a
hundred sixty million dollars
for early childhood education in
its first year and that number
will continue to grow and so the
argument is which I also agree
with how do you put hundred
sixty million dollars into a
system overnight what we don't
want to and we don't need to
through our statutory
construction of the enabling act
after this passes
appropriation even from the land
grant permanent fund is a
legislative prerogative just
because that money is
distributed to the beneficiary
in other words your mark for
that purpose the legislature
still has to appropriate that
money or given the legal
permission to spend the money so
we can build this system
responsibly rapidly and and with
all of our skills and then the
money that we don't appropriate
in that year remains in the
investment account collecting
interest so if we build out say
thirty million a year by the
time we reach capacity and that
particular one percent
allocation there will be an
additional five hundred million
dollars earmarked specifically
for early education in the state
we have an opportunity that is
the envy of every state in the
in the you frankly in the end we
have any country on this earth
to build a robust early
childhood system
from our permanent fund which
was its original purpose and so
I've gone on chairman appreciate
the time I'll turn it over to
Representative my **** and then
are experts thank you.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
president Maestas I'll be very
brief you know we've seen this
bill before you your committee
has seen it before the question
before the committee in the
question before the legislature
is whether or not the idea of
growing the early childhood
funding bucket from the land
grant Fund is worthy of a public
will that's our job here we're
not voting to increase the
distribution we're not willing
to appropriate the money all we
are doing is sending a
constitutional question to the
voters the way we've done many
many times you know and and my
time into that and here in Santa
Fe is you know by law any change
to the constitution has good
water so that's all we're voting
on here today I would like to
add though that.
As the Education Committee folks
who you know those of you who
are on the ground working on
these issues day in day out
this is one way to really begin
to turn the tide in our K.
twelve system.
You know we often times talk
about what's happening to
children in the third creator in
the fifth grade or graduation
rates in surely we've made some
improvements for sure under
under two different
administrations under two
different styles of leadership
we've made some improvements but
we know that there's a lot more
to be done and increasing the
amount of funding that is
available for these critical
early years in a child's life is
paramount to be able to really
improve that K. twelve system
now you know I will say New
Mexico
can pride itself in the we we
build out the system so far
we're doing a pretty good job a
particularly with that mixed
delivery system that includes.
I've providers private
nonprofits for profits Pueblo
systems the that is the entire
system that we seek to up lift
through this piece of
legislation and that we seek to
really.
Resource in the in in in an
adequate way so that not only
Senator owners can benefit from
hopefully what will be increased
reimbursement rates for them but
also elevate the the the the the
quality of life of those early
educators many of whom are
working for a minimum wage many
times in many of our communities
so the question before us is
whether or not this question is
worth you a public vote that
question being should we grow
the size of the funding pie for
early childhood out of these
land grant permanent fund with
that all of you the floor Mr
chair thank you.
Thank you would either of the
experts wish to weigh in
briefly.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name's Alex not
just on the president of CHI St
Joseph's children happy to be
with you this I'll be brief here
to answer questions over this
ten years a decade of home we
started this I had black hair
and so it's been a time this is
been banned this is been tested
this better look at and C. H. I.
C. Joseph children brought
research over those ten years
we brought independent
condiments and research and we
brought that to make it
available again are capped the
drive Kathy Kenny the pathways
part programs recommended our
study on unmet needs which is
still approximately four hundred
million is the unmet need
legal opinion from a
constitutional attorneys
are models of replication
research appalling and appalling
over the ten years is growing
stronger stronger it's it's it's
one of the strongest beings are
holes in New Mexico we should be
proud there's something that New
Mexicans do agree about.
The commitment that they do
agree at that seventy five
percent seventy nine that job.
We should make this money
available for our children we
brought you forward also up
support of replications we
operate the largest home
visiting program and in the
state and one of the largest in
the nation and we take no
government money but we come to.
Advocate for the little our
children the time has arrived
and it is so exciting to think
that we are at the at the finish
line possibly to make a huge
difference in the lives of our
children this is a big deal and
and it's been vetted and it's
ready to go and I'm here to
answer any questions thank you.
Thank you Mr may not a tornado
turn over to miss a just a
County the main out advocating
organizer for this endeavor with
proud to have her with us please
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jessica
outreach and I'm the director of
public policy and marketing at
CHI St Joseph's children is
always a distinct honor to come
before the house Education
Committee as our educators have
a profound role in the
resiliency of New Mexican
children families and our whole
state to date more than ever we
need to equip ourselves all the
tools possible the strength and
resiliency in our families
you know the amount of adversity
trauma and stress our families
aren't you're going right now
this past year at infants has
our call to action every
Mexicans to rise to the
challenge to help our fellow New
Mexicans what is so severely
impacted during the pandemic our
kids help up recently came out
and knocked over in November of
this past year twenty percent of
adults polled who have children
in the household say they aren't
sure if they can get food
because they don't have adequate
resources and they have no
confidence to be able to pay
rent yes it's been weighing on
me deeply as a mother of a one
and a half wall the amount of
stress because it is just under
a couple at early childhood
programs not only bring for
curriculum but connects waste
resources and are consistent
line of support hard working
families and children
The tribe is happening and our
families our experiences in the
one thank forward all hands on
deck your coming out of this
pandemic is going to be and so
important for this resilience
I'm very future of our state
funds this bold investments
right now all the best and like
this but proposed in this house
right resolution
because we are all connected and
our very future of our state on
the well being of our children
and families thank you so much
and I think your questions.
Great thank you thank you Mr
chairman we stand for questions.
Excellent so like I had
mentioned Committee before I go
to the attendees list
We can we can make sure that we
do this as nearly as possible
and and
and check all of our bases and
all of our boxes so so in a
winner take a motion on the
committee so.
Mr chair.
Representative trio yes I move
the committee sub.
For for.
I shouldn't have all right.
Thank you Representative.
All right I can imagine thank
you Representative Figueroa so
is there any opposition to
adopting the committee sub.
All right see none.
Adopted the committee said thank
you all so we'll go to the of
people already raising their
hands without instructions
so I will lower the hands.
So we will go to the attendees
list and I'm going to start off
with opposition to the committee
settled for House joint
resolution one so this is for
opposition.
All right so if this is for
opposition we'll go to Lawrence.
Lawrence in opposition.
Up to two.
In support I'm sorry I didn't
lower my hand quickly enough.
All right so we'll come back to
Lawrence we'll check if Larry is
in the same boat.
Very good morning are you in
opposition.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee we are in
opposition to the amendment and
to the H. a R. one in general.
Do you want those comments to
now please please you'll have up
to two minutes all right.
To go business I'm wary Sonntag
representing the New Mexico
business coalition as hundreds
of businesses and thousands of
New Mexicans around the state
our focus is to make New Mexico
a better place to do business so
The New Mexicans have jobs and
can provide for their families.
NBC supports improved outcomes
for the for our children we know
that there are some studies that
documented correlation to
improve results quality
insisting to education is
provided however we oppose this
force of the Canadian
substitute and H. J. R. one
permanent fund for early
education based on the lack of
accountability and improved
results for the additional
millions of dollars that have
already been added to our
education system over the past
ten years.
Additionally we have protocols
the bifurcated agenda that's
going on right now to increase
the amount of money taken from
the land grant permanent fund
beyond the current allocation
well at the same time pursuing
legislation to stop the oil and
gas industry that puts money
into the land grant permanent
fund.
It's a disservice to future
generations of children to
knowingly initiate a formula
that will decrease available
funds for them while also
planning the demise of the
source of future.
We urge you to say no to H. J.
R. one permanent fund early
childhood education.
Thank you.
Great thank you so much is there
any more opposition.
All right so then we will go to
those in support if you wish to
speak please indicate by raising
or and have up to two minutes.
All right so as with the role in
this committee for people
raising their hands we accept
anybody with a first and last
name please so make sure you
have first and last name or else
you will not get called.
So we'll go to Angela.
Angela good morning of up to two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Angela
Garcia I am the president of the
New Mexico childcare and
educational substation and I
also own the twin box and
learning centers in Los crucis
The New Mexico childcare and
education association stand in
support of the intent of the
funding in this bill this
funding will be life changing
for our youngest New Mexicans we
do have some concerns with the
analysis of this bill by the LFC
and the alley Essie in regards
to the legality around these
funds being able to be
distributed through the early
childhood education and care
department to provide to
providers who I'm do you have
find a second significant
portion at these early childhood
education services and the
analysis it states that the
congressional approval would be
needed to add early childhood
education services as a
beneficiary in order for these
funds to go to ECECD and be
distributed to private providers
I encourage this committee the
Sanchez and other members of the
government to look into these
concerns and take action to
address them to ensure the
amazing intent for the funding
as laid out by the Sanchez and
the governor is legally able to
be distributed to our meeting
early childhood education
service providers on the ground
doing this critical work thank
you so much for your time.
Thank you.
The next we'll go to Diane.
Good morning and up to two
minutes please.
Good morning can you hear me.
And thank you Mr chairman madam
vice chair and members of the
committee and a special thanks
to the sponsors of this
resolution I'm Diane Dennis a
long time quality education at
early education advocate and the
former lieutenant governor today
I speak both personally and on
behalf of growing up New Mexico
the early childhood partnership
we support H. J. R. one because
it provides the best
opportunities after years of
planning to fund the first five
years the most important
educational years and every
child slide in the past two
decades the legislature has
wisely created four year old pre
K. a strong mixed delivery
system for services and more
recently the early education and
care department and the
children's trust present and
past legislatures have provided
incremental increases in home
visiting and child care systems
and other critical programs for
families so we're on the right
track H. J. R. one now provides
a chance to solidify and give
consistency to necessary funding
to fill New Mexico's obligation
to give every child the healthy
start they deserve we have what
it takes the commitment to
invest in our children the
necessary structures and proven
successful programs and now we
need both your approval to send
it to the voters to put that
last piece in place the
financial resources I urge you
to pass H. J. R. one today
keeping us on track and taking
is just one step closer to
meeting our obligation to New
Mexico children and their
families thank you so much for
the opportunity to testify.
Thank you.
So we'll go to have yet.
Okay good morning you have a two
minute warning representatives
Mr chair I am an organizer with
Albuquerque interfaith our
leaders Representative sixteen
institutions across the City of
Albuquerque and our faith
traditions inform our value of
the lights in every child we
believe that it is indefensible
that we our this investment from
our future we also want to Stoke
are legislators imagination in
this pivotal moment in history
to help transition New Mexico
added this scar city mentality
and to grow the pie in years
past early childhood and K.
through twelve have been pitted
against each other in the zero
sum game over a measly one
percent increase but this could
be the moonshot this could be
the shot to create good jobs for
every educator we can invest in
the most critical years in a
child's life and we can take New
Mexico into a brilliant future
we only get one shot at this
voters don't tend to approve
these initiatives back to back
but with seventy five percent
approval in polling we have to
ask ourselves whether we're
asking too little.
Mr chair we respectfully
encourage an amendment to the
resolution to grow the
allocation by at least one
percent if we can get to to
present we can invest three
hundred and sixty million
dollars or more a year and
public education we can match
with our neighbors in Arizona do
with their allocation and we can
fight together for this chance
to change the course of history
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to Amy.
Morning Amy give up to the chair
and members of the committee my
name is Amy pada and I'm in New
Mexico teach plus policy fellow
and kindergarten teacher in Los
crucis.
Throughout my years teaching I
have had the unique opportunity
to work with our youngest
students I have worked with
students that have both attended
and have not attended early
childhood education programs it
is my experience that these
programs are exceptionally
helpful in preparing both the
child and their families for
future success I would like to
begin but with sharing my
experience as a kindergarten
classroom teacher my student
John started the year freighted
change he had little opportunity
to play and learn alongside
children his own age and lacked
a consistent routine and
structure at home.
After months of working with
John I'm just how to be at
school and comply with our
respective Cremins we begin to
work on his academics and found
he greatly struggle here to now
it is my job as his teacher to
work on all of these issues and
delays however had John had
access to a high quality early
childhood education program I
believe he would have
experienced success earlier on
given this early intervention in
just so if pooling motional
development you know I could
have focused more time on other
areas of need or have simply
been further along than we were
to start.
Furthermore John may have had an
IP already in place that would
have included continued services
with the social worker a
behavior plan and other academic
support services I strongly
believe a student success can be
predicted by early support I
have had the privilege of
working with many students like
John they all grow tremendously
throughout their kindergarten
year and is a wonderful journey
to witness it seems that those
students with early childhood
education experience adapt
faster to the new age rigorous
requirements of kindergarten
academics as well as the school
more positively from the start.
Thank you Amy that was two
minutes.
All right so we'll go to
Lawrence.
Morning learn seventh two
minutes please.
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee I am the Leri
sheller a pediatrician from
Santa Fe member of the American
academy of pediatrics Committee
early childhood care and
education.
I'm speaking today on behalf of
the New Mexico pediatric society
the state chapter of the
American academy of pediatrics
we almost three hundred New
Mexico pediatric practitioners
to help care for the children.
Mexico know the importance of
early childhood services
investment strongly support
house joint resolution one thank
you.
Thank you all right so go to you
mean.
Good morning you have two
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and committee members my name is
Eileen the and we and I'm co
chair of the Education Committee
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico and I also have a
background in teacher education
I'd like to thank the
representatives representatives
who have sponsored this
resolution and the league of
women voters have supported the
goals of the resolution for many
years we know that the early
years of a child's life are
crucial in building a foundation
and language experiences for
educational success.
Public funding for early
childhood and she education and
care has the potential to
mitigate high cost of special
education and drop out
investing in early childhood
helps prevent the achievement
gap by building academic and
social skills necessary for
school readiness and increases
high school graduation rates it
also has a positive effect on
parents and researchers suggest
that for every dollar invested
in high quality early childhood
education society gains about
seven dollars in economic
returns over time early
childhood educators need a fair
living wage for the important
work that they do.
It's time to let the voters
decide about the use of the
permanent fund for early
childhood educational services
never in our lifetime has there
been a better reason to access
additional funding from the
permanent fund please pass this
resolution thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so go to hope.
Morning hope you have a two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Alice and I'm the executive
director at plus Mexico I am
currently working with early
childhood educators across the
state related to the recruitment
and retention of early childhood
workforce I thank you briefly
share some of their work
recommendations I teach plus
fellows surveyed two hundred and
sixty six teachers staff and
administrators of early I'm
sorry of children and early
childhood programs birth through
preschool.
One finding from their survey
was that the majority of
teachers believe that feeling
early childhood position at
their site presents a
significant challenge another
finding was that teachers point
to salary planning time and
workload as key areas of concern
and impact the recruitment of
early childhood educators
recruitment is especially
challenging among special
education teachers and
educational assistants.
Our teachers develop
recommendations that would both
recruit a new generation of you
see teachers and staff and also
Rick retain current staff.
We believe we must invest in
effective incentives that will
attract more individuals
especially to our rural
communities and harder to fill
positions we must once and for
all address the inequities of
the ECP salary system that holds
too many of our employees below
what is considered a livable
wage we must create systems that
focus on the continuous
development of quality site
leadership we must use the tools
and technology available to help
market careers and ECP and tell
the story and the importance of
a quality early childhood
education we know that effective
early childhood programs are
vital to closing the opportunity
gap we must now be strategic in
developing and supporting early
childhood workforce thank you.
Great thank you so much I'm so
go to correct Catherine.
Good morning Mr chair madam
madam vice chair members of the
committee I'm Catherine Freeman
president and CEO of growing up
New Mexico formally known to you
as United way's Center the
county in the New Mexico early
childhood development
partnership we stand strongly in
support of passage of H. J. R.
one I'm and I want to talk
briefly about why that is many
of us have worked over the years
to create the foundational
building blocks to be able to
execute on a very robust and
successful early childhood
system we began some years ago
doing a needs assessment for New
Mexico that then led to the
release of the strategic plan
for it New Mexico in early
childhood that all of you
probably signed the last week or
so we were under contract with
the the state department's to do
that work so we know and we
understand the voices of New
Mexico as they have come forward
to talk about the essential
investment in workforce
development and
Childcare and all of the things
that make a robust early
childhood system we think now we
know now that we have concrete
plans through the work of the
early care and education
department and secretary
Groginsky we also have been able
to shine as a light on the needs
of that child care industry in
New Mexico and across the
country so now seems to be the
time to stand behind this we've
come together as a state we've
come together with a common
voice to create the foundational
building blocks that we've
created and we I encourage us to
come together and
Could create good definitions
for this bill so we stand and
support and encourage the
committee to pass thank.
Great thank you Catherine right
on time secretary Groginsky.
Good morning madam secretary up
to two minutes.
Morning Mr chair madam vice
chair members of the committee I
am Elizabeth Groginsky and I
have the distinct honor serving
as the first secretary of the
newly created New Mexico early
childhood education and care
department and I stand in full
support of house joint
resolution one I want to thank
Representative Maestas a
Martinez for their steadfast
commitment and unyielding
efforts on this bill they have
led this charge for over ten
years over the course of the
last few years and under the
steadfast leadership of governor
Lujan Grisham we have made great
strides to support children and
families in our state we
establish the early childhood
education and care department
just this past summer and as of
July one we now have a state
agency with the duty and mandate
to provide early childhood
educational services to children
and their families throughout
New Mexico.
Last year we established early
childhood Trust Fund and both of
these bold steps have laid an
important foundation for
sustained educational support
for generations to come now
passage of HJR one is the next
important step and it is indeed
a once in a generation
opportunity to finally make the
necessary educational
investments are diverse state
needs robust early childhood
development is the foundation of
lifelong learning the first five
years are critical window of
opportunity children are most
likely to succeed in life when
they enter school with language
and early math skills as well as
strong and positive sense of
self identity in addition given
our state's unique history
culturally and linguistically
sustaining programs are needed
to support high quality early
childhood development in all
corners of our state the current
mixed delivery ECECD's system
funding system falls far short
of the funds needed to support
the services that we need for
children to support school
readiness moving this resolution
will require all of us working
together the legislature has an
important role passing H. J. R.
one now than the people of New
Mexico will be given the
opportunity to vote on whether
to amend the New Mexico
constitution to allow a
percentage of the land grant
fund to be set aside and
distributed for the early
childhood educational services
administered by the state and
provided by law.
ECECD will use its expertise to
help draft the enabling
legislation to ensure that the
distribution of these funds will
be in compliance with the New
Mexico constitution and with
Adam secretary that was two
minutes sorry thank you thank
you.
All right so we'll go to Steve
of any.
Morning Steve.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Stacy ideas on that the
government relations director
for any in New Mexico.
And on behalf of our members we
stand in support of this bill as
it aligns with our legislative
goals on early childhood
education and for the second
time in to avoid repeating the
excellent points already raised
we encourage the members of this
committee to vote in favor thank
you.
Thank you Steve.
Right so go to Camilla.
Good morning good morning
members Miller Merrill with the
New Mexico State Land Office
Land Office stands in strong
support of house joint
resolution one and urges the
committee to do the same thank
you.
Right.
Thank you see the Romero's are
in to privative.
I'll.
Good morning madam.
Hi good morning everyone
Mr chairman and and committee my
name is.
My name is Omar tell and
A community organizer and member
of les and a member of ECECD
Advisory Council of New Mexico
and I am supporting this bill
because as a relief aid to keep
early childhood educator
children's and educators this
serve a better wage and a better
Education so right now I'm
working in my associates and I'm
I'm sounding out that
Child need very very special
education and
so I'm supporting this.
Because with this survey as
educator and and kids need a lot
of support in their education so
is very very important for us to
pass and we support this.
A lot so thank you for having
the opportunity to listen to us
and to send this to boat
thank you so much right thank
you.
Right so we'll go to Karen.
Morning Karen you have up to two
minutes.
I'm chairman members of the
committee I'm Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we think the Sanchez
Representative Mart√≠nez my S.
district continuing the fight
and this but and the experts
Alan Sanchez and Jessica Jessica
County for all the reasons
stated by many people and
because education is the fastest
way out of poverty we stand and
strong support for this
legislation as we have for many
years thank you.
thank you.
All right so next we'll go to
Jeremy.
Morning Jeremy of up to two
minutes.
Twenty chair members of the
committee German thank you
director of the to learning
speaking on behalf of governor
Jeffrey of Santa proposal as
mentioned before there are
numerous reasons for this but
this goes along with the need
America's commitment of thinking
about the next seven generations
having the benefit of those
children.
Is one of our for most of us are
purposes but having a decision
that can also benefit the
infinite fathers of today is a
no brainer so with that Senate
proposal fully supports how
straight resolution one thank
you great thank you.
All right so good to stand.
Morning stand.
Good morning Mr members the
committee did manage to get it
on you to stand rounds on the
executive director of the school
superintendents association with
coalition registration we
leaders as we stand in support
of this we asked the user
Committee pay very close
attention and take care to
review the eight analysis by
your own Ellie as C. staff and
by the LFC staff we believe that
your they are spot on in their
in their looks at this
particular bill as amended as
one of the large beneficiaries
and public schools we recognize
the need for early education we
pledge to work together with all
of you for proper for settlement
in this bill and we thank you
for the opportunity to react.
Right thank you.
So that you Secretary Stewart.
Morning Mr Secretary of two
minutes.
More Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for your
ongoing action in regard to the
the way in which we call fund
our public schools I want to
thank the sponsors both the
Representative Maestas Martinez
again for for continuing to move
this forward I won't repeat many
of the comments that have
already been made but I will say
that the mission for the public
education department is very
much focused in equity in access
and excellence and relevance and
the partnership that we have
with our educators our
communities and our families to
make sure that every single
student is helping secure their
identity and prepare for college
is very much in alignment with
this with this piece of
legislation the access to early
childhood education and care
programs is a critical
foundation we're gonna be able
to accomplish our mission and
really deliver on the promise of
public education for all
students we are very much in
support of being able to provide
this opportunity to move this
forward to the voters we want to
make sure that every family has
the opportunity to participate
in a high quality early
childhood education and care
program because we see first
hand the long term negative
impacts when a child doesn't
have access to these critical
services when they arrive to
kindergarten and haven't been
supported to succeed so this
legislation is backed by the
research showing the high
quality education early
childhood education yields
significant benefits in the long
term and we stand in strong
support of this bill from the
New Mexico public education
department thank you.
Right thank you.
Right so we'll go to Mary.
Morning merry.
In two minutes.
Merry you may be muted.
Okay hello can you hear me we
can now okay I'm very much in
favor this bill I many years ago
I was working in day care and it
was proven at that time and
there's been many studies to say
that even having barely a year
of early childhood education
means that a person is more
likely to get a high school
degree and less likely to go to
prison.
And I support this bill because
children going into school today
need to be more prepared to
start kindergarten and first
grade because things are more
sophisticated than they were
when we were growing up learning
to read it's important literacy
is important having children
read to is important to social
experience is very important
before they go to school I
support this bill.
Eight thank you for being here.
All right so go to current.
Morning Kurt.
Two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is director of the director of
leaders advocacy ministry of New
Mexico with ethics
administrative also speaks on
behalf of the New Mexico
conference of churches which is
an ecumenical organization more
than fifty years old and made up
of the denominational bodies
that include Methodist
Presbyterian Episcopalian size
of Christ United church of
Christ Mennonite made the
archdiocese of Santa Fe that
ICE's Los crucis in the diocese
of Gallup.
I'm here today is this morning
to offer our unequivocal support
for HDR one the arguments for
doing this are are convincing
and the studies are there to
back them up I urge you get the
members of the committee to
support HDR one and thank you
for this opportunity to speak
to.
Thank thank you.
All right so we'll go to Willie
Mae.
Morning really me.
Armen good morning members of
the committee on the only made
Ortiz the Legislative last off
of the New Mexico board
association
this so ciation fully supports
full funding for pre school half
day preschool and three year
olds are quite plus.
K. five initiatives and we
support and we know when we
value and appreciate the need
for early childhood education
for students NMSA along with the
superintendents association what
asked the committee to consider
a look at those issues that are
outlined in the FIR and the L.
U. C. analysis issues that speak
and talk about the recipients of
the use of the funds so what
we're in support of early
education and we asked the
committee to to look at this
legislation and pre we
appreciate the opportunity to
comment and give our opinion
thank you.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to
Secretary Blalock.
Warning the secretary of two
minutes.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee
unbearably Alexa cabinet
secretary the children youth and
families department here in the
state of New Mexico it in
standing in support of this bill
New Mexico has the highest
number per capita than the
visuals to experience more than
four adverse childhood
experiences we know that can
lead to higher public to build
alcoholism suicide rates and
other serious health conditions
and one important way for us to
the state thank you all from
such trauma is helping our
families avoid the term all
together through real
substantial investment in early
childhood interventions in this
bill does just that with the
urgency that we need here in the
state of New Mexico this is our
priority approach to HB and
that's why we're here to stand
strong support thank you.
Great thank you Mr secretary so
go to JD.
JD good morning Mr chairman
thank you JD Bullington here
today speaking on behalf of the
public going to believe that if
this constitutional amendment
passes it has a very high
likelihood of resulting in
greater student achievement
thank you.
Great thank you all right so
we'll go to those that don't
have readily have a name
available those of you that I'm
gonna call on next if you would
please identify you as an
individual and then your
organization.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is a
leases y'all and I'm gonna at
Turkey with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and a
member of the legal team for the
Yazzie practice in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit we stand in
support of H. J. R. one thank
you for the sponsors for all
their hard work and tireless
dedication towards this issue as
many of said today we now pre K.
as one of the best ways to close
the achievement gap so I would
just add that pre K. is also an
important part of providing a
sufficient and equitable
education for students and
programs are high quality and
culturally linguistically
relevant.
While demand for pre K. as I we
know access is limited not all
school districts offer it and
those that do it would be less
access is especially limited to
programs a bill from indigenous
cultural heritage for there are
funding is an incremental and
not enough to build programs
statewide to begin to dismantle
racism oppression this
resolution is a step in the
right direction your need to
support it thank you.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to
specific policy if you would
please identify yourself and for
future reference please make
sure you include your first and
last name and then your
organization.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is James Kobe
wine and I am the policy
director for the center for
civic policy H. A. R. one is a
parent is paramount in the
state's efforts to improve long
term education outcomes for
communities we support this
legislation and thank the hard
work of the Sanchez on behalf of
New Mexicos families children at
in early childhood educators I
urged committee members to vote
in support of the legislation
and thank you for the
opportunity speak in support of
this bill.
Right thank you.
All right.
Barbara good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for
allowing me to speak my name is
Barbara Luna Tetreault and I am
the owner of gold star academy
smiley faces licensed child care
centers and I'm also CEO of a
basis first a nonprofit
providing home visiting services
I've been in business over
twenty plus years now and I am
an avid advocate for early
childhood I've spent every
session talking on doors Task
for consideration for additional
money I've given you facts and
statistics on the results of
high quality early education we
need the additional resources to
allow for higher salaries
supplies and education for the
work force that are so badly
needed those of us on the ground
level see it more than others
I've worked with senators and
legislators to advocate for the
pre K. act in two thousand five
the forming of the new early
childhood education care
department and the early
childhood Trust Fund nobody more
than Representative Baldonado
knows the passions in Lancs I'll
go to to get things done I just
feel that it's important my only
concern is always and has been
the mechanism in which this
awesome amount of money will get
to the hands of the private
providers out there there's just
conflicting stories of the flow
that we need to change the
enabling act and the stating of
what we'll get take get we'll
take care of this later let's
get the money now well providers
and myself have not been given a
clear concise answer
I want this money more than
anybody early childhood
educators want this more than
money all we're as private
providers are concerned about
hello this money get on hands so
I look forward to hearing the
conversations I look forward to
getting the answers I look
forward to supporting this more
than anybody we've spent ten
years and I've always always
said I am your hugest advocate I
will be on the ground running
and I will be the loudest.
Voice if you will let me thank
you.
Right thank you barber right.
Okay so.
Seeing no more attendees with
comments will come to committee
we had one more Erica.
If you would please be brief.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica day goes policy
director at Lee and we stand
stand in favor of H. R. one and
you as a racial justice issue
childcare teachers are majority
women of color and B. and are
paid poverty wages and if I may
play a quick forty second video
of one of our members who is
currently in the classroom and
cannot be with us.
This
is because.
The soon as possible hello this
is people.
He.
Okay let's price in the.
Thank you see and he will be the
ideal just a few clicks.
Thank you.
You can see as many as they do
that
yes if you
have in the.
The state must.
He's our.
And she essentially it talks
about her experience during the
pandemic the fact that it's
brought many difficulties and
limitations in to their
classroom and how after
especially after this pandemic
they deserve higher wages and in
addition to that we support this
did it legislation because
currently families who pay out
of pocket pay upwards of thirty
percent of their income in
childcare and so that funding
from this legislation would
allow for a robust widget career
ladder for teachers and
increased access for parents so
for those reasons we ask for
committee members to vote in
favor of each chair one thank
you.
Right thank you.
Right.
So for real this time will come
to our committee in first on my
list as Representative
Stapleton.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee and to the
presenters Representative my SS
Representative happy of guns
that Martinez.
I'm I I'm trying to understand
and I need some clarification Mr
chairman
president does I know that last
year we passed the bill by
Senator Smith which is created a
fund and and and it has quite a
lot of money in that fund and
and I am in strong support of
this piece of legislation and
has been for all the time that
we've been trying to get it
through what I need to
understand is how does this
should this be approved how does
it get expended the process in
of expended it and and the usage
of the of that money versus the
fund that was created with about
what three hundred and fifty or
three hundred and twenty million
dollars in it Mr chairman and
president US.
I may thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Williams Stapleton no great
question they're very similar
but somewhat different you know
the fund up everyone everyone in
the legislature was committed to
to funding early childhood
programs because we know that
it's there it pays off that it's
a it's a incredibly good way for
the government to spend its
money and so last year you know
Madam chairman of Senate finance
came up with a.
What then was a wonderful plan
to to fully funded childhood
education through creating a
second Trust Fund and and that's
what he felt strongly about the
honorable governor built
strongly about it and it was a I
suppose a good idea of what that
did is it took cash.
For the first time in history
this country up verified by NCSL
is the first time that a state
took cash from its general fund
and put into a trust account
that's the commitment that that
everyone showed to fully funding
early childhood and in
perpetuity what we want is we
want to take money from the
trust account thank your verdict
into cash we want to and so the
money will be spent similarly
it's just a this this money will
is for its intended purpose the
permanent school fund is for its
intended purpose to develop our
school system our educational
capacity and and to grow our
economy so what we're doing this
proposal Mr Chairman
Representative a we've Stapleton
is taking an additional one
percent from the existing trust
that's existed for a hundred
years and put it directly here
marked in the early childhood
services that would.
That that the fund right now is
twenty two billion dollars so
obviously one percent of that is
two hundred over two hundred
million dollars but because we
do the five year rolling average
of the first allocation would be
somewhere in the neighborhood of
a hundred sixty million dollars
and that will continue to grow
as the fund
Growth exceeds the distribution
the fund from two years ago put
three hundred dollars cash from
the general fund into a new
trust account that was hoping to
grow to about a billion dollars
and then take five percent out
each year which of would have
been about fifty million dollars
but but that that initiative
although got overwhelming
support kind of contradicts the
whole point of government
spending measures on early
childhood development that every
every expenditure you do pays
off in the long run up every one
dollar for early childhood pays
off in terms of government
expenditures of three to one and
in terms of the overall growth
of the economy seven to one so
so that's the the set the
similarities and the differences
between the two proposals Mr
Chairman representative my SS
so.
This five percent each year in
that trust fund that was
established by early childhood.
I'm this one come about and the
one percent taken out.
So would that be six percent.
Per year of funding coming from
both funds to us early
childhood.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Williams
Stapleton no this this proposal
is merely for the permanent
school fund we wish to take it
send the resolution to the
voters of the voters can decide
whether to spend an additional
one percent annually from the
permanent school fund the the
the trust fund that we created
two years ago does not need
congressional approval it's not
part of this resolution that one
of.
I believe will remain at five or
or or frankly maybe may become
obsolete with the with the
passage of this proposal.
Ops of Mr Chairman
representative I just when you
say become obsolete what happens
to those monies.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative of we lived able
to with those monies are are
just still remain in a trust for
early educational programs
so that would be up to us
whether to continue to spend the
money.
We do whatever we want with it
but that's not part of this
proposal this proposal is to
take one percent from the
permanent school fund it does
not affect the the law in
relationship to that other fund
I I understand Mr Chairman
representative my SS I commend
you and Representative Martinez
for your struggles and your
continuation of wanting to put
the get funding more additional
funding for early childhood
I just know that
Would it take it's been so
difficult to get money out of
this.
permanent fund that you've been
trying to get the funding from
and once we get it approved that
would there wouldn't be
disarray all all obstacles in
trying to expand the fund for
the purposes intended and
reaching for the phone at this
point of of closure on I'm not
having enough funds sufficient
funding for early childhood
education thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Maestas.
Thank you representative
Representative Eli please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative brings bill I
want to ask you a couple high
level professionals are Mr chair
for asked not be dealt as per
the stone extra that I'm not off
on a rabbit so.
The one percent that being
discussed Mr chair that's from
the corporate so that correct.
Mr Chairman Representative lane
no because the fund grows eleven
percent.
and currently we the the January
first distribution was three
point eight seven.
So the fund grows.
So much larger than the annual
distribution so this would
essentially be off of the
interest and the cash inflows
from the State Land Office of
the the point is the fund would
continue to grow the corpus
would continue to grow even with
a one percent increase in
distribution.
Mr chair what about the the law
provides for.
District Court itself and not
just from the income.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Lane it's from
the fund it's from the
investment account
A specific dollar exposed you
know.
I don't know you could consider
the same you can get it consider
it different but the point is
that corpus will continue to
grow even with the one percent
increase distribution.
Thank you Mr chairman so the way
I understand it is simply long
as for the last five years as
long as but the broader five
year average of the farms larger
than Hemphill better allowed to
take one percent is that
correct.
excellent thank you Mr chairman
thank Representative lane a yes
act yes the there is a ten
billion dollar step cost stop
gap we we increase that back in
two thousand fourteen with the
constitution amendment that I
mentioned earlier and that's on
page three line fifteen that
would
Correct if if you're worried go
lower than that than the one
percent would cease to be
distributed.
Thank you amber Mr chair.
I I noticed in looking at
article four section seven which
is what this is seeking to amend
that there was.
But increasing that percent of
corpus taken and in two thousand
five it was increased to eight
tenths of one percent and then
of scale back in twenty thirteen
to one half and so I'm just
trying to understand but where
are the one percent come from Mr
chair whereas previously we had
done like I said eight tenths of
one percent and one half of one
percent.
Thank you Mr chairman no great
question Representative lane of
the as as you recall two
thousand three the voters
increase the distribution
actually from four point seven
to five point eight so it's
actually a one point one percent
in the increase and then your
corrected scaled back to a point
I and then back down to five so
it essentially one from four
seven up and then back down to
five the one percent is actually
a very conservative proposal the
one percent is a very
conservative proposal
considering that the fund goes
eleven.
Of percent a year and the
distribution of hovers around
four point one depending on the
growth of the fund
and so we were comfortable with
a one percent increase in two
thousand thirteen the house
actually passed a one point five
percent increase our friends in
the Senate I have a similar
proposal Arizona
Four years ago when two eight
six point nine percent increase
so if this were to get over the
Senate the conversation in the
Senate will be whether it's one
percent or slightly higher than
one percent but but one percent
has been our proposal the past
four years and and it is a very
modest conservative proposal.
Representative and also in
interviewing article four
six and seven at the where
interpreted those Previn's
changing that they had what what
I would probably refer to as a
sunset and in date
but I don't see Senator language
in this bill is that correct Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman resume
correct there is no sunset we're
confident and in the solvency of
the fund and the and the purpose
for the allocation so there was
there's we see no need for a
subset of particularly because
this will only deal with half of
the unmet need
the condoms we worked with
previously talk about a four
hundred million dollar.
A need when we fully fund this
program this would the one
percent would be about half of
that.
Of that
About a meeting that I'm unmet
needs.
So we do not want to sunset.
So thank you Mr I want to I want
to.
I guess I understand better
where their earnings
Where they go so.
the one percent it's going from
the land grant permanent fund.
To the common school fund is
that correct Mr chair thank you
Mr chairman of Representative
Eli so I used to terms of
forgive the constitution calls
at the permanent school fund and
that's what it is the permanent
school fund the state investment
council to come because of the
land grant permanent fund and
that's what we've been calling
it
the majority of the time that we
have these debates so it's the
permanent school fund and and
the state investment council
manages all of our permanent
funds
and so the state investment
council invests these funds in
the stock market in real estate
in bonds it has a incredibly
broad national and international
portfolio which allows it to
move financial capital across
international boundaries
literally with the with the push
of a button so the they do a
tremendous job of growing our
funds from financial
I investments in addition.
As I mentioned Mr chairman
representing we it grows through
a cash inflows from the State
Land Office
the last two years a nine
hundred million dollars have
been has been
You know input into this fund in
addition to the financial.
Investment growth and so what
happens is if I may Mister man I
I email this to the members and
if I can
Let's see if I can pull this off
it'll just take a minister could
share my screen.
Shucks I can't quite get there
but anyway the what happens is
we take the amount of the fund
from December thirty first.
We take the the last five
December thirty first we added
up we divided by five and then
and then we take five percent of
that for allocation in the next
fiscal year so it's really kind
of a six year rolling average by
the end of the fiscal year
you're taking a a data point
five six and a half years prior
well what happens is each month
for example this in this year's
fiscal year eight hundred thirty
six million dollars is taken
from the investment account into
the general fund so it's taking
in twelve twelve monthly
payments so essentially like the
first of the month sixty nine
million dollars is transfer from
the investment account.
Into the general fund for
government expenditures so hope
hope that that's helpful.
Thank you Mr so sometimes
opening just to summarize
extract programs said so Mr
chair so.
Goes from the permit on to what
I think it's called the common
school fund and then that
comments will provide is is
invested differently it earned
the money
but that is my staff that what
is our topic that come school
funds than.
It doesn't say a common school
on it goes into the general
correct.
Thank you Mr chairman
representing not not exactly
All use the term land grant
permanent fund because that's
what for this purpose of this
the sentence but the land grant
permanent fund is twenty two
billion dollars managed by the
state investment council money
five percent of of the five year
rolling average of that fund
gets distributed into the
general fund for the
beneficiaries and we haven't
talked a lot about the
beneficiaries today but there's
twenty one beneficiaries from
the land grant permanent fund
they get five percent if this
were to pass the voters that
each get six percent of the five
year rolling average so one of
the beneficiaries the largest
beneficiary approximately eighty
six percent of the distribution
is the is the common schools the
COVID schools so we use that
common school money into the up
into the SCG that goes to fund
K. through twelve education
So it's not it's not really a
separate fund necessarily it's
just a it's just a the
beneficiary is known as the
common schools in the
constitution but it's really K.
to twelfth well we want to do is
take one percent.
Of from the COVID school
distribution and air market
early educator he childhood
education.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman I
know Representative questions as
mentioned that.
This increased one percent will
not have an impact on the corpus
and I know as the bell attorneys
okay with with us expressing
maybe some concern and and my
concern would be and and we're
doing the the fiscal impact
report
You know I look at page three of
that report.
In this Representative I'm
determined that as well.
And thank you Mr chair in doing
that that report there's a table
there and the way I interpret
the data on that table as you'll
see there's a there's a road
there with calendar year twenty
forty two.
And it highlighted and and what
I believe that data means is
that in the year two thousand
forty two.
we would actually start to see
fewer dollars coming out of fund
because we would be taking
money out of this fund presently
that we're not presently taking
money out of.
and so I I'd like to give
Representative an opportunity Mr
chair to explain to me I guess
that's why this FIR is wrong.
So my question
thank you doctor Mr Chairman
resembling this is actually the
crux of the issue and I and I
want to thank you so much for
bringing it up.
But for those keeping score at
home page three page three of
the FIR talks about if we keep
it a five percent what would be
the dish the growth of the
funding the distribution if we
bump up to six percent what
would be the growth of the
funding the distribution and so
in twenty years in twenty years
the distribution from five
percent would be a two point
seven seven billion.
If we can bump that up to six
the distribution would be two
point seven six seven billion so
on that date in twenty years the
distribution would be three
million dollars less so so just
a quick cab yet your comments
the distribution would not go
down we just be distributing
three million dollars less than
if we kept at it I so under just
under six percent distribution
if you go down that roadway
continues to grow it continues
to grow exceeding inflation
And so the question is in twenty
years.
Would we rather have twenty
years of early childhood
educational programs.
And spend close to
You know spend over you know two
billion dollars on on our
children or would you have three
million extra dollars.
Being distributed from the fund
that's really the crux of the
question that we're asking this
committee to consider today.
Thank you Mr I I appreciate that
the responses from.
Present my since that they're
helpful in helping bring
stretching.
And I.
and I'll just I guess make my
final.
Madam.
Because I I I interpret the data
will be differently what are
what are your the drug is if we
if we don't touch this money for
the next twenty years.
We will actually end up being
able to take more money out of
respond we touch that money
today and I do realize that sort
of the central issue here
but you know I I think of in
terms of real life examples so I
I have it on.
if they both have I've point
nine accounts.
And I have but I have a.
Son who's a senior right now
high school.
You know I I don't I don't take
money out of five twenty nine
out of my younger son five
twenty nine or older son's
college because I know the
importance of winning that money
grow in my younger sons I on the
count
and you know I I also look at
our historical spending on
education.
if you look at what we're
spending on education back and
say oh three oh four time bring
we're spending in the state
around one point seven one point
eight billion.
R. as in FY twenty one we're
spending over three billion so
it's not like we have kept our
spending on education flat and
so with with the idea that we
have increased our spending in
education
more than we ever have and and
rightfully so I'm not I'm not to
debating that that's a good
investment.
But essentially what I feel like
I'm being asked to do is.
take preference over the next
twenty years which is you know
roughly speaking one generation
of students that I am the show
purpose so that one generation
over all future generations of
New Mexico and I think really
what I look at it in those terms
that's that's one of our time
with this
so thank you sure.
Thank you generate thank thank
you Representative
Representative der.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives for bringing
this forth.
When this passes the legislature
and the governor signs it can
you give me the actual timeline
including it going to the voters
going to Congress what are we
talking about this actually
being implemented.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Garrett no the on
of a governor's been tremendous
in this in this struggle and
supports at a hundred percent.
and she won't sign it when she
goes to the polls with the rest
of the with the rest of the
electorate the LFC does not go
to the governor for approval I
go to the voters so we're asking
the voters to consider changing
the constitution and I will
happen if you look at a page for
line twenty it says
You know the the proposed
resolution will go to the people
for their approval or rejection
at the next general election
so that would be either this
November.
Or next November
And then just so if it goes to
the voters this November Mr
chairman reserve guard then it
will be you know will serve as
the election is ratified its
polling at seventy five percent
so we're confident it will pass
then that money will be
available this time next year
when we're doing the budget.
Representative doesn't have to
be approved by Congress so also
thank you Mr chairman thank you
resin get wonderful question I
I'm glad you asked that it does
not it is not if we were to
change the beneficiary.
Maybe a new beneficiary or
remove a beneficiary we would
need congressional approval
unfortunately at the contract
that we've made with the with
the federal government when they
allowed us.
To be a a state even though
we're supposed to be a state in
equal footing with the rest of
the states but that's another
another issue but we do not need
to go to a Congress that was the
amendment that that was a
Representative prove unanimously
and house commerce we're not
changing the beneficiary we're
not changing the benefits sure
the beneficiary remains the
common schools just like when we
essentially invented high school
or invent in kindergarten I
we've invented early childhood
education program so we used to
put the congressional approval
in the resolution just because
it was too big of a headache to
expose to to explain it to the
naysayers but now we're
everyone's in agreement that we
do not need congressional
approval since we're not
changing the benefits sure thank
you for that clarification and
Mr Chairman representative I
just want to make one more
comment I'm I'm grateful for
what Representative Lang said
but I want to point out that all
of our studies of education show
that the majority of our
students advance one year once
they're in school the problem in
New Mexico is that so many of
our students start two years
behind and so well I understand
the argument thank you twenty
years later the next generation
I think that passing this
resolution will really give the
jumpstart
in our educational system for
our youngest New Mexicans thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
you representatives.
Thank you Representative Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the Sanchez for both
bringing this up I think it's a
has great high quality potential
however I I've been taking a
considerable.
Question to one aspect returns
to the area that I represent
which is a lot of private child
care services so given statute
that we're talking and this new
stature the juror bring to us.
Representative minuses do you
require I that they will in fact
still have the same provided
services because F. R. choose to
give a little contradiction with
the console a lot of my early
childhood field childcare
services greatly concerned.
Mr chairman thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
representative and I appreciate
the question it was.
It was reminiscent of the
frustration that Mr droll
expressed in her in her
testimony one of the last
speakers and.
And the item has been clarified
has been addressed but there is
a lot of anxiety and
misinformation out there with
regard to this issue which is
unfortunate this does not change
the law.
This does not change the way we
we the state of Mexico spends
money on early childhood
education what was the law
yesterday is going to be a lot
of Morrow by the providers get
state money yesterday they'll
get state money tomorrow but
we're not gonna.
Put a paragraph in the
constitution to eliminate the
stress from this misinformation
and that's unfortunate but if
you look on a page for
this is essentially the crux of
the bill one percent of the
average of line six to eleven Mr
Chairman roads and budget of one
percent of the average of the
year and market values of the
fund for the immediate preceding
five calendar years.
Provided that the amount of the
additional distribution from the
permanent school fund shall be
for early childhood educational
services administered by the
state as provided by law and so
this is earmarked for the early
education department it's
earmarked for children zero to
five we're not gonna reinvent
our early educational system
it's it's we're gonna dissension
Lee expand on existing programs
that work that the data is
collected that that there are a
good bang for the Buck and this
merely will if passed in
November and and made available
to appropriators next year will
essentially distribute and have
at our disposal hundred fifty
million dollars that we can then
appropriate some of that money
is to expand early childhood
educational programs
And so that I think Mr Duale
said.
That she hasn't got an
explanation that's the
explanation
it's it's merely distributing
this additional funds to make it
available for appropriators the
lot is not change or do I
anticipate it changing it and
and maybe if secretary Groginsky
can expand on this but we we can
just.
We can just say over and over
again twenty times over this
merely allocates expenditures to
existing programs to expand and
develop and grow existing
programs that are proven to
work.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative so then if the
FIR is isn't aligning and what
we're saying is that everyone
has that concern why isn't
aligning in terms of and I guess
what it comes down to it always
does to me is that we we have
the discrepancy when it comes to
up a private early childcare and
I guess that's the concern that
the FIR still got plugging into
people's heads there that it's
it's not is it going to line a
minute so why isn't saying in
December that it has that
availability I understand and if
you say it again I respectfully
you know understand which drive
down with but the I think it's a
clarification that needs to be
may be expended one more time to
so this aligning that they will
be paid because CYFD is giving
them information that it's they
have concerns about it it is as
the other agencies that were of
in this response to doing this
so I think it's true for you
know I mean I think
there is concern that we want
this alignment to fit the way it
should to work for everybody and
now when you're in a rural area
like money respectfully I have
to I have to argue for and and
work to make sure that they're
not going to be out of pocket of
monies that the briefly
desperately need when I'm
sharing of those kind of factors
that one for over over marches
out there having adverse at risk
spirit and so we're just trying
to meet the challenge I think is
a state legislator and and as a
Representative sponsoring a
great bill we support yes I
support I just want to be clear
that we want your reservations
and if writings it puts a better
I think that might be something
to consider going forward in the
next round.
If we can have if you could have
that availability of we glad to
maybe pull some of these people
together and and let you address
them as well.
On the outside
thank you Representative insured
with.
That's all the questions.
Thank you very.
Thank you representative so good
to Representative Dow please.
Thank you Mr chairman at thank
you representatives for the bill
and I I do want to just tell you
high appreciative I am that you
are strong advocates of early
childhood and that you are
convinced that these dollars
will go to zero five and I just
I mean I I I don't understand
why it's misinformation with the
Attorney General with FY ours
for over a decade even FIR is
this year why would any analysts
Representative misinformation
and I do want to understand that
I do want to believe that these
callers are going to go where
their intended but I I don't
think it's quite
What to say that people who have
a difference of opinion or
spread misinformation when the
agency this information has been
consistent for over a decade and
so you've been bringing the bill
Mr Chairman representative for
over a decade I'm I've been
working in early childhood in
New Mexico for over twenty two
years very passionate about I
love it I'm so glad that we made
early childhood they're not just
targeting as I think they should
be focused on the children who
need it most because as we get
more and more universal we can
still slots without focusing on
this children who need it most
and where the research that's
being touted all day today shows
make the outcome are not
necessarily ones are getting the
program so I am for I'm targeted
interventions for the children
who need it most verses
universal programs but that does
not mean that I don't want to
understand the bill and I don't
want to understand how the
concerns of the last decade have
been resolved a new language so
how many amendment substitutes
whatever are we on this bill
just this year what what version
of amendments and substitute
sorry on right now.
Thank you Mr chairman observed
all of this is the third the
third one the original bill had
sections one two and three
section three was the
congressional approval commerce
committee deleted section three
because you know we don't need
congressional approval that vote
was unanimous due to my err on
apologize to this committee due
to my error I submitted a
A committee report that was in
error and so we ask this
committee to adopt Education
Committee substitute.
Which just says section one into
and we're grateful to the
committee for doing that which
which does not include section
three so this is the third
version thank thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you
Representative and I think but
I.
Representative I think with all
that talking with throws you
out.
Yeah I I am you are you are if
things are like you you might
want to turn off your camera
that's fine we believe it's you
talking and asking the
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative and but I think
what I'm getting at as even a
decade later and even in this
year we're still making
amendments were still making
sense we're still making changes
in order to try to get it where
we wanted to go which is to the
existing infrastructure zero to
five that in the most for the
most part there are exceptions
exist outside of the current
common schools and so I I there
are still questions and I are
you there's going to be funds
are at least amendments as we go
through the house and to the
Senate side and it will be if
it's this of the last decade.
shall not be used for religious
sectarian doctoral purposes
sometimes we take out the
ability for any organization
that might be faith based in
their we Adam BOBACK and then
changes around ECD services
versus gaining an agency verses
you know and so so.
I guess.
I don't feel like my concerns
are resolved and so I thought I
saw in the participants I've
been hearing that the general
counsel for ECECD now has clear
language in clear statute that
allows these dollars to flow
right to the intended
beneficiaries of which the
sponsors are saying R. zero to
five and is is the general
counsel for the city of a to
explain how that's now possible
and it wasn't for the last ten
years.
Has been perceived to be thank
you Mr chairman Representative
Dow before I turn over the
secretary it's it's not that the
sponsors are saying that is the
proposed constitutional
amendment look on page four.
Line fourteen.
Service early educational
educational services for
children and tell their eligible
for kindergarten we all know
that in state law a child
becomes eligible for
kindergarten on their fifth
birthday so it's not what we're
saying it's what it is in the
proposed resolution but
representative of madam
secretary if you can
If you can derive the specific
question that that
Representative Dow asked would
you mind addressing her concerns
Mr chairman if I may have Mr
chair
Representative Dow member
members of the committee I think
what I'm what our general
counsel in what we believe
strongly is what I stated in my
opening remarks which is that
now that we have established the
early childhood education and
care department that has within
its duties the mandate to
provide early childhood
educational services to children
and families throughout New
Mexico we administer pre K. in
both the public and the private
setting and we all recognize
that early childhood education
that education begins at birth
and that by allowing the voters
of New Mexico to passing this
resolution and then allowing the
voters of New Mexico to
establish that they also see
that early childhood education
is a direct beneficiary of the
educational funds set aside in
the land grant permanent fund
that we will continue to do as
we are mandated by law and our
responsibilities are to
administer educational programs
in the state so having the
education department is
something that is different the
early childhood education and
care department that is not
existed before so that is our
thing and then the enabling
statute that will follow will
also further clarify how
education early childhood
educational services are
delivered and administered in
the state of New Mexico through
a public agency I'm which is the
early childhood education and
care department.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you representative and
secretary for that and please
I'm I am not in any way
questioning your intents but
could you give me an example of
the agency that is currently
receiving funds from the
currently grant friends common
schools how is this happening is
there any other example where
this is happening we're we are
going to try to do it this way
and hope that it does needs as
provided by the law.
Mr Chairman I'm unclear as to
your question currently are K.
through twelve system over three
billion dollars
spends money in a whole a whole
array of ways some of that money
goes to.
Not enough but some of the money
goes to teacher some of that
money goes into the classrooms
of the money goes to custodians
coaches and some of that money
is contracted out for services
across the spectrum so if you
could be a lot more specific on
your question about I don't okay
thank thank you Representative
I'm sorry so right now every
single penny close to a COVID
school or another beneficiary.
Correct.
Correct correct and now B.
Ahlers we're saying will not I
think I I mean I don't clear so
these dollars are going to low
to the COVID beneficiaries into
the schools and the schools are
data transfer one percent in the
ECECD department and then ECECD
department will decide where it
goes and makes models delivery
as possible that's not correct
Mr Chairman was ago and I I okay
yeah what we would think that
that is correct what what do
from the beneficiaries is then
it is made available to
appropriators each year and it
gets appropriated to House Bill
to the at the department of
corrections is a beneficiary so
that's a line item within the D.
O. C. budget U. N. M. as a
beneficiary so that's a line
item with the UNM's budget the
public's the public the common
schools beneficiary actually we
decided as appropriators that it
goes into the equalization
formula.
so this would be one percent
additional from the land grant
permanent fund to be distributed
for early childhood services
which would go to the early
educational childhood services
department in its budget within
house bill two.
Thank you Mr chairman that
answers my question so the
intent is to take the one
percent and transfer it in its
entirety.
The ECECD department thank you
Mr chairman Representative Dow
the it's an entire the entirety
of the allocation would be
earmarked for yet but we do not
have to appropriated we do not
have to give legal permission to
spend the money we don't have to
spend all hundred fifty million
next year say for example if we
decide to spend thirty million
then the hundred twenty million
that is earmarked for early
education that we decide not to
appropriate would remain in the
investment account earmarked for
early education and and still
collecting interest.
So Mr chairman and and
Representative then what we're
talking about each year so we're
gonna put this money into a new
category that remains on
appropriated until we
appropriate and then each year
we as a body will appropriates
what we feel is appropriate to
where we feel is appropriate for
services to benefit families
with children before
kindergarten thank you Mr
chairman reps have that's a
wonderful way to phrase it it
would be a new category it's not
a new beneficiary but a new
category.
Five percent will go to K. to
twelve one percent were good
early at.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
language as in the some of that
was just presented it will be
for the fifth part thank.
Correct Mr Chairman
representative correct line
fourteen on page four.
For children and tell their
eligible for kindergarten and
then of course as you know in
statute children eligible for
kindergarten when they turn
five.
Thank you Mr chairman and and we
believe that by does it be
enabling language would assure
it will be the language that
ensures that it goes to this new
category and then the enabling
language would empower the
legislators to appropriate the
funds annually thank you Mr
chairman Representative out
exactly.
Okay thank you very much for the
clarifying questions and look
for the following about.
Thank thank you representative
Representative Roybal kinda you
know please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representatives my Estes and my
thing is for the.
Once again bringing forward this
incredibly important
legislation and thank you to all
of the those sick again great
testimony today again year after
year after year so I I truly
appreciate hearing and just has
been mentioned Mr chair
previously as every year as
we've been entertaining this
legislation every year it
continues to improve and and
move with the tide the social
economic tides of the time and
that's a very admirable and I I
think that's really important
and more important Mr chair is
that now we have an early
childhood you early childhood
Department that now will be
particularly charged with
overseeing
The distribution so I have one
question are directed.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't know if you want to answer
it or the secretary that in line
of the questions that were
asked.
The appropriation process would
be part of this is my
understanding I just want to
make sure that.
It will be part of the
department's budget and
appropriations process as and
then we legislatively.
Do what we're supposed to do and
make sure that there is that
transparency and accountability
associated with those processes
as we move forward Mr Chairman
representative is that correct.
Mr Chairman representative about
going don't know excellent way
to phrase it it's based on
accountability and transparency
and and are up in our decision
to grant permission to spend the
money we as appropriators and
this is where in in the cost in
law we as appropriators.
You know decide how and when to
spend money this distributed
from the land grant permanent
fund to its beneficiaries.
Thank you Mr chair.
Another point
Mr Chairman representative I was
revealing both of the analyses
from LAFC and the and FIR.
And I know that the in both
analysis reference was made to
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit that
was component of each one of
their analysis so I wanted to
ask.
How you look
you see.
The H. J. R. one process hello
will work towards.
Compliment.
And compliment other measures
that are being taken to remedy
Martinez Yazzie findings as it
relates to public education.
Thank you of Mr Chairman
representative of a COVID that
that as I'd be in agreement with
that sentiment Representative
Martinez had to.
Chair is on committee but he I
think is going to take a lead
best statewide representative
Lente and can articulate these
arguments but the lack the
distribution and the
beneficiaries was determined by
Congress in eighteen ninety
eight right all this is a this
state government as hell they
because Donald on this fund and
watched it grow in far excess of
the distribution annually a
cheating our current generations
for this mythical future
generation the current
generation is upwards of seventy
five percent people of color.
Although not.
Not at in the holding of
Martinez Yazzie be state state
exactly the judge in in dicta or
you know in in his writings
outside of the holding talked
about early educational
component is key to fulfilling
the our constitutional
obligations under Martinez
Yazzie the state and so that's
why the teachers support this on
the superintendents at that
though now now.
Excuse me.
Those children going into
kindergarten first grade second
grade will be much better
equipped
and will leave the at the stress
of K. through twelve by being
you know higher social emotional
skills you know colors letters.
Numbers of this is this this is
absolutely necessary my opinion
to fulfill obligations for at
risk youth for native youth and
for limited English speaking
you.
Thank you and I apologize for
that
so Mr chairman and
Representative that's exactly
the point had we been
constitutionally meeting our
obligations since the beginning
would be a lot further in our
public education on means as
well as in terms of using the
the fund as had been intended to
from the very beginning and so
in distributing the funds in
order to being fairness equity
into our educational system so.
Finally Mr chair and and
Representative I do want to say.
Something concerning the
educational benefits of early
childhood education we all have
heard it but I think it's really
important to reemphasize right
you know I've said several times
in other committees throughout
this process that I over some
for many years and and in home
day care delivery system I think
it was over twenty years and we
incorporated Mr chair a child
development approach to our
child care in our childcare so
every child care.
At home.
With certified to the care giver
was certified as a child
development specialist and the
whole point of certifying Mr
chair and representative was to
ensure that the children.
From from.
Until.
Preschool and in preparation for
pre K. eight K.
we're.
Time to beginning to be
educated and prepared for what
they would face in the in the
school system so.
It proved not only successful Mr
chair we tracked the success of
the children as they entered
into elementary school and not
only did they continue to pass
from grade to grade to grade but
many of them.
Were recipients of the bilingual
students on a roll not just the
general but they were bilingual
students on a roll and so it's
improvement educational finding
Mr Chairman representative that
the earlier we expose our
children
to social cultural and
linguistic relevant education.
Appropriate to their levels.
Progress the more successful
they are through elementary high
school and in their pursuits for
their future so Mr Chairman
representative both of you
Representative Sanchez I really
commend you for continuing the
battle if we wait and wait and
wait and wait then all we're
doing is continuing to set back
the progress and for the
generations yet to come we it's
time for us to take bold action
and step up and impasses some
active citizens and the voters
and the families decide thank
you Mr chair and thank you
representative once again for
bringing this forward.
Thank you representative
Representative went that.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning I'd like to make a
motion if it's timely.
I went ahead and senator motion
but we do have another question
but go ahead and say it for the
record I like to make a motion
of a do not pass on H. J. R. one
but a do pass on the house
Education Committee substitute
for AJ are what.
Right thank you representative
all second it but we have
Representative Baldonado so keep
that motion Representative
Baldonado please thank you Mr
chairman thank you on thank you
chairman last us this committee
feels a lot like like commerce
have a lot of the same faces in
in these committees and then of
course the bill's sponsors but
the thank you for bringing this
again and we've you have heard
this bill or this resolution
many many many times in this
body at least while I've been
here but I I still wanted I
kinda want to clarify one thing
Mr Chairman and and
Representative Maestas.
By doing to make this increase
might clear that that all the
beneficiaries have to take an
increase as well or is it just
we just take this this new
increase and just for the early
childhood education portion that
we're proposing.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
rose above and I don't know
you're correct all beneficiaries
will get a six percent
distribution of the common
schools
Portion of that distribution one
percent will go to re education
programs we are correct school
for the deaf New Mexico military
institute you know all of those
will get a.
Six percent distribution.
As opposed to I Mr chairman and
Representative Maestas that list
of of twenty one minute issues
it's pretty interesting I think
you'd agree with me there's a
there's a few things on there
that you kind of scratch your
head there's a I think a miner's
hospital or something up and Rep
tone if I'm not mistaken and
a few things on there that are
that were put in play in you
know back back in the days you
might say Mr Chairman and and
Representative but going back to
that that example you using with
with Representative Dow of the
corrections so
This is this additional monies
will be going to all the
beneficiaries should should that
be sort of your mark to be used
for educational purposes within
their department that sounds a
bit crazy but I mean if we're if
we're bumping up for that
purpose is it is that money to
be used for that within each of
those twenty one beneficiaries
Mr Chairman representative thank
thank you Mr chairman thank you
rose involved all those are
great great questions and and
that we definitely need to think
about I would suggest yes the
the the twenty one beneficiaries
was essentially the territorial
government and I could imagine
the horse trading and.
And log rolling that went into
that but but those up.
Those beneficiaries were
determined by the Ferguson Act
of eighteen ninety eight we get
all.
You know guess what the
demographics of Congress was
back in nineteen eighty I'm
sorry in eighteen ninety eight
and then of course the enabling
act of nineteen ten of codified
it and then of course our
constitution two years later
yeah that's interesting these
beneficiaries
and and ironically they each are
allocated particular sections of
land so if I'm an oil company
and I drill on this section of
the money that's made from that
section goes to that particular
benefits you're it's it's an
archaic system that we.
You know in a perfect world it
should all go in the general
fund for us to appropriate
accordingly but but for now the
program it locks us into these
budget year.
Mr chairman and Representative
Maestas for that answer then I
still want to fall back on that
idea that we do need the
approval of Congress I know that
you're adamant about about not
needing that but they feel like
you know we're still have strong
you know by the way things are
written and and and and think
maybe that we do need to seek
that approval if I'm not
mistaken Mr Chairman
representative that did happen
when the when they did the the
increase in the distribution
at two thousand three or
whatever that was that went
through approval of Congress or
did it not because you have
great great question thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative Baldonado
But it did not did not the the
federal government does not
hamstring us in terms of the
percentage of distribution our
constitution is almost identical
to our neighbors in Arizona
we're admitted
to the union back to back in
Arizona a few years back
increased its distribution a to
six point nine and they did not
need right did not need
congressional approval when we
increased our distribution in
two thousand three from four
point seven five point eight we
did not seek and noted we need
congressional approval and just
like when we invented
kindergarten in the early
seventies.
you know we essentially invented
early childhood education in the
past generation of.
We did not data congressional
approval.
Okay Mister chairman and and and
and Representative Maestas I you
know I think you know where I'm
at on this bill but you know
obviously that we're in a
different position down
legislature so you know this may
this may make it to the to the
ballot this time but appreciate
all the work you put into this
and and hopefully
if indeed this does happen that
we we see you know New Mexico's
could skyrocket Ms chairman
that's the goal so thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative.
Great thank you Representative
Baldonado so with that we have a
motion from representative Lente
for a do not pass on house joint
resolution one as amended to do
pass on the house Education
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution one
and I seconded it so madam
secretary if you call the rule
on that motion I will.
Representative Representative
Baldonado.
No madam chair I'm nope
Representative Chatfield.
No.
Thank all.
Representative Dow all for
voting.
Representative the south no.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Switzer no.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Unequivocal plea yes.
Representative Care Act.
Yes.
Herman.
Yes.
Hi and nine to six.
All right I voted nine to six
you have a do not pass on house
joint resolution one is amended
to pass on house Education
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution one thank you
thank you everybody.
All right.
So I would like to turn
everybody's attention to
Representative Lotta and house
bill one oh one.
Representative who do I need to
summon from the attendees list.
thank you Mr chair agreed to
we need to we need a Mr offered
high work.
All right Mister Hendrick if you
raise your hand please me
attendees list so I may summon
you more quickly.
It is so it can be used with the
body.
All.
I have Mr chair representative
Anderson and better for.
Right.
And Representative Anderson are
you this.
You can raise your hand please.
Not see the representative but
as soon as I do I can promote
them.
Representative.
so please do have a lot of
panelists fuel would be brief we
are a couple hours in already.
But please go ahead
Representative lab.
Thank you Mr chair really quick
I'm gonna I'm going to introduce
a bill and then I'll have my on
my panels of speakers on the
bill really quick in the
interest of time so today
Committee members Mr Chairman
hospital one one New Mexico
eight lottery education systems
act along with Michael Sanchez
Representative Anderson
Representative Pettigrew and now
I would like to have Mr Mister
Heinrich can speak for the
if this writer can say he's.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Fred
Heinrich service general counsel
and compliance officer at
Sunland park racetrack and
casino I've been practicing law
since nineteen eighty six and
had the pleasure of living in
New Mexico since twenty twelve
my parents immigrated to the
United States in nineteen fifty
two I'm first generation and
they always emphasized how
important a good education is I
work for nine years at the
university of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign work for two years at
New Mexico State University and
Representative universities and
in my private practice before
moving to New Mexico.
I've been around higher
education for much of my
professional life.
Representative Larson the
committees opportunity to speak
to you today.
I'm gonna talk about H. B. one
oh one how it works revenue
Mexico expectations and then
some legal issues in a nut shell
H. B. one oh on expands the New
Mexico lottery's product
offerings to include sports
wagering and table games.
The lottery would not operate
those table games itself.
But instead would issue licenses
to operators who run the sports
wagering and table games at the
five racetracks in New Mexico
there are four different kinds
of licenses are operators
licenses those are for the
parties would actually be
running the table games or
sports wagering for management
services providers licenses the
operator can actually hire
another party to help manage the
operations at the operator wants
to do so their suppliers
licenses.
The licenses for the providers
of equipment for example cards
or dice and then their
occupational licenses those
licenses are for the people who
work in the table games or the
sports wagering areas the
licenses are issued by the
lottery only after the party
seeking a license those through
a thorough background check let
me emphasize one point the race
tracks would not be the
operators in fact they are not
even eligible for an operator's
license they're going to be
providing space for the
operations only think of them as
the landlords.
So let's talk about the
the taxation structure there
will be a fifteen percent tax
imposed on table games gross
gaming revenues and a ten
percent tax on sports wagering
G. G. R. and let me be clear
about this as well the lottery
itself is not operating the
sports wagering or table games
it's issuing licenses to
qualified third parties to do so
finally to ensure the integrity
of the games we're actually
criminal penalties establish for
violations.
So having mentioned the tax
rates let me talk about revenue
projections fresh analysis done
in January of this year from a
well respected consultant in the
gaming industry shows the
following we would expect to
sixteen point seven million
dollar the injection into the
lottery scholarship fund once
the games are normalized in a
twenty three point three million
dollar injection into the
general fund for a total of
forty million dollars in new
revenue to the state of New
Mexico.
And that is based on the five
existing race tracks which are
in Albuquerque Farmington Hobbs
read also in some part if you
consider the addition of a six
race track the revenue
projections go up significantly
twenty million dollars to the
lottery scholarship fund thirty
two point four million dollars
to the general fund for fifty
two point four million dollars
an additional new revenue to the
state the addition of the six
racetrack alone would add about
twelve million dollars in
revenue just from the lottery
games and sports wagering.
Every dollar generated by HB one
one it's a dollar that's not
going into the scholarship fund
today the lottery would cover
the cost of administration
administering the new products
and then funds would be pushed
into the scholarship fund on a
quarterly basis the other twenty
five percent remains to cover
expenses administrative the
games.
Last but not least we talk about
the legal issues why is H. B.
one oh one structure this way
the simple answer is that it's
permissible to do it this way in
New Mexico taking into account
all the agreements and laws that
apply the legal analysis starts
of course with the Indian gaming
compact of twenty fifteen which
is what is currently in place
between the state and the gaming
tribes that compact restricts
the ability of the state to do
for different things if the
state does any one of these four
different things a set forth in
the sectional Levin do one of
the compact then the gaming
tribes are entitled to stop
making the revenue sharing
payments first the state can I
do anything to restrict Indian
gaming H. B. one oh one this to
that.
Second the state cannot let
anyone else operate slot
machines other than those
parties they're authorized to do
that today HB wanna one does not
deal with slot machines at all.
Third the state cannot let the
race tracks operate more slot
machines than they're already
allowed to.
This is the racetrack licensees
cannot operate for longer hours
they cannot operate slot
machines off the properties and
they cannot operate table games
H. B. one oh one does none of
that the race tracks are not
eligible to operate table games
and would not be operating the
table games again the race
tracks are only providing space
for the operation of those table
games by the licensee of the
lottery.
Last but not least the state
cannot let any quote non Indian
person or entity close quote
engage in court any other form
close quote the class three
gaming and here's the key other
than a state sponsor lottery and
certain other exemptions which
do not apply here section eleven
D. two of the compact goes on to
further clarify that the quote
operation of a state lottery
close quote will not be
considered an expansion of non
tribal gaming nothing in the
compact restricts the type of
games.
for drugs that the lottery can
offer.
There's a statue called the
compact negotiation Act which
can be found at eleven dash
thirteen eight dash one of the
New Mexico statutes which
authorize the state to negotiate
the tribal compacts with the
Indian tribes that are part
gaming nothing in the compact
negotiation Act restricts what
types of games the lottery can
offer there's also the New
Mexico lottery Act which can be
found at six dash twenty four
dash one of the New Mexico
statutes the original lottery
act does not prevent the state
from expanding the type of
products the lottery can offer.
If the parties want to restrict
the lottery to scratch off games
and similar products that could
be it could have been included
in compacts it could have been
included in the lottery Act but
there's no language in any of
those places restricting the
lottery.
H. B. one oh one simply expands
on what the lottery is offering
to generate additional revenues
for scholarships sports wagering
table games are being offered
through the operation of the
state lottery which is allowed
under the compact one final note
and the legal structure New
Mexico didn't invent the smaller
sports wagering is offered
through the state lottery at
least six states today Oregon
Montana West Virginia Tennessee
Virginia and Delaware.
Similarly table games are
offered through the state
lottery in four different states
Delaware Rhode Island West
Virginia and Maryland in other
states that offer lottery games
Oregon and Montana also have
tribal gaming so the states and
the tribes have been able to
work that issue well we need to
remember that every state is
unique in its circumstances so
we'll take actions like passing
legislation in the way that
needs to be done for that
particular state H. B. one oh
one is the structure that works
for New Mexico in our particular
set of circumstances it was
carefully developed developed to
comply with all of the existing
statutes and also the compact.
So in conclusion I'd like to say
that the states all around us
are expanding their gaming
opportunities I put in your.
and they're even aggressive
lobbying efforts going on in
Texas right now to allow sports
wagering New Mexico should act
so we don't get left behind on a
personal note as I mentioned
earlier as a son of immigrants
to the United States I've lived
the American dream because of
the education I received and I'd
love to see as many students in
New Mexico get the advantage
that I've had and do the same
thing I'd be happy to respond to
any questions an hour later we
also have with us today billing
Blackburn a well respected
Albuquerque attorney who's
issued an opinion that's
consistent with money that H. B.
one one does not cost revenue
sharing to cease if it is passed
by the state thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Heinrich next Mr chair I have a
agency of the product.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Cathy Willie buddy executive
director for the New Mexico
independent community colleges
thank you so much for allowing
me to speak this morning I'm
here to speak with you about
health bill one oh one impact on
scholarships that ultimately
will help students complete
their college education.
As you likely already know the
portion of tuition covered by
the current lottery scholarship
revenues has been declining I
directing additional dollars to
allow lottery scholarship fund
this bill help shore up the
lottery scholarship.
But beyond that the bill creates
a potential revenue stream that
could be used to support other
educational assistance programs
such as the opportunity
scholarship or the college
affordability scholarship.
This is especially important for
community college students
because most community college
students are not recent high
school graduates our students
are typically adults were not
supported financially by their
parents in fact many of our
students are parents themselves.
Throughout the nation in New
Mexico is no exception the
number one reason community
colleges you students do not
persist to graduation is because
of unexpected financial
challenges a car that breaks
down a child that gets sick part
time job that is lost in total
we the rail of students planned.
Expanded financial aid is
critical particularly for
students who come from less
affluent families where parents
cannot step in to fill the gaps
between existing in need and the
full cost of attendance expanded
financial aid to help students
stay on track and ultimately
help New Mexico develop its
workforce and meet the needs of
a growing more diverse economy
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
now I would like to have a
Michael Sanchez if they are
available either Representative
Pettigrew or president of
Anderson speak.
Is Representative Pettigrew
briefly.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
Members of the committee.
Thank you Representative lot of
Mr Chairman now my name is Randy
pentagram the representative
from district sixty one done in
Lee County.
Mr Chairman nose was just
outlined HB one or one is
critical for our students in
addition.
H. B. one one is also consistent
with our governor's initiative
to infuse the lottery.
H. B. one oh one is about
hospitality tourism economic
development increase gross
receipts for many of our
communities.
New Mexico we should welcome out
of state tourists and create
attractions and entice our
tourists to spend their time and
money here.
New Mexico doesn't provide these
attractions other states will.
And they are young tourists want
to put fifteen fifty dollars on
a football game and eat.
At this point four while they
watch that game after the game
they want to be able to go to a
show they want to be able to go
dancing Mr isn't grows local
economies can expand through
more building more stores and
restaurants.
Know the future of entertainment
there is a strong effort taxes
legalize gaming this year in
Arizona the governor is working
to renegotiate their compacts to
include sports wagering.
For tribal and non tribal gaming
operations the states are
actively trying to create a
tourism market that thrives one
sport sport wagering and live
table games.
The part located in Hobbs and so
part located in some part
racetracks and casinos already
attract tourists from out of
state but eighty five percent
the guest from these two casinos
are from Texas.
Weird the reduction downs
customer base is consistently
seventy.
Percent from Texas and Oklahoma
at current times of the years up
to ninety percent.
Or do you think data provides
reliable information on the
direct impact of tourists
through three zero part Ansel
park as they continue to reduce
the balance the same data shows
a significant impact on the
revenue stream for the end of
the month got.
These tourists create a revenue
for our local economies local
communities and business the
drive thru New Mexico on their
way to other states or stop it
casinos on their way to New
Mexico cities like Santa Fe and
Taos.
Mr chair members of the
committee as we rebuild our
state's economy we should not
let our neighboring states beat
us to the punch with allowing
sports wagering.
We should we should.
Do not passively allow these
dollars to leave our state.
I'm proud co sponsor of H. B.
one oh one because my goal is to
ensure business opportunities
and the opportunity to compete
with our.
Members.
And the fact that giving
students the opportunity to go
to college in the process makes
this bill even more.
Strong thank you madam Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you representative Mr
chair I don't know if
Representative Anderson is on.
Representative I'm going to
share again.
A pretty long list no I do not
see the representative.
Okay thank you Mr Churchill at
we could be in the police's you
Mr chairman the committee all
all all some of our our our
introductions.
So one of one of the important
things is that he's the one oh
one has been endorsed by the New
Mexico depending community
colleges.
S. U. N. M. A. S. and was you
the NEA New Mexico State
University The Bridge of
Southern New Mexico City of
someone park and the board
industrial association.
Before all those things this
bill serves all students across
New Mexico it's intended to
propel promised right by New
Mexico lawmakers more than
twenty years ago descent
qualifying students to college
for free if we want to one
creates a path to fully fund the
lottery scholarship source
students who deserve a college
education we receive one yes the
bill doesn't deals with gaming
and lottery and racetrack
casinos and the path we have
taken to fully fund college
opportunity for students may
take some uncomfortable may make
some uncomfortable.
But we decided we.
As educators as Education
Committee will prioritize the
educational opportunity for
students or we will vote to
protect the twenty the current
twenty three you'll system that
that I believe has stifled our
potential to create to release
all ongoing challenges to fully
fund the water scholarship.
As you know I've been an
educator all my professional
life my party is a betterment
all all the students in New
Mexico my constituents are hard
working people summer singles
somewhere single income
households and many are first
and second generation Americans
of all the of all the parents
are present.
The only dream that their
children building with their
children graduated from high
school and then going to
college.
The promise of free college is
important to all of my
constituents.
Okay I will only respond to see
because of the stockholders at
least once does it wasn't a
senior US keeping that process
people your ballots no the house
and they they're not process
those equals in another so
they're about the network
requests you can Esperanza they
guess is okay.
Yes it was that's what I answer
then was there so many us either
most of this this bill give me
Madam locusts and print those
status.
No no since young yes most
Esperanza.
No need in this was the worst
one is them in medicine as a
whole is working on this no
photos no also also centimeters
so most of the screens.
Thank you Mr chair and with that
we will stand for questions.
Great thank you representatives
and thank you panelists for the
introduction so we're on house
bill one oh one so before we go
to the attendees I mentioned to
members prior to the beginning
of of our meetings that
we're at ten fifteen and in
consultation with the sponsor in
our ranking member from from the
opposing party we have come to a
twenty five minute limit for
both sites so both sides will
get twenty five minutes in total
each speaker will get two
minutes maximum in order to
address the committee I know
that this is this is of interest
on both sides however I see
hands going up on the attendees
lists
Please refrain from raising your
hand don't worry we'll try to
get to you please don't raise
your of your ego.
I'm.
Your hands because I've been
stated which side will be
hearing from me at so
please those of you on the
attendees list please be very
clear on the instructions you'll
have two minutes individually up
to two minutes but twenty five
minutes in total so our vice
chair will be keeping track of
the aggregate and I'll be
keeping track of the individual
as speakers come up okay
So please be respectful of the
people that may want to speak in
their time behind you okay
So.
We will go to the support so if
you are in support of house bill
one oh one and would like to
speak.
Please raise your hand B. all
right so it's going up.
The marines to.
All right.
So.
We'll go ahead and get started
so Riley holder.
And we'll start twenty five
minutes good morning Riley you
have.
Hello Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Randy
holder and I am the executive
director for a issue and I'm
governmental affairs at the
university of New Mexico a
political science student and
it's an honor to be here this
morning for the sake of
conserving time and I know that
my colleagues my fellow students
also have some things to say I
just wanted to say that I
support house bill one of one
and as amended by Representative
Lotta and thank you for your
time.
Great thank you.
All right we'll go to Ricardo.
Ricardo good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee regarding all
right with the New Mexico State
University we also do stand in
support of the bill the bill
would bring in a much needed
revenue source into the lottery
scholarship fund in FY nineteen
the revenues coming into the
lottery was about fifty five
million dollars in FY twenty two
it's estimated to drop down to
about forty four million dollars
as a result the students would
only be funded about sixty three
percent of the overall on
average of total for is right
now it is about seventy percent
and we do support it with the
amendment that would
discontinues the collegiate
voting on any of the games thank
you Mr chairman.
Great.
Thank you
We'll go to Gabriel.
Okay good morning good morning
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Gabriel
from few on on the director of
governmental affairs with
associated students New Mexico
State University I'm here today
to advocate on behalf of the
students of an agency you for
support of house bill one or one
the lottery scholarship was
initially created to provide
assistance to New Mexico
residents attending university
however given the rising prices
in tuition and cost of living
for students current funding
does not cover the cost of full
tuition the project the funds of
HB one a one will pro will
benefit New Mexico students and
will push us closer to ideals
once promised a debt free
college education we are the
members of the committee to
consider the interests of New
Mexico students and vote yes for
house bill one oh one thank you
so much.
Great thank you all right so
we'll go to media.
Good morning mia.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
me I mean on the undergraduate
student body president at the
university of New Mexico if
there's one thing that I've
learned in this role and over my
time at UNM it is that the
students at the university of
New Mexico and across the state
of New Mexico heavily rely upon
the words of the legislative
lottery scholarship to fund
their education as you might be
aware the lottery tuition Fund
has been facing a steady decline
for the past decade for what
once used to cover one hundred
percent of tuition at UNM covers
only sixty six point seven
percent of tuition today and
this percentage is continually
dropping with no additional
financial support from the
opportunity scholarship for four
Year research institutions like
ours the lottery scholarship is
more important now than ever my
team and I have been closely
following this legislative
session it is my understanding
that house bill one or one is
the only bill that is looking to
provide the much needed long
term solvency to the lottery
fund we've been working with
Representative Lara needs team
to ensure that the benefits of
this bill positively impact the
students that need the support I
believe that this act is
estimated to contribute fifteen
to sixteen million dollars the
lottery tradition Fund annually
thereby providing a long term
solution to the lottery
scholarship deficit thank you
for your time.
Great thank you for being here.
All right next we will go to
Leo.
We good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the house Education Committee my
name is who Chavis and I in the
system director of a student
governmental affairs will last
few months my colleagues and I
have the honor of interviewing
UNM students are recipients of
the lottery scholarship today
I'll be sharing some of their
stories with the triple the
importance of a lot of
scholarship and the need to go
back to tuition I from the
current for the for the current
students and future sense of New
Mexico.
There are well over twenty
thousand this is across the
state there land water
scholarship premature symphony
is one of them Ramon is a first
generation student majoring
suggests that sticks excusing
we've been like many since
across the state is currently
rely on a lot of scholarship to
help pay for education as raven
Senator interview quote college
has always been a way out higher
education has always been that
way to survive the lies so
should in my opinion literally
means the difference between
continue higher education or not
New Mexico without help from the
lottery scholarship raven
Senator she would not be in
school.
The impassable I discussion
group beyond just a student this
is something that is a software
are you insured with us the
lottery scholarship that not
only helps her but also helps
her role in being a member of
the community.
This is the first among her
family to attend university
hopes that she will be the last
the water education system next
will not only maintain current
coverage right for recipients
but also expand on it.
House bill one one oh one as
amended by Representative ray
Law relied on will allow deuces
siblings attend college in New
Mexico also not having to worry
about financial hardships
associated getting higher
education on behalf of the
centre bodies that student body
at the university Mexico we urge
for House Bill when one as
amended by Representative for a
lot.
Thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to Cat
Sanchez.
Good morning.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Cat
Sanchez here from New Mexico at
the nana county with my in my
part personal capacity as a
parent with my partner and for
kids I'm one currently is at an
agency to to our college bound
after high school one is looking
to return to secondary education
that would be for in college at
the same time I want to thank
the sponsors on both sides of
the aisle this bill because I
think they can steal our strain
as parents financially to want
all of our kids to further their
education and I think the
sponsor see where the lottery
scholarship falls short
oftentimes for parents like us
who have more than one child in
in a in secondary education my
partner and I are not alone as
parents concerned financially
helping our kids and these kids
I just want to strain our New
Mexico's future so I hope and
urge that all the committee
members will support eighty one
once thank you for your time.
Right thank you so much.
All right Jeff.
Good morning Jeff.
Your morning thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jeff true
on the president and general
manager of reduces downs
racetrack and casino.
We stand in support of house
bill one oh one not only because
we believe it is a six eight
a fair and and just expansion of
what the lottery can do for the
state but we're also strong
supporters of.
College education.
The the racetrack rid us of
downs.
Is closely connected to two
foundations which are privately
funded which are primarily
organized to fund college
educations read also we hire
many
High school and college students
during the summertime who do the
F. and B. jobs the parking jobs
the those beginning jobs that
that help their career help
their college finances but we
also see the importance of the
college education that
That this lottery scholarship
program can provide for so we
believe it's not an intrusive.
A development in the gaming
space in New Mexico we believe
it is a very important and
worthwhile bill to support
college education it's something
that's very close to our hearts
because of our employees of
because of our employee
practices because of the needs
of the state so with us today
announces in support of H. B.
one oh one and urged support of
the membership thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you.
All right Tony.
Good morning Tony.
Good morning chairman Ron Romero
and members of the house
Education Committee my name is
Tony hopper Pendergrass and I am
the president of San Juan
college in Farmington New
Mexico.
We face many challenges in
higher education especially this
year.
The additional revenue created
by this bill will help all New
Mexico higher education
institutions and the communities
in which we reside this is been
a hard year for everyone
including our students the
divisional financial support for
students will help them to
achieve their higher education
goals and it will help our
communities grow the talented
workforce needed to rebound and
grow businesses thank you.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to
Orlando.
Good morning Orlando.
You may be on.
I'm sorry I wasn't there we go
hello Mr chairman Ben
representatives Lotta Anders and
pedicure and the rest of the
Sistine committee on environment
when you're gonna you'll Jimenez
I sit on the Cologne has
infrastructure board board and
have done so since its
inception.
I stand today in support of this
bill both as a parent and as a
community member and as a member
of this board a year and a half
ago or all know about three
years ago I'm sorry we lost a
percentage point and a half of
the colonias.
Infrastructure bill and so I
know what it's like to have
decreasing funds each year just
like we're having in the lottery
scholarship
we didn't we we're we're
supposed be mirrored built with
the tribe or tribal belt but god
forbid that they take any money
away from anybody so we just
didn't say anything and we're
not going to get that money back
any time soon I don't think the
percentage point and a half but
we would hope that the I. tribal
community would stand in support
of this bill especially because
you know this will help the
member that students of the
colonias
I'm wearing my make your trip
New Mexico State University I
guess sure I'd realize that
would be on camera but it's not
gonna be possible with for a lot
of people that live out here in
these rural communities to send
their child to school in four
years if this lottery
scholarship doesn't keep going
up I believe that this is a
wonderful and very careful and
thoughtfully written bill
and it is bipartisan obviously
and it is a common sense bill I
really hope and I ask and I
won't take up any more of your
time because I know there's a
lot of people that want to speak
but I ask and I urge and I pray
that you consider supporting
house bill one oh one to date in
committee thank you.
Great thank you so much.
We'll go to tie a Trujillo.
Warning you have two minutes
we'll go good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is tied for
you on the executive director of
the New Mexico association of
community colleges I did for I'm
not to take up any time I just
want to say for the reasons
stated previously by my
colleagues at the community
college level we I just my eight
presidents by association
mycologist and full support of
this bill.
Thank you.
All right Tracy.
Morning Tracy about two minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Tracey
Bryan I'm the president and CEO
The Bridge of Southern New
Mexico we do not endorse this
bill we definitely need at this
time especially as we think
about economic recovery of our
state because COVID the majority
of our students must must earn a
college credential to be part of
the emerging and growing
workforce of New Mexico with a
hundred thousand New Mexicans
unemployed right now one in five
of those being in some of them
the more low skilled jobs.
Many of which may not come back
we really have an incredible
opportunity to help a generation
of students secure college
credentials and university
degrees so we are very
supportive of this of this
opportunity thank you so much.
Right thank you.
Steve good morning.
Good morning Mr chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Steve stealing it.
Mexico and this time I'll be
brief on behalf of our members
we stand in support of this bill
as it said intent is aligned
with our twenty twenty one
legislative goals our members
believe that higher education
funding must be fully restored
and no more cuts made we go
further on this issue of funding
ask for to provide funding
formula similar to that in the
school finance act for public
schools the funding formulation
be enacted to provide sufficient
and adequate funding for higher
education holding harmless all
institutions during the
transition.
Higher education funding must
place students at front and
center and should offer
financial opportunities for all
students to succeed despite the
growing financial barriers as
result of COVID.
For these reasons we support H.
B. one one oh one and urge you
to vote in favor thank you.
Thank you.
The bay Act morning thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my face here on
the assistant director Gokul
fares with the so students in
New Mexico State University as
the director might prevent has
stated we are in support of
house bill one on one with hopes
of providing a higher systems
amount with the lottery
scholarship to students across
the state of New Mexico now more
students are relying on the
lottery scholarship as a way to
pay for their college education
as lottery revenue has decreased
this is love to burden on
students or one or several jobs
and taking out loans as then to
find themselves which often
causes them for their education
second or just continue that
higher education local the
revenue added to the lottery
scholarship from house bill one
of one would allow all eligible
students in New Mexico to
experience opportunities that
we're not not once available to
them we urge the members of the
committee to consider all
present and future higher
education students in New Mexico
and vote yes for house bill one
one thank you.
Right thank you.
All right do we have any more
that wish to speak in support of
house bill one one.
And vice chair had we do on
time.
We do great we actually had nine
minutes twenty nine seconds
left.
Okay.
Anybody else which speak.
Speak now or forever hold your
peace.
At early good morning.
You may be muted good morning
good morning.
I support house bill one oh one.
because.
I think the lottery scholarship
should continue going it really
helps all of us.
I'm a first generation
A Hispanic and.
I I'm.
I.
I'm sorry can you guys hear me I
have to.
Yeah yeah yeah we can hear you
now.
and I would like to say this in
Spanish
me number aside yet often going
to units and use me when nothing
on me go you say you're not good
say over your cell and diplomat
handed us initially acted in it
romantico you Sierra apple yet
in in H. B. one oh one bill but
I can't.
Where the seed.
At the end and allow never see
that.
Lee are you still there.
Yes I'm just having trouble with
the internet.
We're if we can still hear you.
It appears that we've lost her.
Give her a second issue date
will be able to come back.
Is there anybody else that
wishes to speak in support of
house bill one a one.
We will see if we get her back
at some point.
But.
Time we will move to opposition.
So we'll recalibrate our time
remember opposition you have
twenty five minutes in aggregate
and then split up into two men
that.
Increments.
So if you would raise your hand
if you wish to speak.
Will be allotted your two
minutes.
Populate before you click on
anybody because all for sure
click on somebody incorrectly.
Okay.
Returning governor Sanchez good
morning you have two minutes.
You may be muted.
And the governor's mansions.
We'll come back to you and
governor will go to the governor
on phone you.
Governor good morning you're
with that State of two minutes
please good morning can you hear
me we can.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
John o'neill senior governor of
the public the gonna let me
first thank you for allowing me
the opportunity to speak to this
morning every new one which is
in person level so you and your
families may be safe during this
pandemic our public has
benefited immensely from
revenues generated from and
engagement these revenues have
funded essential services such
as all the programs health care
education and jobs for our
members and non members alike Mr
chairman and members of the
committee well I'm grateful for
the opportunity to speak today
I'm also disappointed that I'm
speech on the matters just
before you when the given
tragically Nichola entered into
payment goes Chechen what the
state of New Mexico two thousand
one two thousand seven and two
thousand fifteen we made a
promise to one another he
promised that the poll Glenda
considers binding the state
agreed to allow the Indian
tribes the exclusive right to
provide classroom given
opportunities in the state and
exchange and exchange the tribes
agreed to share what the state
of a percentage of revenues
generated from tribal gaming
operations sadly the enactment
of H. B. one one will break that
promise with the native people
of New Mexico in the going to
Pueblo this proposed legislation
H. B. one one will without
question and the guarantee of
gaming exclusivity afforded to
us by the state which will
without question triggered into
a revenue sharing agreement and
the promise we made to each
other members of the committee
look gonna does not want to see
this promise broken the state
will lose millions of dollars in
revenue sharing that are
currently paid are predictable
and the government does not want
to see a reduction in the
revenues it generates through
its sovereignty in enterprise
the good news revenues will
decline due to the lack of
exclusivity that was promised
was years ago those revenues are
incredibly work for tribal
government operations and
services and its actions will
affect the quality of
governments are.
As we can provide to our people
this bill is a terrible deal for
both sides the state loses the
tribal governments loose thank
you governor that was two
minutes thank you.
All right so we have
governor John idea.
Good morning governor you have
two minutes.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Michael
Tapia on the other Senator
Pueblo I wish to express the
opposition to house bill one one
simply put the bill will not
achieve with the sponsors and
supporters are intended Senator
public strong supporters of the
exporters undershirts
scholarship program however this
bill will not achieve that
purpose well my fellow tribal
leaders and as pointed out in
the physical impact report my
both in New Mexico Attorney
General in New Mexico gaining
control board the beautiful will
trigger police say trouble
compact the only gate tribal
revenue sharing obligations to
the state to address the largest
cautioned needs on a proposal
would rip welcome to the
discussion of the state about
your marking tribal revenue
sharing payments for that
purpose when back to the first
compact in nineteen ninety five
times of expressed interest in
working tribal revenue sharing
payments for specific purposes
doing so what providing more
proven stream funding for
lottery scholarship program not.
Constables proposal house bill
no one one the loss of tribal
revenue sharing the site to get
those numbers which is estimate
of forty million reoccurring
State the restriction the to
learn double that size of the
entire pre pandemic in market
research if he has not been
accomplishment in a given
jurisdiction basically
additional table games and
sports betting the low thank you
chairman members of the
committee for all me some time
to speak.
It thank you governor.
All right we'll go to president
ninety eight.
President good morning you have
two minutes.
Good morning can you hear me.
We can good morning Mr chairman
good morning to everyone on you
know Mr Apache tribe also
opposes this bill.
One house bill one one attempts
to fill a need for increased
access to higher education Amman
monks residents in New Mexico
house bill one oh one fails to
address how to replace the over
seventy million in revenue
sharing that will be lost to the
state's general fund the press
release for the bill calls for
forty million.
In profits with fifteen fifteen
million to the state lottery
fund and twenty five million to
the state general fund money
basically to reach the fifty
million in new tax revenue.
The new gaming revenue at a
sixty forty split was sixty
percent online slash in person
sports betting would forty
percent table games revenue the
race tracks would would need to
bring in approximately one
billion dollars in new revenue
that is assuming standard sports
betting hold eleven percent and
standard table games betting
hold at fifteen percent to put
this one billion dollar figure
in perspective all tribal
casinos reported net win for two
thousand nineteen was low but
was a little over one billion
dollars West Virginia with a
similar population of New Mexico
only brings in about five
hundred million dollars per year
in revenue and profit proximally
three million dollars in tax
revenue.
If we truly want to ensure
access to a higher education for
all New Mexico students I
suggest we allocate fifteen
million dollars from the tribal
revenue sharing payments to the
state lottery fund tribal
revenue sharing is growing
mature market with no revenue
amounts whose revenue stream is
guaranteed through the end of
two thousand fifteen.
Gaming pump give me Compaq and
it will end in June two thousand
thirty seven thank you for the
opportunity speak this morning
thank you.
Right thank you president.
All right so we will go to
the ten governor Sanchez can see
you.
Are you there with us to the
governor centers.
You are muted hello my goodness
okay okay two minutes Sir all
right thank you very much good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Blaine Sanchez secular attended
governor pueblo this letter
representing governor burning
Abeyta who is not able to attend
issues meeting with our COVID
mitigation team on behalf of the
public misled we oppose H. B.
one oh one.
We don't we do so reluctantly as
we strongly support the New
Mexico lottery and its purpose.
Rather misled opposes the bill
based on the method it goes
about raising revenue for the
lottery.
What proponents say of the bill
say it will not affect tribal
state compacts in else's by this
letter and The New Mexico
Attorney General clearly shows
that it does.
This will have an overall
negative about that impact on
the state's general fund and
will likely lead to further
changes to state law that will
not only negatively impact the
state and tribes the bill will
simply not deliver on its
promise the fact is that table
games and sports betting are not
major moneymakers the are
marginal at best.
To beneficiary will not be the
amount of money the state will
race for the lottery but the
receive those themselves.
The state truly wants to ensure
more funds for the state lottery
I recommend the state servicing
look to dedicate to dedicate a
portion of the tribal revenue
sharing payments that the
tribe's already paid to the
state this is proven this is a
proven funding stream that does
not reliable projections of new
revenue that quite honestly are
improving and have never been
realized in other jurisdictions
that allow sports betting and
table games thank you for your
time and consideration.
Thank you lieutenant governor.
Right so we'll go to Maxine.
Mixing good morning you have two
minutes a good morning can you
all hear me.
We can please thank you my name
is Maxine Velasquez I'm the
president CEO of within a
development corporation I am
from the Pueblo of Laguna.
And I am a product of New Mexico
education I have three degrees
from the university of New
Mexico I have a bachelor's
degree and master's degree law
degree I've been practicing law
and representing tribal
communities communities in New
Mexico for twenty years and I've
helped negotiate the two
thousand one compact tribal
state compact two thousand and
seven and two thousand fifteen
any gaming compact.
And in those contacts we have us
section eleven and exclusivity
and this would be a violation of
the gaming compact and revenue
share will go away if HB wanna
one was passed a better solution
to this is the current revenue
share payments of about sixty
five plus million dollars a year
goes to the New Mexico General
Fund and I to care deeply about
education as I have three
degrees from the university of
New Mexico and I think the
answer to how to fund the
lottery scholarship is to re
allocate revenue share.
Questions that at that one oh
one has on the table right now
and take it through really
reallocate revenue share it and
and use that for the lottery
scholarship that we we know as
tribes where that money is going
as well.
So this has been attempted
before to to reallocate money to
to counties but it has not
passed
but I think we need to
reconsider this on the money
that currently goes to tribes to
Indian gaming goes toward the
central services of our tribal
governments it goes to natural
resource protection water land
air it goes to elderly care to
scholarships I got scholarships
from from from the hello we do
now to go to school it goes to
our early childhood education it
goes to paying
helping helping those of social
services I mean it just goes on
and on just how essential
services are paid for through
tribes to Indian gaming so this
would be a big mistake from from
that standpoint the state I
believe to to pass HB what a one
there's other alternate you
mixing that with no insurance.
Thank you.
All right we'll go to Jessica.
Morning just K. of two minutes.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and committee members I'm
Jessica Johnson chief government
affairs officer for animal
protection voters I hope I'm not
in line in front of important
public voices wishing to testify
but thank you for the
opportunity to share that we do
oppose H. B. one oh one because
we have serious concerns about
the relationship between the
purported funding goal and the
state's horse racing industry
which continues to face intense
scrutiny in the wake of
investigative reporting in The
New York Times and federal raids
several years ago due to
concerns over links to cartel
activity additionally it
terrible our injuries and
racetrack deaths and a lack of
transparency have concerned the
public for decades and despite
efforts of regulators these
issues continue to plague the
industry so we're concerned
about relying on race tracks to
house and education funding
source creates an uncertain
volatile dependence on an
industry with a history of
cruelty and suffering in New
Mexico we ask this committee to
vote now thank you.
Great thank you all right Brian.
Good morning Brian you have two
minutes.
Right and you are muted.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Brian vaio and the governor
of the Pueblo of outcome I
appreciate this opportunity to
say our position on the
legislation before you welcome
understands and supports the
need to expand education
opportunities for all New
Mexicans house bill one oh one
will have the unintended effect
of expanding class three gaming
in violation of trouble revenue
sharing provisions under the
twenty fifteen getting compact
the sponsors of the bill have a
fundamentally wrong
interpretation of the language
in the gaming compacts section
eleven of the compact stipulates
that revenue sharing obligations
terminate if the state allows
any non Indian person or entity
to engage in any other form of
class three gaming other than a
state sponsored lottery or
parimutuel betting or or on
horse racing.
The issue is a is a simple but
critical misinterpretation of
language in the compact a quote
state sponsored lottery on
quote.
Is not intended to mean the New
Mexico lottery Authority rather
a lottery and quotes
it's simply a type of cluster
came and by being caught state
sponsored unquote it may
lawfully operate without voiding
the revenue sharing obligations.
If enacted New Mexico with
suffering a loss of millions of
dollars tried to contribute a
significant amount of revenue
that plays an essential role in
the state's budget by providing
services to all New Mexicans as
an alternative Alcamo would
recommend the legislature
consider apportioning a
percentage of trouble giving
revenue shares to the state
lottery to support student
scholarships until then Mr
chairman the public outcome of
strongly opposed to H. B. one oh
one thank you.
Thank you governor.
All right so we'll go to some
pre.
Morning some tree of up to two
minutes.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Jean I.
Associate justice with a S. U.
N. M. as well as a parent
advocate but I'm speaking as a
parent I have a daughter that
goes to the somewhat college and
I can say that she has not been
served by the New Mexico lottery
scholarship or have by as a
student at UNM
we are not in support of this
bill simply because.
It does not support it's an
equitable and it has not
supported
just for all and.
We thank our tribes for us with
our scholarships as well as.
And that's it thank you so much.
Right thank you.
All right.
To.
They're all.
Morning there are.
Yep it's two minutes good
morning good morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Daryl Candelaria tribal
administrative for the public we
and on behalf of governor at the
new Ortiz.
Rise in opposition.
One one Sen freebie is not
opposed to the bills purpose of
finding new sources of revenue
for the state's lottery
scholarship
of the public who strongly
supports the lottery scholarship
fund will be in full support of
the state dedicated money that
types paid to the state it
tribal revenue sharing to the
funds which would be far easier
less complicated way to get
money directly to the
scholarship fund rather our
concern is with the method the
bill chooses to support the bill
was misguiding and thinking that
it does not violate tribal
sharing compacts if the bill
were to pass the state would see
an overall negative impact to
the general fund just ask the
fiscal impact report that
accompanies the bill states.
This is just.
This is not just a public
opinion it is opinion of the New
Mexico Attorney General in this
statement control board I urge
the committee to table this bill
and let's have a real discussion
on ways to fund the lottery
scholarship thank you for your
time have a good day.
Great thank you there are you
to.
Right Richard if you would you
don't have a last name but could
you please say your last name
for the benefit of the committee
please.
Yes Mister chairman of my name
is Richard Shuster or can you
have Mr.
We can go ahead in two minutes
thank you I'm I'm general
counsel to the trouble of Santa
Clara and also council's public
Santa Ana I I will I just want
to very briefly of note that in
support of what the other
witnesses of said while we all
support funding for higher
education.
This bill will as many have said
a trigger the provision of the
compact that will terminate
revenue sharing from this from
the tribes to the state and
thereby calls a loss to the
state of
seventy five or eighty million
dollars in goes the general fund
currently I simply want to point
out of sectional Levin G. one G.
of the compact which says
revenue sharing terminates the
state licenses permits or
otherwise allow any non Indian
person or entity to engage in
any other form of class three
gaming other than a state
sponsored lottery and so forth
these games are not law regions
they're they're not state
sponsored they're going to be
operated by by some unknown
third party home we use not
identified in the bill the
operator the we don't know who
that is and and the the lottery
merely licenses and and you
can't they're they're not
lottery games as defined in the
state lottery so we we as the
state Attorney General is
already applying the state
legislative finance committee
has has said and the the New
Mexico gaming control board has
already
opined.
Revenue sharing would terminate
if this bill were enacted and we
think it's a bad result for the
state I would also point out
that the the revenue projections
of the Sanchez predict are
wildly optimistic and and really
Department Ellie thank you very
much for the opportunity to
address you to the.
Thank you Richard.
And.
Mr her and.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee Larry RN's registered
lobbyists for the pueblo Sandia.
India's tribal council
considered house bill one a one
and took a position in
opposition and I I'll just point
you to the place in the F. out
FIR we're getting our
information so you're not just
hearing from the attorneys on
both sides to go to page three
about halfway down begin with
however house bill one oh one
would expand class to beginning
with the in the state which is
expressly prohibited under the
compacts the New Mexico attorney
general's office and gaming
control board are clear on this
point according to the New
Mexico Attorney General the
compact will terminate if the
state restricts tribal gaming
revenues by licensing new or
expanded existing non tribal
gaming facilities including
issuing new permits or licenses
or allowing gaming machines
class three the operation of the
state lottery is listed as an
exemption in the compacts but
according to the gaming control
board to compacts can
communicate classically class
three gaming exclusivity as a
whole and section eleven and
expanding class three gaming
over senior conducted by the
lottery would not fall under an
exemption according to gaming
control board the remedy for
tribal governments to no longer
share gaming revenue with the
state so you don't just have to
rely on on what we're telling
you or what the other side is
telling you both the AG in the
gaming control board which is
responsible for it regulating
gaming will tell you this is a
violation of the compact we
agree with the intensive of as
you've heard funding the lottery
scholarship but this is not the
way to go you'll you actual
created general fund shortfall
if you pass this legislation
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Right thank you how are we doing
on time madam vice chair.
We have four minutes and
eighteen seconds left.
All right.
Jeremy good morning you have two
minutes.
Morning chair members of the
committee of German thank you
the director of youth and
learning for Santa Clara Pueblo
I also sent as the chairman of
all public council governors and
Education Committee.
Looking at the fire houses has
been brought before you this
doesn't make financial sense you
know walls of the governor's and
the tribal leaders have welcome
avenues to increase callers of
efforts this place is gonna ship
in avenues for higher education
at risk you know this has to do
with gaming and gambling you
know I don't want my students to
be
how have this have a detrimental
impact on my students moving
forward so we sent in opposition
of this bill thank you.
Right thank you so much is there
anybody else that wishes to
testify in opposition.
All right.
You will be the last one Mr
Apodaca Lee that's right.
Please.
Good morning Mr to hear me we
can yes they're members of this
for the welcome Pueblo the pool
will also stand in opposition
this bill up whatever the
reasons are stated earlier so
just thank you thank you for the
time great thank you.
How long do we have been a vice
chair.
We have three minutes nineteen
seconds all right Sir will allow
Mr Gino good morning you have
two minutes.
You may be on mute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Khan which
you know and I'm the registered
lobbyists for House pueblo and
force the governor Romero was
not available to dress Committee
but yes I sure the following
statement with you.
Supporters of Bill but claim
that House Bill when when we
create forty million in revenue.
The reality is New Mexico's
giving tribes contributes nearly
double that amount and even
acted house bill one one would
create a net loss of millions to
the state at a time in New
Mexico's attempts to recover
economically for the pandemic
and there's no doubt of tribal
tribal revenue sharing
contributes a great deal of
significant plays significant
role when the legislature for
parents state budget each fiscal
year and there's no doubt the
loss of millions we impact
programs and services to all New
Mexicans both tribal and non
tribal because revenue share
payments to the state has just
been.
Indicated would go away would
cease and that's spelled out
again in the FIR house what was
always been a strong proponent
education at all levels and we
appreciate the support this
committee is given to
initiatives to expand education
opportunities both in response
to the Yazzie Martinez court
case and the trouble revenue
from work with Taos Pueblo
cannot support this bill because
the proposal before you greatly
reduce the state revenue needed
to fund fully fund education in
the alternative Mister chairman
tells what would strongly
recommend legislature consider
using a percentage of tribal
gaming revenue shares to
increase the state lottery fund
with a portion going to native
student scholarships with that
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
All right thank you.
I believe that concludes our
time for the opposition.
Year.
Notting all right thank you
everybody all right so we will
come to committee however before
we take questions from committee
Representative Lotta you have an
amendment is that right yes Mr
correct we I haven't amendments
it was included in the in the
electronic packet the number on
the amendment is two one nine
two seven zero point two.
All right so should be at the
top of your house bill one or
one share file file.
Of the file.
The chairman I move the
amendment for consideration
great thank you Representative.
Representative Figueroa second
set great can you explain the
amendment for us there
Representative a.
Thank you Mr chairman the I am
asking for Mr hundred support on
this but that really it would be
what we're doing is adding some
some language into the bill into
the bill for it includes of
lottery educational assistance
act and it also would
prevent any gaming of I mean any
betting on in the
from you for from New Mexico
colleges and our schools UNM
NMSU football basketball
anything like that so that
that's what the in a in a nut
shell goes the the.
The amendment is proposed.
Mr hundred would you have any
other other.
No point point of clarification
Mr chair and the members of the
committee
it would prevent any betting any
university teams in New Mexico
I many New Mexico university
teams I should say whether those
teams are playing in state or
out of state and Representative
lar there's also the amendments
from ten million dollars to
eighteen million dollars which
was discussed at length with the
university students for both you
and and NMSU.
And then there's a couple of
other technical changes in your.
Right and thank you Mr chair and
with that we stand for
questions.
All right members are there
questions on the amendment.
Mr chairman I move adoption of
the amendment okay so we have
chairman Mr chairman I could not
get the.
Sure if this is even working
okay you hear me we can
representative is I'll do you
have a question yes Sir
concerning the amendments please
of on page three of Mr Heinrich
or the presenters can explain
this to me this is in addition
to any criminal penalties this
is under section thirty four be
in the amendment it says a
person who violates six
subsection of this section my
have the person's license
suspended or revoked or find
imposed or both pursuant to the
liquor control act and I'm
assuming that that references
the licensee holder is that
correct which is the racetrack
owner.
Representative Lara yes Sir
please of.
Mr chair representative is L.
that language is in the
legislation currently that is
not a change if you look at page
four we change that was made is
in subpar to the definition of
commercial gambling which and
it's The New Mexico lottery
educationalists assistance act
to the exemption the New Mexico
lottery's enjoys currently it's
just it's one of those technical
corrections that I mentioned
earlier Mr Mr chairman Mr
hundred and Representative of
all the presenters out there I
guess my concern there is of.
It does stand to.
Act adversely as far as anything
that does take place with the at
lottery education assistance act
working on that casino floor
which in essence does belong to
the licensee older isn't that
correct.
Mr chair representative Lara
committee members.
Like I said sixty seven a
nineteen the
is currently in the liquor
control act that refers to
licensees under the liquor
control act.
It currently alcohol is not
allowed on the casino floor yes
Sir and I do get that but we
also ensure that the actions of.
You know I probably need to let
this go right now because of
some other issues that have come
up at some other of gaming
venues and that might be a topic
for discussion later on and I do
understand where you're going
whenever you're saying roof
reference number two under
section C. of your amendments
there.
Another thing I had a question
was.
Receiver was it's
Mr Chairman.
And Representative Lara Mr
Heinrich and other presenters of
this bill under all of your
amendments here.
casting now I've got too many
papers in front of me.
Basically these table again
schools be set up at the five
existing racetracks is that
correct.
It is Mr chairman members of the
committee yes that is correct
the the race tracks would
provide the space for the only
they would be landlords in
essence they will not be
licensed to operate the table
games or the sports wagering nor
are they even eligible for
licensure.
Mr Chairman and Mr Heinrich and
presenters of the bill if a
racetrack chooses not to
participate in this.
House bill one oh one at.
Will they be allowed that
flexibility to not participate.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative is L.
absolutely cannot strike a
Arrangement for the lease of
space they don't have to
participate in it that's
absolutely correct okay so Mr
Heinrich and prisoners of the
bill a Mr chairman.
All the racetracks are doing or
just providing the space but yet
the racetrack is going to be
responsible for paying.
Their debt if they have mortgage
that particular building they
are still going to have to pay
the insurance on the building
they are still going to have to
pay the cost of maintaining that
liquor license and try to be in
compliance with the gaming
control board is that correct.
That is correct
Mr chairman and and
Representative as well the way
this is structured
There will be another regulatory
body on property so to speak and
that will be the lottery and it
will be looking at the
operations of the table games
and the sports wagering by the
licensee.
we have the gaming control board
here already
regulating what they racetrack
casinos are doing and we have
the racing commission as well
regulating what
the racing side of the house is
doing so this would be yet
another regulatory agency on
property with the specific goal
towards regulating and in
reviewing what's going on sports
wagering table games only okay
that would be their jurisdiction
and and the racing and gaming
side of the house that we
currently are engaging and a
lottery would would not have to
be burdened with reviewing that
I hope I answered your question
Mr Heinrich you did thank you
very much for that response and
Mr chairman and presenters of
the bill but the rest of my
questions have to do with the.
The rest of the bill not just
amendment so Mr chairman thank
you very much.
Right I appreciate that
Representative cell so further
discussion on the amendment.
All right so we had a motion to
adopt the amendment by
Representative Stapleton is our
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment.
Okay seeing none Representative
you have been amended bill we've
been joined by the third sponsor
Representative Anderson if you
would I understand you'd like to
give some comments briefly
please before we go into
questions from the panel.
Thank you Mr chairman of I'm
late to the committee due to
technical difficulties on my end
but nonetheless I'm here now I
think this is an exciting piece
of legislation because it
increases our revenues into a
lottery scholarship fund which
is in dire need of additional
revenues that is because young
New Mexicans and New Mexicans
are turning to the lottery
scholarship to enable them to
continue their educational
pursuits and the of the other
one was I think I'm going to
forget it for a moment but none
the less I think it's an
exciting bill and I I look
forward to the debate thank you
Sir.
Right thank you Representative
all right so.
Panel questions.
Representative Clint that place.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
good morning committee members
good morning to the Sanchez good
morning to your expert witnesses
thank you so much for your
presentation this morning I want
to first recognized a hundred
Preciado inside.
Us to your plight to where
you're at today as general
counsel for someone park as as a
Senator I think that speaks a
lot to your your endeavor in
your story and and and you know
to be honest with you I I gotta
tell that I do feel like I am a
product of of where I come from
as a first generation college
student from the Pueblo from the
dusty from the dusty roads that
has found his way to college and
also law school to a seat in the
house of representatives I share
in that excitement with you and
I agree that education is the
great equalizer that can find
all of our students an
opportunity to explore their
careers other career paths.
As as part of the Education
Committee I I think I speak for
all of us that we can agree that
it is a good policy to provide
increased funding to the New
Mexico lottery scholarship
undoubtedly that we can agree
that it's a good policy to
provide a steady consistent
funding stream to the New Mexico
lottery scholarship.
Mr speaker and and and sponsor
where I diverge from these
notions is when legislation like
house bill one oh one gives the
gives the illusion that it is
really an educational benefit
bill when really if you peel
back the layers of that onion
skin all it really is is an
attempt to expand gaming in New
Mexico and I'll say what.
Mr speaker Mr chairman and and
and sponsor based on my reading
of the bill based on my
knowledge of the gaming industry
in New Mexico and through
education by others based on the
FIR that we were presented with
last night.
Based on testimony from this
morning house bill one oh one
will undoubtedly seek to
terminate gaming compacts.
It'll provide a direct impact
negative impact to the general
fund.
Finally able force the Education
Committee our committee which is
tasked to support the education
of New Mexico into a tough blow
because how do you vote against
providing more services more
money to education and to
students that's a bad both for
us to have to take but I'll
break it down to make sense of
all this because we peel back
the onion later further it makes
better sense for all of us to
better understand because I'll
have to admit Mr Chairman.
Mr sponsor and to year to year
experts is that all we can I
fielded questions and comments
from from committee members
asked in the I think the the the
else in the room question is
does this affect the tribal
gaming compacts in and out of
the again I do believe it
doesn't so with that Mr Chairman
and Mr Sanchez I have some
clarifying question to ask you
and and your expert witnesses
the first is I'm I'm wondering
who were all the proponents of
house bill one oh one that
helped you get to this point who
have you collaborated with.
Mr chair of the the.
If any of my expert witnesses
would like to try then I would
like to for them to do that but
as a as as far as myself
personally I spoke to and
collaborate with the the folks
over at the lottery board
without with Mr Jones or sell.
Mr Heinrich.
In terms of collaboration
outside we we had.
Discussions with all of the race
tracks.
and I think there were and this
was not me personally
participating in all these
conversations but they're also
conversations with the lottery
as well as those that
Representative Lara had.
The Mr chairman and and sponsor
is is that is that the extent
then so you have and you can say
without without any hesitation
that you have consulted all five
of the receivers in the state of
New Mexico.
And they have unequivocally
provided their support to this
endeavor a possible one on one.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative Lente I
did not personally but there are
a lot of conversations going on
so I can not I don't want to
guess Senator answers your
question Mr chairman and and Mr
hundred.
If you cannot even speak to
them.
Yourself so then can you say.
Do you have the support from all
the five racinos in the state of
Mexico for house bill one oh
one.
Mr chair representative Lente I
cannot tell you that right now
because I have not spoken with
all the personal okay thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr
Hendricks going further than you
you mentioned Mr Heinrich Mr
chairman of two hundred in
regards to how you derive your
numbers for the economics of
your figures and where we're at
today and you mentioned the
January twenty twenty one a
report and I do believe that I
have a copy of that report right
now that was authored by G. I.
enterprises L. L. C. the market
study is that correct Mr
chairman Mr Heinrich Mr chairman
Mr Representative Lente yes
that's correct okay so.
who commissioned the study.
Who.
That study was paid for by
someone park racetrack casino
representative Lente okay so is
paid for commission by Sunland
park casino and then what was
there any request from any state
of New Mexico department.
In collaboration with someone
product to commission a study.
Mr chair representative Lente
not that I know of we want to
present to the legislature with
updated figures study was done a
couple of years ago I think it
was twenty nineteen and we
wanted to have the most current
data possible so and and we did
want to bring you something
unless we've done all our
homework okay that thank you for
that answers to hundreds so Mr
chairman Mr Heinrich that you
commission a private entity to
study.
someone park paid a private
industry to study.
Racing our racinos in New Mexico
and then I want to ask you
because if you can see this this
is the study itself but you have
a really bold state of New
Mexico seal in the front of the
study and and and I and I bring
this up because for me it looks
very legit like it's a
commission study by the state of
New Mexico do you agree with
that Mr hundred.
Mr chair representative Lente my
apologies you have earlier
draft.
The States CEO we we that was
requested to be removed and it
was remote no I don't think
anything change with regard to
the numbers but yes we did have
that still remote so so Mr
chairman Mr Heinrich then none
of us going back to a study that
I was really found available
through a public search on the
internet this is what I came up
with with the seals still intact
and so wouldn't you agree Mr
Heinrich Mr chairman.
On to that that is a bit
misleading a little disingenuous
we think about how this report
came about and now you're
feeding us numbers in regards to
how you want to support racinos
in New Mexico.
Representative Lente missed Mr
chairman I I believe if you turn
inside.
It's who commissioned the study
which is my way holdings LLC
which is the the formal legal
name for someone park racetrack
casino.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members are not to beat a dead
horse none the less we open up
the.
No pun intended as well you try
not to have divorces please.
So so to your point then Mr
Heinrich we flip open the first
page you see who authored this
but I think on its cover read a
book by its cover then I would
assume up to nineteen died that
this is a commission study by
the state of New Mexico on
behalf of providing us a an
objective perspective into
racino aspects in the state of
Mexico so that being said I
don't want to go any further
into that but I want to go back
into the discussion about.
Who your proponents include your
collaborators were to get to
this point and so back in
January of January twenty six
twenty twenty one I stumbled
upon an article by this in the
Santa Fe New Mexican.
In the Santa Fe New Mexican I
have a copy here and you can you
can Google it right now and
it'll come up the Santa Fe New
Mexican offered by million seven
edge.
That.
Says that if you go to the
second vote on on on my in the
article it talks about that the
lottery.
It to get a quote from the New
Mexico lottery Authority CEO Mr
David Barr.
And what his quote in The New
Mexican article stated that the
lottery Authority had nothing to
do with the bill the bill being
house bill one a one.
What's your commented that Mr Mr
chairman of two hundred.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
there are conversations with the
lottery including with the CEO
and my understanding of the
lottery's position is that
because of challenges in prior
years
trying to get legislation passed
that unless the lottery has a
strong urging from a legislator
or the governor's they're going
to take a tax.
Yeah and and and Mr chairman Mr
Heinrich then I appreciate that.
The report goes further and
statements further by
Mr Barton again the CEO of the
New Mexico lottery Authority
saying that it's putting us in
charge of regulating an industry
that's not there right now.
And so my my question is Mr
chairman Mr hundred sponsor that
would you think that anybody
that you're gonna talk to in
regards to house bill one of one
of this magnitude of this
caliber testing industry with
thing you're gonna do this on
behalf of the state to generate
dollars for education that you
would have had very inclusive
very very well thought out
conversations with everybody in
that department in order to get
to this point and not just
simply consider that you have
some conversations and you may
or may not have had
conversations with certain
individuals Mr chairman Mr given
a comment to that.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
my only comment would be that
if.
Other states are doing it and
are capable of doing it through
their lotteries I would see no
reason why if this legislature
and the governor signed this and
into into law why our state
lottery would be able to do the
same there would be some
staffing up there would be a
learning curve but I suspect
that are lotteries just as
capable as other state lotteries
and that they could do it just
as well as anyone else for.
Thank you for that and Mister
chairman Mr Heinrich that's that
that that's a that's a good
answer I think that that but we
not as New Mexicans as the state
of New Mexico compare ourselves
to other states and what they're
doing is probably just as good
for us to be doing as well and
so to that point I would hate to
provide an unfunded mandate to
an industry or to a to a
department in the state in
Mexico to then pass them
something that they have no idea
what you're talking about no
clue as to how it came about and
you're gonna tell them okay now
you can run table games now you
can run sports betting so to
that point again.
I guess not to beat a dead horse
Mr Chairman to Heinrich I I I
appreciate your answers to that
point.
Because this bill is on behalf
of New Mexicos and and as you
say Mr Heinrich on behalf of all
five of New Mexicos racinos.
Let me ask Mr chairman and and
and sponsor who owns the racino
properties in New Mexico.
Mr chair representative Lente
highway holdings LLC on Sunland
park racetrack and casino.
I cannot sit here and tell you
who owns the other for I have
not looked at the legal
documents or title work or
anything else.
So I can't give you a technical
answer I know the Albuquerque
downs is as I understand it
state fairground
that Farmington zoom either
county or County fairgrounds I'm
not sure.
I believe read also is on the
slant
and that leaves.
Zia in Hobbs and I believe there
is a reads involved in that but
again I have not seen the
documentation so I don't know
how that structure thank you Mr
chairman Mr hundred follow up
that we're who is my way
holdings and and what we're is
there there state of
incorporation you know tell me
about that.
Sure Mr chair representative
Lente my way holdings LLC was
set up many many years ago by
Stanley Fulton.
as the sole owner Mr Fulton was
at that time a resident of
Nevada so my way holdings LLC is
it was established in Nevada
when Mr Fulton purchased Sunland
park racetrack and casino this
authorized to do business
obviously and in the state of
New Mexico we comply with all
licensing requirements in the
state of New Mexico whether
that's racing gaming alcohol
whatever
And when Mr Fulton died in
January of twenty eighteen
two of his six children I have
he nominated he he requests and
as a state plan to take over the
operation so
they are the the ones that we
currently are dealing with are
are helping us run someone park
racetrack casino at a strategic
level and and the thirty
thousand foot level.
Thank you Mr handed Mr chairman
Mr hammock I appreciate that
answer and really what I was
looking for is more of an
insight as to who these owners
that own the racinos and and I
did a little bit of research on
my own prior to this hearing and
I found out that the Reinoso
downs in rebozo New Mexico is is
a combination of ownerships of
folks that that actually only
worse is which is a great thing
both in New Mexico and out of
state so there's a partnership
of those folks in state out of
state cool great fantastic.
Albuquerque down another very
popular racino in New Mexico as
a in a partnership ownership as
I understand it as my research
told me is that it is the face
of it is in Albuquerque resident
but really the majority of
partners in ownership reside in
Los Angeles California.
Then then you talk about someone
park.
Some props from Mexico you
mentioned no I way holdings and
you mentioned the the Fulton
family stand the full ten who is
a god rest his soul has passed
but none the less I found that
that while he was the family
patriarch that his Fulton
foundation and the trust itself
is based out of Dallas Texas.
Furthermore then I look at some
of the as the racetrack and
Hobbs New Mexico and I found
that that the that racetrack
racino is owned by Penn national
and international is an
international gaming
conglomerate out of New Jersey.
And so when when I think of
these folks that that only's me
say these racinos maybe but for
then maybe the the folks that
own parts of re it does so and
then maybe that the individual
that owns parts of the
Albuquerque downs that.
A lot of these individuals that
only seen of our our own people
that they're taking this money
making this money asking for
concessions from the state from
our residents and then taking
that money elsewhere.
To my point then.
The FIR and again pretty FIR
that we all received about five
o'clock yesterday that I'm I'm a
little bit worried as to why
would New Mexico our state this
very committee be interested in
subsidizing out of state gaming
enterprises Mr Heinrich Mr
Chairman hunter.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
I can speak as far as
My way holdings LLC someone park
racetrack casino
Stanley Fulton was a very
generous if if the question is
why should you believe that
these people are committed to
the state of New Mexico Mr
Fulton I believe is the.
I guess benefactor The New
Mexico State University has ever
seen I personally know that he
made a thirteen point eight
million dollar gift to the city
of someone park for
consideration and construction
of a
Border crossing I believe I I
know he's made other very
significant gifts to the state
of New Mexico his son and
daughter have could have
continued that and just as a as
a point of clarification the
full family foundation has no
ownership interest in Sunland
park racetrack and casino that
is an entirely separate entity
the people who do own some the
park racetrack casino fifty
percent are split evenly between
trusts set up for Mr phone six
children and the other fifty
percent is owned by the New
Mexico State University
foundation service separate
entity called you but locker so
it's it's fifty percent NMSU and
fifty percent the full family
currently and I think through
the full family foundation the
phone family has showed its
continued support and dedication
to the state of New Mexico your
recently within the past since
the pandemic started maybe eight
a two million dollar commitments
to the state and has been
working with the governor's
office on how
Of that money should be used a
million of it has already been
paid the other million dollars
is waiting for I guess further
direction in discussion about
where that money should go.
Thank you Mr mayor if I may so
we want to get out of here close
to noon as possible I'm so if we
could keep questions brief and
then answers brief as well
please have a number of people
on the list don't ask questions.
Thank you Mr chairman noted so
then going then an actor I
appreciate that that answers to
hundreds so then I don't bring
it up in regards to how generous
the Fulton family is or was I
bring it up simply because an
out of state interests operate a
business within New Mexico
asking for concessions we're
just you have tribal gaming
entities are enterprises that
are owned and operated by their
respective tribal sovereign
governments within the state of
New Mexico and that as they're
formulated under federal law
under the Indian gaming
regulatory act trying to
required to use their gaming
revenue for the health and
welfare of their tribal members
meaning that New Mexico tribes
those within gaming aspects use
their money on health care on
education infrastructure on
public safety and environmental
protection water protection
cultural protection and if house
bill one oh one west to pass
this committee or pass all in
general it moves forward that
the term that the contacts that
have been negotiated in good
faith what then terminate per
the FIR for my own assessment
and so I bring this to point Mr
Chairman and Mr hundred because
in a January twenty nineteen
report commissioned by the the
all public council governors but
performed by the university of
New Mexico bureau of business
and economic research states
that there is an economic
benefit to these tribes
operating and owning their own
gaming revenues within their own
respective counties or districts
in the state of New Mexico that
just the public themselves
commission to study so it does
not include the Navajo Nation
he create pagination Mescalero
Apache nation but that the
problems themselves brought to
New Mexico more than six hundred
eighty million dollars in
revenues in twenty seventeen
they supported close to twelve
thousand jobs in twenty
seventeen with an estimated
wages and salaries of over two
hundred million dollars to our
very own residents in New
Mexico.
Specifically many of those being
within rural communities in our
state of New Mexico.
And so I bring that because
that's New Mexico money that is
made in New Mexico that is
brought in from outside of New
Mexico but Steve's in New Mexico
and these faxes the taxes are
poor because if house bill one
one passes it will in fact
violate the New Mexico tribal
gaming compacts not by my own
assessment but as I stated
earlier is in your FIR to read
by the Attorney General of New
Mexico and by the gaming control
board the Attorney General New
Mexico who is our attorney for
the state of New Mexico gaming
control board with our control
board for gaming issues in New
Mexico not not that that's a
very
The.
Even level you so gaming compact
violations means that the terms
of the twenty fifteen Hey should
house the one on one pass the
terms of the twenty fifteen
tribal state gaming compact
would then be done with.
At exchange for what's referred
to as exclusivity in connection
the class three gaming.
I will agree to pay substantial
revenue sharing payments to New
Mexico and in twenty nineteen
that revenue share from the
tribes to New Mexico was in the
amount of seventy eight point
four million dollars for one
year.
Seventy eight point four million
dollars over five years is take
as an aggregate is is one of the
it's a little it's close to half
a billion dollars.
And according to my S. supported
by the FIR again by the New
Mexico Attorney General and the
gaming control board that you
break that good faith agreement
that lost in agreement between
the states and tribes house bill
one one is essentially asking us
as a committee asking the state
of New Mexico to subsidize
racinos to the tune of about
thirty million dollars per year.
To simply just expand their
gaming operations.
And that's all again in the name
of the illusion of benefiting
education.
Now the.
Mexico enjoys a very reliable
consistent steady funding source
from gaming revenue shares to
the tune again of the last
account of seventy eight point
four million dollars.
The FIR further points out that
the administrative implications
of house bill one one first
edition this new endeavor within
required and an additional six
million dollars annually to
simply set up an office to be
able to try to fund to try to
regulate these these issues this
type of unfunded mandate put
tens of millions of dollars
annually at stake that would
somehow or ultimately go to the
state of New Mexico and so if we
are sincere as an Education
Committee if this is if there is
a is a sincerity to house bill
one oh one.
I have a piece of legislation
that has been drafted right now
that if you Mr sponsor any of
the sponsors on house bill one
one seat to cosign with me that
would seek to have tribal gaming
revenues that they would be in
the line of twenty million
dollars.
Of that to go from tribal gaming
revenues straight the lottery
scholarship.
That would then take up the
question of are we going to
affect gaming compacts is it
going to be a lost I'm gonna
have to be administrative costs
because the system is already
set up and it is working so that
being said Mr chairman and and
Sanchez I almost done and I I
have just a couple more points
is that Representative
Representative please make them
brief as I stated to be
respectful of others times
please please be very brief
absolutely so at I guess in
conclusion Mister speaker Mr
chairman and and and Sanchez is
that house bill one one simply
speaks to the point of.
Yes thank all the care and fun
of educators and from the
universities of other students
to say that this is the
education bill when again
holidays just expansion of
gaming bill.
When you pull the years further
out it'll cost the state upwards
of thirty million dollars a year
the estimates that were provided
in the report that was
commissioned by some and park
for their own reasons are very
Hi and this guy because I think
these age these are numbers that
will never be able to get to it
saturated the market is
saturated so so to the point.
Mr chairman and committee
members I heard all of you.
To not put us in a position to
where we are going to lose the
state thirty million dollars per
year that we are not going to
violate gaming compacts that
have been agreed upon in good
faith and that we put this issue
to to rest and that we allow the
racinos to them further work as
to how do they work in the
business model to expand their
gaming operations without
violating and without putting
Education Committee members and
without putting our state in a
position where we have to take
tough votes like this thank you
message that Mr chairman and
committee members.
So next on the list
Representative result please.
Mr chairman members thank you
all very much presenters
I do have a few comments to make
and I do want to make clear that
I am representing solely by self
I'm not representing any of the
boards that I do belong to Mr
Chairman I do want to point out
some things that right now The
New Mexico horse racing industry
contributes over eight hundred
and twenty eight million dollars
to the New Mexico to New
Mexico's economic output it also
supports close to thirteen
thousand jobs and Mr chairman
and members right now there is
no live horse racing in the
state of New Mexico thus the
casinos are closed there was
there were two tracks that did
step up Representative does so
downs being one of them and they
did run their full May without
benefit of.
Just a of up spectators until
the probably the last quarter of
that of that meet Albuquerque
stepped up.
And ran their May minus the
state fair meet we have seen
what's gone over in Hobbs we're
Hobbs does not care whether the
horses are they're not all they
want is that casino to be opened
up Mr chairman.
Horse racing is a key driver for
it our agricultural community in
the state.
And the jobs that are it
contributes to and economic
could trickle down effect that
it has through tourism is
outstanding of.
Thank you the horse racing
industry contributed more than
seventy million dollars and
direct gaming and wagering taxes
This in two thousand nineteen we
can't say that for two thousand
and twenty because every thank
shut down those jobs are now out
of state and my question to the
priest Center Mr chairman.
Any of the presenters at this
particular bill how will this
bill help the racing industry.
Because it is those licensees.
Premises that that that you want
to be able to set up those
gaming tables how will it help
the industry.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative you sell Mr
hundred would you have a
response up.
Mr Chairman representative is so
We would hope and we plan and
this is what the study was based
on the financial study that just
people come and patients come
into place about on the
Superbowl or play table games
that they would also find their
way to the casino floor where
they will play the slot machines
that they will
and as you well know
Representative cell has state of
casino floor revenue goes up the
purse of payments to persons go
up and that is how the horse
racing industry would benefit we
have projections on how much of
the horse racing industry would
benefit I apologize I don't have
those at my fingertips our pride
I don't remember those numbers
off the top of my head okay at
Mr chairman Mr Heinrich of
prisoners of the bill thank you
for that in information but my
concern here is.
These jobs that are now not
happening in the state of New
Mexico.
Bother me greatly these horses
that are New Mexico most a lot
of them are New Mexico bred
horses are now having to race
out of state.
And whenever the race tracks
combined with the horsemen
whenever they're paying and I I
I not sure the exact amount of
the taxes that are being paid by
those two entities it's over.
Forty three percent is up the
gut forty four point eight
percent in taxes that is paid to
the state of New Mexico.
And those licensees that in to
do with with the racing going on
receives that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
presenters and thank you Mr
Heinrich.
Right thank you Representative
Roybal Caballero please thank
you Mr chair.
Representative
for bringing your legislation I
a lot of the questions on a line
of questions that I had were
answered by a representative
Lente but I do have an
obligation Mr chairman as on a
student and as a faculty in
higher education are to make.
A statement it really is
extremely uncomfortable.
To be placed in this position.
In this committee.
This is my first term in this
committee and I was extremely
proud.
To be named to this committee
because I could represent not
just public education as a whole
Mr chair but higher education
and the the needs in many issues
of our students and what they
face as well as our faculty and
as well as an administration.
However.
Representative Lente say it.
It's unfair.
In my perspective having come
from interim committees that
have heard this request.
Before the economic in rural
development committee place
before the New Mexico finance
authority committee various
other committees there has been.
Recommendations and proposals
put before us by the same
entities representing the
Recinos representing
gaming private gaming that's
that's come before committees in
the interim in different ways.
And if in my.
I'm comfortable in this I
continue to feel Mr chair that
there is an attempt to
circumvent.
Our public.
Intent and our public obligation
or obligation to the public.
When these private Racine no.
Companies.
To circumvent or cloud or in
some form or fashion disguise
the way in which they wish to
expand their operations and in
this case today it's even
probably the worst case scenario
that I've had experience over
the past few years we all know
that education is key to better
futures we know that.
In the past Mr chair I've
sponsored several bills and
cosponsored several bills since
I've been elected to revamp the
lottery scholarship many of
those that are tested today in
favor of this bill have been
before and the various
committees that I've sponsor
these lottery enhancements.
And not they haven't supported
them they oppose them for
various reasons when in fact
what we've been trying to do
throughout the years Mr chair is
to revamp the way in which the
lottery scholarships are
distributed so that they're fair
and equity in the distribution
and that they be income based
and not selective because right
now the lottery scholarship is
open to the entire public
anybody can come in if you're
earning four million dollars you
can your child can get your
depending can get a lottery
compete for the lottery
scholarship so Mr chair it's
it's unconscionable to me that
we would have the private sector
for profit coming in.
And address a committee that has
the obligation to assist in
public education we have a
public got our education
objective and and and our
services to the public not to
enhance our address or explain
why racinos are in a economic
downturn we know all businesses
in the state of New Mexico are
in an economic downturn I
appreciate that and I'm sorry
unfortunately we we didn't
anticipate the downtime to be
adversely affected by a pandemic
and I agree that if we need to
do whatever we can to help
supplement subsidize or whatever
we small increase loans or
whatever we have to do but
that's not the try to this
committee and that's not the
charge Mr chair
of
bringing coming in through the
back door of the side door any
other doors except the front
door and what you're intending
to do and that's where I have a
great deal of problem with this
and I respect the representative
lauded for deleting this way in
this effort respect him from the
standpoint of we all are
concerned about fairness and
equity in education we're all
concerned about how our
education is not reaching those
populations that have been
historically under served in our
state we know that but there are
ways in which we are beginning
to do that and address that
through the appropriations
process.
There was a proposal Mr chair
made to several proposals
actually and Representative
Representative let me just make
more than other and that is that
the gaming of compacts in the
state of New Mexico that our New
Mexico based compacts not only
generously contribute to the
general fund which all of this
benefit from the general fund
all of us benefit from but they
are stepping up today further
generously contribute to a
proposition our proposal for us.
For them to find a percentage of
their gaming shares in order to
support education even though
right now Mr chair and
representative they do so within
their own obligations why do
they have economic development
and why they have a gaming as
part of that is to contribute to
their tribal communities and
families in order to be able to
meet
their their their necessities
bear necessities and yet they
still contribute to the general
fund of the state of New Mexico
which I found I think.
Often times
not not even fair because we
went don't even want to get into
the whole corporate tax issue Mr
chair so I feel I feel are a
real obligation.
To say how uncomfortable and how
actually and I I'm I'm just it's
beyond comprehension to me.
Why the Recinos continue to
circumvent.
All of these avenues of our
state.
And I agree I think when we
offered this suggestion to them
in economic and rural
development and all the other
committees we said perhaps you
need to look at improving your
business models I'm an economic
developer also I know that you
can do that I'm a planner I know
that you can do that I know that
you can change the way in which
you're doing business.
In order to be able to mitigate
the effect of economic downturns
that's just common sense
operation when you're in
business Mr chair but please
don't circumvent.
And in this case our obligations
to meeting our responsibilities
to public education in a manner
that's deceitful.
And that.
Is another way of disguising.
What you intend to do and that
is to enhance and increase
private operations of racing in
the state of New Mexico as
opposed to really wanting to
contribute to furthering access
to and affordability to
education if that's the case I
would ask that when you improve
your business models that you
make the same type of commitment
that's been made by our tribal
communities.
And allocate and designate not
not ten percent.
But look at what is fair and
equitable in comparison to what
our state owned locally owned.
Family based.
Original our inheritance and
ancestors of this land are
contributing.
And then it is their
contribution after Mr chair.
Having experienced.
Close to annihilation due to.
Government and state governments
attempt to erase and remove
them.
So Mr chair and representative I
I feel your angst I I feel the
pain I live it every day is a
student on campus I live it
every day is a faculty on campus
I understand that native
American students have not been
able to access the lottery
scholarship I understand that
our Hispanic Latino students
have not been able to access our
scholarship but this is not the
way.
To come and and allow this.
These enterprises to further
exploit their presence in the
state I think we need to take
another look at this
Representative and I'd be happy
to help with the previous
legislation that I've introduced
along with Representative
setting and and others in trying
to revamp the lottery so that we
can make that system and that's
structure respond to its
obligation and distribute the
hard.
public monies of the lottery on
in a more fair and equitable
manner so Mr chair I didn't have
a question thanks to
Representative Lente us almost
all of my questions my line of
questions but I I do feel I felt
compelled to have to make that
statement thank you Mr chair and
thank you representative
Representative Stapleton.
Mr Chairman Representative lot
about and your individuals that
of Representative in your
legislation
representative Lente at the end
talk about a bill that he's
bringing in full twenty million
to the
To get the funding from the
tribal gaming compacts to be
given to scholarship my question
is
how do
the goal of what you all are
attempting to do.
What in your district what the
attempting to do with the given
funding to scholarships what
that into what representative
Lente is talking about doing.
What I mean I guess Mr Heinrich
somebody can answer that
question for you.
The idea the concept that you
have the concept that you have
in your bill.
Could be integrated all
collaborated with Representative
Lente is ideal which is to me
the same concept of providing
scholarships to students.
I'm is that is that a
possibility and I guess I'm not
sure if you all should be the
one I should ask that question
so all perhaps at a different
time talk to representative
Lente to find out how his goal
works in terms of gaming money
going to scholarships and your
goal of gaming of resi knows
money going to scholarship is
all of the same bland.
Mr chair employer leader you yes
so I I my intent with this was
to provide the scholarships for
the students you know
All right those are really don't
appreciate some of the comments
that were made about me and my
integrity but the the point of
this is I want kids to be
educated that's the point of
this this is why I decided care
this bill so that said I am open
to these conversations as a
matter of fact I've been having
one off line with one of our
colleagues regarding the same
matter so up the only the only
thing is and I appreciate.
Representative Lente is and the
the representatives from the
tribes or willing to set aside
some of the money to pay for the
scholarships that is the point
of this is those scholarships so
in a roundabout way.
This discussion what we're
talking about now is getting us
to that point.
Because it's bringing up that
discussion of people are talking
about it the only concern that I
have with that though Mr chair
and floor leader is that it's
going to come from the existing
contribution to the state.
And that's what's the you know
if that's what's gonna it's
gonna make it up the R. four
flight to shave off those twenty
million dollars from the
existing contributions from the
price in the state I don't know
if any of my colleagues are
representative Lente or
Or it of it Representative
worked out of my car you know if
you have any ideas or
suggestions as to how we can do
that.
Without you know jeopardizing a
veto from the governor or or or
opposition for from from other
areas I am open to it because my
intent once again with this bill
what is to provide the education
for kids.
Mr chair Representative
Representative you have a
Representative Anderson has had
that did you want to weigh in on
that question.
Thank you Mr chairman on that
point.
As we.
As we.
Try to stay focused on what
we're trying to do here the New
Mexico lottery scholarship is
been a very successful program
that is help so many.
Lottery scholarship is in
trouble we've known that for
years this is a solution that I
believe merits consideration
issues have been raised today
that I think of or equally
valuable I worry about I'm very
pleased to hear of of Indian
gaming willingness to come in
support lottery scholarships I
of course have questions about
are we talking new revenues are
we talking matching revenues are
we talking about existing
revenues being re Nibert we
talked about.
So to me it's really about
solvency of this important
educational program is our
governor leeches forward in a
moon shot in education I hope
this committee will allow us to
have a have of some time to
consider in pursue some of the
ideas we've heard today thank
you.
Representative Pettigrew
briefly.
Thank you Mr chairman over the
committees
I to.
Have questions about
Representative is bill is coming
up and and whether or not that's
coming from current
distributions or if it's a new
distribution at the that the
tribes or Roland page towards a
higher education I I think
that's important and and I would
love to have those conversations
some of the questions and
statements that came up today
Thank like as with
Representative of lot of you
know I signed on to this bill
because of what it does for our
higher education and in the
ability to do this having my
ethics challenge that's a pretty
tough one and for me so
I
but I want to speak to one of
the state missiles made with
respect to out of state
Commerce and businesses that do
business in the state of New
Mexico but are actually from out
of state I believe we can both
all go back and look and and
understand that you know the
state of New Mexico and act in
the spirit of economic
development is investing over
five hundred million dollars for
for Netflix to come here with.
And they are not a New Mexico
organization.
They're not somebody that
currently
provides employment to give in
communities and yes they will
but at this point in time they
have not the amount of the
fusion from the racinos to our
communities as and Justin Hobbs
loans well over twenty million
dollars just and and what they
pay for employment and and what
they bring in to the Hobbs
community.
On top of that
Those same racinos the amount of
local economic development that
they do you go back to the R. D.
however days and we nobody now
this I believe we can question
the amount of influence and the
amount of economic impact the
Hubbard family is had the state
of New Mexico the part and
gaming the amount of that the
amount of influx of the they do
from not local economic
development side for for Lee
County this is significant the
these out of state
organizations are are.
Providing a significant amount
of influx and our communities.
This brings one of the questions
that were brought up on you know
what are we bringing and we're
bringing in a different level
tourism.
That will affect those
communities that will affect
those racinos and will continue
to grow our gross receipts and
therefore grow our persons
on the racetracks as well.
I understand some of the
comments that were made and I
would love to have these
conversations as we continue on
with this bill one of the
statements made of course there
are certain things not the
intent of this committee and and
my hope is that that this bill
gets the opportunity to make it
to to Judiciary to where we can
actually fared out the
definition of watery.
And that is where that
discussion belongs so those are
just my thoughts and I do
appreciate it Mr chair thank you
committee members for hearing me
out thank you.
Thank you representative the
further questions.
Representative Lente.
Mr Chairman motion to table.
Right so we have a motion to
table.
Mr chair there's a second by
Representative Sweetser
Representative Lotta please Mr
chair are very at this very
ground I am going to all asset
we rule the bill.
All right so that's what I was
going to suggest if we could
just roll the bill will keep in
committee it would be the same
as the tabling nothing's going
to happen to it unless they get
scheduled but I would encourage
Representative Lotta if if
things line up with what
Representative meant that said
if you all would collaborate on
on that initiative but I
certainly appreciate you moving
forward Representative Lotta
Representative Pettigrew and
Representative Anderson on this
initiative and please listen to
to the committee did you have
any closing Representative
Lotta.
Yes Mr chair thank you for that
I would like to all of us might
co sponsors of the company
closing comments first please.
Mr Chairman this Representative
Anderson and I'll be sure to the
point I think this lottery
scholarship program is simply
too critical for New Mexico's.
Prosperity going forward I think
we're short of good ideas in
long on reasons not to do things
I think New Mexico must look at
of any idea of that brings new
my.
Scholarship for higher education
for our children and our
students I hope you can find a
way to let us pursue and seek a
partnership with the native
American tribes and or anybody
else who is interested in
joining last year out of New
Mexico's general fund we
supplemented the New Mexico
lottery scholarships with
general fund dollars.
Because we did not want the
funding to drop below the
current level which is far below
where we started with the
success of this program so I
believe a
the opportunity to bring it back
will be appreciated as we try to
seek of of a better solution but
let's not lose sight this is
about more money or lottery
scholarships thank you.
Thank you for doing a lot of I
just will echo fox's comments
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the committee members I I
understand that and I I
understand the emotion I
understand the passion the cause
behind this but you know I
looked at it as an opportunity
to get more children more young
people for my legislative
district and around the state to
go to college I mentioned
earlier and I want to see it
again you know you despite the
the total conversation despite
the hard questions at least a
brought this issue to the
forefront now we're talking
about it now there's more
interest in that and.
Once again I guess I have to I
have to say this once again I
did this for my people in my
communities and for all of the
kids in New Mexico I did this
for any other reason I saw an
opportunity and I thought it was
worth a shot and I still think
it's legitimate and I still
think there's an option here
however I'd be more than happy
to sit down and speak with them
and talk to representative Lente
and and and others regarding
this because.
What I like to see is is
everybody is sticking with the
we need to think more globally
in New Mexico we need to look at
the Senator picture you know
just recently we passed some
very significant bills for
Indian education and out of the
Education Committee.
I supported those because I see
the big picture.
I I just have a global
perspective of it's not us
versus them.
So once again Mr chair committee
thank you for the opportunity
and I look forward to working to
the to with everyone who
mentioned that they would be
interested in creating or us
save some money aside for the
scholarship fund thank you Mr.
Great thank thank you
representative thank you all for
the great discussion today on
Wednesday we're going to be
starting with the
SCG bills that we heard a
presentation from Ellie S. C. on
on Wednesday all right so we'll
start off with house bill six
other than that we'll see you
all have a nice rest of your day
have a nice Tuesday we'll see
you all on Wednesday thank you
all.
