Representative Coola present.
Representative line.
You.
Representative or Marrial Moya.
Representative oral Caballero.
Represented car.
Representative Torres Valese.
Here.
Vice chair Garrett. Who cares?
Yeah,
we do have a cora. All right.
Good morning.
Good morning, folks. I hope you
all are doing well.
Um
we're actually not gonna hear
Senate Bill 13 today.
No, I just, I just, I just
wanted you to feel at home from
Senate Finance, Mr. Vice Chair.
Um.
So,
you know, I'm the vice chair,
remember I, I, I just hope that
with, with a hearing like this,
we could at the education
committee serve as models to
other committees about having
having hearings, so with that
Senate Bill 13, please, Senator,
Senator,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and and
members of the committee.
Uh, thank you for this hearing.
I'm gonna say a few words in my
language so you understand why
this is important, you know.
As she thought to it. She's a,
yeah
yeah.
I
Oh my looked good as
I said, well,
I knocked him out.
I didn't know but
I knocked him out. I didn't tell
you that.
And
uh,
my prayer, I thank all of you as
leaders.
We traveled from our home
communities.
With the intentions of
What we have in this bill as it
relates to our languages and our
respective communities and
tribes in this state.
We also traveled here.
You know that we also have all
good hearts and minds to do what
is right for the people that we
represent.
And that
You also, at the same time,
taking your heart.
To understand what this is
about.
And then I hope that we walk out
of here with something that we
can benefit our communities.
Across the state.
With that, I want to open that's
why this is important.
Between 1819 to the 1970s, the
United States implemented policy
establishing and supporting
Indian boarding schools across
the nation. The purpose of
federal Indian boarding schools
was to culturally assimilate
American Indians.
Alaska native and a native
Hawaiian children by forcibly
removing them from their
families, communities,
languages, religions, cultural
beliefs.
Well, children attended federal
boarding schools, many to
physical and emotional abuse and
in some cases died.
This bill was the first time in
the Mexico history turned to
education of our Native American
students back to the tribes.
And to the to the native
educators who know best what is
important to our children and
education built solidly on the
foundation of our respective
languages, cultures, values.
And will give us the ability.
For us to succeed on our own
terms.
Think about it.
For that many years, our Indian
people have never had a control.
the education of our children.
To this day.
As part of our education act
that was passed years back.
One of the sections in their
purpose of the Act, Section sub
D ensured the Department of
Education, Public Education,
partners with tribes to create.
or tribes to increased tribal
involvement.
And control over schools and the
education of students located in
tribal communities.
All we're doing today.
It effectuating what has been
called for.
And then Education Act.
I have uh turn here, uh.
For my village and I have my
brother who's the education
director for the Pueblo of Haus
online, and I would like for him
to share a little bit about the
work that is happening that's
that kind of brought this to
where we're at today over the
last decade of work in our, in
our, in our village, so I don't
know, uh, Mr. Chairman, if, uh,
he's online. I know he's in
California.
Give me a moment. Um,
could raise her hand.
I have an iPhone.
Somebody that says iPhone, and
to promote you to panelists.
Purvizo, the cheer Mr. Sino.
Good morning, iPhone. Is that
you, Mr. Shindo?
Oh, yes, good morning, Chairman
and members of the committee.
This is Kevinendal.
Good morning, please.
OK, uh, uh, thank you, Senator
Schindo for the uh prayer and
the introduction, um, as this uh
bill came to fruition. It's been
a few years in the work, as you
recall this bill also came to
the health education Committee
in 2023, and this was the result
of the uh legislative education
Study Committee visiting um our
language immersion schools in
Hamas so that the committee
members and the staff could
learn more about the immersion
approaches being implemented
there at that time.
more leadership as if
The yes he would consider
supporting tribes as charter
school authorizers, uh, and that
initiated the conversations
moving forward with the
attorneys of LESC and when we
looked at the charter school law
and everything that was in
place, what was um eventually
decided was that um if the
tribes really wanted to be in
control of the schools, the
education, the curriculum, the
assessments and evaluations that
tribes that started school
authorizers would not be a
viable option.
because they would still be
under the state, um, and also be
held to the Common Core
standards and the state
evaluations and assessments, uh,
as was written in the charter
school law. So at that time we
worked with the LESD attorneys
to look at other options in
different states. We found the
models in Washington state and
Alaska, um, that most um
supported tribal control, um,
and oversight of the education
in schools within their
communities. Um, the Washington
model was the one that, um, we
used to draft the um
Act in the bill that you have in
front of you here today, um, and
so that model really
Provided tribes the opportunity
to be able to control our own
destiny, um, to be able to
integrate language and culture
within our school systems, um,
while ensuring that we set the
standards and assessments and
the evaluations in place. Um,
and in 2023, the companion bill,
which was to develop technical
assistance and training centers,
um, past, and so the companion
build to support tribes in
developing our own standards,
assessments and evaluations.
in place, the work is happening
um to get those centers uh in
place and so this bill will only
help us to further support our
own control of our education
systems and moving our
priorities forward, um, as you
know, language, um, loss has
been experienced by tribes not
only in Mexico but across the
country. And um
Time is um a luxury that we
don't have. And so, um, that is
a brief, um.
summary of our work leading to
this point to where we're at at
the moment, um, and we also have
developed a partnership with the
University of Hawaii at Hilo to
develop a teacher licensure
program to license Haman's
emerging teachers, because as we
have journey on this um effort
to develop immersion based
schools, um,
The institutions in New Mexico
do not support a licensure
program, um, that teaches, um,
prepares teachers to teach in an
immersion setting. Um, most are
Western-based, um, elementary
ed, uh, early childhood
education degree programs and so
the University of Hawaii
actually had a college of
Hawaiian language, um, through
which we were able to create a,
a pilot um that has been
supported by both the public ed
department and the early
childhood education and care
department.
Um, to develop this licensure
program that eventually we will
want to bring home to one of our
in-state institutions. Um, thank
you for giving me that
opportunity to share, um,
The work that has happened to
get to where we're at today, and
don't stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Yeah, uh, no, just, uh, thank
you, uh Shashenda for, for that
and just to put things in
perspective.
There were over 300 languages
before contacting this country.
Today, there are only 67
languages that are spoken in the
United States by the tribes.
It is projected by 2050 that
only 20 of these languages will
probably survive if nothing
happens.
So I just want to put things in
perspective, uh, Mr. Evela, good
to see you.
I don't know if Brian ever told
you, uh, representative Baca,
he's got a heinous name.
And we love that means a bull
elk
He worked with my uncle up in
the uh in the uh visco there uh
many years ago.
Thank you. Uh,
At this time, well.
turn it back over to you, Mr.
Chair. All right. Thank you. So,
um, we will go to our audience,
so folks on Zoom, if you're here
and you wish to speak in support
of Senate Bill 13, please
indicate by raising your hand.
I'm gonna let that populate, um,
folks in the audience, if you're
here and you wish to speak in
sport, and Senate Bill 13,
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Right, so we have a good number
of people, which is awesome.
Thank you all for being here.
Um, if you would line up behind
our presenters, you're gonna
have up to 2 minutes, but please
do not be repetitive of the
folks that came before you.
Please,
welcome.
Who is the old
I myukiwa Arisa. Good morning,
chair, people of the committee.
My name is Dmitri Smith. I'm a
senior at Sandia High School in
Albuquerque as well as the youth
intern with New Mexico Native
vote, and I'm here in support of
SB 13. I have the ability and
privilege to speak in my native
language, which was passed down
to me by my family ancestors.
Unfortunately, many young
indigenous people are losing
their ability and right to learn
and practice their cultural
heritage.
SP 13 will protect generations
of students while still allowing
them to learn important history.
This bill strengthens indigenous
sovereignty and language and our
cultural heritage, I strongly
encourage you to pass Senate
bill 13. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes.
I go and see him at our hope uh
Alicia Chrismatic on my he will
mess with the Schultz and
Hannibals,
and in need of Elsa punch, uh,
these schools of almost in time
to pass the Senate Bill 13, an
education was not that cow.
Good morning, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Alicia Carris. I am a tribal
member of Santo Domingo Pueblo
and known as Pulos by my
community. I'm a lobbyist with
End of Native vote, and I am
here today speaking in support
for Senate Bill 13. The only
reason why I'm able to speak to
you in the Chari language and
stand here before you is because
I was not only I was supported
not only culturally but
linguistically in my community.
Our unique culture and language
is integral to our identity, and
it creates the foundation of our
values.
Personally learning my language
and culture instilled confidence
in carrying myself as a sound
bingo pueblo woman to where I'm
able to stand strong in spaces
like this roundhouse. In order
to keep our languages alive. We
need support not only in the
home, but in the classroom as
well.
Today, I'm not only here to
speak in support for the bill,
but I'm speaking for the
language learners and second
language learners like myself
who want better for our children
and for the future generations
to come, for them not to
struggle with the sacrifice of
selecting Western education
before cultural education or
being called to practice outside
of our classrooms or on the
weekends like we did. We can
have both, and I urge your
support because our languages
and cultures deserve that and
more. Thank you.
OK. Thank you.
Please you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino, and I
represent the publics of Tao and
Ama, and also the center of my
poverty.
And we stand in full support of
SB 13.
Um
In my comments this morning, Mr.
Chairman, I'm going to quell any
concerns that
A state tribal compacts will
shouldn't be eligible for state
funding through the SCG formula.
The states, uh
tribes contribute heavily.
to New Mexico's economy and also
the local economy.
And we do that in a variety of
ways.
We have the
staging I gaming compact.
And revenue share payments are
made quarterly to the state.
In 2024, we contributed nearly
75 to $80 million. We also
contribute through agreements
with the state, the state's tax
revenue Department through
agreements for the sale of gas
and cigarettes, and also the
collection of gross receipts tax
with tribal boundaries.
We also contribute contribute
heavily to the local economies
and cities and towns that border
tribal lands like Santa Fe.
And Albuquerque Los Lunas.
Ah, Grants and gallop.
And so, for those reasons, Mr.
Chairman, you know, tribes do
contribute.
Quite a bit to the general fund,
which is a source of SDG
funding.
And so we are hopeful that once
SEB SB 13 does get passed and
signed by the governor, and
those tribes that wished to
compact for a public school on
or near tribal lands will also
be eligible for SCG funding for
those reasons, we ask the
committee for a favorable vote.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Yeah, a Bene a Ota Chavezunish
but initially hissani
basinakkeda and
is on thee.
Gowaihopawasuta
Yeah, a Bene a Ota Chavezunish
but initially hissani
basinakkeda and
is on thee. Gowaihopawasua
um so it's inhaiel my uh Mr.
Chair and members, I'm Ansa
Chavez, a Navajo woman born for
Cuhua Pueblo, introducing myself
and Carris and Navajo is a
privilege that I was taught by
my grandparents in my home.
The way I grew up is no longer
the norm, as we move more for
jobs and for homes.
Our worldview is linked to our
language and place without
languages, our culture's
teaching and ways of life are
being forgotten.
We need these compacts in
particular because PED and the
federal Education systems are
based on English.
As a first and only language.
That's about assimilation. It's
the death of our languages.
This is contrary to our wishes.
We want to revitalize and teach
what is needed to ensure us and
our survival as indigenous
speakers.
This committee passed HB 63 in
an effort to support ESL
students using a similar funding
source. The FRR total that 1 132
million. This would take much,
much, much less. This bill is
about equity, it's about doing
the right thing. It's about
being in solidarity with our
communities that are under
attack.
We must band together. We urge
you to pass SB 13, that she had
nitro. Thank you.
Thank you. Please, you have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
We'll save you.
What you hope but
when those de.
No way Nate while with Jo.
Meanwhile, the unsha Namo Nawa,
Meanwhile, the unsha Namo
Nawasquelaunin he won a surgery.
Uh, my name is James Naranhu.
I'm the governor of Santa Clara
Pueblo.
Anosdis represent
aquito.
Uh, I'm
I'm one of the only natives that
look like a Spaniard growing up
and uh so I have a nickname of
Jaimitto, so I was very blessed
to speak a little espanol and
thank you.
But my first language is Tea,
um, I'm the governor. I worked
for sergeant of arms. Nice to
see you, Chairman and staff.
Keep up the good work.
Santa Clara, uh, we took over
our school from the BIA uh 56
years ago.
We've implemented our
s in our language, our students
in math, science, history, so
not only do we speak in our
table language.
We speak in the English
language, so that our future can
replace each and every one of
you, each and every one of us
standing here today were blessed
to have you supporting us. We
were blessed for Shao to bring
this bill forward because it's
only gonna help our future.
Uh, I thought it was
are taught to go outside our
boundaries and come back and,
and work for our tribe and
that's exactly what we're trying
to do and installing our, our
children, but our language is so
crucial in our ways of life to
keep the state.
It's supposed to be number one
in our minds. We're not going
anywhere and uh we're always
gonna be here supporting one
another. We're neighbors. We
have to respect and love our
culture and, and, and to to
teach our language Kundawaha,
thank you.
Thank you, Governor.
Please welcome you 2 minutes.
Guihopa.
My name is Malena Ortiz, and I
am the registered lobbyist for
the Pueblos of Zuni, Isleta, San
Felipe, and Oke Ainge, and good
morning chair and committee
members.
Um, the Pueblo support this bill
and for the reasons stated
earlier, urge your support.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you. Please, you have
up to 2 minutes, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee on
Mark Duran, on the registered
lobbyist for San Odofonso Pueblo
Santo Domingo Pueblo and the
Santa Fe Indian School, I will
try to compare comments that
have been made previously, they
have been fantastic. We just
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward, he
said it best when he said it's
time to turn education over to
tribal schools and schools on
Pueblos and Native Americans
we'd like to thank him for
bringing it forward, and we'd
like to thank you for support of
the bill. Thank you.
Great, thank you.
Please welcome.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Loretta Tru and I'm with
Transform Education in Mexico.
And I'd like to just add a few
points, um, before entering into
this role, I served native
students in the community of
Sanity Public Schools, up to 300
students who were living away
from their homelands frequently,
and I can speak uh to the story
and the experiences of native
youth that are not given these
supports, and I can tell you
that
There are stories of.
Uh, resilience and grit.
And a sense of commitment to
their communities, but frankly,
our public schools are not
equipped to offer the supports
that are
Um, obligated to them by the
Yazi Martinez court ruling. And
so in light of that, I think
that it's so important to
Listen to native voices to trust
in their stewardship and let
this be a model for the kind of
culturally responsive education
that we know they're capable of
building.
In a public school, uh,
department like Native American
Student Services.
Curriculum materials in
languages.
From our state were almost
difficult, almost not available.
And so this would open up an
opportunity for our communities
that are in larger cities to
have access to materials that
don't currently um exist,
frankly. So I would invite us
all to think about tribal
government sovereignty and the
opportunity for you to continue
to stand as you have before, um,
in alignment with the protection
of language and culture. Thank
you.
Thank you.
lovely though, you have 2
minutes, please, Chairman, um,
relative of mine, uh, members of
the committee. My name is Pablo
Horacio Padilla Junior. Uh, I'm
an attorney. I've been
representing Pueblos for the
last 20 years. I'm currently
general legal counsel to Santo
Domingo Pueblo, um, Governor
Maquino sends his regards. I'm
also the legal counsel for the
public Zuni Ardenuati are
governor sends his regards.
Pretty, please pass this bill, a
Senate Bill 13 from my eyes,
it's a fresh new way to look at
a relationship between state
government and Indian tribes. I
won't focus on education, uh,
um, on language. My wife's uh
Zuni language teacher at
Albuquerque Public Schools.
There's a lot going on there. A
lot of people spoke about um
language already. I'd like to
focus on the word compact.
I bet a bunch of you when you
see the word compact, you think
about the gaming compact. Uh,
what I think about when I see
the word compact, I think about
the compacting that's authorized
under the Indian
self-determination Act. That's
the relationship between the
federal government and the
tribes. Um, what I love about
this bill when I read it, I want
my clients love about this bill.
It's a new way for public
schools and Indian tribes to
relate to each other for the
betterment of students. That's
really
become big take home message
about.
with this. Um, the public of
Zuni currently is in a um
I won't say adversarial but a
dysfunctional relationship with
the local Zuni public school
district there, not to shift
blame on anybody but this bill
is passed would provide a fresh
way for those entities to
provide better services to the
Zuni students.
Um, it doesn't matter which side
of the aisle you sit in, I see
some R's and some D's. Uh, I
don't think anyone in this room
can um
Say that times aren't changing
to borrow from Bob Dylan, uh,
the federal government and the
way that um the relationship
between the federal government
and Indian tribes is in flux. I
bet the relationship between the
federal government and the state
government is also in flux.
That's not a bad thing. I think
that this bill is passed, will
provide a new opportunity for
the state that was and they
didn't try to be proactive.
Thank you very much.
Please, welcome.
Good morning, Mister Chairman
and members of the committee.
My name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor of the Pueblo Susuki,
and welcome to the ancestral
homelands and traditional
homelands of Tsuki Pueblo.
For all the states, statements
that were made previous to me
Tsuki on behalf of Governor Earl
Sammy on tribal council for this
bill. We look forward to a
favorable decision. Thank you.
Great. Thank you all so much. So
we'll go to our folks on
Zoom, so.
Robert, please, good morning.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. 10 members of
the committee. My name is Robert
Apodaca. I'm the lobbyist for
the Hikeia patation and Navajo
Preparatory school, um, for all
the reasons mentioned uh before
uh we do support Senate Bill 13.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you so much.
Ah, Preston, good morning,
Preston. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
Morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Preston Sanchez. I'm
gonna turn you at the ACLU. I'm
here today on behalf of the ACLU
standing in support of SB 13,
um, as you all know, in public
schools all across the state of
New Mexico, Native American
students tend to have the lowest
academic outcomes by all
academic measures, and this is
due to many factors that
include, uh, as Senator Sendo
shared the history of
assimilation and the boarding
school era, but it also is due
to the lack of native teachers
and staff in schools.
As well as geographic distances
that force students to travel
long distances to and from
school and most importantly, the
delivery of curriculum and
instructional materials that are
not relevant to the cultural
identity of students. This
creates a disconnect where
students often do not see
themselves represented in the
public school environment. SB 13
is a key solution to these
issues, uh, by giving tribes the
opportunity to create schools
that address those unique
cultural and linguistic needs of
native children. New Mexico's
native students will be best
served both academically and
culturally, and for those
reasons we ask that you pass SB
13. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Oh, Matthew, good morning,
Matthew. 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Matt Paul with Public charter
schools of New Mexico. We
support Senate Bill 13 because
we know that public school
choice, whether it's provided by
traditional school districts,
public charter schools or the
Bureau of Indian Education,
strengthens community investment
in public education, while also
preserving the values that
public uh education stands for.
This includes the value of being
responsive to our communities.
There are a number of charter
schools that operate on native
lands and focus on tribal
language and culture, but
charter schools have to follow
99% of public school laws, and
that can limit how deep those
schools can go with their
curriculum.
Those charters can continue
should this bill pass, but this
presents a new option for tribes
to opt into.
We know there's a lot of
uncertainty about the impacts
and ramifications of allowing a
new public school model.
But there was also a similar
concerns when conversion charter
schools were introduced in the
90s and charter schools as we
know them today, were introduced
in the early 2000s.
We've learned though that
providing another public school
option can be beneficial to
communities, so we support the
bill and we hope you do too.
Thank you.
OK
Thank you.
Uh, Christine.
Good morning, Christine. You
have up to 2 minutes.
What you hope.
My name is Christine Sims. I'm
faculty at the University of New
Mexico. I also direct the
American Indian Language Policy
Research and Teacher Training
Center. Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee, uh, we stand
in support of, of SB 13, and we
urge this body to to consider
passing this because it is
crucial for all the reasons that
have been stated, but I would
also
this committee that in the
current
Uh, a climate of today. In fact,
yesterday I learned the
Department of Defense has erased
all references to Navajo code
talkers. That's off their
website now.
There's there's been executive
orders regarding English as the
official language. All of these
kinds of things that are
happening now at the federal
level. Our directly impacting
and will impact Native American
education, our tribes, our
languages, our cultures, we
cannot go back to a time when
assimilation was the only option
that was uh visited upon Native
American tribes. We must move
forward.
And I believe this legislature,
this body here has the
wherewithal and the political
courage to change things here in
New Mexico, as you have done
before previously, the Indian
education Act, passage of the
bilingual Multicultural
Education Act, the bilingual
seal culture by literacy seal
for uh students in New Mexico
studying their languages in
schools.
I urge this body to seriously
consider that this bill will be
in a bill and partnership to
support native language and
culture here in New Mexico, and
I ask your support for this
bill, uh, all of you, I respect
all of you in your capacities as
lawmakers, please show us in New
Mexico that you are willing to
move forward and create new
pathways, given options for
additional education models.
Thank you. Thank you.
right
Adrian, good morning. You have 2
minutes, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee have been
Adrian Sandoval Yin,
uh,
Guioa Keshi, uh buatos, I am a
native New Mexican, native
Mexicano and uh for me, this is
really an example of moving
beyond uh our land
acknowledgments here in the
state of New Mexico and
supporting our indigenous
communities throughout New
Mexico. Um, not only do I stand
in support of all the languages
of New Mexico, but I stand
firmly in support of SB 13.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, so all I have is Department
of Education, Pueblo.
So,
please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Hinomouvan Hereba.
My name is Charlene Lucero, and
I am from the publiclo Isleta
and Turtle Mountain, Chippewa. I
come to you as a school teacher,
science teacher, math teacher,
uh, in middle school as a
director of the education
department is um
As a female who graduated from
UNM and has my administrator
license as a uh person who
strongly believes in education
and and in our New Mexico
culture diversity, um, I want to
strongly
Strongly encourage you to pass
this and move this forward. Um,
I believe that our tribal
communities have the ability,
the capacity.
The knowledge
To move this.
And approved schools at our
level. We have, we have so many
educated individuals, and I
respect all of you see my
professors sitting on as a
representatives as I see our
partners sitting on the floor. I
really want to say a shout out
for the education that I
received in the education that
we want our future to receive. I
believe strongly in this, and I
hope and encourage you to pass
Senate Bill 13. I appreciate you
listening. I appreciate all
those, the reasons that have
been stated prior. Thank you and
um please, please move this
forward. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, sharing. Good morning,
Cheri. You have up to 2 minutes.
Yeah and and Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Sherri
Groenhorse and I'm speaking as a
former school board member with
Naval Preparatory School, um,
where a school that's based in
Farmington and one of our models
is
Uh, language and culture, and
this didn't happen overnight and
SB 13, you know, sort of dives
into that same sort of that
model and I think that providing
the flexibility and opportunity
to tribes is important, and this
legislation is important. Thank
you.
Right.
Thank you,
um.
So Melissa, good morning,
Melissa. You have a.
He then
I never have brought a he
then
I never have brought the and
and and we had to
in the.
Mm
It then it then and Nissandalaki
he
won.
Nehimi me uh mental and
what happened
and then not the
but but
huh
no
it no.
Good morning. Um, thank you all
for uh taking the time to
listen, um, in these were our
students from our uh new Hamish
language immersion school here
in Hamas. We ask that you
support us in our efforts so
that our students continue to
hold on to their identity, their
language and their culture as
well as um vigorous education.
Um, thank you all.
We support SB 13. We ask that
you do the same. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, car loans.
Morning, Carlos here 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members. My name is Carlos
Matutes. I am the New Mexico
state director for Green
Latinos. We are environmental
justice organization dedicated
to fighting for environmental
justice for Latino communities
and other communities of color.
We stand in support of Senate
Bill 13.
For me, I was very fortunate to
be able to learn my language,
medioma, and learn my culture as
a boy.
We want to make sure that our
indigenous brothers and sisters
have the same opportunities and
to make those decisions for
themselves and for their
communities. Thank you. We hope
that you do support Senate Bill
13.
Great.
Thank you. Uh, Celeste, good
morning, Celeste. You have up to
2 minutes.
Haramba, not the die home or
resa. Hello everybody. My name
is Celestearo. I come from the
Pueblo of Aslada, and I am a
master's student at the
University of New Mexico. I am
speaking in support of Senate
Bill 13.
Um
I think that this bill is
critical to empowering students
to succeed, not only in our
education, but in our overall
livelihoods, our native tongue
allows us to speak to the world,
to our ancestors. A native
student needs their language,
culture, and a sense of their
identity to support them as they
navigate the world outside of
their community. They need
grounding. I urge your support
and empowering our native
students. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you, uh, Mary. Good
morning, Mary. You have 2
minutes.
Hey Yaho, now I
Ilaya.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of committee. Uh, my
name is Mary Alice Martinez. I'm
from Tao Pablo. I'm from the Red
Willow tribe. I am theta Pablo
to language program coordinator
and also a teacher, please
support SB 13 to ensure the
needs of our indigenous students
in the public schools and for
tribes to develop and design our
own schools, curriculum.
and standards. It is a unique
opportunity to support tribal
sovereignty and protecting our
languages and our culture. We
want our children to be
successful in academia while
preserving their cultural
identity and their indigenous
identity. Thank you to Senator
Sendo for bringing this to um
the committee and we urge your
support. Thank you so much,
Tara.
Thank you.
Camila, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Camila
Feibelman, director of the
Sierra Clus Rio Grande chapter.
One of the things that we learn
and understand and protecting
the environment is the
importance of culture in that
protection.
The role of young people and
youth in understanding the
values of our natural resources
is often fomented within the
educational system.
And seeing that allowed and
supported through state statute
to help tribes and pueblos
develop their own educational
systems is key also to
protecting our environment.
I'll echo the others who stated
that I have the opportunity to
have my son learning his
father's native language through
dual language education and this
further supports the development
of and support of native
languages and therefore we stand
in support. Thank you.
Right.
Thank you.
All right.
We'll move on to opposition, so
folks on Zoom, if you're opposed
to Senate Bill 13, could you
please indicate by raising your
hand on Zoom.
Folks in the audience, is there
anybody here opposed to Senate
Bill 13, please indicate by
raising your hand.
to speak
Right.
We will come to committee.
committee, who wants to be
representing.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um,
I'm going to address some of the
comments I made earlier,
Chairman. When I sit in this
chair, I represent all people.
And, and I, I don't like some of
the divisive language that was
used.
So I, I think that when it comes
here,
All 89 school districts, all
charter schools.
All ethnic backgrounds.
Or, or what I do, but
Um, I, I think that that it's
that kind of mindset.
That I think takes us backwards.
That we reflect.
Or that we're trying to, you
know, we are different in New
Mexico.
So I need to state that.
Because
I, I think that
Well, we may have turmoil, Mr.
Chairman, at the federal level.
The group, especially in this
committee have done always
what's right for kids, so.
Um, I need to state that because
I think that
Just like I've talked with many
of us and you guys have worked
with me and served with me, know
that about me. So, um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Shendo.
Um, I'm gonna ask some, some
questions about this and uh
And I'm gonna, it's gonna cover
it and I will not take so much
time, but I, there are some
Some things that I are left to
my um understanding. So, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Schendo.
What
In just layman's terms, does
this act intend to do?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee.
What we're trying to do
It
Revitalize languages in our
tribal communities.
Or sustain them in a way that
we've never had.
We have 8 languages that are
spoken in the state of New
Mexico.
Many of these tribes are very
small.
Am I right?
4000 of us, maybe 2500 of us
living in the village.
Our current school right now
has, I think, 30 some kids.
The Pueblo down the street.
Maybe 1000 tribal members.
Santa Anna, maybe 1000 tribal
members.
We've never had the opportunity.
to teach our children.
The way we were raised.
I didn't because
Single word of English when I
went to.
But many of us went on.
Our kids don't have that
opportunity. And that's all
we're trying to do.
Let's go back to that.
I was one of probably very
helpful it was when I went to
University of Colorado, there
were 2 of us from our tribal
community went to school.
Many of the students, people ask
me, how did you survive? My
answer is because I knew exactly
who I was. Hm.
The foundation
My education and own belief and
values that I grew up with.
I could withstand.
Any challenges.
That came upon me of who I am.
Why I am
Why I speak the language and
what I believe in.
That's all we're trying to get
back, because I think once we do
that, our kids are gonna
succeed.
That he was termin to thank you
who center for that, and I will
also kind of say that
For many of us who went to
school, Hispanics, they went to
school in the 70s and 80s.
The percentage of those that
still speak the language.
May not be the same, but are
comparable.
So, Mr. Chairman and
In center, that's one of the
things that
My
Accomplishing or said to do
this.
Do we open
The opportunity to Austin we say
the Hispanic one out there.
own culture language schools. So
those are questions that I have.
So,
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
How would this differ from a BIE
school or from a charter school.
I mean, we already have.
Those processes in place. How,
how does this differ?
Um,
Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Baca.
Inhabis, we, we've done both.
You know, I was the one that
created the first charter school
in Hamas back in 1999.
When we convert a Catholic
school.
And then we started with the
high school.
What is different is that
Both
When you're a charter school or
have some control.
The
English is still in this case,
what we're trying to do is do
early language immersion.
Most of the schools that will
probably start that are starting
right now are kindergarten.
through the 6th grade. Most of
the BIE schools in the Pueblos
are go to 6th grade.
And so, so.
Yeah, so, so English is
basically
It's, you know, even though it's
a charter, we are what we're
trying to do is
If I think about it, I guess I'm
not a
School teacher, I don't know all
the pedagogy, all the stuff that
goes on.
But the way I look at it.
is when we took over that
charter school, I really wanted.
For the language.
You know, we always talk about,
you know, build on your
strengths.
But
If your strength is your
language and culture.
Trying to incorporate that into
a system that's not designed.
It was very difficult. It's very
difficult for our teachers.
It was a paradigm shift for
teachers to how do you embed
But what if you started?
From the language and culture of
that community and immerse them
in the science and the
mathematics and the things as
opposed to the other way around.
And that's what we're trying to
do.
You think about Charcoal Candy
and Mesaur, a lot of engineering
going on with our ancestors.
Those things are still standing.
I know, I don't know how many
years.
So it's not like we have been,
haven't been there.
I think it's the systematic
simulation.
Over the years that have got us
to this place and all we want to
do is go back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator Sendo. um.
You know, and, and the questions
that I, I have and I'm gonna
talk more about, you know, I'm
gonna break this into two
different parts. If you want to
respond to that, please.
Yes, and Representative Baca,
um, just wanted, uh, answer your
question and build upon Senator
Sindo's um comments. So federal,
uh, so state standards for
education, um, are, are
promulgated by federal
standards. The premier pieces of
legislation are the 1965
Elementary and Secondary
Education Act.
It was, uh, you, you, you all
may recall in 2001, uh, there
was No Child Left Behind Act,
but further strengthened some
additional standards and
assessments, um, and then the
premier law that stands today is
the 2015 Every Student Succeeds
Act.
So those are the, those are,
that's the federal, um, the law
that
Requires each state who receives
federal funds.
For education to develop
standards.
You all are also aware that Yasi
Martinez affirmed that the state
of New Mexico has felt to
provide a sufficient education
to tribal, uh, English language
learners economically
disadvantaged students and
disabled students. So before
Yazi Martinez, all state
standards and assessments were
an English base.
They didn't support any
Hispanic bilingual.
Uh, Spanish, other multilingual
systems.
And for, and so what's the
difference between the state
tribal Compacting Act and what
is currently in place right now,
even federally, is that for the
first time in the history of New
Mexico, we are able to develop
our own standards and
assessments.
So that we can uh revolutionize
our own engineering,
mathematics, science, and other
places so that in Mexico can be
that beacon of hope for the rest
of uh the United States and the
world. Thank you.
Thank you that in a couple of my
questions.
So we talked about that this
would exempt students from
certain um.
Requirements or statutes
locally.
So then how will we
Compare that growth.
to other students who are in a
are not in a
Uh, in the compact school.
Because with the, the standards
we're talking about overall
success.
So I guess
Which, which statutes would be
exempt.
And then how are we going to
measure.
Or compare
The achievement of this because
the Yazi Martinez.
can be somewhat problematic
because I'm gonna say that in
the Mexico.
We have many students failing,
Mr. Chairman.
Not just the
Hispanics in the
send those in the vacas, we have
the Smiths and we have the other
folks there, so.
Can you tell me, Mr. Chairman
and Senator and
I'm sorry, your first name is
Terre.
so turn.
Which compacts would be
excluded.
How are we going to measure
progress in comparison to
others.
And finally, the big question
and I'm gonna go when I get to
the, the FIR.
is the funding for this, OK? So
those are the three questions
and I appreciate it, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Baca, appreciate that question.
As Senator Sheno conveyed.
We're, we're seeking to ground
our communities and their
cultural identity.
When English Standards.
Are imposed onto multilingual,
multicultural societies.
Our families, our children, are
left with a place of wanting an
identity that they are at some
point never able to recover.
That's, that's what we're facing
in the Mexico.
After generations of only
English.
Uh, instruction and standards
and assessments.
So, right now, you may have seen
the legislative Education Study
Committee's bill analysis of for
uh student outcomes in the
current framework.
Only 25% of native students are
finishing and reading. Only 13%
of native students are
proficient in math.
And only 24% are proficient in
science.
So, what we're seeking to do is
ground our students.
First and our native languages.
That's what the state tribal
Compacting Act is seeking to
accomplish. The Hame model has
said and then we, we have the
great blessing of designing our
education system from early
childhood, uh, and, and moving
with this, with this proposed
bill to have our sys uh our
students up to 6th grade.
Grounded in heinous language so
that they are going to be
grounded in our culture. So, as
we think about the next step of
now what are going to be the
assessments and what is going to
be exempt. The beautiful thing
about this bill is that Senate
bill
13 is affirming and
strengthening accountability. So
we know that the count, so the
accountability provisions to
tend to 13 are actually stronger
than the accountability
provisions for school districts,
local educational agencies,
local districts have full
discretion over the use of their
uh SCG funds.
Whereas Senate Bill 13 gifts
significant powers to the public
education department to set
rules and negotiate compacts in
ways that it sees fit. You can
go to page 2, line 24,
department shall establish an
application and approval process
process. Page 3.
Uh, lines 13 to 17, the
application demonstrates that
the school shall operate in
compliance with all applicable
laws, any rules adopted pursuant
to the provisions of the state
tribal Education Compact Act,
and the terms and conditions set
forth in the application.
And page 4, section F outlines
the provisions such as
compliance.
So our goal is basically to
affirm our states, our, our
tribal standards and
assessments.
And then phase them into English
at a later stage. But we have
learned.
Through our, our, our, our own
um engagement and, and language
uh exploration is that if we
don't ground our students in
language and culture first.
We're not going to be able to
improve their academic
achievement outcomes.
And that's the, that's, that's
the same different from for my
own experience. I grew up in the
Poteus. I am blessed to have
been raised by uh my family, my
mother, my grandmother, and
everyone who only spoke Hemus.
When I went anywhere else in
this world, my, my father's not
from Hami. It was a different
world.
Why is it a different world?
Because the language and the
culture is completely different.
But when ground community and
family and children and language
and culture.
I have a master's degree here
today. I support in many
different technical elements,
and I say I'm a beacon and an
exemplary me and many other um
uh uh children from Heus are
examples of what we want our
younger children's, uh, to
achieve as they grow older.
Hopefully I answer that
question. Thank you. Yeah, thank
you Mr. Chairman and uh thank
you for that and
congratulations. I think you are
representative of.
And not justhaus, but what it
means to be New Mexican. We
would just say that.
Mr. Chairman and the senator.
The, the, the, the other, you,
you brought up here and I saw in
one of the reports.
With each individual tribal.
Entity
The ability to
Create their own compacts.
do even within that, within this
law.
There could be some kind of
Um
It's gonna be hard cause they
may all very be very different.
So then how are we gonna assess
this.
Because, you know, as far as
unless each, each entity, each
tribe is going to be able to do
is how are we going to, because
you may, you may, um,
Negotiate this or the compact
maybe.
Assigned to address this and
Somewhere else ama Tasuki.
You know, it will be different,
so how, how, how do we account
for the differences that will be
generated within this tribal
count uh compacts.
Chain and Representative Baca,
appreciate that question of, of.
The potential for inequity in in
the education of, of students.
So members of this legislature
already had the foresight to
account for some of these
potential disparities in
education. And in order for to
resolve that.
Uh, you all pass hospital 280,
the development of technical
assistance centers in the state
of New Mexico.
There's uh that was uh codified
and to state law and
2023. And right now the
university in Mexico uh Center
Native American budget for
center and policy is developing
their uh technical assistance
center as well as Navajo
Technical University because we
unders because you all
understood, right, as
legislators, you want a, a
equitable uh education, not only
for native students but other
students as well. So we are at
the precipice of ensuring that
while language is at the heart
of what we're seeking to
accomplish that as we develop
standards and assessments.
It is, there is some uniformity.
And basic principles that were
establishing for each tribe, for
each nation, and for our
communities.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. I'm gonna go to page 5
of your bill right now.
Section B lines 6.
14.
And the language says a state
tribal education compact is
exempt from all state statutes
and rules applicable to school
districts.
State charter and charter
schools.
Local school boards or governing
bodies of chicks and charter
schools.
regarding the curriculum,
assessment and evaluation
requirements of a school.
Except for those, so again, what
this is saying is that
There is really no oversight as
far as PED. Is that how, I mean,
that's what it says is that
In my, in my interpreting that
wrong, Mister Chairman, and,
and, and senator because when we
talk about
Equity, that's the, the, right
there, the impetus for my
statements regarding.
The creation of these policies.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Falco, we
appreciate that question. So the
reason that this uh page 5,
section 6 through uh lines 16.
Are exempting.
Tribes from uh the existing
statutes is because we want to
ensure that their standards and
assessments are incorporated
within the PED negotiated
rulemaking process. So you, you,
you raise a great um example of
by exempting tribes on the front
end of against different
standards that are one from the
state assessments that are
created by the state that are
English-based, as well as
federal standards that are
prioritizing the English
language?
But it allows the second phase
is basically when a tribe
submits a resolution to the
public education department,
what they will now be able to do
is because they're exempted from
some of those standards and
assessments, a tribe can go in
with their own standards and
their own assessments, be able
to convey that this is their
phase of how language um
immersion well and
language-based schools will be
um incorporated within the
education system. And then
they'll be able to uh negotiate
with NMPD on how SEG dollars
will be created for English
language learners at.
uh students for supports for
disabled students and basically
all of the various um challenges
that or the unique uh incidences
that make us, our children, um,
Uh
The, the, the people that they
are. So basically exempting on
the front end while allowing
tribes in the PD to negotiate in
a compact. That's really what
the, what, what this uh section
is looking to accomplish.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that, and I
support language programs. I
mean, I, I know what you guys
have done in Haus, but like.
Mr. Chairman and senator.
Like if you were all saying if I
was going to be sent to a
Spanish.
Compact school, right? I'd have
to learn Spanish first and then
learn about math and so I, I, I
think that's kind of where
there's some, you know,
I was there, I supported, I
voted on the legislation for
the, including the licensure of
teachers to address the
language.
But that to me makes sense as
part of the culture and
identity.
I, I just think that this is
gonna be it. So I'm gonna, Mr.
Chairman, I'm gonna turn to the
fight, the FIR right now.
The financial impact report.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Sendo.
This, this bill does not
Um, contain an appropriation.
So, Mr. Chairman, um,
When we look on page 2 of the
FIR we, I see a number there.
is that it could be up to, and
again, I realized that is the
high end.
Of $168 million impact.
Um, to the SCG.
Uh, can you explain that, Mr.
Chairman and Senator?
Uh, yes, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Baca. When we
spoke to uh the uh LSC analyst
that drafted this. This is the
worst case scenario.
Meaning if every
BIE school in the state of New
Mexico.
Converted
To this compact model, which I
think is around 9000 students,
that will be
The
The number.
But what we're talking about are
very small schools.
You know
I would think maybe in the next
2-3 years, maybe. I know Hamme
might be ready to do it in the
next 1 or 2 years.
In Claraite
So we're talking very small
numbers.
And the, and the idea that the
BIE schools are gonna convert.
Over to compact.
That's a decision that the tribe
has to make.
And Naval Nation probably has
the largest number of BIE
schools.
And most of those are, you know,
and that's part of another issue
is part of the trust
responsibility for the federal
government.
To provide education.
So that's something that the
tribes are probably not gonna
want to give up. So we're
talking a very, very small.
A number, uh, and
And like I said, there's only 19
pueblos in the state of New
Mexico.
So at most the pueblos will
probably have 19 schools.
Thank you.
So, so it's not going to be.
Uh, that the big and, and that's
what, you know, we were kind of
disputing, and I when we asked
him, I said, well, we always in
our analysis, we always do the
worst case scenario.
So that is, if every
BIE school converted to state
compact.
students.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you so much that also does
is the impact that it will have
to
Districts
That's already support uh Native
American students like my
district, we have students from
Laguna and from Malata.
So, the, the question then, Mr.
Chairman,
Um, is the flow through money,
how would the money, the funds
flow through.
To this front and also along
with that.
is the capital outlay is
something that has been
addressed.
You know, on page 3 as far as
the funds for.
Uh, for building a facilities.
I, I, I saw the number.
And correct me if I'm wrong, but
it was
Several $100 million as far as
in capital funds, 500 million.
So can you explain, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Senator about one
how these funds are going to
flow through.
Who has oversight of these
funds.
And the capital, the impact of
capital outlay.
Um, of these funds.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Baca, I appreciate your first
question. I just want to close
that loop real quickly to say
that there are 44 BIE uh schools
that receive federal funds
precisely because they are not
language based. So if they were
to change into language-based
schools, which the state tribal
Compacting Act is seeking to
accomplish, they will lose their
federal funding.
So the substantiated claim of
$1444 million that will be
impacted in the SCG.
It's not accounting that the
majority of these schools.
are not language based in the
first place. So the, the impact
of potential uh transition of 44
BIE schools to go into state
tribal compacting schools is
very low. Now, to, um, so I
just, just wanna uh answer that
first question and then the
second question is, uh, you
asked this, how would these
resources flow through and that
will be through the Mexico
public education.
And, and the Indian education,
assistant secretary for Indian
Education as the negotiated
compacting will occur, so the,
the effective date of this bill
is July 1.
But we can anticipate that uh
negotiation of a compact will
take about a year.
And I think uh you all have been
working very hard on the SCG
this year, right? You're looking
through House Bill 63 to amend,
um, to increase the at-risk
factor for uh English language
language learners, to which will
increase the SCG funds for about
over um a few $100 million. So
we all are aware and for those
who are teachers, and I used to
serve on a school board for uh
Sunday for charter school school
board. Every year, the schools,
the districts are um required to
take an assessment of
how many students that they have
in each of their, their schools.
Those numbers are then provided
to the uh legislature so that
the legislature is aware how
much it should appropriate
within the SCG.
In the first place. So we can
appreciate that for any tribe
public nation that is looking to
participate in this particular
effort, it's gonna take about at
least a year, and because the
legislative Education Study
Committee has been such a big
partner with Senator Schndo, um,
on this bill. It will be an
ongoing process to notify the
legislative Education Study
Committee that there are at
least 1 or 2, potentially, who
are working to have a um state
travel contacting Act, uh.
Uh, negotiation process. So at
that point, the number of
students who will be
participating in this program as
public schools will then be
reported to the SCG. So there
wouldn't be a net effect of loss
for, for the current SCG
process. If anything, it will be
uh an incorporation of uh say 30
students, 40 students into the
next physical year. Um.
And then if, but with that being
said, I think there uh Mr. Sendo
online as well if you have any
responses um with the capital
outlay process, we also defer to
you.
I just, I just wanted to talk
about one thing cause I've
chaired LESC for the past 2
years, we haven't seen the bill.
ESC this bill in its current
form, but I think maybe there's
some sort of misunderstanding
that it was legislative council
service because I heard the
testimony of attorneys.
And I think that was through
legislative council service that
worked, is that right? Senator
Shinto, so that's, that's one
thing I just wanted to, to talk
about, yeah, it was the listed
council, uh, service attorney
that were drafting this bill and
doing the research on what is
best.
Suited for this.
Great. No, I just want to
straighten that out as far as
legislative council service
distinct from legislative
education,
um, I think we had lost your
brother online.
Let me see if I can really
promote him.
Oh yeah,
yeah.
How nice. All right. uh,
Mr. Sendo, you're back with us.
just got lumped in, so.
Oh, thank you, Chairman. Um,
just to address the SED
question, I think, um, Senator
Mimi Stewart, when we presented
this bill in 2023 summed it up
best when they discussed the
fiscal impact, saying majority
of native students attend public
or charter schools. So the
impact would be minimal because
The money would follow the
student, and much like you've
created school choice through um
charter schools. This would be
another choice as a school
option. And so the money would
follow the student and so the
impact would be minimal, um, to
the SCG formula because majority
of the students, native students
already served through the
public school and charter school
systems, um, with a small number
attending the BIE schools. Um,
so I think that's important to
note as well, um.
And in terms of the SCG fund or
the capital outlay process. I
mean,
These schools and the students
attending these schools are in
New Mexico citizens, so any
opportunity that's available to
any other citizen or community
or organization throughout the
state eligible for capital
outlay funding is a process that
we can then participate in. So I
don't think that being a compact
school that should exclude um
any citizen of New Mexico
organization or entity from
participating in capitality
process because that is a a
right afforded to every citizen
within the state of New.
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you for that and, and, you
know, I'm gonna say something
that's gonna
The potential of this.
I
Kind of like vouchers.
And the fact that we talked
about vouchers and we've talked
about private schools.
So I, you know, when we talk
about the unintended consequence
of this.
And the, the drive, I do believe
very much in school choice, but
when we're talking about money's
falling kids.
This is the first step in that
process, so I, I think that we
You know, it's kind of one of
those, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Shino.
Um
About the the the interim
process of what do these
compacts look like? What, what
are these compacts? What do
they?
What do they need to include?
What should they exclude? What
part should be?
Kind of the oversight of PED
because I think we got some
issues regarding
was contained in the compacts.
The funding for it because we
have like pay back to right that
how is that going to flow
through the oversight is there
gonna be, is the district still
gonna have the oversight of this
funds.
For these funds gonna flow
directly to PED because it's
almost like creating a second
school system.
We have the public schools and
we have the ending compact
schools.
And I think that those are
You know, the, the, the
You know, I'm torn to be a to be
a 100% honest.
Because I think that in, in, in
I like
Like I said, I've liked a lot of
what this bill does cause I do
believe in retaining culture and
language.
But I think the unintended
consequence of it.
Is that we sit out there and all
of a sudden they say we're gonna
be looking at vouchers in
private schools.
I, I think that's, it kind of
may open up the
Arguing for
Now is that something that our
goals are the folks on the carry
the letter that I do, that's
something they would like to do.
That's why I, I, I just want to
just, I've got to say it
publicly.
Because I think that this
Through this very good, well
intended process.
May open up
Some of those issues that we're
gonna have to come back and deal
with. So, Mr. Chairman, I'll
give my time.
Uh, represent Robot.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator, and thank you
chair for being here and
everyone.
Excuse me, I am.
I need to speak from a point of
um
Lived experiences and um
Knowledge that comes from being
um in my
Indigeneity, being an indigenous
uh woman.
Um, being tribal.
And from all those worlds,
that's very important for me to
to ground that.
And to start from that premise
and from that recognition.
Because when you see me, Mr.
Chair, and when you hear me,
you're hearing exactly why we
need to have
Um
Pay attention to what is being
told to us in reference to this
bill.
Am I one thing the senator for
bringing this forward. It takes
um
It takes a lot of courage.
A lot of courage to um be in
this position that we are today.
The second thing, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, I want to say is
Um, and it needs to be grounded.
And
be centered, and that is that we
must start from the premise of
recognizing and accepting
sovereignty.
And what that means.
To me, um, madam chair,
sovereignty.
has always meant the right to
self-determine.
The right um to own.
What is ours, and what is ours
is our language.
Our culture
Our, uh, education, our
economies.
in our destinies.
I always in this committee and
always in other committees, um,
established that Madam Chair is
the grounding.
For our discussion.
Because if we need to understand
that very, very, very important.
Because that's the foundational
premise by which we come
forward.
Um, with this.
SB 13th.
I also want to begin um by
Looking at the FIR H4.
towards the bottom.
Madam Chair
Where it says, um,
A 2021 LFC evaluation on
implementation of the Indian
Education Act.
Native American students
continued to perform well below
peers.
On state and national measures
of achievement.
Despite the availability of
nearly 147 million in state and
federal funds at public schools
and institutions of higher
education.
For purposes aligned to the Act.
We have an Indian education Act.
In place.
It continues by saying that the
report noted that a history.
Of understanding created
difficulties with funding
utilization challenges with
local collaboration and a lack
of specific targeted outcomes
have resulted in a system.
That has not served Native
American students in a
comprehensive and coordinated
manner.
This
Section of the FIR.
is really important.
also
Legitimize.
Why this bill is so very
important.
Madam Charon, yes.
Um, we not only have to take
bold approaches.
I don't even think this is a
bold approach. This is a
necessary approach.
From my uh perspective.
Um
It, it, it's necessary for all
the reasons that have been
outlined, not just in the FIR
and the different analyses, but
just historically.
It's necessary, and that goes
back to um the meaning of
sovereignty, and the fact that
we do have um government to
government relationship.
that exists currently.
Between the state and and our
New Mexico tribes Pueblos and
nations.
That's another foundational
point.
Here in this discussion.
We already have.
A government to government
relationship.
And that is because we are
sovereign nations.
Within the state.
And within the United States of
America.
Being sovereign nations, we
don't come to ask permission in
my view.
Madam Chair, and um,
And sent it and others. We're
not asking permission.
We're presenting, and I, and I
say we, and I hope you don't
mind senator.
Um
That I'm including myself.
In this discussion.
And then in this um bill.
Because, um,
It goes back to
What I said, this is a necessary
decision that we have to make.
And it's a difficult one because
anytime we talk about
Sovereignty and the rights to
self-determine.
Um, it's been one that has been
a difficult discussion
throughout the generations and
histories of our peoples, so I'm
gonna ask a couple of questions,
um, senator.
Help clarify.
Uh, and I think Charon addressed
um
One of the questions that
represent the Baca.
referred to in the film.
And it is on page 5 of the bill.
Uh, section B, beginning with
line 6.
A state tribal education compact
is exempt from all state
statutes and rules.
Applic applicable to school
districts, state charters,
schools and, and it goes on.
And I think an important point,
uh, and the question is, again,
Is this written in this manner.
Because we're coming from the
foundational premise that we are
sovereign nations.
And because of our government to
government relationships that we
have.
That's the question.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and a representative uh
Caballero before I move on to
that question, I just want to,
uh, address, uh, representative
uh Baca's question, you know,
whether, you know, this is a
voucher system, a state tribal
compact is not a voucher system
or privatization, and I think it
speaks to what
Representativecala compact in
offers a new framework for
intergovernmental.
Uh, collaboration between
sovereign governments and the
state. This is very important.
And if you, uh,
You know, our constitution,
Article 12, Section 3 of the New
Mexico Constitution instructs
that funds appropriately levied
or collected for additional
purposes may not be used for the
support of any sectarian
denomination or private school,
college or university.
So when PED currently
distributes funds, you know, and
this was opinion of, of the, uh,
attorney General, I think of all
theorney generals and going back
to, I think uh the original
opinion was, uh, uh, Attorney
General Udall.
Uh, when the issue came up about
supporting tribal colleges, PEDs
distribution of funds to tribal
and BIE schools.
would not violate this provision
because such schools are not
considered sectarian
denominational private schools,
rather they are operated by
government entities.
And so that, you know, it's a
current opinion but, you know,
Attorney General Rose Torres. So
we're not, so these are not, you
know, it's not gonna open the
door, and I think that's most
fear because these are really,
uh between sovereigns.
And the question of uh your
question representative.
The exemption regarding
curriculum assessment
evaluation, I think from our
perspective, at least for Hamus
is that
When we're teaching our
Our kindergartners through 6th
grade.
In our native language.
We're exempting them from
PEDs curriculum because
You know,
If I was in 3rd grade and I got
tested in English, and all I do
was how to speak Amos, I
probably would fail.
And I probably won't be
successful for the rest of my
life. So that, that piece is
really to exempt.
You know, and this is where I
think the University of Hawaii.
It's very important because they
already have a program.
to teach, you know, us in how to
develop an evaluation based on
our own language.
In technical assistance centers
that are being developed, the
university in New Mexico.
Hopefully we can develop that so
that the technical assistance
centers are now here in this
state.
to help other tribes that want
to take part in this kind of uh
compact and and so we're
building that capacity and so
forth, so I hope that answer the
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
yes, it does. Thank you,
Senator. That was a, we had a
wonderful visit, um.
At the through, I think we
visited LESC visited uh Humus
and we were able to hear from
the Alaskan counterparts of
At the through, I think we
visited LESC visited uh Humus
and we were able to hear from
the Alaskan counterparts
reference to.
Everything that
relates to why this is
necessary.
Um, so thank you for that, and I
wish that all of us would have,
everyone here would have had
that opportunity because it was
wonderful. So going back to um
some questions, further
questions that I have.
Um, Mr. Chair and thank you for
addressing Senator, the issue of
the vouchers, that was really
part of my discussion as well
because it is not the same at
all.
And I don't want even, I, I
don't want to even use that
language.
Because it
That language tends to
sidetrack, I think, and take us
away from again.
The sovereign government to
government relationship.
And why it is structured in the
manner that it is.
So I wanted to to dispel that
continue to dispel that notion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and and
senator for that. So, under the
Indian education Act, now that
we've established the government
to government relationship.
Does negotiating
This compact.
Between a try and the public
education department meet the
criteria and provision within
the law.
That's my next question.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Caballero, we appreciate your
question of whether
The state tribal Compacting Act
will follow the letter of the
2003 Indian Education Act and
unequivocally yes.
The state has already affirmed
that tribal languages, cultures
and traditions are necessary.
As a part of our fundamental
framework of providing a
sufficient education.
And essentially,
The, so just, just to end at
that point and Mr. Shindo, if
you wanna um uh expand on that
online. I'll just, I'll go ahead
and defer to you.
Oh, thank you, um, Karen, um.
Chair our representative Cabaro,
if you can please repeat the
question. I'm in a rural area, a
tribal rural broadband camp in
um Southern California, so the
connection goes in and out.
Mr. Chair and, and, uh, Mr.
Cheno, yes, so reference to the
Indian Education Act.
I wanted to make sure, uh, or
ask whether the negotiated
compact between a tribe and the
state's public education
department meet the criteria and
provision within the law.
If you wanted to expound on
that.
OK. Um, thank you, uh, Chair
Representative Carero and
members of the committee, um, I
think it's important to
understand, um, as part of the
Indian Education Act, on the
focus on language and
culture-based instruction.
Um, one thing that is important
to note is that um there is
research out there that shows
that a child
That is grounded in their home
language, whatever that language
may be.
Um, is it has the ability to
pick up other languages more
easily.
And I think that's one of the
things that in my years of
education, working with Haymans
through our over 25 years with
our charter schools and our
public schools and the BIE
schools.
What we're recognizing now is
that our kids are no longer
grounded in either Hamus or
English. Thus the struggle
academically.
And so what we're trying to do
is to ground them in our home
language first and transition
them to English after, um,
following a lot of the
international models where in
other countries, um
multilingualism and
multiculturalism is supported
and um
Encouraged uh within the
different school systems, the US
unfortunately has adopted more
of an English only English-based
education system.
And so,
You know, looking at the Indian
Education Act and how it was
brought forth and put
Uh, in place, um, the provisions
that are going to be a part of
the compact and the things that
we want to focus on our research
based, and I think the important
thing to understand is we all
want success for our young
people to be college and career
ready. But how we get there may
be a little different, and I
think that when you're looking
at standardized assessments, you
know, they don't really truly
assess what our students know
and understand. And so I think
that looking at these compacts
and negotiating.
And as a tribe having the
ability to do that, we can
create unique education systems
that will ensure that we are
developing young people that are
be college and career ready, um,
as they leave our high schools
and um that as research shows a
student that's grounded in their
home language and transition to
English later, and we've been
following the Hawaiian and Maori
models in Haus where that formal
English is not introduced until
the 5th grade, and the
transitional years
to academic English are in the
middle school years, 6th, 7th,
and 8th. And so that's what we
are working on developing to
ensure that our kids are
grounded and successfully
transitioned into academic
English because that's what is
going to ensure that they are
successful in moving forward in
whatever career path they may
choose. Also I think those are
really important things that are
research based and the brain
development supports it, you
know, the more languages a
student knows and understands.
The more parts of their brain
are stimulated, uh, and so thus
is the learning. Um, so thank
you again for the opportunity to
be able to respond.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um.
Mr. Sheer in turn. So I then um
I'm gonna go back to um a a few
a comment that was made, uh, I
think it was Mr. Chino.
Um
Mentioning that the the amount
of money that the state uh that
the tribes, nations and pueblos
contribute contribute to the
general fund.
Uh, on an annual basis.
And um
I think
I think that's really important
point.
Uh, when we talk about
Again, um, the government to
government relationship.
Um, but it's also not always
equal, Mr. Chair, and senator,
um.
In in our relationship. We don't
always have an equal
uh position in that government
to government relationship, and
one of the examples of that is
um
In terms of the distribution of
what we make as a contribution
to the state. Does that make
sense? I think I, I hope I'm
making sense on that one. So
we're making an outstanding
contribution on an annual basis,
and that contribution has
continued, Mr. Chair, to
increase ever since the compacts
were first.
Um, gaming compacts were first
initiated, and I forget the year
that they were.
There's been a significant
increase, uh, although there's
been some years due to the
overall economy, Mr. Chair, that
those numbers fluctuated, but to
me it seems as as um very
demeaning and oftentimes, um, a
contradiction for us to be
making these types of
contributions to the state, and
then having to come back, Mister
Chair, and ask for
funding.
Or ask for uh policies that
would align or ask for anything.
Um, as sovereign nations.
So as sovereign nations, we've
taken the responsibility to own
our own economies.
Um, and it's in the same line
that I believe this bill is
coming forward in terms of
owning our own education.
And uh education from the
beginning, meaning that we set
up the um the entire curriculum
that is language and culturally
centered and um and to be the
core. And so, um
I would ask under the Indian
Education Act and under the
government to government
relationship to that we have
does the state of New Mexico
have the fiscal obligation to
provide sufficient funding for a
compact school.
Mr. Char and Senator.
Of course they do.
Does under the Indian Education
Act and under our government to
government relationship. Does
the state of New Mexico have the
fiscal obligation to provide
sufficient funding for a compact
school.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, uh, yes they do.
Thank you.
Um, that's a, an important,
another important point here and
another important premise. Um,
the other thing that was noted,
uh, Mr. Chair and senator and
and uh some of the discussion, I
think the word was that the word
trust was used.
Trust meaning that we not only
have the fiscal obligation.
The uh government to government
obligations, um, the trust in
terms of the Indian trust laws
of the nation obligation.
Uh, but the obligation under the
Indian Education Act of 2003,
And the word trust here means.
Again, going back to recognizing
sovereignty and accepting it.
Accepting it.
Means that we then have to
trust.
That are tribes, nations, and
pueblos will be able to, uh, or
are able to, not will be, but
have been able to um provide the
best.
Sufficient
And successful education for our
children.
And so Mr. Chair and um senator.
01 other question related to the
mechanics of funding for the uh
compact school will
accountability and reporting
requirements be part of uh
funding a compact school.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Caballero, appreciate your
question. Yes, yes, it will be
not only the tribes have to
negotiate with the Mexico Public
Education department on the
compacting of the school, but we
also, I also want to um turn
your attention to
Uh, the negotiation process of
uh of evaluation of a compact
school. So right, we, we just
describescribe for native
students fall in relation to
other students, um, with LLC
analysis of uh of native
students and their reading
proficiency in math and science.
So,
And on a 5-year basis if NMPD
and the tribe um comes to an
agreement on a compact school,
they will be, there will be an
evaluation period by NMPD to
determine whether the compact
shall continue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Charon, for that. Going
back to the Indian Education Act
again, and I keep going back to
it because there's a reason why
we have it.
Um, I understand that it is
supposed to ensure equitable and
culturally relevant learning
environments is that
So, Mister Chair.
And it's
Uh, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Represented Cala, yeah, that's,
that's the.
Pretty much, you know, under the
section A.
As the first two words, ensure
equitable and culturally
relevant learning environments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator is it also supposed to
ensure the maintenance of native
languages.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Senator, is it
supposed to ensure educational
opportunities and development of
culturally relevant
instructional materials.
And, um, Mr. Chair, does the act
call for the study, development
and implementation of
educational systems that
positively affect the
educational success of native
students.
Uh, yes, and I will read section
D, ensure that the Department of
Education.
Partners with tribes to increase
tribal involvement and control
over the schools and the
education of students located
within.
In tribal communities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. So in
In essence, what we're doing
with SB 13 is what exactly
The education at calls for.
Where
And acting something that is
within our sovereign.
to do.
They are
A.
against
The history of assimilation.
has caused
Our tribes.
Harm
In terms of losing language.
Mr. Chairman and close with us.
Because it's very
Very close to my home.
Um, my grandfather, my father.
I don't know how many others.
Uncles.
We're all sent to boarding
schools.
Removed from their lands.
Removed from our from their
families.
Consequently, losing their
identity.
Consequently losing their
language.
Consequently, being ashamed.
To shame.
Or
Being who they were.
They were tribal, they were
native.
They were the first.
Americans.
They were the owners of the
lands, the water, the air.
That was sustenance for their
families.
And the shameful part of all of
this.
Because my father went on to
become a World War 2.
Korean War and Vietnam hero.
Hatred.
But when he entered the World
War.
To.
38
Prior to being
sent to um
to war on the European front.
He had to deny.
That he was
Native American and tribal.
There was no check mark in the
box for him.
So he believed not only growing
up because he lost his language
and culture that
The only choice for him was to
mark the white.
Fuck.
In order to be accepted into the
US Army.
This is a war hero.
The medal of honor hero, um.
Um
Purple's heart twice over and so
many commendations, silver,
bronze.
Uh, metals
Or being a true warrior.
Combat veteran
So I, I say all this because
It's
It's hurtful for me, Mister
Chair.
And Senator to be here.
Appearing before everybody.
In a position of
Subjectivity.
Still
Were subject to these.
Uh, public education, I think
department doesn't have the
capacity to do what we must do.
And thereby, we're taking
ownership because it's our
sovereign right to do so.
I have a final question.
In relationship to what I just
Articulate it, Mr. Chair and
senator, and that is
You know, my tribe is an
example, has been fighting for.
US Federal recognition since
1972 when the petition first was
filed.
Wood and my tribe has received.
Um, many different, this is
contradiction. We're not
recognized.
But yet
We were removed because we were
native in India and sent to
boarding schools and our
language lost our language
contradiction we're going before
to be recognized.
Yes
We were recognized enough to be
sent to boarding schools.
So
We're, we've received, Mr.
Chair, several grants.
to help our tribe.
Gain regain um
Its language, which is Tiwa.
So with this SB 13.
Would we be able to uh be
considered.
As part of
The provisions in SB 13, Mr.
Chair and senator.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Caballero, the
whole, uh, recognition and
termination process of tribe is
a federal.
Function and I know that there's
Other
tribes around the country that
are state recognized but are not
federally recognized.
So, I'm not an expert on federal
recognition, uh, and what all
the steps are.
Go to that, uh, so it's hard for
me, you know, to, because that's
what federal federal process,
not a state prosecutor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. It was raised as a
question by a tribal members
that are listening to the uh to
the zoom right now, and they're
the ones that have been
delivering the um language um.
Education under the various
grants that we've received,
again, another contradiction,
we're able to receive grants to
reinstate our language.
But yeah, we're not federally
recognized. So I point all that
out, Mr. Chair.
Um, because
We cannot sit here as privileged
individuals, because we are a
state representatives and
elected.
Um
And fall into the trap.
Uh, the entrapment of the
discussions concerning uh what
could potentially, potentially,
um, continue to divide us.
Bilingual, multicultural,
education.
Is
An absolute right. It's in the
Constitution of the state of New
Mexico.
And this tribal compact.
SB 13.
Solidifies
Again, are right um to.
Um, our sovereign
self-determination. So with
that, um, Mr. Chair and senator,
I thank you in all for um
For doing the necessary.
Thing that we need to do, which
is
what you're doing. Thank you.
Gonzalez
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator. Um.
Thank you expert. um.
For one, I, I just want to make
11 1st statement and then I'll
continue my questioning is just
that I think anyone can negate
the heart of this bill. I will
always work and make decisions,
um, working in the best interest
of our multicultural Mexican
students. Um, I think everyone
on this committee is, is
committed to that and I
appreciate your quote. I'm
grounded in language and
cultures. I think that's so
powerful as to what the intent
of this is is doing. Um, I do
have some questions, some
technical questions, um, based
upon what maybe.
is not in the bill, um, the
first thing I want to maybe
address is um ancillary
services, if you're talking
about possibly creating a new
school district and maybe some
of this will be done in rules
and promulgation, but, um, even
now, some of our charter
schools, um, don't have access
to things like buses and IEP
supports and, and things of that
nature, um, even right now, HB
63 that is in transit right now
looks to just now provide some
of those supports to our charter
schools. That's something that
was not mentioned.
in the bill, you maybe add some,
maybe thoughts as to what that
plan is going forward, um, for
this compact.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair,
I'll have, uh, Mr. Sendo who's
on.
Hopefully still on answer that
because I know that with the
charter schools, they've been a
lot of cooperation with the
local school district and
providing services that the
charters may not. So he'll
probably be best to answer that
question.
Oh, thank you, Senator Chair
Representative members of the
committee, um.
As the laws are currently
written, the local education
agency school district is
responsible for providing the
answering services for students
that are identified, um,
For receiving um special needs
or services, um, but there are
also for tribes, other entities
such as uh NAPA and Pebble
parent resources, um, and other,
um, community-based tribal
consortium organizations that
are able to step in and provide
the supports in case the
district is not able to, but
ultimately, um, the districts
are responsible, uh, within
which um they tried to reside
for the answering services for
our students from Head Start on
up.
And these would probably be part
of the negotiation process and
the compacting process to be um
more clearly defined.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for that. Um,
I work a lot with rural schools.
Representative from, uh,
Chairman Romero and uh
Representative Gonzalez,
appreciate the question. I also
want to expand upon uh what Mr.
Shenel provided and uh incillary
services provided by the other
entities and also um share that
in an education fund, you all
are um considering increase um
appropriations for the education
fund. So as tribes are now um
under the state tribal Compact
Act would be considered as the
authorizers of the schools, but
you all have already been doing
over the
Pat, uh, since 2 2018 is
increasing the the Education Act
fund. So the tribes now will be
able to develop the capacity to
be able to respond to some of
these ancillary services
providing disabled uh support
or, um, the, the, the, I say the
vassar array of um needs that
our students um receive and
because tribes will be eligible
for the state equation
guarantee, and you all are um
working on increasing the at
risk factor for English language
learners, tribes will be.
able to receive, um, and, and
state tribal education compact
schools will be able to receive
the additional resources to
ensure and affirm that our
disabled students are not
neglected in this entire
process.
Thank
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
and thank you for those answers.
Um, again, working in this rural
communities, um, and that.
I think that even limits the
availability for things such as
charter schools or, or, you
know, other alternative types of
schooling just because of
transportation constraints or
just because of support
services. Um, so right now,
again, just making a note that
right now, we are just now
evaluating that change in a bill
that is in transit right now for
our charter schools that have
been in existence, so we're just
now getting to that point, so
just making that a point of
consideration. Um, the second
thing I want to address is that
um some of the different
analysis was a mention about
capital outlay, um, in
particular.
was not mentioned again in this
bill. Maybe these are just some
things that will be worked on
rules, but it does not establish
guidelines for that local share
for that match, maybe how that
will look with the school
district, um, right now, um,
addressing the potential of
possibly a 0% local share, um,
for schools um that are on
tribal land. So maybe what are
some thoughts regarding again
just cause it was not mentioned
here in this bill. Maybe what
are some thoughts for inclusion
of that, or is that gonna be
worked out when you're talking
about the rules and the
promulgation of the compact.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative Gonzalez, you
know, these schools will be part
of the public uh school
framework, and I've served as a
an impact district, you know, on
that public school capital LA
task force, uh, up until I got
put on LSC or Senate Finance and
so forth. So that process will
stay. I know there's a uh
provision about maths, but most
of these schools are on tribal
lands and they're not taxable,
so most of that probably be be
waived just like we do with
other schools that don't have
the capacity, particularly those
Schools that have, you know,
large federal lands or or for
service or BLM.
And so, so those will be taken
care of, I'm sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Senator for that, you know,
just like again wanting to bring
that in as a point of
consideration as it was not not
matched, that is again a sizable
consideration when you're
talking about promulgation of
this compact, um, and lastly,
um,
Excuse me, just maybe some
thoughts.
You're talking about SCG, you
know, there's a pot of dollars
that go out to all of our public
schools. If you're talking about
putting in schools and school
districts that are already have
low enrollment numbers uh in
areas, you know, that are
already um in the bill that was
mentioned, um, admittance to
possibly these schools would be
dependent upon capacity and, you
know, giving relations to
siblings, um, say if you're in
an area and you're pulling
students away maybe from some of
the other schools that those
numbers are they're gonna drop.
Um, maybe what are some thoughts
about the impact to area schools
that will see us likely
may be possibly a significant
drop in their overall SCG to be
able to continue um multiple
schools in the in the community
that has a very small
population. Um thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, uh, I will go ahead and have
a, uh Mr. Chando.
Respond to that question.
Uh, thank you, uh, Chair
Representative Senator, in terms
of um serving student needs, uh,
I think at the moment coming
from forhaus, for example, I'll
share with you that we're very
rich in school choice and um but
in terms of having the students
in the schools be able to
Um
Continue to provide services,
um,
It it's a reality even without
this that we're facing now, you
know, many of our students are
very mobile, uh, for Hamas we
have about 125 in the
Albuquerque public school
system, um, close to 75 in Rio
Rancho Public schools, 35 in
Berna Leo, um, and then the
Santa Indian school is about 70
students, 7, 12.
And so, um,
You know, the reality is, is the
kids and the parents, they're
gonna choose where they want to
go and um as schools and as
districts, uh, we have to work
to make the accommodations and
the supports to be able to
continue to provide the viable
education. So, um,
collaboratively working
together, um, as local entities
with the LEA's tribes, and other
support organizations, um, we're
able to
Um, diversify funding streams to
be able to provide quality
education opportunities for our
young people, regardless of the
challenges that we may face with
our students becoming more
mobile these days than it was in
the past.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you expert. Maybe just as a
follow-up question to that, um,
so say a student may not live in
the immediate vicinity, um, do
you possibly foresee this as
being something a student may be
able to travel to, you know, to
take advantage of this rich
cultural opportunity, um, like
right now, say with Navajo Prep
or Sanan school, um, I mean,
those are more boarding school
scenarios, but is this something
that, um, you know, to be able
to take advantage of of a rich
school, would this be something
that would be open again, it
mentioned a little bit about
enrollment and due to capacity.
But is this something that you
would foresee that mobility that
you mentioned for students,
possibly leaving certain areas
to attend.
These these new, these new form
formed schools. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
A chair representative, uh,
members of the committee, um.
Again, I mean, as these schools
are developed by communities and
compacted, I think those are
decisions that can be made at
the local level, and how they
want to accommodate their um
students and their families, uh,
to be able to take a part of
their rich culture. I know one
of the things for Hamas that
we've done with our Head Start
program is we've extended our
service area into Rio Rancho,
uh, in the Bernao area for our
Head Start immersion program
because of the housing shortage
in Hamas. So,
Well, that's a consideration
that has been approved by the
Office of Head Start for us to
serve families living off the
reservation. Hamus families that
may choose to bring their kids
into our Head Start program and
so there's um
Examples that exist that can
make all these educational
options viable for our young
people and their families.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you for that. No, um.
You know, again, again no one
can negate the value in this. I
think, you know, again,
providing this opportunity is
something we should strive to,
um.
I think that, you know, just my
questions were just an alignment
with, um, you know, the actual
putting this into action and
what that looks like and, and
maybe, you know, what, what are
some of the specifics, but um
with that, Mr. Chair.
For in blood
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. It's good to see
you. Um, I wanna preface this.
By saying that I'm not opposed.
to what the idea is.
I'm not opposed to what you're
trying to accomplish, but I do
have a lot of questions.
Yeah, and one of the first
question that I would like to
ask you, Senator and Mr. Charis,
why didn't this go through the
interim process.
You know, we, we submitted, we
introduced this bill.
And uh the last 60 day session,
um, I went through the Senate,
uh, unopposed.
Or maybe one day get a vote and
it stalled in Senate.
In this committee.
Uh, wasn't what you know towards
the end of the session. I think
we had like 2 more weeks to go
and I think the chair had some
issues with it, and there was
some confusion around.
Tribes, you know, not
understanding what was going on
and we just ran out of time so
it never was brought up to this
committee as far as I remember,
Mr. Chairman, as I recall we
kind of, it was like the last
week it was, it was the last
week, the middle similar to a
Wednesday. So we had about a day
and a half, 2 days when we had
after we had adjourned committee
and we said that we had
finished, it came back, got read
out that afternoon. So that,
that said, it wasn't 2 weeks
left.
It was like a day and a half, 2
days and and so I, I guess, uh,
the reason why I don't
There was never
The issues that are coming up
here, in this bill went to
Senate Education. It was the
Senate Judiciary looked at it
and it was the Senate Judiciary
substitute that, that we have
today. So,
Not hearing, not having a
hearing here. I didn't have all
these issues, so
For me, I didn't know, you know.
What the real issues would be,
and there was no need for me to
go to the legisl study because
the encourage us to do so.
Because we don't, we didn't know
all these issues that this
committee would have because
In Senate, it passed, even, even
uh 3 weeks ago.
This past, you know, unanimously
in the Senate.
Uh floor
So
I mean, I guess we didn't really
need a seat to go to this. Let's
study to me during the interview
because.
There was no issue, at least
from one chamber.
Now we're hearing and so forth,
so Mr. Chairman, uh.
Representative I answer that
question, uh, because usually
when there's controversy over
certain things.
We study them, not knowing what
the controversies or the
question is gonna be, I didn't
think there was a need.
Thank you for that, Senator, and
yes, you have something that.
Mr. Mr. Chairman and
Representative A lotta, um, just
want to circle back to what Mr.
Shenvi provided in his testimon
earlier that the legislative
Education Study Committee is the
uh uh and and the
recommendations hearing about
the public of Haus' work over,
over 3 decades now made the
recommendation of this state
tribal Compacting Act. And while
it wasn't the LESC who drafted
this specifically because it was
the legislative council services
as attorneys who drafted it, it
went through that process, um,
built on the government.
government framework built on
the reality that uh Yasi
Martinez um has affirmed that
native students have been failed
to sufficient education that the
Indian Education Act and
specifically Part B as
described, and astested by
Representative Caballero has a
firmed that the NMPB should work
to establish systems and work
with tribes to establish their
own systems of education that we
are here today as Senator Schnel
just provided that it's
unanimously passed out of the
Senate twice now, and it's
before.
the health education. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, so,
This language, this language and
the instead of Bill 13.
Was presented to Eliasson in
2023.
Mr. Chair and Senator
Sorry, Mr. Chair, uh
Representative Law.
So that study committee spent
the entire day in Hamas.
To understand what this is
about.
So
After that meeting,
This was drafted.
To capture the essence of what
this compact or what this should
be going forward. So it wasn't
brought back, there was no
Decision by the aesthetics me
said, well, draft this thing and
bring it back for our
evaluation.
Nothing like that was required.
So what was captured during that
time was what was the need,
what, what, what was, what
should be contained and then it
was the attorneys of
both to draft this letter, so
yeah.
And, and I wanna thank you for
that, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
because I think it was 23 that I
didn't participate in LESC. So
I'm trying to catch up here and,
and see what I'm trying to
understand what the process is.
Um
So that, that said, Mr. Chair
and Senator, so I, I
I was approached
About a year ago.
So the my, my legislative
district, uh, there's a lot of,
um Taiwanese investment.
There's Taiwanese companies
coming in and then they're
hiring people and they're
bringing their families and
their executives over to the
United States.
And I was approached
About the idea.
Mr. Chairman, about
Creating a school.
For the children.
Of these Taiwanese employees,
the Taiwanese executives that
would have been an exclusive
Taiwanese school.
With Taiwanese language
teachers.
And it was going to be a public
school.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator, I
said we can't do that. I can't
create a segregated school with
with state money.
With this example that I'm
giving you, Senator and
Chairman, being similar to what
we're trying to accomplish now.
Mr. Chairman, uh Laura, you
know, uh, I went to law school
for a year
I'm not an attorney.
But I think a lot of this.
Uh
Why this is kind of unique.
I
Goes back all the way to the
founding of this country.
In the United States.
tribes being recognized as
sovereigns from the outset were
the only.
group of people
You look at the United States
Constitution, I believe it's
Section 8, whatever, Article 2.
The United States
I believe it's in a commerce
clause.
That
Says that
The federal government or
Congress.
So, um,
Overseeing commerce among the
several states and the tribes.
So it's that recognition of
sovereignty.
And the United States taking on
the responsibility as part of
these treaty obligations.
For education of people and then
subsequently the states coming
into being and also having that
same power.
So
Then
dealing with another
international that's coming to
the United States, probably puts
you in a very different
framework, so I don't, I, I'm
not an attorney, uh, but it's
just I think this goes back to
the United States.
And its recognition of tribes.
And then of course, subsequently
the state of New Mexico and so
forth, so, but maybe there's a,
there's a gentleman from the
attorney general's office.
Go ahead. I don't know sit up
here.
Introduce yourself to the public
knows who you are.
Thank you and thank you, um,
share my my assistant attorney
general's office in the Indian
Affairs Bureau. I think this uh
question.
We're able to distinguish
between Taiwanese employees and
in the state, the fact that
there is between the two and as
representative Caballero
mentioned, there's been a long
history of uh sovereignty and or
the sovereignty of the nation's
tribes and pueblos, and that it
is, it's, it's.
It's um it's nice that you were
contacted by the Taiwanese uh
residence in your, in your
district, however, it is
distinct in that.
I, I appreciate that
explanation, you know, I, I kind
of figured that there would, Mr.
Chairman, there was differences
in there.
But there's also a lot of
similarities as well.
And, and so, you know, the,
these uh the these Taiwanese
families want to preserve their
culture. They want to preserve
their heritage. They want a
school where the Mandarin
language is the primary source
of instruction. And so naturally
that then that equates to
instructural materials that it
creates equates to many other
things.
So, you know, they, they, uh, so
the idea, yeah, I.
Personally didn't think it was a
good idea because, because of
the fact that it was public
money that was being used, but I
just wanted to see if there was
any, I saw some similarities.
But then you also know that
there was differences and I just
wanted to uh to ask that
question and make that point.
Um, so I appreciate the answer.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair, I,
there is a section uh in the
bill, Senator 7.
Uh, section 7.
Yes, Section 7 on page 8.
For it indicates.
That
Letter A implementing a policy
of preference to tribal members
and employment.
I wanna ask you about that.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator,
So if another person
wanted to apply that wasn't a
tribal member.
Of any tribe
But wanted to apply for that
position.
What, what, what are their
chances of getting, of getting
that job and where I'm going
with this, Mr. Chair and
Senator, is I would hate to
violate any employment laws.
either state or federal
regarding the exclusive
exclusivity of, of, of, of, of
the request for uh or maybe
perhaps limiting other people
from wanting to be part of this,
uh, actually be hired by, by, by
these complex.
Thank, thank you, uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative Laro
for that question, and it go,
and it speaks back to the
tribes.
The in the Indian Health
Service, the BIA have always
had.
Indian preferences and hiring.
It doesn't violate federal law.
Because the federal government
has an interest.
We have to understand that
tribes are not a racial group,
unlike any other.
race
So, so when you look at from
that perspective.
It's been long held and held by
Supreme Court that Indian
preference will prevail,
particularly within the health
service because of the lack of,
you know, help providers in the
country or teachers and all of
that. So
So this will, that will extend
to here, but
Not having uh lack of teachers
and all of that, you know, we
have many, I've been a tribal
administrator for our tribe for
6 years. We hired many
non-native.
Folks or other people from other
tribes who fill in those roles
because we just don't have the
capacity, but preference is
given.
to tribal members or maybe uh
other tribes for employment.
In many tribal communities, but
end up working but it does not
violate because of.
Of, of where, where, where
tribes stand is not as a
political entity, not as a
racial group.
Thank, thank you for that. Thank
you for the clarification. So
then, Mr. Chair and Senator,
this would also apply a similar
lines with the students.
So we have a a young person.
who is not a member of the
tribe.
wants to participate in this
process since you are receiving
public funding.
Then it is open to other, other
students around the state, with
those students be admitted into
these programs, Mr. Chair.
We, we've had students of other
tribes go to our Head Start.
These are public entities.
And so if a family, for example,
a person that worked in our
community, she's from Oklahoma
Choctaw, the daughter went to a
head start and and ended up
learning to speak A
and so we don't.
You know, uh, it, it's a parent
choice and so if they wanted to
and so forth, but I think the
hiring preferences is different,
but we have many non-native
students that attend, you know,
BIE schools or others because
You know we're discriminate and
who comes in because these are
public schools and public money.
Thank you for that and uh I'm
channeling sometimes I channel
uh former representative you
own, and she would say, don't
ask questions that you don't
know answers to.
So, uh, so along those lines,
another thing that came up, you
know, and, and, you know, since,
since I had seen this before,
you know, I, I don't, recently
that I came over, I, I, I didn't
know that I was in my universe,
so I still, I have a lot of
questions. Another question that
I have, Senator and, and Mr.
Chairman is
As we know, transportation is a
big issue in the state.
Especially for those of us in
the rural areas.
So have
Has any discussion or has any
consideration been taken into
the transportation situation
regarding the bussing of the
schoolchildren to and from their
homes.
Especially in the more rural
areas.
Where I, I don't know if I may
be wrong. Please correct me if
I'm wrong, Mr. Chairman and
Senator. They that that access
may not be there.
So has, has that been taken into
consideration into this bill.
Uh, I'm, I'm gonna say a few
words, to respond to that, and
I'll turn over to Terence, uh,
Senator, I mean, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, and Representative
Laura,
uh, I think, you know.
That that's certainly the issue,
you know, I represent, you know,
Senate district and so on by
students from Torreonublo
Pintado or some of those schools
are traveling probably are have
for almost 2 hours one way to go
to school and bus or those that
are in Cuba and so forth, but
for the schools that are
That are ready, you know, many
of you been to Pueblos, you
know, Pueblo of payments, even
though there's 2400 of us that
live in that area, all within
the probably 2 miles, 22 square
miles and so forth, so it's not
uncommon for many of the
students to walk to school. Uh,
and so forth, so I think for the
initial, depending on what
schools are able to take
advantage of it, you know, the
pueblos are named Pueblo because
they were already in the tact
community, um.
Spanish term for a community or
village, and so forth. So, so
the pueblos I can see, probably
not that much of an issue with
transporting kids because
they're pretty compact, but as
we go out to the larger uh
Navajo Nation or Hickory or
Muscular Apache, that might be
an issue, but that's something I
think could be negotiated as
part of the uh where the school,
you know, it's conceivable that
maybe they might be sharing just
like our charter school.
Our language emerging school is
sharing facilities with our
charter school.
So
would not be uncommon for the
school bus to pick all the kids
and then when they get to the
school, they just go to.
of parts of campus, so.
Thank you for that, Senator. I
appreciate that answer, and
that's said, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, you know, we're talking
about funding and we're talking
about transportation and other
logistical type things. So I, I,
I didn't see it in the bill and,
and I, I don't know if I saw it
in the analysis, but I wanted to
ask you, Senator and Mr. Chair.
Uh, the SCG funding.
So our school districts and our
charter schools.
Or are received this funding on
a reimbursement basis.
With the supply to the compact
schools.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lara, we appreciate the question
and we want to say yes.
And that's so so we have
provided information over the
course of this hearing.
The state tribal Compacting A
schools are going to be public
schools. So they'll, so senator
uh Shendo, and I think members
of the legislative Education
Study Committee were very
cognizant in the development of
this bill to address the
transportation challenges
funding adequate funding
resource challenges and really
what is um
Uh, going to continue to ensure
that these schools have
resources on a long term basis
for, for continuity. So
The, the reality here is the
state tribal education compact
schools are eligible for SED
funds as the, the bill, um, the
lineates, and as I've conveyed
earlier, the state tribal
Compacting Act would actually
not be um put into an effect,
although the law goes into
effect until after NMPD
negotiates with the tribe that
is looking to participate. So
the SCG funds are taken um how
SCD is really developed this,
each school district throughout
the state and
Mexico and there's and is
required at it on a yearly basis
or various points in the year to
take account of their numbers.
So that prior your number is
developed into the next year
school budget.
So
I think for the first year there
may
And there's just not reality
that the, the state tribal
Compacting Act if it becomes, if
it becomes law, um, would have
any impact on the on the next
year, this upcoming year school
budget because it would take
over a year for negotiation to
occur in the first place,
allowing for the development of
um in the in the negotiation
process for numbers of actual
students who will participate to
be submitted to NMPD and vis a
vis the state legislature to
ensure that adequate facilities,
adequate transportation
services, adequate, uh.
just a number of students to be
um shared to the uh state
legislature so that when House
Bill 2 is being developed, um,
There's an adequate number of,
of funding to be appropriated
for these schools and I won't
interject their representative,
um.
Director Senna, can you come up
here, please? Because it was
said that LESC was a part of
developing this bill director
said, could you speak to that?
Sure. Uh, good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, just wanted to clarify, so,
um, as, as Senator Schendo and
in turn have mentioned the the
committee and this was before I
was working for you, uh, this
time, um, did visit Hamas, um,
and I believe it was May of
2022. And um so there was a
discussion about the program,
what like what came out of that
was a, was a conversation about
whether or not tribes could
essentially operate their own
charter school.
And so
later that summer and I want to
say August or September of 2022,
um, you all had a joint meeting
with the Indian Affairs
Committee in uh Kirtland, and at
that time there was a a brief
presented to you all from
legislative council Service.
So that was not LESC staff for
an LESC brief that was a legal
analysis and a presentation from
Legislative council Service
Lanea actually presented that to
you all in um in uh Kirtland,
and so I'm trying to, I was just
checking with staff and I can
double check, but in the
development of the first bill,
there may have been some
technical assistance that we
provided, but this was not an
LESD developed to build or or
and and the committee has not
endorsed this.
In any, in any time prior to
today, just to clarify, right?
Thank you for the clarification,
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh.
and uh I appreciate the
explanation about, you know, I
know about the.
The
The accounts that that the
school districts turn into the
states, you know, that's why,
that's why there's a lot of
incentives for the kids to ride
the bus that day and things like
that, but at the same time, Mr.
Chairman has said, and Senator,
the school districts and the
charter schools are are required
to have a reserve.
In order for them to
Function and do their
operations.
And then, and, and that reserve
is used.
As the upfront cost.
And then they get reimbursed by
PED.
So if these
will compact schools.
Or to if this bill were to pass
and the schools were to get
approved and signed into law,
and they would be allowed to
negotiate with PED.
To the schools, you know, where,
where's this reserve gonna come
from, where they can fund
operations before they get
reimbursed from, from, from the
PD, Mr. Chair.
I have a
Mr. Schindo, I hope he's still
on and listening to respond to
that. OK,
yes, uh, chair representative
members of the committee, um.
In terms of determining a
reserve, I mean, I think that
would be something that can be
negotiated with the tribe to
determine how they can support
um the startup of these compact
schools if there's an avenue
that they wish to pursue, um.
I know that a lot of our state
Allocations on some of our
federal funds and grants and
awards that we get at the tribal
level are reimbursement basis.
Unfortunately, um, so it's not
something that's unusual for the
tribes to deal with and work
through. Um, so I think that
that um would be an individual
decision with each of the tribes
and supporting a compact
agreement with the state and the
startup of the schools um to
ensure that the reserve funds
are there.
Uh, to be able to help support
the school. And I'm chairing
representatives and members of
the committee, I, I just wanted
to share one other, um, I guess
frustration, um, in the work
that we're doing with in our
tribal communities and the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit. And I think
it's important to note that a
lot of
What has been proposed as
recommendations and solutions to
support tribes in the education
of their children has come from
the communities. So we've taken
up the responsibility of the
state to try and meet the Yasi
Martinez lawsuit, and it becomes
frustrating when we're creating
these avenues for the state to
be able to invest and show that
they are meeting the needs of
native communities and native
students, and yet then we're
questioned.
And when we're actually doing
the work and the groundwork
laying the foundation.
To fulfill, to help the state
fulfill the Yazi Martinez
lawsuit, and that becomes the
frustrating on our end, you
know, in Hama,
we took the initiation
initiative to establish a
relationship with UH Helo
because the licensure program
for immersion teachers did not
exist. PED was able to support
that step in ECECD to show that
this is what we're doing to
support.
Triballicensure of their
teachers and piloting this
program.
We looked at the compact schools
model. You know, this is an
opportunity for the state to
support tribes in our own
priorities and the vision.
As a result of the Yazi
Martinez.
You know, this is another avenue
for the state to benefit from
the work and the groundwork that
we've done to give you an avenue
to support this, and I think
that's for me, working in
education for the last 25 years
is a frustration.
is that it took a lawsuit to
bring attention to this, but yet
we as communities are doing the
groundwork to enable the state
to provide them an opportunity
to invest in our communities.
Um, and I just had to share that
because it's just been on my
mind and it's just being
frustrated, so thank you.
Thank you for that. It's, it's
greatly appreciated. um.
Um,
trusted by my constituents.
to represent them in the
legislature.
And I need to be as thorough as
I can.
Uh, and as fair as I can.
And, and the questions that I'm
asking.
Mr. Chair and Senator are
questions that I have because
this is the first time I've seen
this bill, and I'm really trying
to get into the weed to figure
out what's going on.
Um, you know, I, I
I, I, I, I don't want, I don't
want to go there, but you know,
my community struggle as well.
We have poverty.
Our kids aren't being educated.
Uh, we have low wage jobs.
Uh, we are environmental
pollution.
So we also have our issues, but
that's not, that I, I, I don't
want to, Mr. Cherry, that's,
that's not what I'm trying to.
to do here, what I'm trying to
do here is just understand and
learn what the process is and
what the thinking is, so I can
better get a grasp of what
you're trying to accomplish.
That said, and I think it was
mentioned in, in the possibly in
the FIR, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, so
With, with these schools have
the ability to, to do any
bonding.
For projects for capital outlay
projects or or anything of that
sort, Mr. Chair and Senator.
Uh
Well sure and uh
Representative Long, uh, that's,
that's a good question, I think,
you know, um.
Uh
As I said earlier, most of these
schools, if they're on tribal
land or on federal land, so they
will not have the capacity.
Uh, like other school districts
do with their meal levies and
things like that, so.
But oh yes, thank, thank you for
that and I, and I do want to
make that point that there's
gonna be that these schools are
going to need that additional
support.
Um, and I think, uh, that's, I,
I, I'm sure, I'm assuming that,
that that's what's gonna be
discussed during the
negotiations. I'm sure that's
gonna happen. And, and, and I
appreciate that. And one of the
other things that I would like
to ask, Madam Chair and Senator,
so let's talk about teachers
and, and uh our our our
teachers. Let's talk about our
teachers.
as, as we know, we have a
shortage of teachers in in the
state and, and I'm sure.
teachers with specialties in the
languages that you want to
preserve.
Uh, are in very short supply.
So has there been any
collaboration or work with
higher institutions to get these
teachers trained and certified
to to teach these uh to teach
these languages at the schools
manager,
uh, Madam Madam Chair and, uh,
Representative Laura, yeah, yes,
there's a lot of work that's
going on right now. I think a
lot of investment going on, uh,
the individual that testified
early on Christian scenes from
Akimo Pueblo. She's part of the
team along with the uh folks at
the University of New Mexico,
they're really working hard, uh.
Around this whole uh area of
language, uh, retention
revitalization, but also bring
it in uh a students, um.
That are pursuing teaching and
so forth and.
Thank you for that, Senator and
Madam Cur, uh, and so another
question is, you know, we, we
have the tears for our teachers,
and we're increasing those tiers
for our teachers.
So with those tears we have to
negotiation with, with these
compacts with PED so with uh
with those tribal teachers be
able to get more or even less
than what our teachers are
getting.
Uh, I, I'm just curious about
that,
uh, yeah, me and, uh,
Representative Lara. These are
public schools.
And so whatever public
teachers are making.
I'm sure I, I believe it's gonna
be the same thing and I would
defer to Mr. Sendo.
Uh, since they are, these are,
these are going to be considered
public schools.
Uh, thank you for that. I don't
know if there's gonna be a a
response, but uh.
Thank you, Chair Representative
members of the committee, um,
yes, we would follow the state
uh tier licensure programs to
ensure that um our teachers are
equitably paid uh just as the
other teachers within the
different school systems are.
Thank you for that. So that,
that, that portion of, of, of
what you're trying to do won't
be, uh, won't be up to
negotiation with the, with the
compacts.
uh, one more question, Mr. Chair
and Senator, and, and I know
once again I apologize I'm
getting into the weeds of this,
but uh what, what would be, so
would there be one overarching
data agreement between the
compact schools and PED.
or does each one have with each
compact will have its own data
sharing agreement with PED.
Uh
Since this is a compact, you
know, between the state and the
tribes and the tribes opting in,
you know, each tribe is at
different levels of, of, of
language, I think, uh,
revitalization, retention, so I,
I can't speak, but I think these
are, are compacts that will
probably be individual developed
uh by the tribe and PED based on
what the tribe intends to do and
which greatly wishes to pursue.
So but I, um, yeah, those I
think will all be in the
compact.
Negotiate independently, so it
will, it will not be.
an overarching, I would not
think, but there's some probably
some things that are
overarching, but there's gonna
be, I think, some unique things
because Twa Tewa, Toa Keras, I
mean, they're all different and
and how they
are captured in whatever that
reporting be a little different,
OK. Thank, thank you and Mr.
Chair. This will be my last
question.
So, uh, that said, Senator, um,
then how are we, when, when PET
is recording the academic
progress of our students.
Uh, yeah, the compact schools,
we're gonna have different
numbers.
And it's gonna really not give
us a true picture of what the
the student achievement is when,
when it comes to the reporting
of the, of the data.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lara, um.
Thank you. I appreciate that
question. I think it's an
important question to raise. I
shared earlier, House Bill 280,
the development and technical
assistance centers are looking
to support um tribes, tribal
education departments, local
education, um, what does
agencies, school districts, but
also the state, the NPD, uh, so
the technical assistance center
will help to ensure um that I
think as the standards are
developed as um assessment tools
are, are, are also going through
the process.
Um,
that NMPD will also be able to
help um be aware of the
different tiers, I think as a
senator that was conveying with
respect to the languages. Thank
you. Thank you. I truly
appreciate that answer because,
as we know, you know, we, we
have the, the Martinez Yasi
ruling that we have to uh comply
with, and this would be a
critical piece of that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you before I go on to the
next, um.
Me with questions um or a half
hour past the floor, but we know
we're on legislative time so um
I'm in communication with the
speaker's office, um, about, um,
when we'll head on the floor and
that's something we'll need to
do so if we could have um
questions as succinct as
possible and answers as well.
Thank you. Uh represent Garcia,
please.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Shando,
um.
My name is Martha Garcia.
Uh, so.
as
the who I am and that's how we
normally introduce ourselves um
to establish our kinship and
whoever um
We are speaking with, so that's
who I am. Um.
This bill that has been
developed. I've heard about it
in the past that it was
something was being developed,
was gonna go forward. Well, it's
here today as Senate Bill 13,
and it's a long time coming, I
thank you for, for bringing it
to us, but then there's some
questions that are coming up
that if we have had time to
listen to it, like a couple
weeks ago, I think, uh, we would
that be that much further along
to get the
questions to answer, even
myself, I have questions. I come
from a background of education,
uh.
I come from a tribally
controlled school that was
started in 1970, and we are a 54
years old as of February 7th,
and we were incorporated under
the state, but since then we
have used the uh in this
self-determination, and now we
are at grad school.
And as we are talking about how
this program will be developed a
compact itself, how it will be
developed where.
about a year away, are we gonna
use um people that have been in
uh that are in the process that
are, for example, I um um I
think in the state of New
Mexico, we have about 7 or 8
local control school where we
have uh experts that have uh
Uh, put the grant in place and
have always been very active and
understand what it takes, and
then you're coming from uh
From the area where you are
already established an immersion
program. So are these people uh
gonna be part of the
development.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, and, uh.
Representative of Garciaade
um.
I'm glad you mentioned uh is it
uh is it uh
Rama
Yes, very familiar with Rama.
One of my very good friends who
ended working with Ken Wilson,
uh, used to teach at at Rama and
we worked at University of Carra
all together.
And, you know, interestingly
enough, Rama and Rock Point and
some of these schools.
were in this position.
In the 1970s.
If they had succeeded
and what we're doing.
I don't think we will be having
this conversation today. I
remember visiting cause I used
to, uh, you know, uh, Rock
Point, they had a newspaper, the
kids develop in high school with
Britta in Navajo and in England.
So,
You know, this is not something
that, you know, is new.
But I think it took the courage
of schools like Raymond and Rock
Point and others.
This compact is to be negotiated
by the tribe, and I'm sure of
that tribe and the Navajo
decides to bring in all those
experts and I know we talked
with the Department of Education
at Winder Rock, and they're on
board as well. So they have the
experts to engage these
individuals, uh, that have been
a part of this.
To to be a part of that
compacting and so forth so.
OK, then my next question is,
um, uh, you mentioned that, uh,
the BIE school, the one that was
that the BIA themselves runs are
in this case um where they
provide the funds for tribes,
uh, our local community to uh
control the school and run the
schools, uh, when they become
part of this, uh, what does it
mean? Do they, uh, do they fully
become immersed in the compact
itself or do they keep their
federal
Uh, grants and contract and then
if they want to um
Use the state compact for their
language and uh the immerse
language to to develop or not to
develop, but to enhance what
they're already doing, would
they be able to to do that.
Uh,
Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Garcia, these are
technical questions and I think
it's, it's, I think the unique
thing about this is the tribe
has to decide.
What they want to do if they
have a BIE school. BIE schools,
for those of you, there's a
beautiful in the schools that
are that are are managed by the
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Washington and then there's
tribally controlled schools that
are still funded by the same
mechanism, but the local
community like Ramon.
Representative Garcia's, the
community oversees that still
gets the funding, but there's a
lot more local control.
But the important distinction is
that even though they're locally
controlled or BIE.
They
They
The medium of instruction is
English.
This is all about language
immersion.
So
If the, you know, and so the
community or the tribe has to
decide.
Whether what they want to do and
and making those choices, you
know, what it means in terms of
federal funding, state funding,
and those are the mechanics that
I think will be part of that
discussion and negotiation
because I don't know how or.
The various tribes that we have
K through 6 schools, we have K
through 8 BIE schools and K to
12 and and so it's just very.
OK, so that means that uh Mr.
Chair, uh, that as we move
forward in the uh either the BIE
or the um tribal or the local
controls school if they want to
uh move forward then all of that
has to be ironed out in during
this year-long development
that's gonna take place.
Right, uh, um, uh, yeah, um, Mr.
Chair and representative, first
of all, the tribe has to pass a
resolution that they want to do
this.
Then on top of that, there will
be an application process that
will be developed by PED and
that that is part of that
negotiation and so.
OK. Well, thank you very much
because uh this is an
opportunity uh for um the
pueblos and the tribal nations,
Napo nation, whoever gets
involved in this for them to um
go into a system and they're
already in that system from the
home level, but now to bring it
into the educational system.
Well, work for them because it
uh
Number one is establish who you
are. You take pride in who you
are, you take pride in the
language that you speak, but on
top of that, uh, just like you
mentioned, the Hawaiian um what
what they're doing is they're
teaching.
Like they're teaching English in
their own language, math,
science, everything is in their
language until they get to a
certain point and then they'll
uh switch to English, but they
have already learned the system
they have already learned what
math is all about, what English
is all about, uh, science is all
about and everything else, and
they just move into uh into a
new area and it's just enhances
what they've already learned,
and I would like to see.
that of be implemented to full
extent so that um
Like I sink in Navajo, I have to
translate in my head when we're
talking that that's my first
language, and that's how I am
and I'm able to communicate in
that way. And so when you
establish that it really helps
um our, our children to um to
move into uh what what they're
all about, and I just want to
read to you, um, our founding
philosophy back in the 70s, this
was expressed by.
An elderly woman who became a
school board member, she had
about an 8th grade education,
the 5 board members only 2 of
them had any kind of education.
The rest uh didn't have any
education, but they, they look
uh into the future and decide
that, you know, we have to do
this ourselves. I would love to
give you the whole history, but
it'll take me all day.
But this was the founding
philosophy.
Throughout our history we have
always lacked formal education.
That is why
We have always depended on
others to help us survive. We
have lacked the means to become
truly self-sufficient and
strong, the community elected us
to start something for their
children, something which will
stop the sun ending cycle of
despair. We want to end it now
for the sake of our children and
generations to come. This is why
we want to see the group again
and grow to bring, to help bring
about the kind of education
which will develop
strong leaders of our people,
Navajos with a strong sense of
pride in their novel ways. Nas
who can move confidently in all
worlds,
not Navajos who will become
leaders in all fields of
endeavor. This is why we work
now to see this group become a
reality, 1970 and this, this was
the founding and it's still true
today, and that's what we
follow. I don't think we will
ever
Reached that
Point, but you know, along the
way, we have been gaining a lot
of uh uh successes and
achievements, and we do have
setbacks at time again, but it
had been a a very interesting
journey, and I would like to see
more and more, not only the
Native American but for for
everyone in the state of New
Mexico were so diverse and um I
support of this bill if
can go forward.
That it would uh be an example,
and it would show uh what we are
all about because we're all very
unique and what and what we're
doing here for education. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representatives
Velasquez.
Um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee and
uh bill sponsors. Thank you so
very much for this bill.
Um
And
Um
In reviewing the bill and the
analysis, um, I
I have a few questions. Um, I'd
also like to say that I'm very
familiar with the Alaskan Native
Knowledge Network and I worked
with Ray Earnhardt, uh, on a
project many years ago, um, I'm
also familiar with the
University of Hawaii and have
doc students who have used the
model that was created there,
and I think those are both
excellent models. I'm really
glad to hear that it's, however
the connection was made that
that connection was made.
Um, I also have worked with
graduate students who teach
children mathematics concepts
and uh these are native
teachers, um, working with
native students and what we
discovered is that in
mathematics at least a lot of
the concepts in the kindergarten
level don't translate.
And so to know and to be able to
explain in the native language
is very important.
In teaching, um, even, uh,
something that is as concrete as
mathematics.
Um
So, I have a number of questions
and I'm I'm gonna start.
With one that's very important
to me because I keep hearing a
lot about the Martinez and Yazi
lawsuits and on page 5 of the
LESC analysis on
First paragraph on line 12345.
Um
The Senate Bill 13 could present
an opportunity to help the state
in fully responding to the
Martinez Yazi lawsuits by
allocating targeted funding.
I'm
just wondering and would love to
hear.
Um, do you need to find it? I
can wait.
It's the LESC analysis.
Page
5
I'm not sure we're looking at
the same analysis is it the last
two the last page.
No, sir, it, um,
It's the 2nd to the last page.
Mhm
And, and before I ask my
question, I, I, I would like to
ask my chair, Mr. Chair, I would
like to ask you a question just
to confirm my role on this
committee as a member and asking
questions around the bill, um,
what, what are you, what is
expected of me as a committee
member when we hear a bill.
That's a good question, uh,
representative is to use your
expertise and applying it to
what we're looking at and what
you've read, um, to ask the
questions that you need to make
an informed decision for
yourself. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, so, uh, those sponsors on in
this paragraph, uh, Sanate Bill
13 could present an opportunity
to help the state in fully
responding to the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuits.
Um, now Martinez has Native
American plaintiffs and Yazi has
Native American plaintiffs and
school districts. I'm wondering,
I would just like to hear, has
there been any agreement made?
That by creating these schools,
the state would be
Fully responding and done with
their obligations.
Uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Torres Vasquez,
uh, I'm not aware of any
agreement, but I think
certainly, uh, I, I, I think
the, the decision.
Um
Or at least the judge stopped
short of any.
prescriptive measures, but does
say that this SB 13 could
present an opportunity.
You know, for
For uh the state to fully, you
know, respond to at least Ozzy
Martinez, but allocating, you
know, targeted funding and, and
creating these types of you.
The plaintiffs and, and, and
yeah.
I, I want to make sure that no
agreement has been made because
Mister Chair, um, I foresee that
um, well, when
We first won Martinez and Yazi,
the there was a set amount.
That one of the parties was
asking for and
Martinez felt that we really
could not set an amount, and the
judge had not sent an amount,
and the judge in fact said.
That whatever it cost, these
things were going to happen. So
I foresee that.
By passing a bill like this, it,
it won't be over that the SCG
won't maybe will not be
satisfactory and so it, I won't
repeat the questions that I
heard, um, but I appreciated
those answers because I, I do
believe that more money will be
needed and, and it may be that
those monies are part of the
Martinez and Yazi remedies and
so I, I want to be sure that
this is not the final
settlement.
Or Martinez and Yazi.
Thank you on that.
Um
My second question is just a
vocabulary question in the bill,
and that might have been
answered when I was out
presenting my bill in another
committee, so I apologize if it
was, but on, uh, page 6 of the
bill.
On line 14, the word sectarian
is used, and I don't know if
that was asked already, but I
would be interested in knowing.
Um, what might have been meant
by that, so a state tribal
education contact school, shall
not engage in sectarian
practices in the school's
educational program.
I'm gonna, uh, I, I think this
refers back to, uh, the fact
that, you know, our
Constitution, you know, uh, the
funds appropriate levy or
collected for purpose may not be
used for support of any
sectarian denomination private
school, college or university.
Uh, it speaks to that.
Mr. Chair, thank you. I
appreciate that. And Mr. She uh
Representative Senator Shanddo,
sorry, I'll get it right.
Um
My
Next question, Mister Chair.
Comes from um page one of the
FIR.
Under synopsis of Senate Bill
13.
So the Senate bill amends the
public school code to create
state tribal education compact
schools.
And describes what the PED is
authorized to do in order to
enter into this compact with um
Indian nation, tribe or Pueblo.
And um,
I have some questions about
that, and I also have questions
about that in relation to the 4
subgroups of the Martinez and
Yazi lawsuits. Um, I believe I
heard part of an answer as I was
coming back in, um, in terms of
how
Students with disabilities and
special education would be
addressed um with a state tribal
education compact and
Because I missed it, I would
appreciate Mr. Chair, if I could
hear that again.
OK, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative, uh, I'll have,
uh, Mr. Shindo, who's still
online, I believe, respond to
that, uh, as related to also a
representative Gonzalez's
question with regards to
services.
Uh, chair representative members
of the committee. I had shared
earlier that on
For any tribes on that lie
within the public school
district, the LEA is ultimately
responsible for providing anly
on services or special needs
services to the students
identified during the child
fine, and that's from early
childhood on up, um, but also in
terms of tribes, there are other
organizations and consortiums
that exist that can help to
facilitate uh services needed by
our our children, and I had a
referenced earlier, there's
napper.
American public parent
resources, um, for him in that
area, we also have the 5
Sandoval Indian pubs that has
different providers to be able
to provide that, uh, because I
know that in um a lot of rural
areas, sometimes it's difficult
to get licensed practitioners to
be able to meet all the needs of
all the students, so it'll be a
collaborative effort, but
ultimately the LEA is
responsible, um, but where they
may not be able to. They are
consortiums and other resources
available to help provide.
services as needed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair members,
um, of the committee and
represented uh Senator, um, and
sponsors. Um, can you
Also talk a little bit more
about that.
Public code change in relation
to those 4.
Subgroups.
Mr. Chair
I thought I did, sorry.
I'm so sorry. I thought I
didn't.
Is there is, is, can you
reference a specific area you're
looking at or?
looking at the bottom of page
one on the fiscal impact report
where's the synopsis of Sentinel
13. But.
visit a chair and representative
uh Torres Velasquez, the code
that will be amended is
basically to basically to allow
tribes to develop their own
standards, their own
assessments.
And then criteria. So that's,
that's a section of the public
code that will be amended there,
authorizing tribes to become um
To, to develop those standards
and then on the second end, um,
negotiate with the public
education department. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, I am
very familiar with how the
Alaska Native Network developed
their own standards in addition
to the public school standards
and they worked very well
together, and so I'm hoping that
we can see some of that as well,
um, Mr. Chair.
Um
Next question.
Um, I, I do believe that
You addressed some of what I'm
about to ask, but you referred
to um entities outside of the
state in Lea and.
Hawaii
Um, and you've referred a little
to
At UNM and so I, I want to make
sure that we have um Native
American, um, indigenous groups
and
Experts, researchers.
Who are connected very strongly
from New Mexico.
Who are working with you, um,
because it's one thing to
support education, it's another
thing to teach.
And preparing is another thing
to actually teach. So can you
share with us who are the
experts that are working with
you on this project?
Mister Chair
Mr. Charon represented Torres
Velasquez. Appreciate that
question. At the heart of what
we're trying to do is improve.
The readiness of our children to
be college and career grounded
in our language and our culture.
And the experts that we're
engaging in are Doctor Glenna
Martinez out of the University
of New Mexico, Doctor Christine
Sims, uh, who has been leading
in some of the work with
language and culture instru
instruction, um, we're also
working with other folks at the
University of New Mexico with
health and, and social services
as we're describing some of the
disabilities of many native
students who, um,
Uh, are facing some significant
challenges. The other piece is
the development of
intergovernmental agreements, so
we're working with attorneys who
have been part of the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit, President
Sanchez, Mosa Candelaria, Mexico
Center of poverty, who are very
aware of the challenges in
existing um uh legal
deficiencies so that tribes can
be able to go to the state
public education department and
then be ready to negotiate some
of these uh intergovernmental
agreements. But at the heart of
what we're working on is
recognizing.
That this has been decades in
the work as Representative
Garcia has attested. Many people
have laid the foundation for us
to finally be in this
conversation today, and it is
those experts that we're going
to be incorporating with the
technical assistance center out
of the Native American Budget
and Policy Institute at the
University of New Mexico and
same at uh Navajo Technical
University to support um.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, um, members and
sponsors. I'm very glad to hear
that you are also working um
with the people um on the health
education side, uh, for some
reason my names are blanking
out, but, um, Doctor Lorinda is
my good friend and I can't think
of her last name because I'm
here under pressure. Uh, sorry
about that, Lorenna, if you're
paying attention and listening,
um.
Has been worldwide recognized
for her work in community-based
participatory research, and it's
my hope that you will work with
her and with her team, Doctor
Vincent Warrito as well, who
have been working for many years
on CBPR, um, and finding great
success in working with
community because for a project
like this, I foresee, Mr. Chair,
that a lot of a lot of work will
need to be done with.
um, especially if you are
expecting tribes to evaluate the
education that you provide the
students. And so, um, that leads
me to two questions. Um, I, I
didn't see anyone here from
Navajo Nation, and I heard some,
some support from
Uh, individuals who are Navajo,
but I did not see anything from
Navajo Nation, and I want to
make sure that that whole nation
is fully involved.
And I want some reassurance
there will be equity in the
planning and the implementation
of these schools, um,
I really appreciate the history
and the vision of uh
Representative Garcia and our
other Navajo representatives,
um, and I, I'm not sure how to
go about doing that, making sure
that there is equity across the
board, um, and I'm hoping the
LESC and our in our chair and
others can help us with that,
um.
But I, um, the researchers
involved with CBPR are Navajo,
so I, I would hope that they are
closely involved in this
project.
Um,
Next question.
Has to do with um some of the
information that came up in the
analysis that um
Um
That indicate we have 44 BIE
schools or tribally controlled
schools, and if this is a
question that has already been
addressed, Mr. Chair.
Please do let me know. Um,
And so I, Mister Tarr, I'm
wondering, um, as we look at the
sites and locations for possible
School buildings that already
exist.
Are we looking at those BIE
schools are we looking at
schools that already exist on
pueblos, um, and, and if so,
Um, have site's been identified.
To initiate this project.
Uh, Mr. Chair and a
representative, uh.
I'm not familiar. I know that,
uh, I can speak for Hamus right
now or the language immersion is
uh
Uh, sharing, um, classroom space
with our local charter school.
Uh, I can't speak to the other
tribes, uh, because, for
example, Santana Pueblo is
interested, they don't have a
BIE school. All the kids go into
the public school, so they would
probably have to create
something on their own, whereas
Santa Clara, as you heard from
the governor, they have a BIE
school, uh, so they already have
the facilities and they choose
to convert, so each tribe, I
think it's a different uh
situation and certainly that
would be part of the
negotiation, but Mr. Chair, I
want to go back, uh, and just
let you know that
Uh, for the Indian Affairs
Committee was in and out at
Crown Point that Technical
University uh this past uh year
summer, uh, Doctor Ferdinand
Clark, as well as uh please
representative Crowley from the
council delegate were there, uh,
uh, to hear our presentation to
the committee.
Um, there are certainly the
department of education.
Mr. Chair, um, and sponsors,
I'm, I'm glad that they were
present.
Um, at that presentation, I, I
am hoping that we see them
involved.
In other ways as well, and that
we see that they are supportive
of this because we do have
numerous schools on BIE schools
in Navajo Nation, as we heard
from Representative Garcia, um,
Mr. Chair, um, this leads me to
another question. Uh, there was
recently
Um
A webcast that was explaining
the executive order that
President Trump delivered on
January 23rd, um, asking
educators and stakeholders to
consider Mr. Chair to consider
vouchers or um private schools
and I'm, I'm wondering if um
If any thought has been given to
a couple of things around that,
one, well, the use of vouchers
then mean that students will be
exiting from their BIE schools
or tribally controlled schools
to other sites leaving those
buildings.
Um, leaving that school
population shrinking.
That's one question.
But the other question I have is
long-term implications for the
treaties that have been
established and
How this could possibly affect
even the future of the BIE.
These vouchers that President
Trump is offering.
Oh
Mr. Chair and representative,
uh, I, I read the executive
order and I believe uh what
they're asking for is
consultation with
representatives of those schools
to see if those are things that
they want to, uh, I guess use as
options and, and, uh, so I don't
know what the response is gonna
be, you know, from the tribes or
if those consultations have
actually happened or not.
Uh, I, so I, it's hard for me
to, to say what the
What the status of that might
be.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Torres Velasquez, the question
of the executive order um to
facilitate voucher programs to
Bureau and Education or tribally
controlled schools, um, while it
is an executive action, um,
seeking to engage in this
dialogue, um, this Indian
education and self-determination
Act provides the contract
ability for tribes to take over
their own schools, as well as
facilitated by the tribal
control Schools Act as well. So
right now, federal law provides
its resources to government
institutions, which are tribes
and uh essentially,
The federal government, I think,
has to reconcile the federal law
first before any voucher program
could be established in the
first place, but it is something
that tribal control schools are
open in in education schools are
are conveying to members of the
federal government at this point
in time. Um, so I hope that
answers your question. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Um, that
is very helpful information.
Um
And there's one last question I
have. I believe it's my last
question. I will end there, Mr.
Chair. Um,
Let's see, this is the
This is the public education
department bill analysis.
On page of
Second to the last page.
Um, it's intersection called
technical issues.
And
Uh, just below the section 4 of
the bill prohibits state tribal
education compact schools.
On the sectarian piece, the
paragraph that follows, the bill
requires that the compact
address renewal renewability and
termination of the compact.
but does not address what
happens to the school when a
compact.
is terminated. Does a compact
school become a solely tribal
school.
Does it default to being subject
to the entirety of the public
school related law.
From which it had been exempted.
Um
It's an issue to be negotiated
and addressed, or is it an issue
to be negotiated and addressed
in each compact, and I was
wondering your thoughts on that
question.
Mr. Chair
Again, I think uh that's
something that needs to be uh
negotiated as part of the
compact chair and uh
representative because again, as
I said earlier, uh,
You know, right now, you know.
starting schools, you know, can
rent schools and you get, you
know, a reimbursement, uh,
whether that's the case in some
areas or whether they're
converting a school that's
already got buildings and so
forth, uh, those will probably
all be part of the negotiation.
Thank you.
Z.
to cherish.
OK, so.
I'm sure I looked at the
analysis and the votes in Senate
and I'm sure that you were not
expecting to be grilled like
this in uh house education
because um I think it is
probably since it was unanimous,
she thought that we wouldn't be
happy because by what we had
talked about before, it sounds
like you kind of prepared for.
picking at you.
That be correct. Say that again.
Well, I was prepared for
everything.
You just never know.
You just never know what, what
curveball my my friend Senator
uh Representative Baca is gonna
always be ready.
You choke up on that bat
laid on the ground, and Senator,
cause I, I know that, yeah, it
went through unanimously and you
were
sure about having this in the
interim because you didn't face
that kind of like before in
2023, so, um, and I'm, since I'm
new to this, but you know, we've
known each other for a while,
um, center that I know that
there's issues within.
Um
This type of education, um,
we've, we've had it up there and
Rio Rancho, um, being able to
serve.
Our students making sure that
their needs are met and also
with their cultural needs as
well. Um,
And we did have a few years
back, um, to chair and center
issue with Bernardino, um,
school district as well. So, um,
Now I started my district, but
it, it kind of played into part
of what was going on with Rio
Ranal public schools at that
time, uh, Mr. Chair, so,
And I don't know much about.
The, the native languages, so
I'm gonna ask some really, you
know, very ignorant questions
here, so I do apologize. So,
like Bernna Leo public schools,
they have, um, I know they have
like Santo Domingo. They have
sent a San Felipe, Santa Ana.
Now, are those
Different languages if those
does each one do, is it when
each 3 different ones, so, uh,
uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
representative, uh, there's the
Karapean villages, which is
Cochiti, Santo Domingo, San
Felipe, Santa Ana, uh, and then,
uh, Laguna and Acoma speaks
various dialects of the Karish
language.
So that's sort of a, azi as well
so my I guess my question is, so
with each Hubble build their own
school.
Is that what the envision is
with this.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, most likely,
yeah, because they're
independent sovereign nations
that they will have to negotiate
the council has to.
Pass a resolution, you know, to
go to school.
And Mr. Cha and what, what I can
see is kind of some of the
concerns here with the committee
in and we all look at unintended
consequences. So with SCG it
does follow the students, but as
we know that most of our school
districts right now are in
declining enrollment. So I think
that's where some of the concern
as well is financial stability
of our uh public school
education system with the
declining enrollment.
Mr. Chair and uh senator, um.
But I, I certainly see the need
because we've talked about this
before, um, and I don't know if
we are addressing some of those.
But my concern
Um
that
You know, we know that the
perform we've had a lot of the
performance issues in the past
and I'm, I'm hopeful that maybe
this could certainly
Um, help with this.
Um, but my question is, are you
looking at a K through 6 or K
through 12. It looks like it's K
through 12, but what I'm seeing
in here, is that what you'd be
looking at?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, uh,
Representative, I, I think the,
the, the bill, uh allows for a
cake through, came through 12.
But I can specifically speak to
Hamus, where the council has
created a K through 6 language
immersion because they feel that
if, if a child from Head Start
to kindergarten is immersed in
her own language.
by 6th grade, they're never
gonna lose it.
So as, as, uh, Mr. Sendo spoke
earlier, the transition to
English will start happening
probably around 5 or 6th grade
into the English and so forth,
but just like the rest of us,
you know, we end up speaking our
language.
Uh, fluently from the beginning
and in our total language is our
first language.
Um
You know, whenever he loses, and
I think that's what we want to
do at least for the tribe to see
how do we, you know, create that
school of language emerging, so
by the time these kids are, you
know, 1011, 12 years old,
they're never gonna forget it.
Then they can acquire Spanish
and they acquire English, you
know, my grandfather, you know,
who never had a former uh
education, you know, spoke
Spanish, spoke, spoke English,
spoke Navajo and spoke Hamus.
It's amazing that today.
You know, most of us people
speak too, or at least one, when
our generation before because of
the interaction that they had to
with the various communities
around the state, knew how to
speak 4 or 5 languages.
Um, and, and.
So I, I guess you're saying
you're looking at K through 6
OK, for heinous, but for others,
so this is.
And you're doing immersion
program, it's gonna be mainly
their dialect that they their
language that they'll be using.
So then if you're only doing it
from K36 and then they
transition from
Your school and say, now you're
going to go to
If you don't have from 7th
through 12th there, then they
would be going back into the um
like, say rearrange a public
schools. So then since they're
immersed, it's just and just
they're only speaking their
language, then would that be a
problem with them trying to do
the English going into the uh
rearranged public schools if
you're only doing
That, I guess I, I, if you're,
you're racing it and you're
taught it only through 6th
grade. Are you not taught
English as well during I'm gonna
have uh.
Um, Mr. Sendo speak to that
because there's a plan for that
transition.
A little chair I representative
members of the committee. Um,
And following a lot of the
immersion models that are out
there um in different parts of
the US and the world, it's
Again, as I shared earlier,
grounding the kids in our home
language first and then
transitioning them into formal
academic English. Um, we know
that, um,
For a fact that our world here
in the US is inundated with
English, so whether we teach
English to the kids or not, they
are gonna learn to speak it. Um,
so that was one of the
priorities that was shared with
us by a lot of the immersion
movement folks was that you
focus on the language that you
want to strengthen, um,
revitalize and maintain, uh, and
so that was our home native
language. Um, in the, um, model
that our tribal council first
approved with the
6 immersion of the formal
academic English is introduced
as a class at the 5th grade, um,
which is following the Hawaiian
and the Maori models in New
Zealand and um then
transitioning them into academic
English, um, in their 6th, 7th,
and 8th grade years. So last
summer, the council
Recognizing this, um,
Initiative, um, approved to
extend the K6immersion to K8, so
the transition that you're
talking about to academic
English will happen in the 6th,
7th, and 8th grade years. So
then after that, they can
transition into any public or
charter school of their
choosing, uh, and as research
has shown as they transition
into the next school system,
they may, um, be a little behind
their peers or counterparts in
English, but as the
progress through their high
school years, research shows
that they will outperform their
counterparts and peers who are
monolanguish speakers because
they have the ability to speak
in two or more languages.
His chair in so thank you. So it
would be looking at well within
what they're doing is just going
back into a public school within
high school. So that was going
to be one of my questions is
extracurricular and band and all
that if you guys were going to
be doing that, but if they're
looking at really transitioning
after 8th grade.
Going into the public.
High school, the, you know, you.
established districts, I guess
it should schools as well, um,
so Mr. Chair and um center, so
The other question is, we've
seen
Especially during COVID,
broadband issues. I know Senator
Patilla has certainly working on
broadband for many years, but
that's still, I think an issue
across New Mexico with the with
the schools, you know, for them
to have access to that. So my
question, Mr. Chair, and center,
is really the um infrastructure
that's going to be needed for
some of these areas to be able
to have these schools built
there.
And supply what they need.
Mr. Chair, I, uh, Representative
Collin, uh, yeah, no, I, I
think, uh.
The, the tribes along the Middle
Rio Grande as well as Tehamas.
We've all, you know, fiber to
all the communities.
Uh, we were able to get money,
uh, back in 2016 $5 million
grant from the feds as part of
the E-rate program.
And we were able to uh get money
and so I was tribal a minister
at that time, so uh we were able
to, I was able to convince to
try, uh, since that company was
laid the cable if what would it
cost to create or, or put in an
empty conduit.
Um, on that as well and so they
quoted us a number and the
council approved, and so they
laid the era fiber along with an
empty conduit.
And so now with COVID and all
that, we were able to use our
resources, you know, to, to put
that line in. So now Hamer, I
think we were probably the first
try to have, you know,
Dark fiber cable straight to our
village along with the, at the
same time simultaneously, I
think, uh, Santa Ana San Felipe
coached there in uh Santo
Domingo were also laying that
fiber. So for those tribes, I
think exists and so forth, but
as you go further out like for
Navajo, I mean our fiber ends at
at San Ysidro going up 550. So
our plan, because our
reservation goes up towards
Cuba, our plan is to take that
fiber along so that we can help,
you know, those other
communities around Cuba, Torreon
over Encino, and
hopefully take that fiber all
the way up to Farmington because
that's really a big donut hole,
there's no nothing that exists,
you know, in terms of that area,
so uh.
Referred to
Mr. Chairman and uh Miss Cole,
uh, Representative Cole,
appreciate your, your question.
I, I wanna, uh, circle us back
to the fact that the state
tribal education compact bill is
an opt-in bill and emphasized
the importance of a tribe.
um developing and.
And passing a resolution because
I think you raise a really good
points with respect to proper
infrastructure capacity, some
of, some of the necessary human
capital but infrastructure
capital points that are
necessary to implement a proper
education system. Tribes have
been engaged with, uh,
developing their own programs
since the 70s. So,
All the tribes um have with with
this bill have a chance to opt
in at this point if, if this was
to become law.
But each tribe is going to have
to evaluate. Do they move from a
Bureau of Internet education
school which has federal funding
or tribally controlled school
that has federal funding, or do
they move away from their
existing public education, um,
paradigm.
Or do they opt into this knowing
that there's going to be
significant.
Risk associated with this, but I
think the resolution process,
tribes are very thorough and
their evaluation of human
capacity, infrastructure
capacity, and really um the work
that is going to be necessary.
So I think that I, I just wanna
emphasize that point because,
well, we know the tribes, the
long term vision as
Representative Garcia conveyed
and she, she beautifully um
provided that eloquent, um, um
prologue is that the long term
vision is, uh, where we're,
where each
tribe is at this point in time
to be able to develop the state
tribal compact Act is, is really
minimal as opposed to what it's
been um suggested in the fiscal
impact report. So I just wanted
to close that loop. So thank
you.
represent me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um,
um, there's a lot of moving
parts here, uh, so, um, a lot of
my questions have been um kind
of asked and, and I, and I think
I, they, um,
Got some clarification in, in,
in a lot of things. I really
wish that we could have
Um
dove deep into this and spent a
day in uh in um.
The interim because there's 7 of
us when you visited Hemas,
there's 7 of us that weren't
part of the legislature that are
sitting on this, on this, uh,
Um, things, uh, on this um
committee. So, so we did not get
the luxury to chew on it and uh
other than last night when I got
it.
So, um, so, so, so that's,
that's in, like I said, there is
a lot of moving parts. We are
creating a whole new way to do
education. Um, so, and, and,
and, and the fact that um
I think it's been said that you
get frustrated cause, cause,
cause you're getting questions,
that's my job as a legislator is
to ask questions for my
constituents, yeah, and, and,
and, and, and that is, that is,
that is what that's what we do
and, and we do it very well.
That's, I've been in this
committee for, for, um, you
know, this is now my 2nd term
and, and I am very thankful for
how thorough.
Um,
This committee is in and
properly vetting and not passing
through things that are
incomplete and let's wait and
see type of mentality. Um, that
is something we don't do here.
Um, and so and it and it is more
difficult when we don't have the
proper time to vet and chew and
see and, and, and become
comfortable with it because we
are um uh we're, we're, we are
charged with not only one
section of, of people.
To, to, uh, to make sure that
they're educated, we are charged
to make sure that every single
student in the state is
educated and how does this fit
and
And where this is great for one.
Uh, certain, uh, people, it
affects.
Others in the process, uh,
because it's going to affect
every school district that
probably could be moving from
one to the next and and that
kind of stuff. Now I do have a
lot of uh a couple of questions
uh regarding just technical uh
type of things, um, I think, um,
Mr. uh, Representative lot of um
You're one of your answers to
that uh uh was one of them. It's
so, so it definitely is like it
is an option you just said. Um,
so, every single tribe if they
choose to, whatever that time
frame is, is going to have their
own compact because they're,
they might have their own way of
going about it, um, in this
process, correct?
Um, so, so, uh, Mr. Chair and,
and, and Senator.
Um, uh, just a couple of
questions cause I'm naive to, I
think I, I know some about the
different languages they ate 8
different languages, right, um,
in the native languages, do all
the like all of the languages
have written languages.
Uh, Mr. Chairs representative
Moya, I know the Navajo Nation
is written, uh, I think the
other, uh, tribes aren't, uh,
written at the moment, but I
think there's been a, um, so, so
thank you for that, um, uh, Mr.
Chair and, and, and senator, so,
so how do you foresee without a
written language, how do you
foresee uh proficiency in
reading.
Uh, the same way that I've done
it for to language speaker.
nothing about English.
Same as my colleague here.
But I think we need to kind of
move out of this lens of
You know, we're trying to get
back to what worked for us for
centuries.
You know, our language.
Our culture or ceremonies, or
songs or dances, all the things
that makes us who we are.
is connected to our language.
English is everywhere.
Reading, you know, you guys did
not signs of reading, and this
particular reason why I think
that happened.
Work, we're trying to go back.
what used to work for us.
So that we can still in our
young children.
The value of what it means to be
heinous.
The value of what it means to be
Kiwa.
Amaya.
In there.
Like I said,
Since 1819.
Everybody made decisions of how
we should educate our children,
except for our own people.
All we're doing is trying to
effectuate what is in the Indian
education Act.
allow for us to control our own
schools.
He will decide what how success
is.
Give us the opportunity to fail
on our own terms.
Not yours.
That's all we're asking.
Um
Mr. Chair and, and, and Senator,
um, I totally understand where
you're coming from, but the
reality is is that um everybody
loves to quote the fact that New
Mexico is 50th. Those are based
on national standards.
Um, and, and we have to answer
to that.
Like, and, and that's the
reality. Uh, and, and, uh, and
so, so that is, you know, where,
where they have to be able to do
it.
Together, not a um I don't have
to answer to those standards.
We, we do.
Um, so that like that's, that's
that, that's just unfortunately,
it's the unfortunate reality of
it. Um, and so, um,
Um, so, so this means that every
single um um
Tribal school or um I forget the
exact terminology that you guys
are gonna uh then have your own,
uh, you'll have to establish
your own school board, um, your
own, uh, possibly screenings for
certain disabilities that cause
if you're not getting into
English language and, and like,
so, so how is that? I mean, I
get it that
You're gonna focus on yours, but
the reality is eventually they
have to come into English. And,
and so is, is, have you thought
about
AP 504s, uh, screening for
disabilities, any of those kind
of things that, that, uh, that
every other school in the state
has to think about. I'm gonna
have uh Mr. Chando, uh, do that
because we already do it with
our Head Start, which is
federally funded and that local
education uh Act allows for
services and I believe uh
history, I think this will be
his 3rd time repeating that, uh,
so, uh, Mr. Scheer, go ahead.
Oh, thank you, uh,
Chair Representative members of
the committee, um, just to go
back to the question of your um
literacy based, um,
I think one of the areas that
the state has lacked is
investing in research.
That's rooted in um
Native and indigenous languages,
and that's not only within the
state but also nationally.
Um, we've, uh, embarked on some
of our own research-based
methodologies because Hamus is
not a written language, but in
our partnership with the
University of Hawaii at Hilo,
that's one of our scopes is
identifying early literacy
strategies to teach literacy and
pre-literacy skills in a
non-written language. And so
those are things that we're
already currently putting in
place based on what they've
developed with their own
syllabary on how they teach
Hawaiian.
Um, Hawaiian is also written,
but working with us, um, to
pilot a program that will help
to teach some of the
pre-literacy literacy skills,
um, that our kids need, but
doing it in our home language.
Um.
And understanding that there's
such a focus on the written
word, uh, here in the US, um, I
wanna share a quote that was
shared with us on a research
trip to uh Aotearoa, New Zealand
and the Maori language
revitalization founders when we
asked this specific question
about how to address literacy,
early literacy and pre-literacy
skills in a non-written
language.
And one of the elders actually
sat back and said,
Looking back over the last 40,
50 years of our language
revitalization movement.
We should have
Focused on the written word.
The oratory.
In teaching literacy.
Because when you write the
language down, you separate it
from the heart and the mind.
At that time, when we
established our schools, we had
to compromise.
With the crown. In order for
them to have those schools, they
have to have the literary piece
of literacy pieces in place.
And they shared with us, you're
in a position where you don't
have to compromise.
And I think that speaks volumes
to how we define success in
looking at education and
developing our own strategies.
Yes, we understand they have to
be research based, but a lot of
the research that we've
initiated is on our own with our
own hired institution partners
trying to secure private
foundation funds.
And I think that if the state is
really invested in supporting
tribes in developing these
things. The research dollars
need to be invested in a higher
institutions to support
education in languages other
than English, which also
includes non-written indigenous
languages. So I think that's a
piece that
Should be a priority uh for the
state and legislature and the
questions you're asking, um, and
identifying priorities moving
forward. So with the pilot with
the University of Hawaii at
Hilo, our goal is to develop
The pilot program that helps us
to develop famous language
immersion.
teachers and that license your
pilot that can be replicated
here in New Mexico, um, at one
of our in-state schools and as
shared earlier, there are
different uh experts, um, Doctor
Sims, um,
Rebecca Blue Martinez and others
that we have been working with
and connecting with, um, but the
reason why the partnership with
the University of Hawaii at Hilo
Works is that they have a
college of Hawaiian language.
They actually are a college
within the university where
they're able to develop and
design unique systems.
That for in New Mexico will get
stuck in the bureaucracy of a
higher institution and to also
answer a representative question
earlier about our partnership
with Navajo and other areas. We
have an MOU that we've entered
into with Nava Technical
University to support this
licensure pilot with the 1st 2
years. And with the University
of New Mexico, she mentioned
Doctor, um,
Uh, Lorinda Balone, we've been
in the research partnership with
the University of Mexico for
over 20 years on our family
circle, family listening
project, and it took us over 15
years to get the numbers, to
have our research to be
considered statistically
significant.
So these are some of the
challenges that we face as
tribes in trying to take
ownership over our education
systems to define the research
for ourselves is that
We don't have the population
base to become statistically
significant in a year or two.
It's a long term process and the
funds aren't invested to be able
to support us in that. Um, now,
going back to the question of
special needs and LE and
services. Those are areas that,
yes, are prioritized to ensure
that we meet the ancillary
special needs of all our kids
and as identified, we will put
those supports in place, as I
shared earlier, tribes, we are
within Hama Valley School
District, the L
is ultimately responsible
through a child find efforts to
help identify these kids and
whether they're going to our
Head Start, uh, charter school,
public or emersion school as
they have identified those key
critical pieces are important in
the transition process of a
child's education. So those are
not going to be overlooked or
left behind.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
um, and senator, so will this
each school will have their own
school board?
Like they're gonna be considered
their own district.
Uh, you should know if you can
answer that.
Chair representing members of
the committee, uh, yes, they
would have to have a governing
structure in place that's part
of the compact negotiations to
be able to directly oversee the
school.
Um, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, and, and Senator, and,
um, so who is going to oversee
his PED gonna need like a
different division cause I know
like charter schools, it's the
PEC it's, you know, they, they,
they do like the state, the, the
state run ones, so there's
different ones, so, so who is
gonna
Is it just
Mr. Taran Representative Moy, I
appreciate your questions. I
think they're really important
and we're we're happy to answer
them. Um, with your with this
specific question of who will
oversee, uh, the state tribal
Compacting Act, Education
Compact Act, it, it'll be within
the Indian education division,
as um established under the
Indian Education Act.
Uh, so, uh, there's an assistant
secretary currently in place,
um, who will help to oversee and
implement critical provisions of
this piece of legislation.
All right. Um, so, um, I foresee
uh Mr. Chair, and, and, um, and,
and Senator, I
I was thinking about the even
kind of a little bit going back
to the funding and, and, and,
and, um.
About the
Getting funding for for English
language learners.
Um, where now we're gonna have
to rethink how that works
because
Your students are choosing to be
in in English language learners,
like, it's a different and it's
a different, it's a different
thing we're usually English
focused.
And now we are not an English
focus, so there may be something
that has to be changed within
that way how we fund these once
they get back into public
schools because it's, it's
different. It's, it's no longer
a, a um a student that is
centered around English, um, and
which, which it is, I mean, it's
the reality. Um and so we may
have to figure out how to, how
to fund.
That differently.
Um, have you thought about that?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Moya.
In the Yazi Martinez versus the
state of New Mexico.
Lawsuit at the heart of how
education is delivered to
children has always been funding
because the state has always
said that we don't have the
funds.
But as
The late uh Judge Sarah
Singleton affirmed.
No, there's the legislature nor
the executive can no longer say
that there's not enough
resources here in the state and
you all have enjoyed a historic
amount of resources in the past
legislative sessions, including
this, to say that we can't
invest more because we not only
native students, disabled
students, English language
learners, and, and economically
disadvantaged students have
already been on the bottom end
of the totem pole for decades.
That's really what the, the
land.
Mar lawsuit, um, affirmed. I
think we all know as
multicultural community members
just the inequities that have
been in place for many decades.
We're living those realities
today and when it comes to um
revising the state deposition
guarantee.
There's always been an effort to
increase the at risk formula to
include the the reality that
Native Americans um are their
own distinct political class and
should have its own at-risk
factor because of the
disparities that have been in
place for decades at this point.
However, you all have advanced
House Bill 63, that is advancing
a at risk uh formula increase
for English language learners is
pragmatic. I think it's the
right thing to do. It's an
important thing to do. Uh, but I
think it is an important
consideration for the SCG to
consider, um,
Uh, increase, um, considerations
to increase for Native American
factors as well, but I
appreciate you asking it and,
and I hope I answered your
question. Thank you.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and, and, and,
and senator and like cause it
is, it is, it's a, it's a
different animal. Like it, it's
so it's so it can't be the same
funding that we use, um, since
we're creating a different way
of of doing things, there may be
a need to create a different
type of and which I, I mean,
believe me, I, I, I argued with
uh, with the money people plenty
of times in here, and so, um,
and, and saying that, uh, yeah,
it's not there. Oh yeah, yeah,
so, um, so, but I'm, I'm with
you there.
But thank you, thank you for
answering my questions.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and thank you, Karen
for uh and you see their
channel.
Um, I have questions that have
been answered, but now I have
new questions with the debate,
Mr. Chair. Let me start with
something that I just
Raise a red flag for me. Um, we
keep talking about immersion for
the students and then transition
into English when they are done,
that sounds we share so much as
a
as early transition transition
in bilingual programs. Is that
what we are talking about?
So
Mr. Mr. Chair and representative
Guroa, uh, I think.
Um, to answer your question of
whether these are bilingual
programs. We're trying to
establish systems of education
grounded in language, uh, not
and not necessarily what um how
native language or even Spanish
uh in most circumstances in the
state has been, uh, put to a
lesser degree, only to be one
credit in a high school degree
program, or, I mean, I mean, in
reality, there's not even, um,
there's there's very little uh
prior primary education systems
that teach uh
Another language other than
English. Um, so,
With respect to the bilingual um
discussion here.
What we're trying to do is
establish a system grounded in
native language.
And not have art languages as a
second tier system. Thank you. I
hope I answered your question.
Thank you, yeah, that's what I
understood, Mr. the whole time.
That's what I got concerned, um,
so our goal, the goal here is by
literacy.
Or in in in in native language.
Is that correct, Mr. Chair,
panel?
They're uh representative
members of the committee.
Um, to address your question,
um,
I think it's very important to
understand that um we are not
looking at a bilingual or dual
language programs. Those are
what we've, uh,
Currently implemented within our
charter schools and some of the
education efforts that we have
done, particularly in Hamas, but
I know that that's also being
implemented in other tribal
communities. The goal of this
effort is to first ground our
kids in the home language. Um,
and then build English later,
um, because what we're finding
out now is that we live in a
world where we're inundated with
English and whether we teach our
children English or not, they
are going
to learn because they're
impacted within our communities
through technology, devices, uh,
especially with the whole
pandemic and virtual learning.
English is all around them. So
our goal is to strengthen and
focus on maintaining
revitalization and strengthening
our home indigenous languages
and then transitioning them to
English later. And just to
address representatives
questions earlier about formula
and the funding. I think that so
often our education systems
looks at
Language speakers in languages
other than English as a deficit
rather than acid as a strength.
And I think that that thinking
also needs to change in terms of
really supporting language
development and language growth
within our students because they
will be getting the academic
content and some of the
Essential skills at the
elementary level through the
language. It may not be
English-based, but that's the
grounding that they are going to
get and that we need to take a
strength-based approach,
recognizing that they're coming
with two different perspectives
to the table because whether we
teach English or not, our kids
are gonna learn. Our prime
example, my grandson comes from
Three different communities, um,
raising carrots and or through
our heinous immersion programs.
He's 7 years old, hasn't had a
day of formal instruction in
English, but has no problem
speaking English because it's
been all around him growing up,
but he is fluent in the two
other languages. And so these
are the types of systems that we
want to develop and support that
support multilingualism as an
asset as
strength-based approach and not
as a deficit and a liability.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. She and represent us
and
that was exactly what I was
going with my questions, um, but
I don't know why we
I know so I would wanna make
that defense that this is not
that and this is this, um, I,
I'm afraid I'm gonna sound like
a broken record here, but um I
always have, have advocated for
dual language programs because I
saw in my community that when
the students feel that they
belong and see their culture
reflected in the curriculum,
they stay.
They succeed, they try.
And that's the reason why I
advocate for that. No, for the
luxury speaking two languages
because this is culture and this
is who we are. So trying to
separate one thing from the
other, it doesn't resonate too
much from me, but it does
concern me that we think that
when the students are in 6th
grade, they are ready to move to
English only.
And, and I agree, I mean English
is everywhere, students are
gonna learn and our state for
the last 5 years, 6 years with
uh science and reading being the
mostly on the curriculum, it has
been focused on English only.
To this year, so that's
something that we have discussed
in this committee for a long
hours. English only has been the
focus.
Um, so that's my, that was a
concern that I got, um, I hope
that's not the goal on this bill
and, and it's one of the loose
ends on the bill, I think. I
think I like the idea of cat 12,
and educating our kids in the
way that you feel and consider
most appropriate, but don't
think that um they are ready to
move to English only and they're
gonna maintain the language, um,
I think that's something that
should prioritize and I just
wanted to clarify that.
Um,
There is um
And call up let me try to switch
a little bit since I was trying
to think and I find a route
here um it says here, Mr. Sher
on page 5, and I think everybody
has talked about concerns about
that, the funding but also the
part where you extent for all
the state statutes and rules.
Um
Is that
When, when we talk about exempt
is because we need to create our
own curriculum
curriculum and
All that on page 4 on little G
says that the provincial
promulgate rules which the
permit, uh.
Public education department, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yes, it'll be
the New Mexico Public Education
party. OK, so.
And, and again, maybe it's just
my, my fear with this and I'm
gonna be upfront is with all
these loose ends.
At the end
We could lose the opportunity to
build this.
Uh, I'm, I'm not, I'm afraid of
that. I think this, this is
something that should happen,
but Mr. Chair, with all this
loose ends.
It could eventually in 1 year or
2 years, make it fail because of
this. So here, the department
will promulgate rules for
implementation.
But in these rules, uh, it has
to be included this exempts.
Or, or, or PD is gonna decide.
Which part is not exempt of?
I, I'm, I'm confusing this part,
Mr. Chair and and.
Mr. Chan uh Representative
Corora, the
The exemptions are basically to
ensure that it is not state
standards, it's not state
assessments, overtaking the
vision of tribes who wish to
participate within the state
tribal Compacting Act and it is
there.
curriculum assessments that are
going to be ground the, the, the
framework for which our children
are grounded first prior to
transitioning them to um
bilingualism later, later in, in
their education, um, pedagogy
and, and systems of, of uh uh
matriculation. So with that
being said, um,
One of the things that is
important here as well with
regard to uh the assessments is
that PD is is already obligated
to develop systems of
instruction materials and
languages uh through the Indian
Education Act. That's the
presiding law that NMPD and the
and the assistant secretary of
Indian Education is to engage
in. So,
Well, while the negotiation
process is going to be
emphasized English as a primary
language. There's the Inland
Education Act and the
multicultural, all those various
um components that are still
gonna be, um, ironed out in the
negotiation rulemaking.
Built and strengthened by tribal
standards, tribal assessments,
and tribal curriculum.
Thank you.
Mr. She, um, thank you, but I
didn't think that answered my
question about the rules. I'm
still a little bit confused on
SPD decides that part of the
rule has to follow this testing
that's a nape who is part of the
federal test.
Um, we'll.
How will that combine, um, I, I
think the assumption will say
more collaboration with BED.
More than more than exempt what
you say is excent for all state
that should more should read
more like it should be in
collaboration with PD using the
um in the education act as a, as
a framework.
Mr. She
Representative, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, the, the, the
reason for the exemption as as
conveyed is, is just to ensure
that in the rulemaking process,
it is those other standards that
are not the prioritized in
place. However,
The Indian education or the
assistant secretary for Indian
Education is still bounded by
the Indian Education Act, which
will be presiding over how the
rules will be established in the
first place. So a critical
component in Yazi Martinez
versus the state. I see you are
barely aware, is that the state
has also failed to provide a
sufficient education and failed
to comply to the Indian
Education Act. So, um, if we
look towards the first um
provisions and the Indian
Education Act.
It requires the state to ensure
equitable and culturally
relevant learning environments,
which the state tribal
collaboration uh compactack will
look to accomplish ensure
maintenance of native languages,
which will ensure, uh, provides
study development and
implication of education systems
and to work with the Department
of Education partners with
tribes to increase tribal
involvement and control over
schools and education of
students located in tribal
communities.
So those are the the details to
be engaged in within the
rulemaking process with and then
the assistant secretary for
education to help with the roles
in those and the promulgation.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Again, um, all sounds, you
clarify the question, it just
seems loose ends in the bill,
and that's my concern, um, we
talk so much about funding and I
think it's a concern of
everybody here at the funding
part, and I heard you in the
beginning saying that it was
exaggerated and on that um the
um the um um LFC report. Uh,
could you give me a more closer
estimate.
Uh, of what will be an impact or
on Mr. Chair in our schools, um,
we have a school district like
Bernalillo who served the
largest population of Native
Americans probably that state, I
don't know. We have a large
population of language learners
in my, in my district that now
the federal government has
closed that language acquisition
office they're going, we don't
know how much it's gonna be
impacted, so what will be the
impact?
Um, if this is too much, what
will be the estimate that you
could have on an impact for, for
um for our, our communities, Mr.
uh,
but I mean, again, I think it it
it depends on.
Where tribes are.
In the development of the assets
that need to happen.
As I stated earlier, you know,
Pueblo Jim, we've been working
on this probably almost 20
years.
It takes a lot to prepare
teachers.
To do what we're gonna be asking
him to do.
So if anything, I would say in
the next 2-3 years.
It might just be the
Pueblogenes.
Because the tribes have to.
dialogue among themselves in
which route they want to take
and what they want to do.
Right now, he, I think, I
believe there's like 30 some
students in this emerging.
class.
And then I think Santa Ana, like
I said, there's a very small
place in the tribes and so.
Probably in the next decade.
5 or 6 of these tribes do
something, you know, that would
be phenomenal, but we're not
talking mass numbers. We're
talking.
very small communities.
Mr. Chair, thank you. So it
won't be, I mean, that small
group, it won't be that huge
pack, so, um,
And, and that will lead to my
next question, Mr. Chair, how I,
I have work in some communities,
rural communities.
And I could tell you there's a
lot of poverty in some more some
of nature and tribe communities.
How the communities and, and,
and the, and the stakeholders
and even him is cool, uh, be
part of the conversation for the
other.
some pueblos to be part of this
program. Um, again, um, I
Probably, if we tell me, tell me
about payment.
is one of succeeding.
Mr. Sher, um, I will say this
prioritize other other schools
who need this more.
You don't, I don't know if I'm
making my, I know that we don't
do it here but other schools are
failing, yeah, I represented.
You know, it's fascinating just
look at this because I think uh
We're in a state in search of
success.
But yet we've been kind of
taking, you know, off.
And
Who's to say the success of this
cannot be the model for our
entire.
Public education.
Think about that.
Look at all the tribes and
diversity we have.
Who's to say that the success of
this model.
is wanting
For us to succeed as a state.
So I think this is actually, I
think it's gonna happen.
I think this is gonna be the
model and that's what I'm
asking, how will this help your
so.
Sometimes you get frustrating
sometimes it gets like we wanna
go faster, Mr. Chair, and I feel
frustration on the same end. um,
so I guess my, my next question
would be how this, cause I don't
see any in the bill how the
communication will be with
legislators.
Uh, I see it about with with PD
um and I think we have to
advocate about this every year.
So, um, in order for us to be
able to do that and we may not
be here like
7 of us are new here and instead
of doing this, um, hopefully
now, every year, but how this
success is gonna be communicated
to our body, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chair, I'm sure you know.
Uh
I, I mean, I think we're excited
because I think there's a new
opportunity and I think the
communities that are engaged
this would be more than happy
to share
the education and study Camino
the legislature as a whole. The
success or challenges going
forward with this, so I think
that would be something that
could be part of the, uh, you
know, negotiation of, of.
Uh, of the approval of these
schools.
negotiated with the tribes.
Thank you, Mr. She and thank
you, Senator. Um, I still feel
like the questions are like in
goodwill and we hope and we are
looking for this
still a little bit concerned
that if it doesn't work, we are
gonna lose this opportunity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representment
I'll make it quick, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
And thank you, Senator Sindo.
Good to see you this morning.
I've just been sitting here
taking it all in and I wasn't
gonna speak, but
22 small questions.
Because we're so interested in
The younger side, did you guys
even think about getting EC ECD
to fund this.
And if so, can they fund it?
chair
Uh, I'm gonna have, uh, Mr.
Chando speak to because I think
there's partnership going on
right now with Head Start and EC
whatever the acronym or the
letters are, uh, and I'll have
him speak to that because uh uh
he's more engaged on a day to
day basis as director of our
education department and what
kind of collaboration is going.
Um, Chair, representative
members of the committee, um,
our partnership with uh
Secretary Gurginsky and the
ECEC, um, the, um, is
Um, we're part of their uh
preschool development 5 federal
grant.
So they are investing 500,000 a
year over the next three years,
we're in year 2 of our grant,
um, to help us to strengthen the
language immersion teacher
licensure pilot with the
University of Hawaii at Hilo.
And part of that grant is also
to host tribes and state
agencies and any other folks
interested in learning about the
partnership, uh, University of
Hawaii at Hilo has a fully
developed licensure program.
On the Has model pilot is being
developed at the moment in
partnership with the Naval
Technical University, uh, the
professors mentioned at UNM
Doctor Sims, um, and, uh, her
counterparts Blue Martinez and
such and um Glenoval as well.
Um, play a role in helping to
support our teacher professional
development and licensure
efforts. So that is the
investment that ECECD has made
currently, but through a grant
that they were able to secure,
not specifically the funds that
have been provided, um, through
the state. Um, but it is an
effort that we're building and
growing on and developing and
hoping that the pilot that we
develop with the University of
Hawaii, we can bring back and
find a home for within one of
our state institutions.
So that this licensure program
can be taken advantage of by all
the communities that are looking
to
Look to immersion, uh, as a
strategy to revitalize and
strengthen their languages.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenter.
And Senator Sindo.
So
And appropriations, they started
out asking for, so that was
500,000.
And I'm not even getting snobby
about 500,000.
Whenever you talk about a state
budget, 500,000 is like
Here's 500,000 chump change.
And Mr. Chair, they, they
started off asking for 250
million.
And at the end of it, it was 500
million.
And just food for thought right
there in the, in the second
question that I have and the
final question is, did you ever
think about
Starting a pilot project.
With
Ha
And seeing how it's gonna unroll
because the more we ask
questions, the more confused I
get.
This started out kind of headed
more and then I think we're off
in the weeds now where I am.
And Mr. Chair and, and
In Sindo
Did you ever think about the
pilot program and just starting
it in heinous and seeing how
that's gonna work first before
we just dive in.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Harlan, uh,
representative uh Vincent.
I think
Our experience with charter
school for the last 20 years
since 1990.
That I would say has been our
experiment and our pilot.
And as a result of that failure
to allow us to do what we really
want to do.
It's a result of what we have
here today.
As, as we've stated.
You know, the mechanisms for
charter and other public school,
the, you know, the instruction
is English.
But when you have a tribe that's
trying to revitalize their
language. Mescalero Paci.
You can't do it within the
school systems.
So, I, I think what we have
today is a result of this 20
years of experience at Hamas. We
were the first tribe to have a
charter school in 1990.
And trying to implement the
things that the tribes wanted
within that system and its
structure.
We're 20 years out and still not
really make the changes.
And I think that experience and
that pilot.
As a result of what we, Mr.
Chair and Senator Shindo, why
are we not starting out at home.
I know the question of this, and
I'm gonna keep my answer to
myself, but I've talked to
elders, and they've told me what
they think of the parents.
And the parents should be
teaching this at home, and
they're not, why not?
You know, Mr. Chair, uh,
President Harlan.
She goes back to the history.
Just like Representative
Caballero.
When you have a generation of
people.
Deny
And shipped off to boarding
schools.
To be a part of their culture
and language and community.
And they come back and they
don't speak, they don't know how
to teach their children.
Yeah, it's easy to say.
But yes, we should speak to our
children at home.
But when you're denied that
opportunity.
To speak your own language
because of federal laws.
How do you do that? You can't.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Sin.
In Sindo, how many years are we
talking about?
We're not talking about now.
Because I don't see that
happening now. I know we have a
lot of bad history.
Yeah
And, and I mentioned this
earlier on.
I am not literally color blind.
But I'm kind of color blind. I
don't look at you any different.
You're my brother.
That's just the way it goes.
And I don't think that we're
denying anybody. We have it, I
hope we haven't been in the
last.
30 years.
40 years. I'd like to even
stretch it out 50 years.
But the elders told me why those
kids are not talking.
The language
And I see it.
There's not very many people
that can speak that language.
And is it because our parents
are lazy.
And I'm not even talking about
native language. I'm talking
about Spanish as well.
I get, I get free Spanish right
here. I'm learning it. I'm
trying.
Just, just food for thought is
just comment, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Zinger.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I I do agree that it would have
been ideal to really have these
deep discussions over the
interim.
Um, I did go to Haus. It's an
incredible model, my son went to
Korean emmersion school when we
lived in Korea, makes all the
difference, um, but I do have
some questions.
first ones. I'm looking at the
actual bill. It is not clear to
me
When we say that PED will make
Um
When, when we talk about them
making rules, it's not clear to
me.
That, that is what's wanted
here.
Or
If it is each
tribal
PED I hate step doesn't sound
good. I, we need a better.
Acronym, but
Whether STEC compact is totally
individual for each compact
proposal. Can you clarify that?
Um,
it's representative uh McGarren,
thanks for that question. Like I
said, you know, when we're
talking about sovereignty, the
tribes, you know, have, have,
you know.
Individual have to decide what's
best for them, and so I can see
these compact being individually
tailored to where the tribe is
and what it wants to do and what
grades it wants to serve.
and Senator, I understand that.
What I'm talking about is, for
example, is it
Yeah, Terry, T E R A N. OK,
that's fine, so that's why I get
confused.
Um, when we talk about
sorry
um, here's my next question.
You talked about the funding
formula, the EOL.
And the at risk are separate
categories.
To identify ELL students. We go
by access testing. I was a test
coordinator for years.
So, that's when when we talk
about
But um
I'll call it universal what
representative uh Laura asked
earlier.
Some things
We're gonna have to require, if
it's gonna be each each compact
for itself. What do we do about
categorizing who is an ELL
learner and therefore generates
unit values in the SCG.
Mary and Representative Garrett
I appreciate the question.
I think this, these are, these
questions that you raise are
part of the response of House
Bill 280, a technical assistance
centers and how we align how
tribal standards are going to
fit within the framework of the
Indian Education Act as an
example and how schools began
developing um assessments and
executing some of these
different things regardless if
they're at a uh state tribal
Compacting Act or would there
within the existing framework of
education, which is the public
education school system. So,
What,
what will trigger this entire
process is if and when a tribe
initiates a resolution and
submits that to the public
education department and then
we'll begin developing that
government to government
discussion and then the
promulgation of the framework of
how uh these will actually be
implemented between the state
and the tribe.
I, I'm not really satisfied with
that answer, because it means
that PED whether it's the office
of the Deputy Secretary for
Indian Affairs. They have to
start from scratch each time. I
feel that there's some universal
things.
That it's like, OK, for example,
um, every compact school will
have a governing board. There's
some things that I believe need
to be in place, and it, it's to
me it is not clear. I understand
what you're saying, but to me
there's some bottom foundational
things that have to be looked
at.
Um, let's see, my next question
is on page 2, line 12. It says
that the state tri tribal
educationact means a compact
that has been entered into by
the Department of the Indian
Nation tribe of Pueblo located
wholly or partially in New
Mexico. What is that partially
apply to?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, is he aware Navajo
Nation?
You know, uh, has, you know.
The reservation encompasses in
the Mexico, Arizona, and Utah.
So
You know, I think that's pretty
much standard term as we refer
to Navajo Nation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because
there's several laws that we've
Um, has it specifically say
within the boundaries. So are we
talking about compacts made
between the Navajo nation that
would involve non-New Mexico
residents in the schools. It, it
is simply not clear to me the
way it's written.
No, to be, um,
No, I think this is a state law,
so, you know.
It'll be for state schools, but
it's not uncommon for us to, I
think there's a line out in, in
PD or SCG formula that pays for
our, the Mexico residents that
go to Arizona schools.
That we pay for. So it's
Right, but that's a different
situation when they're closer to
that school, we paid for their
tuition.
So this would mean involving
Arizona funding.
For New Mexico, it's just not,
I'm just pointing out that it's
not clear to me. I don't know if
it's clear, but I had a problem
with that.
Um, let's see.
This is kind of a joke, senator.
I don't see an amendment for
structured literacy on the bill
OK
too soon
Yes, and, and you voted for that
unread amendment that was
amended. Anyway, end of story. I
just had to get it off my chest.
Just get it off your chest,
would that be a friendly
amendment, Senator
And, and I do mean that in
seriousness because that was an
initiative that failed. I mean,
I will say without joking that
in committee, so.
I don't know, um, if we can put
it on every other school, um, in
this case, would you be willing
to accept that.
OK, moving right along,
is that a yes or a no? That was
a question, Senator.
Um
Thank you, right? Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um, another question I have is
if
I, I have the list of languages
and pueblos and who speaks them.
If two pueblos wanted to because
of their proximity and common
language if they wanted to
develop a STEC school together
and the resolution from their
governing bodies agreed to that.
Is that a possibility? And I
understand there may be cultural
differences, but if they worked
that out, is that possible under
this compact legislation.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garret, you know, that's, that's
quite possible, I mean, because
the numbers are so small for
some of the pueblos and you
know, I can think of some of the
characters you can communities
that have small population in
order to have enough students
that, that this might be a real.
Oh, thank you. Um,
let's see, we already did.
I do have a question that
breaking news from the
Department of Education, Mr.
Chair. It founded a memorial,
which I think they had um
webinars on March 14th, saying
that BIE and tribally controlled
schools who received student
funding, they could send those
students with that funding to
private religious or charter
schools.
Does that have any impact on
this legislation? Are you
hearing back from any um leaders
in those school situations in
New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, uh, thanks for sending
me that EO and I was familiar
with it, but I read it and I
think that
Consultation is going out, so I
don't know what the response
have been, you know, from the
tribes or education around the
country in response to the EO
and I could defer to, you know,
uh, representative Garcia
because she's been a school
board member and maybe she has
some thoughts on the EO as it
relates to her, particularly
school with Rama.
Thank you.
Um, as we know, there's breaking
news like every hour, Mr.
Cha from
bedrooms I can't keep up with
it.
Um
No, another question is, does
Hamers currently get advantages
of the Indian Education fund. I
think there's 30 million per
The next 3 years.
Can you access that money.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, uh, the way that, uh,
it's been described to you from
PED is the allocation of those
funds, I think every tribe will
get.
a portion of that, uh, I think
it's 10 billion per year. I read
it and so yes, certainly I think
the Pueblo Jama will be uh to
get some of that money.
Thank you, Mr. Cherry, yeah,
you know.
Um, I looked into the Alaska and
Washington state schools. It
appears that Alaska's um
The law, they did pilots, they
did a lot of research and now
they're just gonna be actually
opening the school in Washington
DC has 7 state tribal education.
Um
I want to follow up on
representative um
since
I always have to think, what's
the last name and what's the
first name?
He, he has to be Navajo cause I
had a lot of friends that when I
was always have first name as
last name like Sisco Bob, you
know.
Why not when he said pilot, I
didn't, I heard an STEC pilot
specifically, not a charter
pilot, but taking exactly what
this says.
Because of the incredible and
anybody who hasn't been to him
is to observe you need to go.
Um, it's incredible what they've
done.
And um using Hawaii and uh the
majority is an incredible wise
choice. But um that's what I
heard, like an actual pilot.
That would go every step of the
way through this. Was that ever
considered?
Let me defer to uh the educating
director for the Pueblo Jema,
uh,
chair represented members of the
committee, um.
The pilot, I think that we have
in place has been funded um
through private foundations, uh,
and, um, different state grants
that we were able to secure
through the Indian Education Act
funds. Um, so the pilot for
Hamus was not considered in
fashioning this particular uh
state tribal compact bill
because the pilot has been
currently in operation for the
last 3 going on 4 years for us.
Um, so you'll be looking to help
to further support and
strengthen what we've piloted,
um,
As
And yeah, uh, as compact school,
um, is, is where we're at at the
moment within Hama, but um.
You know, if that's a
recommendation, I wouldn't just
leave it to Haus only I maybe
identify 5 or so communities
that may be willing to pilot and
are ready uh to take that um
initiative, uh, if that's a step
that is going to be entertained,
but it's not, was not written as
a pilot as uh the original
compact bill because we are
currently in the pilot phase,
um, being funded by private and
and state dollars. Um, and just
One thing going back to your
units allocation of uh
ELL students. I have in past
tribal consultations with the
different school districts that
serve our students have made the
recommendation, um, that, you
know, we don't have English
language learners in some of our
tribal communities now and
speaking specifically for Haman,
we have Haman language learners.
So I think the terminology of
how the state looks at
allocating these units and
labeling them also needs to
change because we have young
people in our communities that
are not fluent in Hammoth no
more.
Um, uh, nor grounded in English,
and that's why I shared earlier
the struggling academically. So
we now have Haman's language
learners in Hamas and I'm sure
every other tribal community in
the state does as well. So maybe
it's revisiting those units and
formulas and how you label
support, um, for, um, the young
people that are going through
our education systems because we
now have a lot of native
language learners, and that's,
that's the effort to revitalize
our school systems. And and I
I think one other thing that
really has challenged tribes
that are working to revitalize
and strengthen their languages
is the messaging that comes from
PED and the B Bureau of Indian
Education is that if our kids
aren't English language literate
by 3rd grade or a certain grade
level that they're not going to
be successful.
And I think that also hurts
tribal efforts directly because
it's
Invalidating the wealth of
knowledge within our own
languages and the brain
development that is supported by
a young person learning multiple
languages and the capacity of
the brain that is stimulated,
um, based on research, and I
think that
Those are all aspects that need
to be considered if we're really
serious about improving the
academic success of our
students, and we keep talking
about the 50th place, um, we
have such a diversity in
cultures, um, not only native
Hispanic, um, African American
and other Latino um cultures
within our state that
We don't bring that diversity
and enrich it, um, and use it as
strength within our school
systems, and I think that's
where really we need to look to
revisit education within our
state. Thank you.
Thank you. I just have um one
more question and a comment.
Did you sit down and senator,
um, with people in PED.
In preparation of this bill to
go through it with
Um, well, it's been some changes
in PED, uh, so, uh.
sleep.
We will take.
I, I just think it would have
been good for this specific
bill. And I just wanna say I'm
a, I, the model that you're
striving for.
And have already been
implementing I totally support
it. I just
You know, the legislation and
everything else, everything has
to match it. So thank you. Thank
you. Um, so I had a few
questions and along the lines of
represent Garrett, I'll push him
a little bit more because yes,
there has been change amongst
the secretary, obviously, um,
and has been, but a lot of the
core uh deputies especially for
for native education are still
there, so have you had those
discussions with the folks from
PED
to, I think the director, I
personally
wouldn't have much interaction,
but I know there's a lot of
interaction that's going along
with.
Respective education directors
of the various tribes and in
particular I think uh Mr. Sheno
from Hama probably had a lot
more.
A chair represented members of
the committee, um, I think your
interaction with the Indianed
assistant director for Indian
education.
Um
We do have a lot of interaction
with the different grants and
funds that are supporting, uh,
with this particular bill.
We did have a discussion with
them when they were tasked with
doing the analysis uh of the
bill. And so we clarified some
questions and um but they are
aware from 2 years ago when the
bill was first introduced to
where it was now on, so yes,
they, we did have conversations
about um the bill analysis that
they were asked to do and some
of the clarifications that um
they needed support with. Um,
but overall, just our work with
the Indian division, uh, has
been very good and it's um
I guess it's it's on a deeper
level than what it was in the
past, um, their engagement,
their communication and
consultation interaction with
tribes on the different grant
sources and resources available
and investments that they're
making in different tribal
communities that support the
unique, um,
Priorities that each community
is trying to pursue um because
each community is in a different
place, uh, not only with
language and culture, but
resources and their structure
and um the programs that they
have available to their kids or
want to make available to their
kids. So they are are tasked
with the quite a bit uh in
order, currently, you know,
we're saying these individual
compacts will be individualized
between the state and the tribe,
but that is also currently
happening with the different
grant processes.
because the grant requests are
respective of uh individual
tribe's priorities and needs.
And, and thank you for that. Um,
I guess I was wondering, Senator
Shindo as well, what do you see
the role of us and I'll I'll use
us because we're all a part of
state government right here.
What's the role of us as a
legislature in these compacts,
do you see a role for it?
You know, the way it's
Um
Written
I don't think our rule is
explicit, but I think we can
certainly build something in,
you know.
So to ensure that we're all
understand or it moves forward
and station of these uh schools.
And I, and I think Senator,
that, that that's an important
piece of this because I think as
I'm seeing it, we're having a
disconnect between we're seeing
us as the legislative branch all
the power to the to the PED and
to the executive, um, whereas us
here are the appropriators and
we just had a struggle, which
you know, Senator, on House Bill
63 and getting that fully
funded.
Amen, I think it was
representative Cullen that
brought up the fact that um
We had struggles with the SCG.
We have issues with um
potentially deluding the SCG,
um, and, and, and that's a real
cause for concern amongst
everybody that we have declining
enrollment and we're struggling
around this question as a state,
how much is it enough to find
education in general.
Whether it's these schools
potential compact schools,
whether it's our schools in
general, the school that I teach
at, other public schools around
the state, um.
But we're still stuck in this
model of so much per student,
um, and, and I think that's what
what really gives me concern
when we start carving up.
The SCG in different sorts of
ways and in a non-orchestrated
fashion because I hear a lot
about House Bill 63, but that
was theunte that was 2 years'
worth of work.
Bringing all of the stakeholders
together to talk about what that
looks like, what should be a
part of it. Is there a problem
just like starting off with that
question, is there a problem?
And then working from there um
which we came to, to, um, you
know, the proposed solution on
um.
I mean, also, um, I think public
school capital outlay system. I
mean, I'd be interested in your
thoughts, you know, you had
mentioned as far as the SCG, the
potential impact is, you know,
granted on the very extreme end,
um, but also public school
capital outlay.
Um, being that there may not be
a local match.
What the hit with that be uh
$566 million.
Um, any thoughts on public
school capital that way.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, uh, thanks
for that question. I think, you
know,
Um, again, you know, the
analysis on the extreme end, but
I think, you know, these
schools.
Uh
You know, should be
And for all the reefs for them
differently and we're treating
them as second class citizens,
and that's what we're trying to
get away from.
And, and, and I understand that,
Senator, um, but also I mean
part of what we're trying to do
in education around the state
too is to be responsive to all
students, um, despite their
background and we had that back
and forth as far as the science
of reading bill, and this
question of English only and by
literacy and what sort of of of
role.
both play as far as our
students, and that's something
that we're trying to juggle,
whereas here I understand the
issue of tribal sovereignty, but
we're also talking about
allowing these schools to bypass
the public school code almost
entirely.
Um
We
You know, um,
It is also a question of to what
extent um do we allow, um, the
bypassing of the public school
code.
Which is a question I think PED
had as to what extent is that
something that's going to be
covered in the compact.
Uh, Mr. Chair, yeah, no, I think
that's part of the, uh, the
conversation and so forth and
just to, you know, I mean, SCG
is one piece and I the
legislature, you know, we have
other, you know, multiple
sources just we just passed HBO
450, you know, it has an entire
section funded for, you know,
public schools and charter
schools, so, you know, we have
various funding mechanisms to,
to fund, you know, you know.
As as appropriate was to find
the resources to make sure.
And, and I appreciate that
answer, and then lastly, for me,
um, you come to a decision on
the amendment for proposed signs
of breeding.
No, but I, I do have an option
to put out there, and I think
something that.
discussion of in this reminds me
back in the 1990s when there was
a big discussion around
Vouchers with their governor
Johnson.
And the fact that the, as part
of that.
debate and uh uh negotiation
that they allowed up to 5
charter schools that first year.
So if we want to pilot something
without expanding it to a
larger.
I will be amenable to.
Allowing up to 5.
Uh, schools through this compact
model.
So that will allow us because
tribes are different stages and,
and, and, and, and I don't want
to prevent tribes from thinking
about this, but I don't think,
but I, I'm thinking.
3 to 4 might be, but I think if
we were to look at 5 of these.
Compact schools as models, at
least for this first iteration,
then that will give us the
feedback, and I think uh uh that
will, you know, hopefully
support some of the tribes that
are here supporting this
because.
You have to remember every day,
we lost a lot of elders during
COVID.
We can debate here about.
Dollars and cents.
But when or language speakers
go, they're gone.
So we can spend all the
afternoons.
We're gonna find the money.
That is less concern for me.
And for some of these are, are,
are, are relatives.
verge of losing their languages
if we don't do something.
So I would be more than willing
to entertain.
You know, in this bill.
At least pilot 5 schools.
Whatever communities whoever
we're not going to pick them.
They have to decide for
themselves.
And and give them opportunity.
And Senator, that's something I
think.
certainly appreciate here, um.
We have an issue as far as time
obviously.
Um, cause we're running up
against time here, so a lot can
happen in 24 hours.
That, that is, I've been here
for 13 years. That is true,
senator. Um, so I guess what
we've done in the past in this
committee is roll bills.
Um, until probably Friday to get
those amendments in so that we
can look at them.
Um, bring it back.
And then as you said, in 24
hours, try to get um a bill.
Through the process, if we're
going to be a pilot.
This does have another committee
House Appropriations and
finance.
I mean, the, the thing is, the
thing is is that
We have one more committee.
Which is fine, but
the only thing is is that we
need a commitment that we're
going to have that in finance
and appropriations should we let
this bill go.
Chair, I have.
That's a question for for
Senator Sinda. I'll repeat that
again so
if we let this go, we just need
assurance.
Well, we just need assurance if
we were to let this go, that
that's going to happen in
finance and appropriations.
An amendment for a 5 up to 5
compacts.
Pilots and this be a pilot
program.
It
well
it is, but
and we do have 4 people sitting.
With us that are on finance and
appropriations if we can make
that to that.
Yeah
I represent boviero, please. So,
um,
procedurally.
Uh, we're asking the senator.
When we move this bill out of
here with our vote to amend.
The bill to add the 5 which the
amendment would be up to 5
schools.
Which would serve as the model
pilots.
Or enacting.
this bill
The amendment
would be made here or the
amendment would be made to what
we're talking about and I just
want to say, obviously it wasn't
our idea, but it was a senator's
idea that we are agreeing to,
but yes, we're talking about
whether we move this bill on
with the commitment that it be a
pilot.
Up to 5 compacts every time that
was my question. I was gonna,
where I was leading to is how
then do we frame our motion to
move pass representative, we
would, we would have a due pass
or whatever motion is the will
of the committee, and it should
it move on, that's the
commitment.
So that's what I wanted to do.
So if you could not entertaining
I know if you could put me on
the list for that motion. Sure,
sure, if you would please also
go back in the chair.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, I'm
ranking member in the approach.
But I, I'm not the chairman.
So I, I'll be glad to talk to
the chairman.
I only have one vote once we get
past that, I, I don't vote for
the whole committee, so, so I'll
be glad to talk to the chairman
about uh in in uh maybe you
should write it down what our
request is when it comes out of
this committee and, and I'll be
glad to take it. I'll go there
and talk it to the Mr. Chair,
uh.
Uh, Senator, I'll take it to the
chairman and knowing that I
have, I have one vote, that's
all we all have in this, uh,
In this building, Mr. Chairman,
so I, I would be glad to be the
messenger. Thank you. I
appreciate that, Mr. Chairman,
and so forth, and you know I
come from oral traditions, so my
work.
It's more than the written
language, we certainly
appreciate that.
And I can also speak and go with
you to the chair of finance and
appropriations as well.
Um
All right, so, uh, represent
Roel Caviero.
Mr. Chair, I then move a Du pass
of Senate bill.
13.
All right, so the do pass motion
by Robert Caviero, seconded by
Represent Conn, Madam Secretary,
call a roll on a
Do pass
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Jat Bill.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
love.
Representative Garcia.
Uh yes, I don't need to explain
it
to Gonzalez.
Yes.
Representative Corona, and I
want to explain my book.
Representative Chilata.
Yes, and for the first time ever
I will explain my vote.
Representative
Maribal Moya.
Yes, but I don't have to explain
my book. Oh good.
Uh, energy for al caballero.
Unequivocally and um yes.
Representative Collins. Yes.
Representative Torres Valese.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Our representative Vincent. Yes.
Uh vice chair Garrick. Yes.
Yes.
All right, so we have end list.
We've gone through quite a bit
today, so please make it like
brief, brief.
I think he was term thinks
Senator, and I appreciate you
coming to this kind of agreement
because I'd rather start with a
model and do it right, then
we're saying we're gonna be back
to 5, you know, schools like
this in 10 years anyway, so
that's the reason for my vote
and the fact you own us too.
Uh, basically meant it for a, a,
a study or basically model
represent.
Mr. I also come from a, a
culture where you're wearing
your handshakes all it takes. I
only wanted it written down, Mr.
Chair, so that I got it right
lot of
for the first time ever
groundbreaking moment
groundbreaking,
uh, senator.
Thank you.
I've always had a lot of respect
for you and now have you had
more respect for you. Thank you
for working with us. Thank you,
Senator. Represent Torres
Velasquez. Chair and Senator, I
echo that. Thank you so very
much for your flexibility with
this. I do believe that a pilot
is the way to go just as we
heard what I would like to make
sure is that we have Navajo
Nation and Mescaler Apache at
the table in all aspects of this
pilot. Thank you.
All right, so you have a due
pass in 13th. Thank you.
Alright, so folks in the
committee.
That is our committee, so thank
you all very much for all your
hard work. I appreciate each and
every one of you. Great work
represent Corola. Yeah, thank
