Representative put a home
representative horrible coviato.
Chairman romero
madam chair garrett here
we do have a forum
with that our first bill and our
only bill today will be house
memorial twenty nine
study teacher recruitment and
retention and representative
when you're ready you can start
and introduce your expert
witness good morning when yes
thank you and i'm sure that you
committee for me to be here
with me is I met his
he's gonna be helping avoid that
thing support and expect with
this you want to use yourself
sure madam chair committee and
happy to be here this morning
any armortage I would send your
policy analyst for alliancy
so how's memorial twenty nine is
asking lesc.
Do a study
for we have in that
intercommunity whether chair if
you remember the committee we
have any actually introduced a
presentative as I report on
differentials so we when I was
beyond that we want to see how
those efforts make that the
friends in teachers retention so
our state has made a lot of
progress in teacher salaries but
it doesn't seem to translate the
declaration teachers retentions
so we want to see if that
financials and
certification teacher will make
any further that also we know
that providing highly credit
card if I location first it is
required teachers who are also
highly qualified right so we
want to see that correlation and
that is anything that we can
learn from that and to support
our students especially that
once were in the in a negative
this advantage thank you
anything.
Madame chair members of the
committee i'm just to add on wet
to what the representative said
and i'm sure preaching to the
choir here everyone here is well
aware that educators are
absolutely critical education
but just to highlight that from
school you're twenty three
citical you're twenty four we
did see an increase and
estimated teacher vacancies
according to ms use so report
we're seeing increased rates of
teacher turnover in the state as
well over the past few years and
although following twenty twenty
two legislative investments to
increase teacher salary minimums
we did see an increased teacher
pipeline which is great it's
also important to note that the
majority of those are program
completers are completing
alternative license or programs
about sixty percent of those
and some restaurants does
indicate that they have higher
rates of attrition and they're
generally entering classrooms
with little to know classmore
experience when they are arrave
so with this memorial aims to do
its fairly broadened scope it's
to really kind of digging to
what do we need to do as a state
to address teacher recruitment
and retention we know the
compensation is one of the most
important things in recruiting
and retaining quality educators
and so this report would really
can have digging to a wide range
of those issues ranging from
when we increased the salary
minimums what does that do for
compaction per experience
educators it looks out what kind
of differential payment can I
get to them can we use to fill
hard just have positions but it
also looks that how do we retain
our most experienced teachers
i'm in terms of kind of
innovative staffing models that
are better for teachers and
better for students potentially
and could provide career
advancement opportunities for
teachers that don't require them
to move into an administrative
position and leave the classroom
providing kind of more
leadership and cluster
mentorship roles within their
schools for other teachers which
we've seen some.
Sort of phenomenal initial
outcomes being pillated in
my goodness I want to see carls
bad and I hope i'm the current
with cars
so i'll leave it with that
that's that's sort of the the
general the general memorial so
with at least stand for
questions thank you thank you
madame chair and wist of
requested and comments
thank you and with that will go
first to the audience then we'll
go online is there anybody who
would like to speak in favor of
house memorial twenty nine.
Cape will go on the right side.
The.
Do you want me to wait for a
microconnector.
Is that how we're okay thank you
members
thank you members in the
committee my name is alan
bernstein I am the president of
the other few teachers
federation and I am speaking in
favor of this memorial for so
many reasons I was here when we
created the three tiered license
system and as somebody who had
already studied compensation
reform in teacher pay I wondered
why we didn't get famous as a
state for our compensation
reform that we created with the
three tiered system i've always
wanted to flesh out our career
later to recognize or highly
credential teachers and I think
if we look at credentials as an
opportunity to not just
recognize
the talent and the capability
that our teachers have in our
classrooms but also as a way to
address the martinis and your
lawsuit as we really target
credentialing areas that are
highly sought after and need it
to resolve that last year such
as t so and by legal we've
already created the precedent
for this as we've recognized
national boards certified
teachers with a credential
differential and I think this
will go along way towards
retention we have a great work
force I was on a national task
force on teacher shortages and
one of the things it's clear as
we have more people credential
to teach in our nation then we
have people willing to teach and
so we there are many layers to
retaining our people in the
classroom and I think this is
one of those great things we
could do and I support thank you
thank you anybody else on the
side on the speaker support.
The.
Okay on this side anybody want
to speak in support.
Hi good morning what about
martinis professor university
mexico and also the director
have the instruction in the
education and also and the pi
for the native mercy teacher
preparation program I think i've
testified in some product you
would listen I want to thank you
for this legislation and for us
due to retention as well as
recruitment is is vital to what
we do we have we've had were in
our second cohort and all of our
students at are waiting and
getting certified or from one of
the twenty three native nations
in new mexico and their for
purpose of our of our um of our
organization or if our program
is to make sure that these
students return or are going to
teach in our native communities
whether it's eliminal or it's
towers
or whatever whatever community
take come from in whatever means
it takes and will former high
and still certified your
teachers to retire the high
school coach price country and
chat track up in high school as
well as highly then sell and I
work at why ddc I taught it for
your high school but this is so
critical and I really hope that
we move forward with this so
thank you for your support on
this thank you.
Okay anybody else want to speak
in favor he will go to online.
If you would like to speak in
favor of please raise your hand.
A greg rockled and meet yourself
you have the floor for two
minutes.
Thank you ma'am thank you for
this opportunity to address the
committee.
Since twenty seventeen.
We have staggering numbers of
children in our state not having
a license teacher in her
classroom that numbers a hundred
and twenty three thousand kids
in the mexico without a license
teacher.
This is humungous this is a
travesty
to put a serbian there and
expect the sub to actually grow
those kids academically.
We can't continue year after
year.
I was present coalition school
administrators and i'd be at
meetings and albuquerque and
everybody with someone would
make a statement thank god we're
not missus sippy well look at
mississippi now.
They're leaps above us.
We've had the same results for
fifty years.
While I support this I support
this endeavour.
I create a spending another year
because our kids need license
teachers.
But again I do support this.
The teacher crisis the teacher
shortened crisis is real.
In its kicking us in the tail.
And we can't afford to go
another year we need to address
this now by using our community
colleges ccba community college
back lord association we need to
use was available to us to turn
out teachers in a hall at
quicker fation because as I know
everyone in the room knows it
takes right of four years to
graduate but it takes anywhere
from two to four years
additional years to become a
halfway decent teacher.
So there's no way we can ask
kids to wait seven to nine years
to have a decent teacher in your
classroom.
So thank you very much.
Thank you and next is.
Kate she know other people see
anybody in opposition to house
memorial twenty nine.
Anybody online
in opposition to house memorial.
Number twenty nine
opposition will go to the
committee i'm represented their
middle
thank you madame chair think you
representative in any
I really i'm kind of excited
about this because I think we
really need to kind of get an in
depth of what is going on here
one thing I would definitely
hopefully recommend I know in in
my district I I see.
A lot of turnover in those that
are brandy teachers those that
whether it's alternative license
or or or whatever but those
within the first five years
sometimes they don't and I mean
I teach up at a high school and
often people tell me all my gosh
how can you do it I personally
love it and and I wouldn't I and
I don't want any other any other
age group but those that are
that have to that go in there
and really don't know or aren't
ready for what they're getting
into and have no support last
one or two years.
And and then they're gone and in
their like I can't do this I I
don't get paid enough to deal
with these these teenagers as
what is what because they just
they don't have the tools and
that's where I think looking
into that career advancement to
wear like carls that is doing
with those teacher mentors if
they have that support if they
didn't fill alone in the
classroom maybe we could save a
lot of those that are in there
alternative license or because
we do need to open it up when
you start we need to think out
of the box in order to
get I was actually an
alternative license teacher so
so I definitely know how it is
when you know zero educational
lingo
and you're and you might know
your content but but that's
about it so
not having that help you know
there's other issues for those
that have been the been there
for for thirty years in our like
too tired to deal with it
anymore but a lot of times we I
mean I know even if my own
experiences
I think even though and i've
shared with the sir with this
committee often that it took
five years to finally get our
science department fully
staffed.
Um so for for the other then
this year there was a sub in the
biology class every single year
and and that's terrible because
now there my physics students
for the past you can sell so
that they're missing those
components because as much as
long term subtries they don't
have the knowledge m n
and the end and the ability to
do what would license teachers
do so so I I would definitely
hope that we can kind of figure
out because I think that's all
that's a lot of them too is is
those that get in there and
within one or two possibly three
years they're done by the time
they're their first year
licenses up which is what I
think is like two or three years
that that they get their initial
license yeah then they just
they're like i'm not going to
renew it i'm not i'm done and
and they're out so how can we
save them because that could be
huge because they already have a
desire to do this if we can
support them and save them and
then maybe keep them in there
that would be excellent thank
you.
Representative he sell
mentioner thank you very much
we've gotten the station this
legislative session where
everybody's
ready to go home i'm afraid we
have passed the burger so I
think we probably should before
we get in deeper than I am
sitting here reading this
particular memorial and I do
have some concerns about it okay
I understand what you want to do
here
but whenever I see on our
analysis that
you're asking less to require
work with representatives from
ped lfc hed teacher unions
teacher prep programs leadership
districts and tarder schools
there is one porting round that
is missing from this and that is
representation from my rural
areas that do have four day week
classrooms to me that's very
import.
If you don't include them and
this we're going to have more
teachers shortages especially if
we have somebody from the fourth
floor say in
and I see mr frosted is here in
the room saying.
We don't want for day weeks we
want everybody to have five day
week get your birth out of the
office get out to these rural
areas where there are four day
classes and these are the
schools that are excelling
because if you close them down
guess what.
You have just cut these students
are from what they were doing to
expire in their scholastic
careers.
And what is going to happen
there.
They're going to be put on a
schoolbust riding in for adam I
went to two hours to get some
other school district.
That's what fixed and happened
so i'm not going to support this
unless you include that
particular round in this dirty.
Simple as that
whenever and yeah i'm getting
testy right here not really
don't care
madame cheer and representative
on page two of your memorial
starting on let's see listless
call at mine twenty four.
And I will read this the average
teacher salary and the state
falls below a living weight in
new mexicans highest living wage
counties I want to know what
those counties are.
Thank you mister mellon share
and representative
can we other is the first part
and then the second where you
talk about them and it was just
a statement I had to make sense
to go on with the with the
second issue I brought it
madame that I love the don't
thank you
representative I can I list all
of those for memory thought up
my head but I can look it up to
you if you like mature economy
follow up with you now i'd i'd
really like to know or we just
including our more metropolitan
areas in that statement or
reincluding los alamos because
that is the top living weight in
our state i'm kind of curious
sure i'm representative and
there's about I think ten
different counties that we
looked at that fault that fall
within that not all of them are
metropolitan I can also say that
within the
analysis for this bill and
within the memorial itself it
points out that another area we
really want to look into his
housing because we've heard from
rural districts that that is one
of the biggest problems they
have for recruiting new teachers
is not the cost of housing in
those cases always but just the
availability of infrastructure
and that's why a lot of them are
needing
teacher and just investments and
infrastructure for their
teachers so we do really realize
that the needs of our districts
are widely diverse and that's
why aliested in this last
interim conducted a few major
studies including one and
tendence and was very careful to
select um including the smallest
district and in the state but a
lot of rural districts and we
went to them and visited them
and interviewed their students
and their staff to make sure
we're getting at the same as
differences between the
different needs of districts and
madame cheer representative can
you tell me what areas you did
visit whenever you're talking
about the smaller schools
and put me on the spot.
Share presentative you are
actually did not conduct a total
of that at the top of my head
look into that for your follow
up okay I think that's very
important because you know we re
reach all the way from loving
new mexico all the way up to
moscow going across all around
in our rural areas and there are
making it work that these
teachers that are teaching in
these small rural schools that
is a four day a week classroom
sometimes they do have a
commentations that they stay in
during that four day period they
come in on a monday or a tuesday
working through thursday or of
friday and then they're able to
go home.
And if that changes forum.
You guys have just missed the
opportunity to retain these
teachers that are teaching the
school these young people to the
best of their ability and they
are excelling get it so I do
have concerns there.
So yes I would like to get back
with me on what rural schools
were
right in
and another thing i'd like to
bring up there is one school
district out of my part of the
world.
That if that small school was
closed down these kids would be
on the school bus over two hours
one way so that means they would
leave whenever it's dark they
would get home whenever it's
dark.
That needs to be taken into
consideration
but you know what.
Most time more often than not
those of us that do live in the
rural areas are completely
overlooked it is mandated by
what some of the bigger school
districts want and i'd take
great offence to that I really
do I am a product of our teacher
public schools I did at him
carton with school I was the
minority out there.
We didn't know that because we
were all friends out there
everybody was treated equally
and that's a problem.
Do not overlook us cause we do
have a loud voice evident by me
okay matter chair representative
I actually have the information
for you
know that's your
okay the districts that were
included in less these
attendants study these were as
save visits they made included
burdenly a public schools
central consolidated schools a
light and municipal schools los
alamos public schools loving
municipal schools masovista
consolidated schools santa fe
public schools towards
integrated school for the arts
truth are consequences municipal
schools and west last biggest
public school.
Man I have a problem with the
out of other schools at you
listed there's a lighter loving
house and potentially tears see
cause I can't remember if they
are
four day or five day I really
care a member
so I don't think you have given
great overview to our rural
schools.
My opinion okay taken from what
it's worth.
I love our teachers my
grandmother was a teacher for
over forty years as she was one
of those that
had to start teaching back in
nineteen twenty seven after her
husband got killed.
Okay
and she is a pretty remarkable
woman.
And every student that she had.
Just praises her like you can't
believe.
But she had to drive to be able
to get there and that was back
during the dep.
I do get really upset whenever I
hear that we always need to keep
training them.
Folks light is not easy
simple as it
and I get tired of
getting calls from my
constitution we like to school
but we don't like the teacher
that's there so my opinion my
opinion only madame chair
those text dollars should follow
the students.
Because if they are not getting
the best education that they
possibly can that mean money
needs to follow students whether
they decide to go to a different
school or to charge school or
pro.
Because our kids desert we we
guarantee it in the constitution
oh but wait sometimes we don't
care about the constitution
says.
That was real snary on my part
was snippy a minute
I probably I don't i'm going to
listen to see what everybody
else has to say cast the living
in housing availability
statewide I don't understand how
you can.
Not have visited a lot of the
schools and understand the
housing situation we have varies
in our part of the state that
does find education to the
fullest extent
and there is no housing in
certain areas down there mainly
because of the amount of work
that is going on down there that
does spend our state's budget at
fifty percent.
Over fifty percent.
I know one of my smaller school
districts that does have a four
day school week does have a
teatrit.
Many this good smaller areas do
or there are accommodations for
these teachers that do have to
drive
to be able to spend that work
week there and be able to go
home for three days.
Yeah.
I do want our teachers to be
retained if they are good if
they are qualified if they are
giving the best education
possible to our students but I
do have a problem whenever I
hear somebody
on line stating it takes nine
years to make a good teacher I
don't agree with that at all.
Adult
all it takes as communication
folks if you have a problem you
need to go visit with somebody
whether it's the principle
whether it's another teacher
down the hall or whatever the
case might be but it does not
take nine years to make a good
teacher I appreciate every
teacher out.
And I think that we have given.
The amount of races that we did
give our teaching staff
throughout the state
cost of living I know keeps
going up keeps going up keeps
going up and when I will this is
really getting out of subject
madame cheer but I am going to
bring it up right now.
Whenever you're going to the
grocery store now you used to
spend a hundred dollars and came
out maybe with four bags
groceries to go in the grocery
store today
spend a hundred dollars and come
out with two and think what's
for separate.
So I understand that but what's
fixed and happened.
This body and i'm not saying
just dried here i'm saying down
there on the house
with fixed killed against the
late golden egg.
They tried to do away with the
well and gas production that's
what is right here we're trying
to go breen I don't have a
problem with that but I don't
want it mandate it's my right to
choose to adelectric vehicle to
drive.
What gets all of our goods from
the west coast or the east coast
into our area for sale.
It seemed trucks that do it.
Whenever there being mandated
that they have to be electric
their pay load is just cut now
mainly because the way that the
batteries that are in those in
those similars.
So it's an.
We can work hand in hand with
the extraction industry because
if you drive an electric car
you're still going to have to
have oil
you're going to have to have
rubber on those tires you're
still going to have to have
copper on indian in the
batteries and if it's come what
in the hickory you're going to
do whenever that car won't start
if I had electric vehicle if it
was my choice I wouldn't be able
to get from my rent to sound
I would not be able to pull my
stock trailer to get my
lifestock to sale.
And I know i'm getting really
off subject right here but we
have to keep in mind how our
actions are pure
effect everybody statewide.
And what we're looking at right
here is the but most should be
of that most important what
we're doing up here.
Making sure that our kids get
the best education passport.
Awkward thank you madame chair
thank you for your responses I
do look forward to the response
okay thank you
thank you representative we have
three more representative latter
representative chat field and
the representative
and do try to stick a little bit
to the
memoir we've had a broad
presentation and now we'll go
focused.
Thank you madame chair.
I like the idea obviously I
signed onto it but one of the
things that in my conversations
these pasts last night and this
morning with the similar score
members and are super denied is
the the need for a special edge
teachers.
And I think that should be a
very important emphasis on this
is is emphasizing the the
how we can compete especially
with with our neighbors to the
east to get more special
teachers in our classrooms and I
think there should be an episode
of the study and i'm i'm gonna
look at over a director warn
that please if we can make that
a very important part of it I
honestly in my opinion it should
be the the the impetus of it.
But we really need to focus on
special teachers because many of
our students aren't
able to receive all the services
that they deserve to receive
because of the lack of the
teachers that we don't have so I
think that's going to be one of
the most important things that
we have to to to look at and and
focus on it on this on the
studious especial education and
how we can recruit every
teenager teachers and how much
we're gonna have to compensate
the for that because we need to
write a living weight a
competitive living weight and we
need to make sure that we're
competitive with our neighbors
around that that surround us and
that's really important to and I
think that would address a lot
of the issues and the needs that
we have that are children have
and I believe that that the
study was going to help us get
there but III ask if we could
put a little bit of a little bit
of spicener and make sure make
sure that we look at the at this
a little bit more closely thank
you manager thank you.
Representative chat feel
thank you very much matcher I
would be encouraged at housing
be one of the things that study
it's a big issue out in the area
of the four days school week in
the small schools of the rural
schools are remote school there
is no housing
I spent sixteen years on the
school board at moscow at that
dime it was the smallest school
district in the state we hire.
A small school district where
you're just all on your own not
a good learn in place for a
superintendent they need to be
have some mileage so we would
hire super tenants sometimes
they had retired in taxes or
somebody that had some mileage
and understood things but if
you're really really good you're
not going to make your family
live in a piece of job cast you
just not going to do that and
there was a time when it was
really hard to for a school
district to get funded to build
houses it's getting a little
easier now and that's a very
wise choice but it's idiot very
important thing trying to
recruit teachers and
superintendents.
There are top of their game that
are high quality that really
like what they do and that are
good at what they do if they
they're not going to bring their
family to live in a piece of
dress now search this month they
don't have to and they're not
going to so it's important in
our in our rule areas our remote
areas that we have the ability
to put those teachers in a good
house
sometimes we might have to build
that house.
The highest
cost of living also in the state
of new mexico by the weight is
corallas.
Los ratus towels and sanity so
that would be another place
where housing would affect those
folks because of the high cost
of housing so I I really are due
to make that a part of your
study because it it affects us
in the rural areas and it
appexes in the cities also take
your manager.
Thank you representative and I
might add i've visited must get
on not only do they have teacher
edges but they have a super
intended edge as I recall.
Representative.
Think you made a chair and think
your sponsor
i'm very proud of the fact that
smart know the new mexico
college graduated forty three
teachers last year it was kind
of amazing and I think sometimes
when you have a problem
people they're drowning you know
downstream you might want to go
up stream and look and see
what's going on
and this is one of those cases
i'd like to see what the when
you do this study i'd like to
see who's graduating teachers
and at what level.
I and how are they doing that
how is this small school with it
really a small enrollment
graduating forty three teachers
a lot of that has to do with
grill your own a ladder that has
to do with the opportunity act
so so they've they made it a
point to reach out an r recruit
people you know they they just
hired a recruiter this year to
go out and recruit people who
are interested in teaching their
trying to track more people the
colleges doing that that is in
any legislation that we've
created here so I would like
that steady to look at that and
see who's doing the best job in
in
getting teachers through you
know a four year program
I I think that should be
important part of this study and
it's nothing you have to write
in or make an amendment about
that I I think that's really in
a a critical part of this study
how are you know cause we have a
lot of problems getting
universities to do things we
want him to do i'm i'm just
going to say that so we should
look at the unit the
universities and the colleges
that are doing a good job and
see how we replicate that I
think that would be helpful for
future legislation that's all I
have to say and I fully intend
to support the spiel thank you
manager.
Thank you and I just have a
couple points
i'm looking at career
advancement opportunities to
improve the recruitment and
retention we can make sure we
take a deep dive to
alternative license teach.
Because that's an issue and I
think as a representative mitter
while moya pointed out and we
saw in carl's bad I moved former
instructional coach I had a
hundred and seven adults because
I had the largest elementary
school and when I went to carl
spread and I saw a model of a
teacher taking you know to grade
levels of math they're too grade
levels.
Of language arts
looking at new ways
do we need a new category of
certification what what can we
do and then my other point is.
As an aps teacher bilingual
endorse teachers who were doing
it got I think three thousand or
thirty five hundred t soul
endorsed people.
Got twenty five hundred if they
were teaching five hundred if
they had it but I don't believe
that's a state wide situation as
I believe that for a billing
will teacher who's personally
teaching and two languages many
bilingual endorse teachers don't
teach a billing will classroom
because of the massive work so
if we can look at that and then
as everybody said you have.
These rich communities where
teachers can't live you have
rural areas where there's no
place to live so really
available point so thank you
very much for bringing this
forward do I have a motion on mr
chair madame charle move a due
pass and house memorial twenty.
It's like.
Second from a representative
chat field we've had emotion and
a second is there any opposition
to passing the memorial
at case seen no opposition you
have a memoil and with that our
final business of the day is
interductions and I believe
representative of latter you
have some people to introduce
thank you thank you thank you
manager
i'm i'm proud to have some
students from something that is
a high school to hear to you
with us their members of the set
that has a high school band and
welcome welcome students
manager if it's okay if we can
have an introduced themselves to
us.
And with the thing
yes introduced or something what
instrument you play please
they could start over here at
this end of your yes.
I'm german landmark.
I'm saying that.
When in the salary model I play
the trouble.
I mean other such as I played.
Thinking manager and also we can
have their teachers there
they're bending the instructor
introduced please although i'm
daniel
director bands at saturday's.
I applied.
Thank you
welcome to the house
representatives they can walk up
thank you manager
and I wish you could have like
marriage
practice
we have some additional
introductions from
representative of chat field
thank you I would.
