No, as soon as the
but it's the signs now that it's
a signs that they put up now
cause we hadn't had a problem
and now there's one with the
sign.
All right, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, representative
for bringing this forward. You
know, there's always unintended
consequences every time you do
something good, sometimes we
don't see what what could
possibly happen and I'm gonna
support your bill today. But uh
one of the questions I had was
CTE teachers in high growth
areas earn nearly 20% more in
the private industry. And I've
been hearing that, you know, we
have teacher shortages. It's,
it's hard to get our, our
teachers and um with the study.
specifically focusing on how to
compete with the draw of private
industry for these teachers
seems like the biggest hurdle
and how are we going to combat
that? How are we gonna make sure
that we're paying our teachers
right. And, and if you start
losing teachers.
And they're going to the private
industry, sometimes that's that
unattended.
Consequence that I'm talking
about, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
one point that I
Didn't mention in my instruction
was, um, that was the intention
of the inclusion of Department
of Workforce Solutions, um,
another part of the study calls
for the possible partnership
between workforce solutions to
see how to possibly integrate
industry into this very critical
pipeline.
I have seen in my home area, um,
our hospital, for instance, um,
let their head nurse go to go
teach our local community
college, pay the salary of the
head nurse or the salary of a
nurse, um, but that then
resulted in 6 new nurses coming
into the hospital right out of
that cohort. So this is also
part of that study is what sort
of solutions can we work
together with industry to see
maybe if there is some
incentives for because it is
It is also self-serving, uh,
workforce to want to continue to
create that pipeline, um, every
industry mentioned here is in
need of workers, is in need of
staff, is in need of personnel,
and so what
What can all the departments
together work to create that,
knowing that industry does pay
higher. Um, you are not likely
to get a master mechanic to come
in and get $2000 for an 8 week
course. But where does that
partnership happen and maybe
what incentives can be put onto
industry to allow this teaching
pathway to happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you for the time.
don't have anybody else on my
list. What's the will of the
committee?
I make the motion.
Alright, have a motion for a
pass by Represent Colin the
second by representing Mea Moya,
um.
Dare I ask, is there any
opposition to the DuPass motion,
any opposition, seeing none, you
have a house on 433. Thank you.
All right.
Zoom into one more, please.
Oh, we'll go to.
As Bill 277. So whenever you get
set up and ready,
representative, please.
All right, thank you. Hopefully
I can get through this without
coughing, so that would be
great. um, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair. um, and, uh, and, and
committee members. I'm here
presenting House Bill 227277,
sorry. Um, it's a simple bill
that amends the waiver, um,
eligibility criteria for the
public school capital outlay
Act.
Uh, currently there are 3 ways a
district can qualify for a
waiver of their calculated local
match requirement from the PSCOC
and um uh projects.
And so House Bill 277 would
amend criteria A by reducing the
mills that a school district is
required to levy against a local
tax base from 8 mills, I mean
from 10 mils to 8 mils. Uh, this
would help school district
school districts that don't
qualify for the other two
criteria, for example, if you
have more than 800 men, um, but
still reside in a community that
does not have the tax base to
meet their local, the local
match to replace their schools,
so.
I'll also, um,
This is my expert witness, uh
Rebecca Barto, or you, sorry,
who is the the school board
secretary for Truth of
consequence truth or
consequences of school district
should have just said to see,
uh, but if you would like to say
something.
Please, welcome.
00, there we go. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and honorable
representatives. Um, I'm so
thankful for the opportunity to
be able to speak to you today
about something that's very near
and dear to my heart. Um, I'm a
20 year veteran educator. I was
also the assistant principal and
principal of my alma mater, and
in 2023, I was voted to the
school board on the campaign
that I would be their voice. And
today I come before you as their
voice. The options available
right now for the waiver uh for
Capital Outlay or a bit
restricted.
active
In my opinion, and I can only
speak for my school district.
Um, but I have spoken with other
people who have other um types
of restrictions that these three
options for the waiver don't
apply to. And I believe that
House Bill 277 is a start. Do I
believe it's perfect? Do I
believe it fixes all things for
all school districts? No, I
don't, but I believe it's a
start and I believe 19 other
school districts along with ours
would benefit from this change.
Um, I also think that there
could be other possibilities to,
um, this process.
Like factoring in the age of
your building, factoring in
whether you are serving, um,
at-risk students, because
currently our school district
serves 72% poverty or low
income, 80% population of
Hispanic, 20% ELL learners and
20% SE population,
as well as serving migrant
families who work in the field.
Um, our demographic is also very
unique with our voter base. I
have an 88% population of
retired veterans in my
community, and they have voted
down ill.
um, for education based for
buildings. So here we have a
challenge where I'm elected to
be the voice of my community and
my community probably isn't
going to vote in a 10 mil levy,
um, to, to do those types of
projects. Um, but we do check
all the other boxes, so
therefore the current waiver
system is not serving us. And
according to the Zuni Capital
Outlay lawsuit. I also believe
that the current process for
applying for a waiver needs to
be amended because we still have
schools 20 years.
Here we are 20 years later, we
still have 70 year old,
50-year-old, 40-year-old schools
in the state of New Mexico. So I
believe that House Bill 277 is a
start to, to solving those types
of problems with, um, building
educational facilities in our
state.
Thank you.
And
With that, Mr. Chair, we stand
for questions.
Great. Thank you all so much. So
we will go to our audience. Is
there any opposition on our
Zoom. We're going to opposition
for House Bill 277 on our Zoom,
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Books in our audience here in
person. Is there any opposition
to house 277.
All right. So we'll go to
support.
On Zoom, is there any support
for
House Bill 277, please indicate
by raising your hand.
Folks in our audience, is there
any sport for House Bill 277.
All right, if you wish to speak,
please line up behind our
presenters. You'll have up to 2
minutes. Please don't be
repetitive.
All right, please. Good morning,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Lily May Ortiz
representing the New Mexico
School Board Association and
speaking for our membership, uh,
one of our top 10 priorities for
this legislative session is
capital outlay. And New Mexico
School Board Association
supports and continues to
support the reduction of local
matching requirements and
erasing match waiver
requirements for standard-based
and system projects. Uh, we
continue to support removal of
matching requirements for school
safety.
Pre-K and career technical
education facilities and
programs and ACHAVC replacements
and upgrades. In December at our
annual conference, one of our
school districts brought forth a
resolution which an entire
membership voted on and it deals
with this particular issue
because of the high poverty
level in some rural areas, which
is already been explained to
you, um, and New Mexico in some
areas is higher than the
national average. Some districts
are unable to increase the
property taxes as required by
the state statute, and as a
result, are unable, unable to.
qualify for PSCOC funding, which
places our students in
facilities that need to be
upgraded and and taken care of.
This bill proposes to change
changes to the waiver uh
criteria A and that amends the
waiver eligibility and would
include and increase the number
of school districts that are
able to be eligible for local
match and for the award process.
The New Mexico School Board
Association strongly supports
this legislation. We ask you to
please favorably move it forward
because it is good for our
students.
And it's gonna help put them in
good learning environments.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman John Thompson. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
Central Consolidated School
District, Central Consolidated
School District is approximately
3000 square miles, of which
approximately 2% of the land is
taxable as a sponsor and the
expert noted approximately 19
districts would be applicable
under, under this, and, and I
think it's worthy of note, Mr.
Chairman, that Central
Consolidated concerns are only
exacerbated with the closure of
the plant, Mr. Chairman.
So we would certainly encourage
you all to pass this bill
without being duplicitous, uh,
the, the previous speaker hit
most of my comments. So thank
you very much. As that you
support the bill.
Thank you. Please have 2 minutes
stands for the school
superintendents Association and
the Coalition of Educational
Leaders. I also serve on the
public school capital Oversight
task force for about 12 of the
last 20 years that this has been
in place, so Mr. Chairman, this
is the one
Who, if you will, in
accessibility to your effort to
be sure that our school
facilities are of high value and
high quality.
Poverty should not be a reason
for a lack of support of
buildings.
We have many aged buildings in
these 19 districts that are
qualified.
We urge your uh uh passage of
this legislation to open that
doorway so that we can
appropriately serve our students
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Great, thank you.
All right, so I did have a hand
on Zoom, if you wish to reraise
it if you wish to speak in favor
of House Bill 277. I'll give it
a moment.
Otherwise we'll move on to
committee members.
OK.
We come to committee of which I
don't have anybody except
represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Mitabba Moya and
um Mrs. Barto.
My question is,
So
That's the 2nd time I've heard
about tier C.
And I know that's a problem, so
I would like for you to give me
an example. So in your school,
you have a 40-year school.
You have 88% of your residents
that are retirees, so they
really don't want to pay for a
new school.
How does this bill?
No
That problem.
Thank you so much for the
question, Representative
Vincent.
Uh
Initially what how this will
help is because we're having
such a hard time meeting that
bonding capacity, um, because of
the requirement of the 10 mL is
that if it's reduced to 8, we're
currently at an 8 mil. So we
would meet the bonding capacity
and then we would also be able
to leverage our bonding capacity
at that as well. And there's
multiple, also multiple types of
bonds. So there's the a tech
bond and then there's the geo
bond. So we would be able to
leverage the ones that we
already have, and then we would
qualify for ones that we don't
right now.
And so that's the way it would
help us to be able to. And yes,
our, um, middle school currently
is over 40 years old. The pipes
are collapsing underneath it,
um, the roofs are horrible
whenever it does rain. Not very
often, but when it does rain,
the rain runs down the sides of
the walls, um, in the cafeteria
when it rains, we have to
replace all of the ceiling
tiles. Um, it's just, it's, it's
coming apart and, and there's
also some issues with safety
with doors and um access for
American.
Americans with Disabilities Act.
So there's just things like that
that happen within a 40-year
time span that, and, and here's
the thing, we've been quoted 20
million to repair and 32 to
build a new one. So initially we
were going to, um, we were
actually gonna do a special bond
election, and then we found out
that if the bond election is
voted no, that we don't qualify
for the waiver.
Because we're not out of 10 mL.
So here we are, the monkey in
the middle, where we, every
corner we turn, there's another
pitfall. So that this would help
our district to secure the
capacity to be able to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that, that answer.
Whenever you're, whenever you go
out for a meal, I know that I
look at you and I, I look at Mr.
Rounds. I know that you
understand bonding and village
and all that stuff, but does
the, do you believe that the
general public really
understands millage and bonding.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, absolutely
not, because other than, other
than being in in and talking
about it and actually, not so
much in this one, but I have, I,
I don't get to go to a public
school capital out late, um.
Interim committees as much
because I don't like to miss
school that much, but, uh, but
if more talking about it there
is the only way even I
understood it at all. So the,
the general people out there and
and really uh the general voter
usually will look at it and
they're like, no, I don't want
to raise my taxes, and that's
all they know. They don't
understand what it's for, um,
and, and, uh, and so, so that's,
uh, that, that's the issue is
that a lot of people don't
understand what's what this is.
So that's why it's, it's hard to
get through it.
I
Mr.
Charon would like to piggyback
off of that. I believe to a
certain extent they do
understand that it's for bonding
to be able to build a school.
However, I also
I have to be the, the voice for
them because we're talking about
fixed small income retirees.
We're not talking about lavish
retirements. We're talking about
veterans. We're talking about,
like, for example, my grandma, I
remember her counting change on
her table. Um, it's a retiree
community. It's very low income.
I believe we're one of the
poorest counties in the state
and our average annual income is
less than, I believe it's less
than $23,000.
Um, we have a very unique
situation and we also serve um
migrant students and migrant
families, I mean, we, and by the
way, I would like to give a
shout out to our district
because our graduation rates at
85% with overcoming all of those
barriers. So I do believe our
population, and we do whenever
we go out for a meal, we go, we
invite the community, we do the
whole advertisements, radio
spots, newspapers, you know, we
communicate, we communicate, but
ultimately, they just can't
afford it.
And I think that's, I mean,
every school district has unique
challenges. Like, I was just
talking to someone else that
they had to worry about 2000
students leaving over summer.
I've never even contemplated
that. That's more students than
we have in our whole district.
So I, I think every district has
unique challenges, and I think
that part of the application
waiver process is kind of
restrictive and, and doesn't
have provide an opportunity for
those unique challenges. And I
think that this is an
opportunity to start that
process, to lower the mileage,
to, to see
Well, this is going to help some
of us, but let's also look at
some of the other struggles that
other districts have, so that we
can stop having 70 year old
educational facilities in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you, presenters. I
appreciate you explaining that
to me because I'm part of the,
I'm part of the
The community that if there's a
bond that comes out or a, a mill
levy or something I just vote
for it because I know that it's
gonna, it's gonna make it better
for my district, but, you know,
really knowing what it does and
being able to go out there and,
and tell your community what it
does. I think that's really
important because especially in
in your district with the
problems that you have, I will
proudly support your
legislation. Thank you for
bringing it forward. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, for the.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list.
The motion I represent, right,
so we have a do pass motion by a
representative Chatfield,
seconded by Representative
Cullen.
Uh
I'm
Yeah, we got it.
I was just deciding, dare I ask
if there's any opposition to the
Du pass motion.
Are we all in agreement this
morning. Don't be shy. OK,
Singan.
You have a due pass on House
Bill 277. Thank you all.
All right.
Thank you.
You were the one.
All right, so we have our first
Senate bill, folks. So for those
of you new members, you may
notice it looks a little bit
different. We have
A little bit more information as
it comes through.
All right, so we're going to
have our vice chair kind of step
in for Senator Figueroa, um.
And pinch it while she makes her
way over. Oh, look, there she
is.
All right.
So, welcome, welcome back to
House Senator Figueroa.
Happy to be back, Mr. Chair.
All right, so Senate bill.
Not at all. Sitting down. So
Senate Bill 75, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee Senate Bill 75 is an
update to our ERB language.
It does one new thing.
Codifies 4 current practices in
the language and repeals one
section.
So in
Backwards order.
Governing how ERB members handle
gifts because that is superseded
by the 2007 Gift Act, so we
don't need it in ERB statute
anymore. There's one.
The 4 codifying things. Um,
these are things the ERB already
does, but it's clarifying in
statute this practice. So one is
allowing the unclaimed member
funds to be deposited in the ERB
fund.
This is where they sit. This is
what we normally do, but that's
never been stated explicitly in
statute. So we're clarifying
that.
Um,
the second thing that's
clarified is what, 5 years
means.
Um, because ERB includes
contract employees and
non-contract employees.
In one instance, it means the
last day of the 60th month and
another instance, it means the
last day of the 5th year, but
it's just to clarify how those
are defined. Again, that is
already the practice.
Um, this is language
clarification.
The 3rd.
Practice that we're codifying
here is allowing members of ERB
who want to purchase credit for
military service, which they're
allowed to do, giving them a
little more time and flexibility
to do it, increasing the time
from a 60 days to 90 days.
And the 4th clarification, um,
is that members who are
receiving a disability
adjustment that that disability
adjustment will continue when
they reach age 60. Again, that
is already in practice. We're
putting the words in statute.
Now we're down to the fun stuff.
The one new and super useful
thing that this bill will do is
allow ERB to communicate member.
Information with Pera only with
Pera.
Um, but that is because as most
of you probably know, folks can
combine their credit service in
pay and ERB. So there are a few
folks with a few years of ERB
credit.
That might not know, they can
combine those years with their
para retirement, um, but the
institutions right now are
prohibited from talking to each
other.
So this bill would allow ERB to
reach out to Perra, give them
the list of folks that have some
credits that might be able to
transfer um and help increase
those benefits for, for the
members.
Those are the items in this bill
and Madam Chair, we stand for
questions. I'm sorry, I should
have introduced director of ERB
David Archuleta, in case your
questions get super technical.
Thank you, Representative and
great to see you, Mr. Archuleta.
Uh, with that, we'll go to, um,
public comment.
Is there anybody online?
Opposed
No, there's not.
Is there anybody in the room who
is supposed to see no opposition
will go to support.
Is there anybody in the room who
would like to speak in support
of this bill.
OK, we have a very quiet
committee today.
Uh, is there anybody online who
would like to support.
Speak in support of the bill.
Hey, no hands are raised, we'll
go to the committee. Are there
any members who would like to
ask questions today.
Man.
Yes. We would do pass.
Second,
Madam Cha who got that 2?
OK
That's been moved uh for Du pass
by Representative Lara, seconded
by Representative Chatfield. Is
there any opposition?
See no opposition.
got a bill.
Yeah.
Longer
Right, we're gonna have, we're
gonna have some free time this
morning.
Let's go out to breakfast and
get those pastries.
OK, we will go to our 4th and
final bill. This is Senate Bill
163 as amended.
Tribal regalia at school events.
Is do we know who's presenting
it.
Hm
I do believe we uh will need
someone.
I can do it or
OK.
So Representative Roy Buck.
Aera will present Senate Bill
163. There was some confusion
because uh the Goldenrod
yesterday did not list it, but
it was online, so we apologize
for that. We will let the
representative meet her expert
witness.
OK. Uh, representative, please
start.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, I am, uh, here to
present on behalf of the Senator
Schendo, Senate Bill 163.
And um today we have the cabinet
secretary of Indian Affairs,
Josette Monet, uh, who will
assist in uh the presentation so
SB 163 is an act relating to
public schools.
Permitting public school
students who are enrolled or
eligible for enrollment in
federally recognized Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos to
where tribal regalia and
graduation ceremonies or public
school events.
And um I stepped up to present
this, uh.
Because it's dear to my heart as
well. So with that, um, Madam
Chair, Cabinet secretary,
please.
And Senator Shindo, please join
us, Senator.
You find what you're looking for
I'm sorry, I think so. I found
my pencil and you're here too,
so that's awesome, we found you.
thank you Mr. Chairman members
of the committee I believe, uh,
Representative, uh, major
introduction, uh, this bill.
Uh, basically.
What's is uh
Preventing districts from uh
Uh, school boards and governing
bodies of uh of of school boards
and charters from banning
regalio or objects of cultural
significance worn by students.
A graduation ceremonies or
public events. So.
Pretty straightforward.
Alright, please.
I mean,
uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, members of the committee.
I'm Joseph Mone department, um,
as Senator Schendo mentioned is
uh to allow tribal regalia at
graduation to that when native
students are graduating that
they have the ability even in
front of you, um, I'll just
briefly go through some of that,
but we amend some of the school
district policies and just
basically the languages that um
school boards and governing uh.
Uh, but, uh, Native American
student from being able to wear
their tribal regalia. We put in
a few, uh, line items about
what, like, you know, they're
their dress and jewelry, etc.
and then in on the Senate side,
we were able to get an
amendment, uh, where they're
regalia at their graduation.
And so, uh, the bill is
important because for regalia
really shows as well are honored
the students and so, uh, we
believe that, uh, there are
nearly, there are over 40,000
Native American students
enrolled in public schools in
New Mexico. We also, uh, the
last, um, there's about 18 other
states who have a lot.
All right, you all stand for
questions.
All right.
Stanford questions, Senator.
Um
All right, good.
Thank you. So, we'll go to um
our folks on Zoom. I see some
preemptive hints, but I'm gonna
ask for ah folks that wish to
speak in opposition first.
If you would please indicate by
raising your hands that we have
opposition on
Zoom to Senate Bill 163 as
amended. These indicate by
raising your hand. This is
opposition or any folks in the
audience that are opposed to
163 is amended, right?
Um,
I do have one person on Zoom.
But I'm going to, there we go.
OK, so do we have support,
support for Senate Bill 163 on
Zoom, please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
I'm gonna let the Zoom folks
populate, folks in the audience,
you're here in support of House
Bill 163 in which to speak,
please line up behind.
Our presenters, please, you'll
have up to 2 minutes. Please do
not be repetitive.
But please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, chair and people
of the committee. My name is
Santiago Hardy. I'm a 19 year
old youth intern with Nimative
vote, Ahaus Spanish, and, but
I'm born and raised in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Today I'm here in support of SB
163 because it is crucial to
allow our indigenous students to
represent their communities and
cultures and ancestors through
regalia.
Most people think that regalia
is just clothing or jewelry.
But to us it's more than that.
They hold stories in every
thread and bead woven to make
this beautiful regalia we wear.
It holds spiritual value and
reminds us of who we are as
native people.
It's important to have cultural
representation in school events
to inform and support our
students to be proud of their
heritage, and we support, and we
shouldn't have our native
students choose between
graduating and representing
their culture, so I, so I urge
you to support this bill. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you so much. Please
give up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
it's a
Great. Thank you so much. Please
give up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, chair and the
people of the committee. My name
is Dmitri Smith. I am a senior
at Sandia High School at
Albuquerque as well as a youth
intern with New Mexico Native
vote, and I'm here in support of
SB 163. As a young Native
American man, Chaboily holds
significant power as a symbol of
my cultural heritage and
identity allow students to honor
their ancestors and the
traditions of.
In for us influenced us
throughout our lives, wearing it
acknowledges the diversity
within the student body and
fosters an inclusive atmosphere
by allowing students to wear a
tribal galia, educates my peers
and enhances their understanding
of my various cultures and
traditions.
Passing this bill will show
respect for the rights and
traditions of indigenous people
and recognize their freedom to
practice and express a diverse
religious and cultural beliefs.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please welcome me. We have up to
2 minutes.
Good morning members of the
committee, Mr. Chair.
My name is Gina Morales with JD
Bollington government relations
and we represent the Pueblo of
Laguna and the Pueblo of Laguna
supports this bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please, you have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Danny Macky, a
registered lobbyist, or AIO, uh.
We are, uh, Albuquerque
indigenous community, uh, a
coalition of 35 native leading
nonprofits in the Albuquerque
area and we stand in strong
support of this bill.
Thank you so much. Please
welcome, you have up to 2
minutes.
Cool. Let's see him at all hope,
Alicia Chrismeican Maase New
Mexico native Elsaan.
Hello everyone, good morning,
uh, chair and committee members.
My name is Alicia Carri. I am a
proud member of the Pueblo of
Santo Domingo. I am a registered
lobbyist for NMD to vote and
also a co-founder and member of
the New Mexico State Indigenous
Youth Council, and um I stand
today in support of this bill,
um, my great grandmother was
only able to attend up to the
6th grade and
So when I graduated high school,
I shared that accomplishment
with her. However, um, due to
restrictions from my high
school, I was unable to wear my
tribal regalia, um, as, you
know, I think working with other
youth that have experienced the
same thing. We have been told
it's been distracting and does
not conform. However, our
identity is our strength, our
culture is our strength. And so,
um, as, as a big sister and as a
fellow youth organizer, we stand
support to allow our students.
To be able to express who they
truly are and share this uh
accomplishment with their entire
culture, with their entire
community as well. Thank you.
Thank you.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino and I
represent the publics of Taos.
And Aima and also the Center on
poverty.
We are in strong support of SB
163, um.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, I, I
think everyone on the committee
is well aware that the state um.
Is this
The home for many tribes and
pueblos and and and tribal
communities can't go very far
without running into it, one of
them, um, but it's also a state
where native culture runs uh
deep and wide.
And it's a living culture that
has existed for hundreds, maybe
even thousands of years here in
New Mexico.
And so basically this bill
protects uh students freedom of
expression, whether it's to wear
traditional clothing, which uh
in the bill is called regalia.
Um, but it's also, uh, a real
sense.
Are protecting Rose's sense of
pride and identity.
Um, the bill also protects
students against harassment.
And discrimination and
intimidation.
Uh, for merely expressing
themselves at a very celebratory
time in their young academic
lives. So for those reasons, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I urge your support.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Please, you have 2 minutes.
Welcome,
my name is Matt Paul with Public
Charter Schools of New Mexico,
uh, the vast majority of charter
high schools already provide for
the wearing of tribal regalia at
uh at uh celebrations and the
whole of the membership, whether
we're high school or elementary
school believes that uh a
student should be able to honor
their culture while celebrating
these big milestones that we all
value. So thank you, we support
Senate bill.
Great. Thank you so much.
Welcome. You have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Katie Anne Moniko. I'm the
assistant secretary for Indian
Education for the New Mexico
Public Education Department. I'm
here to say that the public
education department is in
support of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome. Good morning,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Mark
Mitchell, and before I make my
statements, I want to welcome
all of you to the ancestral
homelands and traditional
homelands of Tasuki Pueblo.
Um, for all the reasons stated.
What about Tsuki also stands in
strong support and solidarity
with this bill. We look forward
to a favorable outcome. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning
honorable chairman and committee
members. I am Jay Garcia with
Santa Ana Polo, and I'm here
today representing uh our
governor Myron Armijo and our
tribal council and Santa Ana
Pueblo does support this bill
for tribal regalia, uh,
recently, a lot of our students
have been attending Rancho,
schools, um, predominantly
Cleveland High School, and I
think there's gonna be some
opposition.
So asking you for your support
to be able to uh so our students
can represent um their
communities with pride and
honor, and lastly,
I just want to welcome uh
Representative Martha Garcia to
the legislative family, uh, wish
you well, wish you luck, uh,
you've come in right in the
middle, but uh you know you're
gonna do well for your community
and your district, so in the
spirit of our of our languages,
let's say
in a come by but you see on the
corner so.
Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Yeah Benehopa. My name is Atsa
Chavez. I am the CEO for Nava
and the ED for Nimnative vote.
I'm here in strong support of
this bill, specifically when the
incident happened in Farmington,
our office got a number of
calls. We have a satellite
office in Farmington and
everyone was really distraught
for how um that student was
treated when I was in high
school, I started the inner
tribal Student Union,
specifically for the purpose of
being able to wear our regalia
in high school. That was not an
opportunity that I had in high
school. So when I received my
other degrees, I was sure to.
to make sure that um I was able
to wear regalia during those
times. It is very difficult for
our community to um be out of
our communities and a lot of
these schools, um, that are not
within our tribal lands, and I
think at this day and age we
really need to respect our
communities here in the 23
tribes, nations, and pueblos
that are represented in this
great state, and I also would
like to welcome, um, you, Miss
Garcia.
Or being a part of this, um,
House of Representatives, and we
really urge you to look into
your hearts and allow our
students to celebrate their
cultures. They are, it's a proud
moment and they deserve that
right. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. All right.
Do you have any other folks in
our audience, you know, OK, so
we'll go to our folks on Zoom
that are here in sport. Um, so
Tan.
Please, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome. Good
morning.
You have to add the good morning
committee. Taan Benali and Sheho
Aim Bashain the Kiani Arido
irrational
best.
My family is from the four
corners, and I'm here
representing the ACL New Mexico
fully support SB 163 as a dinea
as a woman, a Navajo woman who
attended public schools in New
Mexico and currently at the
University of New Mexico School
of Law. I really believe.
In this issue, because to me
it's not only important, but to
all native students in New
Mexico public schools. We know
that there are over 40,000
Native American students
statewide, it is necessary that
there should be a uniform law to
allow native students to
practice their traditions. While
I was urban native who grew up
in Albuquerque, urban and rural
natives deserve to express
themselves because honoring our
culture identity equates to
academic success. Many Native
American students in New Mexico
and across
nation often we tribal regalia
to honor significant milestones
and lifetime achievements,
adorning one's headwear with
feathers and beads.
During high school graduation
ceremonies is a common practice
among us natives. In fact, 18
other states have laws that
permit Native American students
to wear tribal regalia during
any high school event. However,
as we know it, New Mexico does
not, and so that's why we're
here. Unfortunately, an example
is Genesis White bull of
Farmington High School who was
stripped of her graduation, and
she was not allowed to wear her
tribal regalia adornment. It was
a crisis for her, but not only
her, but
many native peoples. We do not
want this to happen again.
Therefore, we need stronger
protections for Native Americans
and their right to wear tribal
regalia.
We believe
I feel you and myself along with
many natives, I'm sure you could
agree with me that SB 193 is
long overdue, considering there
are 23 federally recognized
tribal nations in the state of
New Mexico, and more than 40,000
Native American students. Thank
you. Thank you.
Alvin
Good morning, Alvin. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alvin Warren. I
represent the Lionel Foundation.
Uh, we'd like to thank the
sponsor for introducing this
bill, and Secretary Monette for
her support. I also want to
welcome you, representative, uh,
Martha Garcia, uh, so the other
foundation supports SB 163
because it protects the rights
of Native American students by
ensuring cultural expression and
traditions are respected.
It's important to legally
guarantee that school boards and
charter schools cannot restrict
native students from celebrating
their achievements in a manner
that reflects their identity,
fostering a more inclusive and
respectful educational
environment.
As a member of Santa Clara
Pueblo, and the parent of 3
children, 2 of whom attended
public or charter schools, and
one of whom is a student now at
the Santa Fe Indian School. I
know how vital it is for native
students to know that they can
succeed academically, while
proudly and visibly maintaining
their languages, cultures, and
traditions. Our foundation
believes that native students
deserve the right to celebrate
and honor their cultural
identity without fear or
discrimination, we urge to do
pass. Thank you.
OK. Thank you. All right, so
we'll go to
Carmen.
Morning, Carmen. You'll have up
to 2 minutes.
Yatesh a Carmen Lopez in,
what did she dash his chin,
although Bill Dutilla quit a son
initine bequet that ease deep in
a
real ranchodinaha.
Good morning, committee members.
I'm um uh here as a Navajo
parent in support of the regalia
bill. Um, I live in Rio Rancho
and my daughter will graduate
from BC Cleveland High School
this May of 2025 and
I also have two sons attending
Mountain View Middle School.
Cleveland High School does not
allow Native American students
to alter or decorate the cap
gown. Students cannot wear
traditional jewelry on the
outside of their gown. They
cannot beat or place ceremonial
feathers on the cap. They cannot
wear stoles to recognize their
participation in the Native
American Student Union and the
dress code for the graduation
includes wearing dress shoes and
the gown must be zipped up to
cover.
Clothing underneath as they walk
on and off stage. Parents and
graduating seniors have to sign
a contract by March 14, 2025 in
just about three weeks. Um, so
this bill is urgently needed. I
appreciate the emergency um um
uh amendment to this. We
especially need your help in
school districts where the
Native American student
populations are small. In Rio
Rancho, Native Americans make up
6% of the population. I've been
in
active parent at my kid's school
for the last 12 years and in the
Native American Parent
Association Committee. Parents
are confused about whether the
school board or principals at
each high school in Rio Recha
since the graduation rules. In
some years, we heard that Rio
Rancho High allowed native
students to wear regalia at
graduation where Cleveland High
School has not. Over the years,
high school students at
Cleveland, including last year's
president of the Native Student
Union at Cleveland High School.
School, met with school
administration and they were
denied. Thank you.
Anna, good morning, Anna. You
have up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Um, good, good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, um, I am Anna Hansen.
I'm a registered lobby lobbyist
for the Pueblo of Poake, and I
apologize for not being there,
but I am sick and I don't wanna
share it with you.
But the the Pueblo ofuai stands
in full support of this bill,
um, we also support the
emergency clause and uh please
uh give this a due pass and I
wanna thank Secretary Monette
and Secretary Shindo and
Representative Wanda Johnson for
bringing forward this bill. It
is a very important for our
native brothers and sisters to
be able to uh show their pride
during uh graduation ceremonies.
Uh, thank you very much.
Right.
Thank you. We don't have anybody
else in the audience, so go to
our list,
I represent Cao, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you, senator.
And Madam Secretary.
I am. I wanted to share.
Just a couple of thoughts, and
then I have a question.
Um
One of the most
One of the most proudest moments
that uh we get to experience as
elected.
Officials is to attend
graduations.
And um to participate in the
schools of our district or
wherever we're. And uh one of
the most heartbreaking moments
for me in attending a um such a
graduation was when I personally
witnessed
Um
A young woman.
Uh, getting ready to receive
her.
graduation diploma.
Be asked to go outside of the
line.
And remove her headdress.
Uh, it was heart wrenching
because it was in the moment.
Of uh joy.
Um, it was a joyous moment. It
was um one well deserved because
her headdress reflected.
Um, her honors. He was an
honorary student, Mister Chair.
And in that moment there was.
Very little that could be done.
And um
The young woman chose not to
receive her diploma and um there
was a great deal of of um.
Crying?
And um
Discussion going on behind the
scenes and ultimately um they
literally asked her and her
family to uh leave.
Or to remove themselves from
that particular area.
This, um,
Let's just
Heartbreaking for me. And so,
I also, Mr. Chair, um, had to
address.
The fact that the regalia was
being referred to as a costume.
And I understood then.
As I've always understood as a
um.
Indigenous woman.
How important it is to educate
and to inform and to correct not
only language but to correct.
Practices
Um, and to stand strong, um, in
moments such as this. And so Mr.
Chair, I had to proceed.
With an explanation about why.
We do not refer to our
ceremonial dress.
as costumes.
And um this didn't occur in the
1960s, 950s when I was growing
up, this occurred just a few
years back.
So, um, this.
piece of legislation is.
Um, we, we should have done this
a long time ago, and we should
not need to have to do this.
In my viewpoint, but, um, I'm
glad we are and I'm glad we have
the emergency clause so that.
Our graduating students um
coming up this year, do not have
to face uh any type of um.
Racism in any form or fashion,
because that's what it is, we
have to call it what it is.
We've grown up, Mr. Chair, in uh
institutions that um have
exercised.
And executed things that are um
harmful to us as communities of
color.
Indigenous communities.
So with that, I have a question,
Senator, um.
It's another difficult question,
but one that affects our tribe,
my uh my community.
Very much
There the office of the tribal
liaison recommended broadening
the bill.
The bill's definition of
federally recognized tribe to
include tribes that have applied
for state recognition.
And or those currently seeking
federal recognition.
I bring that up because I have
grandchildren.
That will be coming up and that
are being um.
Taught
Their cultural traditions.
The cultural, uh, ceremonial
clothing and dress, and in fact
I have a 3 year old, a young.
Grandson, who refuses to cut his
hair.
And his hair is all the way down
to his waist right now.
And I would hate
For him
To go through his kindergarten
graduation.
Or proceed with any other.
Ceremonies or graduations and be
restrained or refrained from.
Uh
Dressing in the manner that he
wishes or and wearing what he
wishes.
Because our tribe.
Has been seeking federal
recognition since 1972.
And again, because of the
Um
failure to understand the
historical.
Um, the histories in our
communities, Mister Chair, we've
still remained the only tribe.
In the rolls of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs Department of
Interior.
That
is pending
Um
Full recognition.
And so this concerns me and so I
would.
Don't know how this can be
handled in terms of, of an
amendment or how we can
incorporate the language as per
the office of tribal liaison,
but I really am concerned about
The others, not just my family,
but the other children and um
soon to be in high school.
Uh in Las Cruces area.
How they will be treated, so
Mister Chair, that's
Um, Senator, I'm not quite sure
how we can address this.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, thank
you, Representative uh
Caballero, uh, when you refer to
tribal liaison, tribal liaison,
uh,
chair.
From which tribal is on?
Mr. Chair, uh, I mean, yeah, Mr.
Chan, Senator.
I'm not really quite sure. I
just saw it in our um analysis,
and it was referred to as the
office of tribal liaison. It
doesn't say of the state or of.
It's um
It's in our
No. What, what are you looking
at excuse me,
what section?
Oh, page 4, sorry, um.
In the bill itself. OK.
What line?
I'll have a secretary to speak
to that because I think we're
trying to be consistent with,
you know,
But the current uh.
Definition is I know federal
recognition is a is a long
arduous process and.
We're, we're, we're not in the
position to make that decision.
You know, uh, it's the federal
government who has the trust
responsibilities and they're the
ones that set the criteria for
Recognition of tribes and so
this is not.
We do and so I'm gonna turn it
over to the secretary.
Some additional comments to that
effect.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
wanna acknowledge your question.
I think it is a good question.
uh, one of the things that we
looked at when we are drafting
this language as we looked at
how some of the other states
have written their language. We
also looked at what is the
federal law saying and um trying
to keep in line with, in
particular what federal law um
as Indian countries sees strains
on its um ability to exercise
its sovereignty through various
um cases that have gone
through the Supreme Court in the
last few years in order to try
to retain that language that's
in line with federal law, that's
really why we went with that,
um, language here today, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Jar, Senator and cabinet
secretary, um.
The, the recommendation.
is simply to
State, Mister Chair tribes that
have applied for.
State recognition and or those
currently seeking federal
recognition. We in no way I am
in no way asking that we
interfere with the federal
process or the federal
recognition process. I am asking
that we consider the language
that's being recommended to be
incorporated because the
language as is being recommended
does not.
Forces into a position, Mr.
Chair, of taking um or
conflicting with federal law,
and again, this is an example of
how federal laws
Have continued to be the
stranglehold.
On our not just my tribe, but
tribes that have fought.
30, 40, 50, 60 years.
to execute and exercise their
rights under the um treaties.
That were were left out and so
it's important to note.
That, um, this is a perfect
example of how we're being held
back.
And how states are uh electing
to um
Continue those practices, so
it's
I appreciate, Mr. Chair and
Senator, um, the comments,
however, again, uh, and just in
closing, I'd ask that you
consider the language that has
been um proposed to us because
it does not interfere or nor
does it conflict, nor do we in
any way overstep our bounds as a
state by using language that's
being recommended. But in fact,
Mr. Chair and um senator.
We are exercising what our
elders have known through
generations, and that is that um
they recognize the histories uh
uh as they relate to the region
and to the state. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Our represent
me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you, Senator and, um, and
presenter, um, I'm, I'm
definitely 100% in favor of this
as a as a high school teacher,
um.
I, I
Graduation is the time that
there's the that uh these
students get to express who they
are.
And show the world.
Where they come from and who
they are and they get to
celebrate that they that they
made it there. Uh, so I think it
is, it is 100% important that
they should be able to do uh to
adorn their their culture in the
process. Um, and so, um, I
definitely
Um, I, I love that this is here.
My one question though is on
page 5, on uh the sex subsection
3 starting with the with the 11
to 13, why did we strike out the
um
The definition for race.
Representative, it's our
understanding that that was, um,
a proposal made by LCS who
stated that this is an
antiquated, um, some of the
other. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I, I just want to make sure
that while I, I definitely want
Native Americans to be able to
express themselves, but I also
want African African Americans
and Mexican Americans and and
everybody else to be able to,
and I don't want them to be able
to be prohibited because we're,
we're striking out race, um,
and.
and excluding one to include the
other because I, I personally
believe that, you know, I'm very
proud of my, uh, Hispanic
culture and, and, uh, and so,
and, and I, and, and it's a
different culture than than uh
than than a Mexican culture or
anything like that. And uh and I
and, and I don't want any child
to be able to say, OK, this one
can and this one can't, so I
just want to make sure that that
uh whatever whatever culture
they come from, they should be
able to express that during
during graduation.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you. uh, Reverent
Collin.
We had a long conversation about
this, um.
And actually, if you didn't
bring up this bill like.
Um, so I appreciate that, um.
So there was a gentleman from
Santa Ana. I served on the rear
rancho school board and uh my
daughter.
Graduated from VC Cleveland High
School, and this has been a
fight that I took on.
Uh, a number of years.
And tried to change the policy,
um, but the board and I had that
that was probably the most
opposition that I received.
Um, which was.
I was really quite surprised,
um, and it wasn't just because I
wasn't trying to.
Native American, but I was
trying to include the stos.
The, the cords and anything to
be able to recognize, I mean
that's your last day at the
school and you want to celebrate
um Rio Rancho High School was
allowed to have stalls, have the
cords, and they were able to
wear the Native American.
Um, dress, um, and recognize
their, you know, African
American.
they had all those.
Isu Cleveland does not, and they
actually.
Line the students up and if they
had them.
hid them, they removed them just
before they walked out for
graduation.
And it would infuriate me. I
love Rio Rancho public schools,
but this is the one thing that
had uh really bothered me for a
lot of years because we want our
our children to be able to
recognize their hair.
Or and or their accomplishments
while they were in school, so I,
I said I wouldn't, you know,
cause there's a lot of things I
could have added in here, but I
said that's probably not the the
time, um, but I'm
Very supportive of this. My, um,
my husband's Hawaiian.
And part of 50% Hawaiian. His
father's Hawaiian and um my
daughter was not allowed to wear
lathe.
And uh and we've talked about
how
With the Native Americans, they
give lays right after the
Cleveland.
So this is something that's very
dear in my heart and um I hope
and I always believe in local
control.
But this is one that I could not
change at the local level.
And I, uh, this was one that a
lot of people said you need to
change at the state level, so
I'm appreciative and I still
will try to sign on if you give
me that, um, uh with uh your.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry, I missed your
presentation, Senator Shindo
to my good friend Senator Shindo
Representative Vincent, it was
awesome. I'm sure I missed it. I
usually miss all the awesome
stuff.
Mr. Chair, um, and Senator
Shindo.
I'm gonna support your bill.
I'm gonna proudly support your
bill.
And one of my most prized
possessions.
Is my lanyard here.
That was built, made, handmade.
My little girl Lindsay on the
Mescalero Apache reservation.
And
I can't tell you how many people
want one of these.
And I called her and I asked her
if she would start making these
for some of our legislators
because they want them and she
said, Harlan.
This, this one was for you and
that's all that'll be coming
out.
So this is mine.
And it took her almost an hour
to tell me what it, what it
meant.
And it means a lot. There's a
lot around my neck right now.
And in my district.
A lot of the, a lot of the
Mescaleros go to Ridoso High.
And
They do get to wear, they do get
to wear their stuff and I, I
haven't seen them.
Um, regulate this, but I guess
there is other places that do
that.
And it, and it
It's almost infuriating.
And I made a deal with myself.
That every time I heard the word
racism.
That I was gonna talk about it.
And I hate that word.
I don't like the word at all and
I don't see it.
And maybe I'm in a box.
And I need to get out of New
Mexico a little bit and check
out the world, but I've been
here my whole life.
I'll never tolerate that.
Um
And whenever I get ready to run
my melting pot day.
We, nobody said it better.
Then representative Allison.
And it's not about Hispanic.
It's not about um native.
It's not about African American,
he said we're all five-fingered
beings.
And that's the way I look at all
of the people.
And the two representatives on
both sides of me.
They teach me a little bit of
Spanish every day. And, you
know, I, I get to thinking as
far as the racism side goes, I
think it's policy.
And the policy is people get so
enthralled in policy that we're
not gonna let nobody do
anything, it's just gonna be a
standard outfit.
I can't believe I just said
outfit.
A standard
Uniform
That that kids wear when they
graduate.
And I was having a discussion
and I might have missed it with
my good friend Representative
Chatfield.
And, and, in my eyes, he's king
of the cowboys.
He's been a cowboy. He's got, I
mean, everybody knows.
Jack Chatfield as a cowboy.
And they wouldn't let him wear
his cowboy hat.
When he was in school.
For his graduation pictures.
And that's wrong too.
So I don't want to call that
racism. It's just people need to
think outside the box and quit
going off of policy.
So, I just wanted to make that
statement. I'm sorry for being
long winded, Mr. Chair, uh, but
that's the way I feel and I'm
gonna support this bill. Thank
you.
Gary.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, thanks. This
kind of presentation always
makes you cry.
And I'm so grateful for all the
students uh here.
Young, older people who used
your precious native languages
to speak, especially the one
high school student, that's
beautiful.
Um, I want to make a suggestion,
you know, I.
A long time ago during the
Vietnam War.
And I had an arm full of peace
signs for people to put on their
um mortar boards. Well, someone
was posed, and they ripped him
out of my arm, and I cried on my
way, uh, I cried on my way up to
the stage. It's still with me.
So when I heard about Genesis
white bull during the national
anthem, having people come up to
her. I feel what a wound she
has. So I want to suggest that
we ask the governor when she
signs.
Spill because the spill is gonna
go to her that Genesis white
bull be invited to be there with
her regalia to be present with
Thank you.
Thank you. um.
Mr. Chair, and thank you for
bringing this is.
It's kind of shameful that we
had to do.
Yes.
I mean we live in a state with
our diversity, our diversity was
here before and now we have to
fight to be back.
Um, this is, this is not
something that.
I could say I feel proud of
this.
I thank you for fighting for
your rights and it has been.
Centuries fighting and we're
still here.
Um, I just wanna add my voice
about uh the part federally
recognized.
Um, we don't know what is gonna
happen.
Definitely.
If we will stop being
recognized.
So will that change anything
here?
And that's my only, that's my
question, and the other thing is
I have students who are from
native Pueblos in Mexico and who
were in the promotion ceremonies
in 8th grade the native dresses
to and um I will think that I
would love to see their culture
represented to because this is
this is that's not just
something that we were in in in
the moment is our ancestors,
that's who we come from, and
this is who we are here and now.
And it does represent something
beyond what we represent ex
So that's the only thing that I
would love to hear and see too,
but uh thank you for con
continue raising your voice and
don't let in your um, your
culture and our diversity die.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, I
Move a do pass on Senate Bill
163 as amended
motion by Representative Garcia,
a secondary representative.
Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to the DuPass motion.
see none.
Yeah, I do pass, Senator. Thank
you.
Committee and thank you for the
conversation discussion and your
support. All right, thank you
all so much. Um, so we have a
couple of things to get through,
um.
Understand.
All right, so, um, we do have
with us folks, um, Gammay
Micheau, so she's the president
of Wiy the Western Interstate
Commission for Higher Education,
which I've served on over the
past 11 years on and off. Um,
so, and president.
If you would like to address us
quickly, students, we're gonna
get to you all if you wish to
stick around, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, it's
wonderful to see you and thank
you for the introduction. I'd
also, if, with your permission,
like to recognize Doctor Barbara
Dameron, who is currently the
witchy chair as well and um she
is accompanying me here today.
So thank you for the opportunity
to see you today.
Yeah, it's great to see you and
Dr. Dameron, Dr. Daron had been
our
Uh, secretary for higher
education as well. Um, so thank
you for being here.
All right, um, we have students
as well, so I'm just left,
unfortunately, but we have
others. Um, so if you all would
we have a microphone going
around because we're gonna cold
call all of you. So if you would
tell us your name, what grade
you're in and what school you
attend.
Hi, my name's Sophia Lutheran.
I'm a senior at El Dorado High
School.
I am Sam Lay, I'm a senior at
Eldorado High School.
Hello, I'm Yael, and I go to
college in high school and I'm a
senior.
Um, I'm Sueel and uh 12th grade
and I go to college and career
high school.
My name is Julio and I go to
CCHS Colgate career, and I'm in
12th grade.
My name is Miguel Martinez. I'm
a senior at College and Career
High School.
I'm Alexa Garcia. I'm in a
senior at college and career
high school.
My name is Serena. I'm in 12th
grade and I go to college and
high school.
My name is Alondra, um, and I'm
a senior and I go to college and
career high school.
Uh, my name is Brian. I go to a
college and high school and I'm
a senior. Hi, I'm Ariana and I'm
a senior at college and career
high school.
I'm, I'm Annape Garcia and I go
to a college and career high
school.
All right. Welcome to House
Education.
All right, folks, so that
concludes our business for
today. We'll see you, we'll have
a Saturday session. No, I'm just
kidding. Just kidding, folks. We
will not have a Saturday, so
we'll see you back here, well,
at least in committee. We'll see
you on Monday.
I'm like, oh.
Any questions or anything
