you don't be able to start.
Yes.
Thirty six.
Okay.
All right so called the house
Education Committee to order
good morning everybody ma'am
secretary cultural please.
Representative office.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative is up here
Representative girl left.
Representative for.
Representative Lane your.
Representative Lara there's
Representative Madrid.
Representative member might.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo I.
Madam vice chair and Mr
chairman.
We have a quorum all right good
morning everybody so we're going
to start off with a bill that we
heard about a week and a half
ago house bill one twelve
Representative Herndon Anderston
that there's an amendment yes Mr
chair there is an amendment that
is being passed out right now
all right so give it a moment
may have a motion to discuss the
amendment please.
Thank you Representative
Herrera.
Is that a second Representative
is a no can I have an art second
by Representative Trujillo all
right so we will be on
discussion of the amendment will
wait while this gets passed out.
Representative results.
We have our rural we do this was
sent out I believe last week.
Yeah it's been over a week as
well it's been a minute did not.
It was.
Okay so yeah this definitely
pass the twenty four hour rule
by some margin okay so.
Representative Brandon if you
would please walk us through the
amendment yes Mr chair members
of the committee so with the
amendment we took into
consideration every single
suggestion thank you made during
the last time that we appear
before this committee and those
of these other equipment that
we're looking at so if you turn
to page two of the bill one of
the things that we did is that
we are indicating that we are
providing space for students who
need to release that privacy so
that think it was really
important that you all pointed
out and we created the
information too so that we're
providing a space for students
who are mostly stress to have a
place to me then if you look at
that's that's on the page to
line three so we have stricken
the word some privacy but in the
words face of page two eight
twenty two through twenty four
we have taken out
the the terms regarding the
individual schools are different
and there is no perfect model so
we've taken that out and what
we've done is just remove it all
together and Mr chair of
Representative Herrera I think
that was a request so we
absolutely followed a
recommendation that we thank you
for that on page three line of
five and six one of the the
things that we took out is
specified exactly how many rooms
that would be as part of this
mental health room so we took
that out we'll see there is no
limitation on it we'll go as far
as the funding will allow us to
go and the request is there on
page four line twenty three if
you will turn their.
But you will see is that we have
of we've done a more specific
definition of the students who
are going to be covered in terms
of the priority for these mental
health rooms so you will see the
list of the priorities there and
then the final amendment Mr
chair members of the committee
is so on page five and what that
amendment does is so the type of
and space the time in which the
this a particular project will
move forward.
So we give we have given plenty
of time not just July first so
we've gone through this so that
we've given plenty of time for
things to be in place in to move
smoothly.
Mr chair those are the
amendments and I have with me
today two experts I have a
Mister Greg frosted who is the
director of policy at PED and
then I have the directive
behavioral health this Leslie
Kelly with me our and we're
ready for questions right thank
you so we're on the amendment
we've heard testimony from the
audience about the bill
questions about the amendment
members.
All right Representative is off.
I would like this question on
your first.
Mr chairman I would like yes
Representative a couple of
questions on her amendment
Representative Herndon on page
two line three.
For U. S. stricken some privacy
and insert in lieu thereof base.
All it's saying is means the
room ordinary that provide space
for students who need to release
emotional mental behavioral
stress for resting and
relaxation.
This could possibly be a closet
I feel which could also lead to
more stress for the students do
we need to be more specific in
that.
Mr chair Representative Ezzell
the we don't want to be
prescriptive we doing allow for
local control for them to be
able to determine the best space
and it doesn't necessarily have
to be a room it could be.
We would never recommend the
closet but it could be an alcove
I don't I don't know that we
necessarily want to specify a
particular size because it could
very significantly depending on
that the local conditions of the
school okay Mister chairman and
representative and Mr frosted
when we were talking about this
wellness room that provides base
who need to release emotional
mental and behavioral stress
will there be any sort of
observation so the students
might not do harm to themselves
where they were able to talk to
somebody to release their
tensions if you if that is what
the case may be that is also
assisted by resting and
relaxing.
So I'm I need a little more
clarification there Mr chair
representative this the the the
spaces will be staffed and that
was part of this bill
and if the it's designed not to
be a place for therapy it's
designed to be a place where
students can self regulate so
there will be somebody there who
can a system with that who can
check people in check people out
so that the you know there's
there's
There accounted for except
Representative and if somebody
needs further assistance they
will refer those students to the
counselors counselors on staff
so no one will be in there by
themselves.
Okay and Mr Chairman
representative Herndon and thank
thank you for that explanation
was Kelly but.
In case of an extreme situation
where the students are monitored
in this space.
Will their parents be notified
the.
for their guardians and I should
include both Mr chair
representative these out this is
really not something that
requires.
Parental
permission to go to a place to
take so it's a it's a time
limited space to self regulate
now somebody was going to injure
themselves or others or needed
some more serious intervention
than the school follows its
regular protocol which is it is
to contact a sense yes so yet
the the space really isn't
designed for intensive mental
health it's it's more
preventative early interventions
okay and then Mr Chairman
representative on page four for
your next for the.
The state up with the Fourth
Amendment is you have stricken
at risk of failure and you have
inserted their of.
Who are low income families are
English language learners who
are disabled our high risk
students or have a high
percentage of native American
students.
Hugh.
Mr Chairman to me that sounds a
little discriminatory.
Because sometimes students of
all race color creed economic
background they do experience
that so.
Are we it says giving give
preference to public schools
that have a high percentage of
students who are from low income
families English language
learners are disabled are high
risk students or have a high
percentage of native American
students.
Representative Romero and sorry
chairman Romero and
Representative Ezzell the.
We we want to make sure that we
are meeting the biggest areas of
need it's not that school other
schools could not have such
rooms through the program it's
just one make sure that we're
prioritizing our our students
with the highest need and and
students in those four subgroups
the they are at a higher risk of
having behavioral health or
having having aces
and and we want to make sure
that we are serving that the
schools that have the highest
area of need.
Mr Chairman I don't mean to
argue with Mr frosted that I
totally disagree with that
statement every kid seems like
anymore does have some sort of
trauma in their life and.
I just I really have a problem
with that language right there I
understand what you're trying to
do that to me again it's it's a
little.
And balanced in that area if you
want to call it that balanced
because the need sometimes
happens to be for any the
students to go to any of our
schools so Mr chairman that's
all I will leave it at that
thank you very much for your
responses.
Thank you Representative other
questions on the amendment.
Or is there a motion on the
amendment.
For.
I'm sorry for what I'm sorry.
Of
the
This.
This.
Speaker on I move house
amendment to house bill one
twelve.
That we adopted that we adopt
all right for adoption being
adoption of the amendment thank
you Representative for of a
COVID a second by Representative
in Canada is there any
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment all right show
representatives in opposition to
the amendment everybody else any
other opposition all right.
So you have an amended bill
we're back on the bill itself.
Questions.
Motion on the bill as of
Representative.
Hearing from the amended bill
all right so we have a two
passed motion on house bill one
twelve as amended M. secretary
if you call the roll please on a
to pass motion to accept.
Second yes Representative okay
as a second Representative Baca
Representative Chatfield
Representative Ezzell.
Representative corolla.
Yes Representative for yes
Representative Lane yes
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid
Representative more money yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes Representative Trujillo yes
members chairman Mr chairman
yes.
All right so by a vote of eight
one you have a do pass on house
bill one twelve is amended thank
you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee right.
Love the past.
This.
All right.
In.
I appreciate that.
So we're almost at the halfway
point so hopefully by the
halfway point we get their
emotions are going.
All right so we have
Representative Lara.
House Bill to ninety six.
All right Representative.
Thank you Mr chair okay.
Members of the committee of the
house bill two ninety six.
Incentivizes a hiring spree as a
social workers counselors
librarians and other
instructional support providers
as we all know currently there's
a disincentive for to hire
experienced social workers
counselors and other support
those other students were
providers these critical staff
members are not included in the
tier costs index currently there
are two ways to get funding for
instructional support providers
and you from are aimed at the
general student population V.
two X. six also spoke putting
social service providers in the
tier cost index.
This would provide additional
funding for schools to hire
experience instructional support
providers and there's a very
long list of of instructional
support writer said that would
qualify under this and it is
important to know that some
districts charter schools will
have their
Hey heather to send you to the
impacted by early career
instructional support providers
and with that Mr chair I would
like to have my experts it
witness introduced himself.
Mr chairman of the committee my
name is Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico
this issue came to us from one
of our schools who hires a
number of social workers for the
general student population right
now there's funding for within
special ed ancillary service
providers for for counselors
social workers as well as take
you know not not technically but
you could also use at risk
generated funding for these for
these instructional support
providers with what's really
become clear in our schools is
that this is needed for the
general population and as we dug
into the issue when we had the
T. and T. index the training and
experience index these positions
many of them were actually
included in that index when we
moved to TCI we only had
instructed instruction
instructors classroom teachers
and so this just kind of
includes them in the new index
if you look at your analysis
from the LFC it notes that many
of these instructional support
providers already make more than
a level three licensed teacher
and that really just underlines
the problem if we don't have if
we have experienced
instructional support providers
that aren't helping to generate
more funding then that's a real
disincentive to hire someone who
has great experience in this
realm because they cost a fair
amount of money
we think this can make a
difference in incentivizing
having experienced counselors
social workers a number of other
providers for the general
student population rather than
those that are just focused on
special ed and at risk
populations.
Thank you Mr without several
questions.
All right thank you for The
presentation so we will go to
our audience so if you're online
in support of house bill two
ninety six if you would please
indicate by raising your hand
those in our audience I'll go to
my left hand side is in support
of house bill two ninety six all
right please Sir you have a
students walk.
Under the to New Mexico we are
in support of this effort we
know that needed for these roles
are schools that so anything we
can do to provide services the
broadest swap of students
possible would be a good thing
are thank you great thank you
Sir invective to unspoken good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee States youngest G. R.
director with any New Mexico and
we also stand in support of this
bill we thank the sponsor
bringing it forth just a few
brief we think this is a great
deal with aligned with our
twenty twenty three New Mexico
legislative priorities
the wording that develop that
very important document what we
did was we we conduct the
service Senator survey.
Just introversion members told
us that this was imported
priority for us to advocate for
so with that said we think the
sponsoring again and we ask for
a vote in favor thank you right
thank you all right to my right
hand side doesn't support all
right so certain for please
welcome to Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Bonnie like but superintendent
that house but also president of
the association superintendents
you've heard some great reasons
for to do best.
Thank you please Mr chairman
members of the committee wants
Mexico council of education and
we also stand and support this
legislation.
Thank you please welcome the
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee.
New Mexico FOR Association
the centralized on as you know
the sport Association of home
having a prison salaries for our
teachers and principals
educational systems of school
staff raising the bar so that we
can be regionally competitive
with support this legislation
and after the fall thank you
thank you anybody else in my
right hand side the wish to
speak in support.
All right I don't see anybody
online.
We'll go to opposition is our
opposition to house bill two
ninety six either online or in
our audience.
No skating sorry I didn't I
didn't have Representative Lara
look thank you all right.
Welcome back to committee
Canadian Representative lane
please.
Thank you Mr chair just I think
I know this is question I think
I just I just need some
confirmation so the way I read
this bill Mr chair is that this
money is going to flow through I
guess through the SCG is that
correct.
Mr chair representative yes
that's correct and so with that
it would not creating Mr chair
what would commonly referred to
as an unfettered unfunded
mandate on local schools is that
fair Mr chair Representative yes
that's correct all right thank
you Mr.
Thank you Representative is off.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lara of right in
line as well Representative Eli
when my questions but I need
clarification.
Our educational assistance and
instructional assistants.
Are they instructional support
providers.
Mr chair representative I would
like to defer to my experts from
okay Mr Chairman representative
Ezzell they are they are not
they're not on a three tiered
licensure system and that's
really what this bill
encompasses all the providers
that are on that system okay
thank you that's all the
questions I have Mister chair.
Representative please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward I it's just a
curiosity question our other
states trending in this
direction I I don't know are we
the first to do this there are
other states trending this way
Mr chair representative would
like to defer to the microphone
up.
Mr chair and representative of
Herrera I I don't know but we
have done it in the past so it
is so I think we're just kind of
returning to form here in this
with this bill that's how Mister
chair Mister chair
representative I if I may as
well you know the you know we
we've been putting out there for
a fourth and a great effort to
to incentivize and to hire
recruit and and and bring more
quality of people into our
schools and I think this is just
helping a student now Mr chair
and representative a lot I
totally agree with you I mean I
think I think we're trying to do
a full court press and catch up
on the people we haven't caught
up on before any civic here last
year we're going further ahead
and to I think it speaks well of
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo I moved to pass
restrictive all right so we have
to pass much by Representative
Trujillo second by Senator I do
want to say before except the
motion is thank you offered for
trying to address this problem
so it's been an issue I think
this is a creative solution to
start getting at an addressing
some of these issues and I'll be
interested to see where this
goes in the future so with that
I'll accept a motion for present
here second by Representative
staff and a is there any
opposition to the past motion.
All right seeing none do passed
house thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee six.
All right so we have house bill
one eighty six eighty one I will
be presenting it.
I have a volunteer to chair
representative Ezzell if you
wish to chair the meeting while
I present.
All right thank you.
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for this opportunity I move that
we turn the entire session.
Sided die right to.
The.
Members of the committee.
The chair to present house bill
one eighty one.
Right thank you madam chair so
house bill one eighty one is a
bill that we've heard for a
number of years now Lee I
carried it my first term eight
years ago I'm in something that
has the house we've passed
numerous times but it's adding
various groups into our National
Board certified program units so
currently those that draw the
extra stipend are those
practitioners that are
nationally board certified that
are currently still in the
classroom this would expand it
to administrative as well as
counselors so one of the I think
the most important things to
keep in mind as we look at our
administration particularly as
instructional leaders throughout
the interim we've talked about
the importance of having.
Good well trained and and and
very understanding of the
practice of teaching
administrators at a school site
and so by allowing them to carry
over and incentivizing
National Board certified program
units for help those outside of
the classroom I think we'll have
definite positive effects on our
teaching force and our
principles our school leaders as
professional leaders as well so
with that madam chair of stand
for questions thank you very
much we'll start with the
audience first is there anybody
that is in favor of this bill
will start over here on this
side.
Yes ma'am.
I'm here I might put great
pieces for this okay so these
regions to increase the path.
Thank you next yes ma'am and
members of the body functions
register of this tendency now
and we appreciate the Sanchez
work on this and believe this
expansion is going to improve
our availability and resources
in our schools.
Thank you very much yes ma'am.
The committee ability here to.
Research shows that.
Thank you to have a significant.
Have.
Schools as well as the more
effective cost thirty one for
resources the position on
supporting at four four years so
we support this bill we have to
move forward we just.
Representative was addressed in
the bill analysis if talks about
not included appropriation and
it mentions that that without
the procreation.
At the increases.
Fund.
The issue of health and we do
just that.
Thank you very much in madam
chair school districts have a
lot of research they compete
for.
That's a little bit of insight
into we have a suite.
Anybody else on the side.
This move to the other side of
the room anybody that what like
to support this yes Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee Matt Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico
the training and the experience
that you get when you become
nationally board certified
doesn't go away when you become
an administrator so we think
these units should carry on with
them we Sanchez.
Thank you very much yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee to under two and a
half to New Mexico we have long
supported this legislation I
think it's important right now
is that as national board
certification as modernized over
time since we started a state
recognizing their value in two
thousand four that should
transfer to administrators and
counselors right now according
to national we're not work there
are three counselors who are
certified as national were
teachers and they are missing
out on this differential we also
know there are a lot of quality
teachers who are National Board
certified who are choosing not
to make that jump to
administration as the presenter
mention because that would
actually reduce their pay
because they would lose the
differential we firmly believe
that a good
good three in the tier one.
After when in the leadership
positions we would urge the
committee to support thank you.
Thank you very much yes Sir.
We're chair members of the
committee CC on yes with any in
New Mexico G. R. director
we support this bill the the
sponsor I did a great
presentation we've been working
on it for several years now and
I just want to point.
Three point five billion dollars
in one form on the.
It's not this year one right
this is an opportunity to start
creating a change our public
schools are public school
students deserve so with that
said thank you and we urge you
to vote in favor.
Thank you very much anybody else
in our committee rooms that
would like to stand in support
we will now go to the people
that are online.
In first off we have Ellen burn
sting.
Go ahead Ellen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Ellen
burns Steen I represent the
teachers and support staff in
the Albuquerque public schools
as the union president this is
something that we started having
a conversation about many years
ago when a nationally board
certified counselor came to me
dismayed that she wasn't
eligible for the recognition
that the teachers in our state
have because they're nationally
board certified as a national
board certified teacher I can
tell you that it is a very
rigorous process and that there
is an incredible amount of
research on the impact our
nationally board certified
educators have on students well
being and learning so I just
urged support for this bill
because
we need to keep these people and
all rural groups who are
nationally board certified thank
you thank you very much Mr burns
Steen next we have.
Mary Ellen.
Dannenberg.
Mr Burke go ahead please.
Thank you for this time I
appreciate it I am the assistant
principal at turquoise trail
charter school and I just
maintain my certification in
December I use it every day I
choose to coach teachers I use
it to look at best practices
even in part of our
Our tool to observe and evaluate
teachers we use the rubric based
on national board standards it
for family do changed my
teaching and it for family is
now changing the way I work with
others so I just think it's
something that we should
recognize and honor for teachers
and administrators.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you we will move now to Mr
Alvand Warren Mr Warren go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Alvin Warren and the vice
president for pathways in
advocacy for the Landel
foundation we are in strong
support of house bill one eighty
one we have been a partner with
the the public education
department in the in the process
of certifying more teachers as
nationally board certified
teachers
so there's currently a small
subset of certified New Mexico
educators that are excluded from
receiving the annual salary
differential which has others
have spoken about recognizes
their credential this includes
principals administrators and
school counselors who received
the certification but are not
eligible for the increased
because of the current language
that only refers to teachers we
feel that this is a a relatively
straightforward but very
important change to make to
promote equity in our education
system to recognize the the
accomplishments.
And the skills of these
educators and encourage it to
pass thank you.
Thank you very much Mr.
The two that looks like all the
comments we have in favor of
house bill one eighty one at
this time we will move on to
those that are opposed to house
bill one eighty one we'll start
our committee room is there
anybody here in opposition to
house bill one eighty one.
If not we will move on to our
I don't see anybody that's on
soon that is opposed to this so
we appreciate all those that are
on our soon meeting for their
responses we will move on now to
the committee do we have
questions from the committee.
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair
Madam summer line of questioning
Madam photo sure Romero can help
me understand how how're these.
The national board certified
teachers funded currently.
madam chair and representative
currently there is a fund that
funds nationally board certified
teachers so their rate
differential for on top of their
annual salary in order to fund
their national board
certification as an incentive
because studies have shown that
nationally sort of certified
teachers are are effective in
the classroom in the gains under
those students are are higher.
And so madam chair.
There there's a separate.
The legislative fund to take it
this doesn't or is it a factor
to the SCG or
Madam chair representative I
believe it's a factor through
the SCG.
Has funded to be specific thank
you madam chair appreciate the
clarification
And so it if I'm and National
board certified teacher and then
I take a job as a principal or
or maybe at uh administrative
offices.
I lose that stipends that our
current practice on Madam chair
representative line yes if you
go into administration you would
lose it and you would not be
paid the differential okay and
we madam chair I should say that
you would keep your nationally
board certified status but you
would lose the differential just
to clarify.
And madam chair I so the where
to send this bill then is.
At least from my my way of
thinking is that if if we're
currently funding this already
through the SCG.
We don't want to penalize
qualified people coming from the
classroom.
into administration I think we
need to encourage that
and I I I zoom is not reason why
someone wouldn't go to
ministration but I think it
could be a factor that that ways
and so I think from how I
understand it could help bring
me some of that so thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Eli anybody else
with comments.
Representative nope all volume.
Have a quick question and this
just came up with the last line
of course sorry madam chair
and Representative does this
include this is licensed
employees so with this include
we we've talked about principles
of going up with this include
maybe someone going into and
like a director position and and
or an admin position in the main
office type of thing.
Madam chair and representative
I believe that the answer to
that would content would be yes
that if they're still license
and they're an employee of the
school that yes this might
factor them into the fold as
well okay thank you thank you
madam chair.
Is there any other questions
yes.
From.
Share story and what the
possible calls before the one.
We do have a motion from
Representative and I'm sorry I
can't see your name.
Corolla with the second from
Representative Roybal copy here
of a before I do take that
motion though I do have a
question for the sponsor of the
bill.
Mr Mr chairman Mr chairman
Romero.
These dollars will be put into
the classroom and my
understanding that correctly or
will the.
Hello and if so if they're not
have was is going to improve our
education system madam chair
that's a really good question so
numerous studies have been done
on the nationally point sort
Berg board certified teachers
and their outcomes for students
are typically higher than those
seen with licensed educators
which is why as the Legislature
us some those of us that have
been here for a number of years
we sponsored a a separate fund
in this a separate fund to fund.
Teachers who are going through
the pasta process of national
board certification now we have
and we've had the state been to
go along with it so I think as a
state we've prioritized national
board certification because of
the outcomes these educators
have gone through the process
find for students.
Thank you for that explanation
but Mr.
Chairman Romero I also notice
that there's no appropriation in
your bill he said that there is
stipends available and that
money is available but this
seems like more of an incentive
for more teachers to to obtain
this go.
Will there be a shortfall.
Madam chair that's another good
question we don't believe so
because currently as as one of
those that stood up in support
mentioned is that currently we
have three councillors in just a
handful of administrators that
would require that so I think
The immediate impact would not
be diluting the fund however
that's why I think we should if
this were to pass monitor it for
inappropriate appropriation
coming next year because that
doesn't mean that others
wouldn't want to as we move
forward.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee one reason you're able
to do this is because of.
The money that is coming from
certain industries throughout
our state and that is the oil
and gas industry along with
agricultural communities and I
think that we owe them a great
deal of appreciation for helping
to improve our educational
system and
I hope that we can maintain the
level that we're at as far as
speed ticket so we do have and
motioned for the past from
Representative Figueroa seconded
by Representative Roybal
Caballero is there any
opposition to this.
Mr Chairman do have a due pass
right you madam chair thank you
committee.
Thank you for help.
All right.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
and we will have Representative
Martinez up here.
Good morning welcome to health
education good morning Mr
chairman members of the
Education Committee.
I appreciate the privilege of
standing in for my friend
Representative seven Jana on
house memorial twenty two.
House memorial twenty two.
Is asking the public education
department to follow up on the
Google store public schools
program a bill that was passed
in twenty twenty one.
requiring PED in the school
systems
to implement the proportional
or.
Representative.
The purple star program.
shows a major commitment to
students and families connected
to our nation's military and
this is a nationwide program.
The purple star programs diss
designed to respond to the
educational and social and
emotional challenges the
military children faced during
their transition to a new school
and unfortunately this happens
quite a bit and with me today is
Claudia Risan all have her
introduce herself.
Home morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
thanks for taking a look at this
bill this memorial today I'm
retired navy captain for for
twenty nine years I've had a lot
of experience with families
moving service members moving
and their kids moving all over
bill the air in the summer
whatever and we work very hard
to try to help the kids keep up
because they have to trail their
active duty father or mother so
this program would be
exceptionally important to be
implemented here
I don't know how much for you
want me to go into this would
like to I think with that we'll
go ahead and stand for
questions.
Thank you all right so we will
go into the audience for COVID
so House memorial twenty two if
you're online and you wish to
speak in support of house
memorial twenty two please
indicate there is your hand.
Alright we'll hold off on line
those of you in the audience my
right hand side those in support
alright Sir welcome you have up
to two minutes thank you.
Your
own member of the New Mexico
veterans and military families
caucus research shows that
eighty percent of America's
military connected children
attend public schools military
connected children it's a nice
way of saying military craft if
army brat my mom and dad for
the.
With the four elementary school
to junior high school point
seventy five
No evidence that the the public
education department is
implemented purple star program
on based on the website if you
go to that website and search
for purple star schools nothing
comes up to the public facing
digital evidence program
military families are unable to
provide for the for the for the
full program for the children to
move to New Mexico.
Colorado and several other
states that implement this
program is made information
widely available on the website
the only school system just
three public schools than
record.
Approval for school order drive
that program before Senate bill
two seventy one was passed in
twenty twenty one because of the
proximity of home an airforce
base there website has turned
into a program.
This is the world intended to
motivate the New Mexico public
education department require all
of New Mexicos public schools
today implement this program and
help our military children to
the best of school we stand in
support of this and ask you to
support this morning thank you
thank thank you others American
side that we speak in support.
Thank you for all please finally
of up to two minutes.
This is chairman of the
And we can still appreciate.
To continue
this for those of I'm Terry
families in that transition that
you Francis thank you.
Thank you all right others on
the right hand side the wish we
can support all right we'll go
to my left hand side those who
wish to speak in support please
Sir give up to two minutes walk
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico we
appreciate the sponsor and their
work that they've done and would
like to see full implementation
of the program thank you for all
right thank you others on my
left hand side that we speak in
support.
Okay we'll go online we have
Megan's to speak in support.
Good morning Megan you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning my name is Megan
delarosa second of director of
the program partnership
committee and on behalf of
Kirtland Air Force base and all
bases across New Mexico we
strongly support this memorial.
Right thank you.
All right.
Good opposition is our
opposition to house memorial
twenty two.
Online or not.
Okay will come to committee for
some analysts Representative
Roybal come in a please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and thank you
expert witness right now I have
just one question and I will say
on that I am an army brat.
I I never say I was because when
once you are an army brat you're
always an army brat
I was have the privilege of
traveling all over the country
and the world actually with my
father and you know I being the
outgoing person that I am.
Mick I mixed and mingled very
well and really appreciate it
the countries that we visited
however.
there were periods of time and
parts of the country and Kansas
in particular that I remember
that was very difficult we were
stationed in junction city
Right outside of of the base and
then that Mr Chairman.
Representative it was a very
difficult transition at that
time and had there been a way in
which to help
Montoya.
Dependence acclimate to their
various.
You know conditions social round
surrounding where you're
stationed at within the probably
of a difference but in fact it
left a little bit of a negative
lifelong.
Impact on me that experience is
very negative and so I just I
want I'm wondering Mr chair I've
had several memorials very early
on when I first got in fixed
began serving in office.
And they went.
The they didn't go anywhere and
when we asked for follow up Mr
chair there is.
Even a lack of
understanding or knowledge that
they even had this point so I'm
curious about
In the whereas on page two that
begins online I questions have
arisen are these because there's
no evidence has has been given
in terms of testimony that
anything's being done or what
what what are the questions that
have come up that cause us to
have to do this again Mr chair
Representative Roybal Caballero
back in twenty twenty one Senate
bill two seventy one was passed
directing that this program be
implemented and as you've heard
from the audience there is no
evidence of the schools in
Alamogordo that are close to
home and are for space implement
this program before Senate bill
two seventy one was passed so
this memorial is just asking
that a renewed interest from PED
to to implement this program
the that's the basic
Push of this memorial thank you
Mr chair representative so that
is important because how we
measure whether what we're.
Our legislative intent is when
we pass the legislation is to
have advocates and community
members around.
To be our eyes and ears and our
R. everything in the community
so I'm grateful that this was
one of those that was closely
monitored just not having pin
followed and yes you're correct
the memorial is set up to help
motivate but you need to now at
this point when we pass this Mr
Chairman representative become
even more vigilant because of
the hard questions have to be
asked and then if we can offer
support as a community to the
PED I don't know what we kind of
further than our expert
support then that's how we would
need to push in order to get
this take a tentative because
it's a very important piece of
legislation that was intended to
assist the multitude of military
families that we have in the
state so on the one hand Mr
chair and representative we
pride ourselves with having a
strong military presence in our
state that we have to
demonstrate.
That price by offering the
services that are intended in
our legislation so Mr chair
representative of thank you to
all of you Sanchez bring forward
thank you.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for staff Representative
Martinez I do want to thank your
expert witness for your military
services for at risk advocacy
for house memorial twenty twenty
two I appreciate it very much Mr
chairman of the gentleman in the
audience was mention what all is
going on over it Holloman Air
Force base Mr Chairman.
We have several more military
installations in our state I
want to make sure that are they
involved in this program as
well.
Mr chair representative these L.
unfortunately Clovis which is
and then your economic and
Albuquerque which is home to
Kirtland Air Force base have not
implemented this program.
And Mr Chairman representative
Martinez thank that gives me
concern.
If I have the school districts
not see the scene the need to do
this or they just waiting for
more guidance from PED may be on
Mr chair representative is L. I.
I do believe that the
responsibility hangs on PED to
push this program down
We would need to ask PED why
this is not been done and that's
basically the purpose of the
memorial and Mr Chairman
representative Martinez I guess.
We didn't probably need to prod
PED on this issue and.
When they were talking about the
success of the students that as
Representative Roybal copyright
pointed out whenever there is a
move in place for all these kids
and.
Being the.
I have several bonus kids that
went to New Mexico military
institute and then they for that
their careers in the military
and yes.
The number of times that these
young people have moved and
upgraded their children from the
cut schools that they went to
whether it was in South Korea
whether was in anchorage Alaska
where the case may be it is
sometimes a really hard
transition for the students and
that the to have all of our
students be successful
especially these kids that are
moving into a totally different
area.
Sometimes it can be daunting.
And I think that PED I'm going
to chastise him and I don't see
Mr fasted here anybody else out
there you are I'm sorry of yes
we are going to.
Thank you and take this message
back okay these kids do need the
support business specially when
it we have.
The installations involved in
the towns because those families
to become part of those towns or
cities where they're located or
in conjunction to these kids do
need the support so I Mr
Chairman representative thank
you very much break in this
that's all Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and thank
both of you thank you
Representative Martinez for
bringing this bill forward it is
deeply appreciated and your
expert is wonderful
being the woman who has four
brothers who served in the
military I I certainly think
this is really an important
piece of legislation and I
remember at our interim in
Alamogordo we had previously had
a kind of a deep dive into the
this program and it was
remarkable what they were doing
an on court can you give me an
update of the cost of that I I
can't quite remember It nine no
I asked that question and that
is it alludes me now Mr chair
representative that I don't have
an answer for that but I will
get you that information well
that's fine I I I just know it
was an excellent programs should
be emulated and all our schools
I'm just going to say that.
I I think the veterans need to
go have a meeting with the
governor or the sponsors of this
legislation I I would join you
because I'm unless the governor
is explicit directions to PED to
do this study it's it won't
happen I that's what happens
with memorials I'm just I'm just
saying and I've even I even put
junior money into a memorial and
it still wasn't done so it's
it's a yeah you know it's a
problem so I'm just saying
we need to follow up on this and
make sure that it is implemented
with PED and so they have the
available staff to do this and
that it's done in the correct
manner that's all I have Mister
chair thank you Mr can I respond
quickly Mr chair representative
Atlanta
for twenty five years I
Greatest career that anybody
could ask for.
My public service is transition
now to an elected official and
believe me I will follow up on
this like I used to follow up
when I was with the department
of Veterans Services because
these children face very
individual challenges but not
only that they bring much added
value to those schools and those
communities and that's what I
want to focus on
of course being young and going
to a new screen every two years
is a challenge but I want to
focus also on the value that
they bring to those schools.
I thank you Representative I
couldn't agree more and thank
you for bringing this
legislation forward at I will
join you in your efforts thank
you Mr chair right thank you.
So without further debate to
have a motion.
All right so we have to pass a
motion by Representative Ezzell
the second by Representative a.
There any opposition to the do
pass.
Seeing none do have passed on
house memorial twenty two thank
you so much thank you for your
members of the committee thank
you very much right thank you so
that concludes our business for
