Airline.
Representative Lotta.
There.
Representative Lente.
Here Representative Madrid.
Representative for ball come by
at all.
Representative Stapleton.
So here.
Representative Sweetser air.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Here.
Representative Garrett.
Here.
Chair.
Here to get representatives but
the terrible County yes I get.
Sorry.
Revise accounted for all right
so we have a quorum good morning
everybody and to are returning
members it's good to see you all
House education to our new
members welcome will kind of go
over things here and a little
bit but I want to start off with
some introductions so we'll
start off with the members and
all kind of go in the order that
I see you all on the screen and
then we'll go on to our
wonderful staff so
Representative Figueroa if you
could give us a brief
introduction produce yourself to
the group good morning.
Good morning.
I am Natalie Figueroa I
represent New Mexico house
district thirty that is in the
mid north these types of
Albuquerque.
I am super excited to be meeting
with everyone and I will be
asking often on as my
legislative aide comes in the
office
so I hope it will be clear
enough happy to join all of you
this morning.
Good morning Representative
good.
Representative laying please.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
everyone a I am new to the house
and this the new to this
committee on Representative
house district three which is
formally held by Representative
pump and use some of you
probably remember
I was born and raised up in
Aztec love the northern part of
our state.
terms of I get some needed
experience serve on the as for
for about five years I am an
attorney by trade
but a lot of educational of
learning
I wife and I've been married for
almost twenty years we have two
teenage boys and a of the state
for serving with everyone
thanks.
Awesome it's nice to have you in
the committee welcome
Representative Baldonado
returning champ.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning everybody my name is
Alonzo Baldonado I represent
house district eight which is
the west half or so of once the
county of live animals than us.
Ten going on eleven years now in
the house always on the
Education Committee so I guess I
should note two things by now
and good to see familiar faces
as well as new faces thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning everybody Representative
Derrick Olympic committees my
hope here in Sandia pueblo I
represent the sixty fifth
district which includes the
counties of Santa San Juan and
Rio Arriba I have in my district
seven pueblos five chapters of
the Navajo Nation hickory Apache
nation as well as the largest
municipality in my district the
town of Bernalillo.
So happy and excited to be on
this committee thank you Mr
chairman and report to serve
with all of you good morning.
Great right welcome
Representative Representative
but three Senator Baca yet
please.
Yes thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee and thank you everyone
from the committee community
who's feeling my name is but
these Sierra right back up I I
all I represent house district
thirteen which is on the far
southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque but definitely
County and I'm I've been looking
forward to the day that I could
serve on the house education and
today's the day so thank you
very much I am I am in higher
education both as a student
doctoral student as well as all
faculty so I'm happy to be part
of this committee and contribute
as much as I can and learn as
much more than that can and have
thank you Mr chairman thank you
everyone.
Hey welcome Representative
Representative Sweetser good
morning and welcome good morning
and thank you Mr chair on Candie
Sweetser I represent house
district thirty two which is the
far southwest corner of the
state I have all of Luna most of
Hidalgo and Juan Grant County
pre thank I have a daughter in
high school so education very
close to me I'm new to this
committee and very I did that
there have also taught for
western Mexico university as an
adjunct I have a a little
connection there but that I
think education most important
thing we do in the state so I'm
very happy to be serving with
you Mr chair thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Sweetser we're happy to have
you.
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton I represent district
nineteen in southeast
Albuquerque and a little bit of
the nineties heights and I am
always happy to be serving on
the Education Committee.
Thank you.
Thank you madam for later
we'll go to Representative Dow
please.
Morning.
Thank you Mr chairman hi
everybody I'm I'm really looking
forward to getting to visit and
get to know the new members I'm
I'm in district thirty eight
which is down south at any
Sweetser is my neighbor and I
have grant he dog when Sierra
County so I raise two children
in New Mexico from they work we
were my kids were and three and
five when we moved here and so
my daughter just finished her
master's degree in social work
at western New Mexico university
and so in my role I work
basically at with programs
outside of the school system
outside school system that make
sure that when children get to
school they're ready to learn
that they can be safe and secure
in our surroundings that they
have of the the things they need
so that they can be active
learners and so through that
process over the last twenty two
years I worked in title programs
pretty much every type of
program that there is twenty
first century programming lots
of different types of district
grants whether nonprofits I
found it was one of the first
six pre K. programs in the state
also there three school
districts include might renters
border border school districts a
rural school districts that are
you know parents want to drive
an hour away if we can't keep
those rural schools open and
I've primarily worked in early
childhood so my children did
public school private school
home school and mixes of all of
the above and so I definitely
believe that parents know their
child needs that's and we should
look for options for them to be
able to use what they need for
their children as their children
go to our public education
system thank you Mr chairman
looking forward to getting
everybody.
Definitely thank you
Representative Dow it's good to
have you back Representative
Madrid please now they're
returning number.
Thank you all to the Education
Committee and Mr chairman I'm
glad to be back really matured
from the south down district
fifty three in a in a
surrounding mountains close
attention to the Texas border.
It's a beautiful area that's
come to to prosper and we should
should be up to thirty thousand
out there my reguards is in we
can education is that I've been
a educational system or
instructional system as the
state calls by the two trials so
been of a coupon code voices of
course was the real people that
are the C. mental many of our
school systems the gore and
forgotten so I think you
mentioned retrospect from back
in the second term I feel more
than the energy and resources
that we need to put up for those
of our educational process thank
you for having us I'm in the
back.
It's great to have you back
Representative Madrid madam
chair Christine Trujillo are
chair of legislative education
study committee good morning.
Good morning everyone it's nice
to be here and I represent.
That house district of in the
middle of Albuquerque right in
at uptown can you hear me have a
weird microphone input I
apologize you're you're good we
can hear you representative you
might want to speak up just a
little bit more it's a little
bit quiet on my side but if you
can little bit more sounds good
I just want to say that this is
my tenth year on the committee
and this is the first time I
have been served breakfast by my
husband before come and
Education Committee meeting he
got up early and made sausage
and eggs and jalapenos
That's all I have to say.
Great thank you representative
hopefully he can cook for us
next time we're up at the
capitol that would be awesome.
Representative Chatfield good
morning.
Welcome back Sir.
Good to be here.
Representative Jack Chatfield
Representative Representative
district sixty seven I was on
the board at which rural schools
for seventeen years.
law school district in the
state.
I live in a very.
Rural area Representative said
Candace and I really
appreciate being on the
Education Committee that's our
our communities in northeastern
New Mexico revolve around our
schools and looking forward to
we can get him back open again
we really really miss that
interaction.
Year.
Thank you representative
Representative is L. good
morning and welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman I'm
looking forward to serving on
this committee my name is candy
Spence is L. state
representative district fifty
eight I represent not only there
rossoll independent school
district but three other very
rural school districts and
Representative Madrid is exactly
right.
Those rural schools are the
heart of those communities and
we have to always keep in mind
that one size does not fit all
whenever it comes to educating
our use I have a school district
that these kids have to ride the
school bus for over an hour and
a half to be able to attend
school and the they have no
internet access in there the
school consist of fourteen
children two teachers to
buildings and they're not
allowed to operate we do have to
be mindful of the educational
needs that constitutionally we
do have to provide to our you Mr
chairman thank you very much.
US and welcome importance good
to have you representative
Lotta.
The returning members good
morning good morning Mr chair
good morning everyone it's it's
great to be back on this
committee my name is relied on
state Rep house district thirty
four down does so in doing in a
County Down to the Texas our
Republic of Mexico border I am
honored to have a Representative
Sweetser to to as my neighbor to
the west I have been in
education for over twenty years
and also full rules all right
now I'm working with the air and
as the coordinator for
instructional materials for gas
and schools so I also represent
gas Independent School District
and portion of the Los crucis
public schools in my legislative
district and I look forward to
working with everyone again
thank you.
More a welcome and then.
We have our new vice chair vice
chair Garrett good morning hi
good morning everybody thank you
Mr chairman I feel like I'm
looking at the faces of New
Mexico so it's just great to see
everybody I am a state
representative joy Garrett I
just entered my second term
Representative house district
twenty nine this is the north
west Bernalillo county from I.
forty to Sandoval County and
Unser to the real quick revert I
just retired from twenty eight
years of teaching on July first
lake Representative Dow I have
been a home schooling.
A my son has been to every form
of school from remediation to.
Home school to private school to
public school.
so I've taught myself in public
private from pre K. to
university level I've also
taught in addition to teaching
New Mexico I taught in
California Connecticut and South
Korea so I bring a lot of
different experience but but
what's so exciting about this
committee is that we really
Representative everything from
front care districts to rural
districts to urban districts so
I just really look forward to
serving you in any way that I
can and supporting our chairman
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you madam vice chair so
I'm state representative on
dress Romero I represent house
district ten which is the far
south valley of Bernalillo
county and parts of southeast
Albuquerque I'm a high school
teacher so I teach high school
social studies US history a
leadership class at atrisk
heritage academy high school in
south LA public education is
obviously very near and dear to
my heart.
Excuse me my mom was a twenty
year elementary school teacher
at the school in our community
lost for the SLO and
representatives L. points out
that that in rural districts
that the school is really the
the heart of the community I
mean that's true also here in
Albuquerque in our south valley
it's a school near dear to my
heart I was a student it's where
my wife got her start as an
educational assistant at the
school yes a woman or a school
I and my siblings all all went
to school there
I teach Senators go heritage
like I mentioned it's it's the
school in the community that I
represent that I was born and
raised in
and and mice my children as well
go to local public school my
wife teaches at IIT carcinoma
mentor each school to stand up
the road from us so public
education is obviously very near
and dear to me and and something
that is is something I truly
believe in and and I put my
children in because I believe in
it so so much and and me and my
wife certainly choose to work in
our public schools and and to
try to better the the system as
I know all of us are certainly
interested in New interested in
working toward so I I really
appreciate and I I love.
This committee I love serving
with all of you I think the past
two years with certainly are
returning members was was
fantastic we had a lot of great
collaboration we were able to
collaborate and work on a lot of
various bills touching on
educators students families and
there was a lot of of of good
collaborative working
congeniality in the in the in
the work that we did I think
that's something that I hope
will will translate into the
next
this legislative session I
should say it's not next it's
here now and ever present
but I look forward to working
with you all
and it's good to start getting
to know you all so with that in
mind before we can to get to
what to expect from the
committee will go around and
kind of introduce some of the
other faces that we have on the
soon for those of you that may
be familiar we have a lot of
returning members and then we
have some that are that are you
so all start off with our
committee secretary
When he would introduce yourself
good morning good morning
everyone I'm Linda Vieira and
I've been with the how's
Education Committee for nine
years and but I've been with the
house Representative for
thirteen years and I'm glad to
be back with the health
education and I'll help you in
anyway I can just give me a call
and I am well you have all my
information so I'm here to serve
you glad to be back.
Eight thank you it's great to
have you back when that is good
seeing you the other day.
so we have all our committee
analysts so by order Mary if you
would please introduce yourself
S. good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is merry Wommack I'm coming to
you from my home in Albuquerque
this is my third year service
serving the committee as an
analyst and I really look
forward to being of service to
all of you if you need anything
please feel free to reach out we
provide you with the committee
and Alice's every evening and
that will be electronically this
year.
Thank you.
Okay it's good to have you back
merry of Rachel please good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning members of the committee
this is my second year as a
committee an analyst and I'm
just happy to be back even
though it's virtually it's good
to be back and I look forward to
the next fifty eight fifty seven
this.
Thank you Rachel not that
anybody is counting or anything
I'm sure you all are not
but it's good to have the the
the core team of the committee
back Linda Mary and Rachel for
sure and like they said anything
you all need they're also there
to to help you out
so we'll start off with
Tony so from the majority of
major analyst morning thank you
chair good morning everyone Tony
girlish is at a list for the
house majority committee and I
am a retired educator
having been in the classroom for
ten years and have eight schools
in Santiago the Chile
international schools and Warsaw
Poland and most recently founded
to schools in Santa Fe the mall
to those old charter school
which is now twenty years old
and the Mandela international
magnet school here in Santa Fe
which is in Santa Fe public
school focusing on the
International Baccalaureate.
Nice to see you all and I look
forward to a wonderful year with
you.
It's good to have you again Tony
and good morning.
Good morning thank you this is
my first year it's a bit of a
steep learning curve but I am
really enjoying this I retired
in June it and my brain is happy
to be engaged again I've spent
my whole life working in schools
I grew up in Sedona and was one
of those kids who rode a bus for
an hour to get to elementary
school
I've worked over the years and
public private and charter
schools and retired from the
master's program early college
charter school on the campus of
Santa Fe community college which
was ten years some of the best
ten years of my life working
with an incredibly diverse group
of students who many of whom
were getting degrees before they
left high schools so
I am really committed to making
sure also that we have great
opportunities for kids to be
able to move ahead thank you.
Great welcome aboard Randy Piper
good morning.
Welcome aboard.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity.
I just retired actually July one
as well
after twenty eight years in
education and much like
Representative Madrid at my
educational career started out
as an educational assistant
substitute teacher
Also you know after that moved
on to an elementary teacher
principal for middle school and
elementary schools
served four years at a regional
education center in the state
providing training to school
districts and then spent six
years as superintendent
Lordsburg and two years in truth
or consequences New yes many
members of the committee I have
worked with
before so excited to be here
experience in federal programs
title one title two bilingual
education the homeless programs
migrant education as well as
special education so looking
forward to the experience it's
good to be back among the people
who really care about education
thank you.
Definitely well said okay
welcome all right so then
we also have director Rachel
gradual from the legislative
education study committee who
right so if you would director
federal.
Morning Mr chairman members of
house that it's nice to see
everybody this morning and
Rachel got all the staff
director of the LFC how much is
a permanent bicameral committee
of the legislature that focuses
on K. twelve education
throughout the interim so we
work with Ellie S. C. members
throughout the interim and then
try when session starts we staff
you guys and house and Senate
and members
for your work on education
issues so I've got Mister
chairman staff is waiting in the
attendee list to introduce
themselves you will always see
You always see it would probably
at least to LFC staff attending
meetings every morning to pay
attention to provide support as
you guys do your work so we are
permanent legislative staff
nonpartisan here to help any of
you that need it drafting bills
analyzing bills to answering
research questions.
Great you want to bring those
members and if we could allow
them and so that members can see
their faces and kind of get to
now
put a name to the face could we
do that when they're.
And so then I think there's two
that don't say LAFC Joseph Simon
and Tim video.
In addition.
To the other I guess.
Three that saliency.
Right.
Good morning Ellie S. C. folks
so Chelsea good morning if you
want to introduce yourself to
the committee please.
Mr chairman members good morning
nice to see all of your faces
on.
I'm a senior policy analyst for
the sorry I'm in your policy
analyst for the legislative
education study committee my
policy area that I focused on
throughout the year is the
educator workforce and educator
quality feel free to reach out
to me whenever you need anything
I'm here to serve you all and
looking forward to a great
session.
Great thank you right good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee if we
were to this morning my name is
ritually on and one of the
senior policy analyst or daily
SCG.
And I'm responsible for issues
related to curriculum
instruction and small clients
looking for to join the box or
productive legislative session.
All right welcome the morning
Joey good morning good to see
you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Joseph Simon I'm a fiscal
analyst here with Ellie S. C.
and I can help you with anything
you need are related to the
public school funding formula
school finance issues local
school budgets pensions and
healthcare benefits or anything
of that like thank you.
Great thank you Jerry Emily good
morning.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Emily
Hoxie I am a policy analyst at
Kelley Essie and I'm happy to
help you with anything related
to early childhood education or
extended learning time programs
happy to be with you this
morning.
Great good to have you good
morning Jessica.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of house and good to be with all
of you today in my name's
Jessica halfway senior policy
analyst with Ellie S. C. and I
focus on a couple of our calls
are of our policy blocks college
and career readiness and also
all school choice issues so
please feel free to reach out
any time happy to help you in
anyway I can good to be with
you.
Great good to have you ten good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning members of the house
Education Committee my name's
Tim but they'll I am an analyst
last senior analyst to tell yes
you have been here for about
four years now my focus is on
assessment and accountability
issues and I recently picked up
capital outlay is also happy to
serve you however I can.
Great thank you so.
Then that's a good morning.
Good morning chairman good
morning members I am Vanessa
Hawker I and the deputy director
at legislative education study
committee I am looking forward
to working with you and
supporting you this session.
All right thank you so much so
is that it for the LFC folks
that believe that is right.
Your dental all right I'm so
we'll go ahead I'm going to
permanent.
Permanently and you myself so.
Like we said good morning
everybody it's nice to have
everybody in the group for our
first meeting
Before I get started
Representative Madrid did you
have a question or comment.
How can you lower your hand for
me plans.
Representative well did you have
a question or comment.
Or get started Mr chair yes that
they will we as a committee as
the committee.
Will we be provided a list of
Linda's phone number and
remember and all the directors
and analysts will we be provided
with their name room number and
phone numbers please as well as
the membership of the.
Committee.
So so Representative but
something we can put together
I'm gonna go over some of the
committee stuff so so all
address that thank you my
comments.
Thank you.
So.
So I'm sorry about the for for
members about the mix up this
morning
I got information usually public
education department will join
us just in case there's some
sort of clarification issue or
question about implementation
around the bills and usually
they'll they'll be within the
attendee list that we can allow
to talk and speak to us to
answer quick questions from the
committee about things
But but just know that they will
also be be in the audience most
of the time as well
So getting to to the committee
of the whole you can expect that
we will be meeting at eight
o'clock each time that we meet
so eight o'clock and for members
you all know that that means
Monday Wednesday Friday we also
tend to meet on Saturdays as we
have a pretty pretty heavy
workload especially during the
sixty day so you can expect on
Saturdays Saturdays I should say
typically start at nine o'clock
so it doesn't follow the the
eight o'clock rule give you an
extra hour to sleep in but other
than that will start at at eight
o'clock during the week day all
of this if anything does change
of course it'll always be posted
well in advance and you will
know well in advance of of all
of that
To that request Representative
is L. we can certainly but they
put together a list of the
committee members I know
our committee analyst Rachel has
been kind of gathering a lot of
that information already so we
can start compiling a lot of
this information for members
that want to reach out to to
members to to our staff
Ellie S. C. we can certainly put
that together and distribute it
for members as a quick are all
one pager I think one pager is
also one of the one of the
things in education that that
certainly teachers have learned
really well of having their
super helpful guide so I think
that's a good suggestion and
once we get that compiled will
send that out to members
About the committee obviously
work on a virtual platform and
this is you know welcome to
teachers lives for the past six
months
and so you know there are always
some technical difficulties
obviously this morning on that
we have to be cognizant of
please make sure that
your microphones are off
At all times be cognisant of the
various functions on your
computer if you need anything
tech wise of course we have
plenty of staff around the
roundhouse in order to help you
with your technical difficulty
should you be experiencing them
One of the things and and of
course returning members now is
that
That I'm I'm I'm a stickler on
time that we get started at
eight o'clock in that we have
members ready and able to go
obviously we have some technical
issues on that we're working
through but I think we got
started you know ten minutes
late which is fine but I tend to
start right at eight o'clock
with our first presentation
whomever may be first on the
list to to get presented and and
start presentations I'm thinking
of
obviously there are a lot of
balls in the air currently this
is a new format but I'm hoping
that we can wrap up our business
by eleven
each day Levin as a late mark
worry we like I said have quite
a number of bills to get through
and we have such a rich
background of of members of of
experience to really tackle a
lot of these very serious issues
that we know that we all face
So when when we have the agenda
in the agenda set we go until
the bills have been heard on
those of you that know if this
means going a little bit over is
fine but by the same token we
need to make sure that that we
respect everybody's time that
means our time as members you
your time and your colleagues
time as members that they get
their questions answered but
also the public because we have
a specific time frame in which
to work and a specific agenda to
work with and there if we have
people waiting on the attendee
list to hear a bill to speak on
a bill that we don't have to
turn them away that their bill
will be heard and so for the
returning members you know that
we did a really good job of
doing that the past two years
and like I mentioned in my
introduction we had a lot of I
think good
Good rapport with each other I
think we had good substantive
discussions around bills when we
had made changes a lot of it was
tended to be
changes that we agreed with and
then we have very healthy
discussions where we had
disagreements and I think that
is is very healthy and a very
good thing for New Mexico
families teachers and certainly
students so I look forward to
having that again
the other thing I'm a I'm a big
stickler for is decorum and I
mean I'm glad to see everybody
is so neatly dressed this
morning and and already
conducting themselves a in in
such a way that we would expect
in in any sort of committee room
right no matter our current
location on that we're always
we in our appearance and in our
conduct with one another that we
maintain the decorum of the
house committee room right so
going through the chair
Not calling members out
specifically right in keeping
the the discussion on the topic
and about the topic that we're
discussing and in discussing and
not straying on to any other
sort of off topic for or on
political speeches I think is is
a big thing we're here to do
very says serious business in
terms of our public education
system I I trust in you all that
you all take that seriously and
I take that with the utmost
seriousness there's a lot at
stake in what we discussed
and and we need to make sure
that that the ideas that we're
discussing are done with the
utmost respect between members
okay
So like I said last couple years
we had a lot of good discussion
we had a lot of cordial
discussing discussion around
these topics and I look forward
to continuing that with with a
lot of the new members it's
gonna be an awesome experience
this is a really good committee
and we have such wonderful staff
we have such wonderful members
to work with
So the next thing is is is about
the agenda so again my my hope
is we started eight and we and
by eleven o'clock because
members do have afternoon
committees these meetings
obviously on a virtual platform
are are are strenuous
and and do we want to make sure
that the the bills get heard so
we'll find a balance between the
bills that we have to here and
and that time but again it's a
very fine line and when the
agenda set it for a day we will
hear those bills because we have
a lot of eyes watching us the
public on people with a direct
interest in the bill that will
be attending that meeting we
want to make sure that that
they'll be able to to get their
voice center at least show
support for any sort of bill all
more initiative we're putting
forward I think it's really
important so I do ask that
members when when asking
questions ask your questions
it's awesome
if you're gonna make statements.
Please make your statements but
also make them brief I'm not I'm
a firm believer in in brevity
being the soul of wit
and and take that seriously so
I do ask members task very
pointed questions and certainly
encourage participation but also
know that that we're also a
little bit under a time crunch
and we want to hear from the
public as well that super super
important
So.
I should say that the agenda of
course will always be
The day before and you can.
Make sure you you will notice
that that it doesn't change very
much of course throughout the
day obviously there are some
members that would ask for
various reasons to pull bill or
whatever
and and that's fine but know
that the agenda will go out
With plenty of time for all of
our analysts to really get their
ducks in a row I think that
super super important that all
the analysts have a fair shake
to give us information about
what they're doing and
information about the bills that
we're hearing so all of us white
could students can come in well
prepared with our questions or
comments and and and prepare to
vote on these initiatives with
that being said I do stick
strictly to the twenty four hour
amendment rural and that crosses
across both parties obviously
those of you that are returning
members know that that I'm a
stickler for that and if members
do not have it I tend to turn it
away I always defer to the
committee on things like small
amendments in committee we've
done that add period here add a
word here or there that are not
substantive in nature and I
always defer to the committee if
there's something substantive
and and the committee can kind
of come to some sort of
agreement on okay it's
substantive enough to warrant a
a change we can certainly
entertain that
but I'll put it to committee
otherwise if you're making
substantive changes if your
committee setting
and you come at the last minute
I will turn you away and we'll
reschedule your bill for a later
date so please make sure that
you're prepared when you're
scheduled make sure you have all
your ducks in a row as far as
your bill Representative Dow did
you have a question.
Thank you Mr chairman my
question was just in regards to
the twenty four hour rule and if
you because we we are past the
rules for the for the house.
Yet so if if if we have a twenty
four hour rule what happens if
the bill doesn't come out before
twenty four hours per doesn't
get referred logistical thing.
Are we sure so if the bill.
What happens in the bill if we
want to propose an amendment and
the bill is getting sent to our
committee and expected to be
heard in less than twenty four
hours we have reviewed it.
my my requests especially with
our leadership has been that
they referred the bills with
enough time for analysts in
order to refer it
I think that's important for the
work that we do it's something
I'm gonna stick to so so I would
like that to happen within
twenty four hours so that we can
post it we can post an agenda so
the public knows so that members
know what to expect and we can
come well prepared thank you Mr
chairman I really appreciate you
honoring that because if it's if
the bill goes out I I need
twenty should be twenty four
hours to get to the builder read
it to to to review I'm sure the
rest of us all the same way
especially folks on probation so
I really appreciate you standing
by that I think you'll make for
good lawmaking thank you Mr
chairman.
Definitely and and so
Representative Dow that brings
up a good question before I get
to Representative Baldonado is
is that a lot of questions about
potential procedure I always
look to Representative Baldonado
being the senior minority leader
in house education to to kind of
bounce ideas off if there are
any changes to rules right so
we're caught in constant contact
about these things because I
think it's important to running
up a really fair process and and
and one that is good clean and
fair for everybody that we can
stand behind our work.
Representative Baldonado please.
Thank you Mr chairman my
question has to do with the
little yellow hand and in terms
of of you recognizing members
when when that time comes to
questions we will be using that
feature on zoom and just raise
our hand that way or was there
some other list or something
you'll be working from on a
regular basis so that so that's
a good question Representative
Baldonado so I would performance
to to raise their hand when
we're in the middle of debate
so if there somebody presenting
their bill for example and I'm
up here presenting house bill
whatever right and members can
start raising their hand we are
able I believe to lower hands so
what I am going to do personally
because this is this is how I am
as a teacher I'm still have my
note pad like I'm in the capitol
this is one thing I took at the
capitol tell anybody but I'm
gonna still I'm gonna still
write down names so then we can
lower your hand so we don't get
inundated with hands going up
because me as a teacher in my
students I noticed that when we
have a bunch of hands up it kind
of freaks people out so I'd like
to keep that to a minimum all
right names down and then we can
kind of lower hands or all the
knowledge some members that
you're on the list if for some
reason I miss because we why
currently we have more members
of LFC than we normally would
so I have two pages of attendees
if I miss somebody obviously
it's not on purpose just please
give me a heads up about it.
And tastic thank you Mr chairman
and then in terms of
Bill presenters bill sponsors of
the bill gives them link
invitation I assume what about
their expert witnesses will they
indeed get their own certainly
can be separate or those folks
expected to be in the same room
together that's another good
question Representative is that
will have them as attendees and
then we can patch them in
to the meeting so as long as
presenters to give who their
expert or experts may be.
All those names to Linda.
Or me or July we can patch them
into the meeting once their
attendees we can add them like
we did with the folks from LAFC
into the meeting pretty easily
and then we can we cannot move
them back to the attendees list
once we're finished with the
bill.
All whole New World Mr chairman
and and people will have some
hiccups but I think we can we
can manage I've I I will be
honest I wish we were all set in
a committee room together I
think we we missed a step you
know being in a virtual setting
here we don't get those looks
across the room at the other
members are body language and
things of that nature when you
see how there might be going but
hopefully we can communicate I
think it's important that we all
sherry to others cell phone
numbers I think a lot that's
been going on the chat this
morning and and this way we can
reach out to each other whether
Mr Ladas down in the southeast
or southern part of the state or
or Mr landed there and in the
middle of I'll send the approval
so I appreciate your leadership
and look forward to a a really
productive session thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative for
sure I think that'll be one of
the things for this year it's a
little bit more
of a of a of a wait on us to
have these conversations I was
come micro conversations right
that we have during the session
now turn into five ten fifteen
minute long phone conversations
when it could have just taken a
couple minutes but but I do I do
think in this sort of platform
we have a definite opportunity
to delve more deeply in the
conversation with one another
really grow those relationships
with one another and that's one
of the things I certainly
enjoyed about being a part of
this committee in being able to
lead this committee the past
couple years I feel that that
we've made a lot of progress and
certainly did you members we
hope to be able to up to to make
those bonds within in in join us
and that
we have any more questions
before I continued on with
anything so far.
Okay so the hand function test
will be utilizing that I'll be
writing the names down and that
kind of taking the hands down so
if you see the hand your hand go
down don't think that you know
it disappeared or something
we're just making note of that
and and again if I miss anybody
I apologize in advance and will
apologize at the time but it's
certainly not to exclude anybody
from the debate or discussion
So I'm one as a heads up my
understanding is that we're
gonna be disabling the chat as
we move forward
in the chat function here so we
will have the committee and
communication strictly through
the format that we're tend to be
used to which is by recognition
so
so please be aware of that so
we'll get everybody's kind of
preferred numbers will get
preferred email addresses to
make that more of a seamless
process if you want to get in
touch with with members for sure
So.
The public comment so will have
obviously public comment like we
do in our committee room we have
the attendees less than we can
add them into the room to make
public comment so for public
comment will have two minute Max
maximum limit
from from the past two years I
always encourage members of the
public again like I do everybody
is is please be brief and your
comments
and if things have already been
said and then reference them but
we want to make sure that we can
get as many members of the
public to give their testimony
as possible I think once we
really get started with all of
this will definitely see a lot
more public participation and
certainly we have a lot of bills
that are are
Well will generate more public
interest and discussion as time
goes by so so so will will
definitely include public
comment in there and and that'll
be something that that will work
on as time goes by
I won't bite them into the room
So I mentioned twenty four hour
rule
The the other thing about bills
like I said that they'll be
scheduled I think we even have
if I'm right window we already
have the the
agenda printed and and available
already for Monday's meeting is
that correct.
Yes I just have to send it it's
going to be in the golden rocked
out for two you'll be able to
see it tomorrow when it comes
out tomorrow
in the website.
Okay thank you and that so we
always have the the like I
mentioned the agenda posted with
plenty of time for certainly our
analysts Ellie S. C. to really
take a look into the bills and
to get us the information
So this year I'm looking at
doing more some the returning
members may remember is that I
would group them at times by
category because we'll have a
lot of bills that deal with
similar subject matter
and we can group those together
so that we can and see how they
may be work with or against one
another in various ways and I've
also been talking with director
gradual about having perhaps
briefings we did that with
Federal impacted a couple years
ago when we had first for her
the issue and we had Ellie S. C.
coming give us kind of an
overview of the issues at stake
with federal impact aid I really
like that system
to get a broad overview and and
and for us to do a lot of the
deep dive into the actual bills
and initiatives themselves so
I'll be doing that a lot more on
this legislative session I tend
to schedule the built in the
order in which they're referred
and then I also leave it to to
my discretion about about bills
that we're hearing but everybody
will get plenty of notice twenty
four hours at least of the
schedule that we're hearing the
bills that's always my
commitment to both the both
sides of the aisle is that we
have a level playing field in
which to discuss these bills and
again that you all and all of us
are informed about the bills as
we move forward so that we can
come in prepared with our
questions and or comments about
the bills I think that's that's
the most important thing is that
we need to make do our homework
as legislators and read the
bills in the analysis and then
to come into class prepare to
ask those questions and to make
these decisions
So with that being said does
anybody health have any
questions comments concerns.
Thank you Sir right hand
function.
Representative Dow you look like
you're searching do you have a
question.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
no I was part of the question.
Come.
Will thank you Mr chairman how
will we get.
Like somebody said it's on the
golden rod like to all the stuff
is virtual so.
So when when expert witness may
have a hand out.
Will we get twenty four hours
before as well or what.
Yeah.
The committee.
So so that's a good question you
typically what happens with
those is that they have to clear
it by need in advance anyway
and I mean they could do two
things says that if one if the
handout has been cleared they
can presented on the screen for
us while they're presenting I
think that's one of the nice
things about this platform is
that they can project their
screen so we can allow that for
them if they have a presentation
but I don't know if Linda you
might be able to address that if
there's going to be
that's available for members
sent out also so they can pull
it up because I know I have a
laptop here that I'm gonna have
built in analysis and and sheet
staff.
right now if it's a flyer or
something that that that would
be like I can put on a folder on
your file and your folders.
If I can put that in your
folders you'll be able to see it
when you.
When it comes to that bill.
I think that's kind of the way
it's going to be handled I'm not
really sure.
I'll have to ask.
Once you've approved it.
So so the idea is is that we're
gonna have a file sent out to us
with the built in them.
One analyst says along with the
analysis and Martindale
swordfish seats that had been
approved
So does that answer your
question Representative.
I can hear.
Representative staff it's a good
do we answer your question okay
thank you any other questions
comments concerns
Garrett Hester Hannah.
Don't think stir.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm.
Yes I I want to thank
Representative Dow for asking
that question and all the
folders I know LFC sends them to
Dropbox
which is sometimes confusing so
if it can just be cleared
clarified where the folder will
come will come like to are
provided email are are preferred
email or drop box and then my
other question is to know who's
going to actually be at the
capitol.
because Representative Dow is
going to be here I'm gonna be
here others are going to be here
and from time to time
we may want to meet so would be
Representative Trujillo is going
to be here.
Representative several people
are going to be here so it be
helpful to know who's going to
be here
on a regular basis just so if we
have to communicate or to
something.
Thank you thank you yeah that's
that's all stuff that can be
done offline I mean that's up to
to members certainly contact one
another reach out build those
bonds across one another but
that certainly that that that's
up to members to to discussing
in coordinated okay so which
Tony please Representative
commute thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my
quick question is do we have any
idea what the agenda on Monday
will look like and will there be
any bills on it.
That's a good question Tony no
that's exactly what I was gonna
get to next if I could book
market at and see if there any
other questions and then that's
what I was gonna dress that.
Any other questions.
All right so that that's a good
question Tony no there will not
be any bills heard on Monday we
are going to have a presentation
from the legislative education
study committee about well a lot
of the broad topics mainly the
the state equalization guarantee
I think there's going to be a
section correct we director
gradual about on the
international systems and no
time to lose so we've been
working with that correct.
Mr chair
you request we were going to do
an overview of public school
funding and student outcomes and
so.
To beef up version of what we
have been presenting two new
member orientation both in
December and then yesterday
morning so I'm working with LFC
it'll be LFC and Ellie S. C.
stops the legislative finance
committee and us
for adding to the slides we
presented yesterday morning a
little more detail and I think
we'll have a little more time to
dig into things so if there are
other things you're interested
in us adding besides where
funding comes from how the
funding formula works
And student outcomes how how
money is spent what we're
getting for those dollars let us
know and we'll add it.
Great thank you for that so
that'll be on tap for for for
Monday's agenda but we will
start hearing bills on Wednesday
and so we'll put the schedule
out and things like that
Representative Stapleton.
When would we get when should we
look for the the link in the
email for Monday.
Meeting and who should we be
looking for it from would it
always be from in that.
That's a good question Linda so
she'll be sending out the link
my understanding is to in
correct me if I'm wrong when
does that it'll also be
calendars for for members.
It will be coming for me.
And now.
Everything will be coming from
me all the meetings will be
coming for me Representative.
Thank you you're welcome.
Great so any other questions
comments concerns.
Okay so like I said Monday we'll
have the presentation from
legislative education study
committee and legislative
finance on the finances of
education in educational
outcomes and then on Wednesday
is when we'll start with bills
so of course if there any
questions comments concerns
please let me know
That window know let any of the
staff know but
happy to have you all aboard and
then get prepared to go through
some bills next week.
All right have a good day
everybody thank you so much
we'll see you all.
By.
Okay Representative Stapleton
did you still have a question.
Hi everybody.
