Here.
Representative.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Stapleton and.
Representative.
Year.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Morning I'm here.
Vice chair Garrett Care.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum all
right so we do have a quorum
good morning everybody we
survived another weekend of
committees and all that good
stuff I hope you all are doing
well wanted answered I want to
make before we get started today
well I guess two on the first
one is you can see will start
off with the bills that we have
yet to hear and then we'll work
our way to to Representative
plant this bill that we had
rolled over last week
since we heard it we can here
the changes that have been made
and then go about our business
but that'll be the the the last
thing that we hear since it's
just will be going over the
committee said that we've had
testimony and all that
the other thing I would like to
announce is obviously we're
getting into the middle of the
session I hope you all have been
provided enough free time to get
kind of your
legs under you and do things
that you enjoy doing
I know it's difficult being
online experiences with my
students
with that we're all in different
ways sort of isolated from one
another where communication is
difficult
So I hope you all are are taking
time for self care during this
time.
The other thing too is that
please in committee if if
members would
Be cognisant of we're still in a
setting where we're working
socially with very with a lot of
other people communication is
that much more difficult since
we don't have that in our
personal contact necessarily so
please just be mindful of the
tone that you take than the
words that you use with our
members please make sure you're
going through the chair to kind
of diffuse any of the the
personal feelings within
committee and then ultimately
we're all colleagues I think's
especially in this committee
we've had a lot of bipartisan
votes so far on a lot of
different issues we've had a few
that that we've had
disagreements on and that's
perfectly fine let's just
maintain decorum of Committee
and certainly have it translate
to the floor as well okay but
with that.
I will turn the floor over we
are in house bill two thirteen
Representative Sweetser please
when you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair and good
morning and colleagues and
committee members House Bill to
thirteen provides a critical
lifeline for New Mexico special
education students and their
families as you well know the
impact of COVID nineteen on all
New Mexico students have been
challenging and detrimental but
managing virtual learning for
special ed students and families
has been nearly impossible
despite PED allowing districts
to provide in person services to
special education students in a
five to one ratio not every
district has taken advantage of
this option and that's led to
increased disparities of
services being provided to
special ed students.
Mr chair and LFC report stated
that districts superintendents
no considerable variability in
terms of in person services that
were available to all the number
of service hours students
receive per week and how many
students were accessing in
person learning time and time
again we've heard from families
of special ed students without
access to in person learning
telling us how for their student
has regressed and how impossible
it is to navigate virtual
learning so White House Bill to
thirteen does.
Is it proposes to reimburse
parents for their personal out
of pocket expenses incurred by
families of children with
special education IEPs during
the pandemic for services
required by the I. E. P. but not
provided by the school district
it requires all school districts
to create and maintain a special
education services fund that
will be funded by a percentage
of each school districts special
education funds received through
the state equalization guarantee
and finally we to seek
reimbursement have to provide
school districts with receipts
of services provided so the
school district would reimburse
the families provided that the
service received did not fall
outside the scope of that
child's I EP.
The funding makes it possible
for families to find their child
goods and services not provided
by the district but without
creating an additional.
Families.
Without this lifeline families
without the financial means to
do so on their own are left with
no help no support and no way to
mitigate the devastating and
long lasting impacts of COVID
nineteen for their child.
My experts this morning is
Amanda ought to go on with New
Mexico kids can and I see that
she's been let into our our
session or I did see here I'm
not seeing at this moment but
with that Mr chair we will stand
for questions.
Going to do you wish to make
some opening remarks are would
you like to go to the attendee
yes please Mr chair please.
Okay.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Amanda of on and I service the
executive director of New Mexico
kids can a statewide education
advocacy organization I'm
honored to be here with you this
morning to support
Representative Sweetser and
Representative Dow in presenting
house bill two thirteen which as
you heard it will provide much
needed relief to New Mexico
special education families as
the Legislature has reconvened
and Santa Fe this year there has
been an emphasis on providing
pandemic relief to New Mexicans
today we present house bill two
thirteen as an innovative and
necessary action to mitigate
impacts of COVID nineteen.
Which is disrupted the public
education of one of our most
vulnerable student populations
are student edge our special
education students.
Mexico kids can we have one
singular focus what is best for
the students of New Mexico as we
engage with stakeholders over
the last year we heard from
families who are struggling with
the new realities of COVID and
while all families are
struggling like Representative
Sweetser mentioned there was one
group of students and families
that face even more dire
circumstances and we knew we had
to act in fact in a survey
conducted by New Mexico kids can
in October seventy three percent
of parents with special
education students said they
were not receiving the services
outlined in their student's IEP
our special education students
and families are in crisis and
they need immediate relief.
No one knows a student better
than their parent as the virus
register our communities our
education system has become
unpredictable and uncontrollable
and at times even impossible to
manage especially for parents of
special education students it is
time that we empower parents
with real opportunities to
provide their children with the
services they need most by
putting some of the purchasing
power directly in their hands
thank you for allowing me to be
here this morning I look forward
to supporting the bill sponsors
and committee with any
information that may be helpful.
Thank.
Thank you so much.
All right so we will go to the
attendees list those in support
of house bill two thirteen
please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right so you will have up to
two minutes please do not be
repetitive of the P. speakers
that came before you we have a
long list today on the agenda
Angela.
Good morning in two minutes.
Good morning my name is Angela
Travers Adkins I am the mother
of a three year old who was set
to start preschool this year but
unfortunately we ended up
keeping him home and set and so
that he could get the required
therapies that he needs for his
autism that includes
occupational speech physical and
behavioral therapies this bill
would help out families like
mine as most people and
especially mothers are not able
to work during the pandemic if
they have school age children
thank you so much great thank
you Angela.
All right so we'll go to Julie.
Truly good morning you have up
to two minutes thank you
chairman and committee members
my name is Julie branding I am a
policy analyst for C. pack
Committee working with
Representative Liz Thomson but
today I come to you as a parent
in support of this bill but I'd
also like to suggest a committee
substitute if someone would like
to carry it my thoughts in March
when APS went to
virtual my son who has autism
was unable to do the virtual
school because of his
disabilities we also lost all in
person services everything that
we had and so what I have to do
is pull him out of APS and I had
to go find those services
ourselves and I also another
child with special needs so
there's two of them and it has
cost us thousands upon thousands
of dollars and it's been a huge
hardship for my family.
During the COVID.
But here's the part that's
really interesting to me I'm not
the only parent to pull their
special needs child out of APS
because they could not provide
services there are many of us
who had to pull our children out
whether to homes going under or
to find other resources so my
suggestion to you and the
committee today is to allow
students the reimbursement who
were enrolled in the two
thousand nineteen and twenty two
school year but who are not
currently enrolled right now in
special education through to
school districts mainly because
if you don't includes that swath
of students who had to descend
role because of the special
needs it'll miss the point of
this bill so I'm I if you want
to call me or talk to me about
my my proposal I'd love to speak
with you I've been in
communication with
Representative joy Garrett about
this idea I think it would
strengthen the bill if you could
please include those students
especially students who had to
descend role because they had to
go find
those services that were
unavailable I'm once again I do
support this bill but I do
encourage you to consider
usually that was your two
minutes thank you.
Steve.
Good morning Steve you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee CDC on is
government relations director
with any in New Mexico I'll be
brief on behalf of our members
we stand in support of this bill
because it's pretty
straightforward it helps both
our students and working
families during this pandemic
and it really helps students and
families that have been impacted
the most of the most
disadvantaged so we think the
sponsor for bringing for this
bill we accept this committee
voted thank you great thank you.
All right so we'll go to Jason.
Morning chasing two minutes
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I think it's just
Espinoza I'm the registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
child first network which is a
nonprofit organization dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster in foster
care and empowering those who
serve them according to a report
from the National Council on
disability it is estimated that
thirty to forty percent abuse in
foster care our inspection on
our in the special education
system a significantly higher
percentage than non foster care
use child welfare and education
systems share responsibility to
ensure that children in foster
care receiving an appropriate
education a COVID nineteen is
presented obstacles in
everyone's life but we need to
make sure that these children
it's just students in special
education do not fall between
the cracks we stand in strong
support of the legislation thank
you Mr chairman thank you.
All right so go to Deborah.
Good morning Deborah your books
two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Stephanie Gilmore and I'm the
children youth and families
departments new director of its
new office of children's rights
this.
Get academic gaps that we've
heard about with children with
disabilities translate as they
transition into adulthood into
poor employability outcomes poor
health outcomes and a higher
likelihood of engaging in risky
behaviors.
And we know from our experience
and research that increased risk
that we just heard about of the
the children with disabilities
experiencing child abuse and
neglect children with
disabilities come to the child
protection agencies attention
across our nation are more
likely be placed out of home and
less likely to reunify more
commonly removed due to quote
parenteral inability to to cope
or the quote child's behavior on
quote.
I think nice in the urgency of
better supporting these children
and their families in the exit
had attention needed to help
close these academic gaps for
children.
See why these CYFD is excuse ME
office of children's rights will
have educational rights as a key
focus area doing our part having
a special education ombudsman
will facilitate better
educational services supports
and outcomes for our children by
streamlining and communication
processes to facilitate
information sharing serving as
that neutron trusted point of
contact when you're on a log jam
and helping educators and
caretakers to think outside the
box of our resources develop to
develop our system services and
supports we stand in support of
this bill thank you for your
time.
Thank you Deborah.
J. M..
Good morning Jimmy of up to two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Jackson on the registered
lobbyists for disability rights
New Mexico.
And I think we all can agree
that the special education
children and their families have
been especially hard hit by this
pandemic a lot of them do need
indeed in person services that
they were not able to get and
yet they have a right to receive
those services as part of their
appropriate education.
I can't speak specifically to
the issue of this required set
aside of funding but we
certainly support the concept of
reimbursing families who had to
go elsewhere outside of the
school system in order to get
those services in a child's IEP
we also recognize of course that
a lot of families might not be
in a position to have been able
to afford that of the for those
folks who were able to secure
those I. E. T. services
elsewhere we strongly support
the idea behind this bill to
make sure that parents can get
reimbursed for those services
that are part of the child tell
you do thank you.
Thank you all right so go to
Alan.
Good morning Ellen you have up
to two minutes thank you Mr
chairman and I won't need
anywhere close to that Ellen
pines representing the
disability coalition we advocate
for the interests of persons
with disabilities of all kinds I
won't repeat all the testimony
is that has gone before and
simply say that for the reasons
given by the other speakers we
to stand in support of the bill
thank you right thank you.
Share a.
Morning sherry of two minutes.
Hi good morning miss a lot now I
come from the pueblo of Zuni and
I am speaking as a parent I have
a daughter who is in college
right now and she's special
needs and going through the
system of trying to get
accommodations and support for
her during this pandemic has
been very difficult and I just
want to say please support
families with disabilities
students with disabilities
because we are the last on the
totem pole when findings and
things get issued out to
districts and communities
families and students with
disabilities is always last on
the totem pole so again please
look out for families with
disability fund these bills that
are in positive connection with
them and please support our
students thank you.
Thank you.
Joan.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee and
and sponsor for this bill my
name's John Baker I'm the
executive director of the for
which stands for businesses
educators and families
organizing to reform education
so I'm here on behalf of my
members as well as myself so my
son is a special needs student
with an IEP.
And since the pandemic I have
had to cut I'm an essential
workers but I've had to cut my
work schedule down to three days
a week and I've had to pay a
special tutor and I and I'm
paying three hundred dollars a
week out of my pocket to ensure
that my son is is having the
proper supports that he needs
and and I'm I'm very privileged
to be able to do that but it
doesn't mean it hasn't been a
huge financial strain on my
family and I believe that that
US families with with I. E. P.
in special needs students need
the support and so I ask you all
to vote yes on this bill thank
you Mr chair.
Great thank you for being here.
Right.
So any more support.
All right so we'll go to
opposition opposition to house
bill two thirteen please
indicate by raising your hand.
And you'll have up to two
minutes.
Okay SO good to stand.
Morning stand you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman Stan
rounds on behalf of the New
Mexico school superintendents
association are we are going to
have proposes well intentioned
piece of legislation we
understand the issues but as
often occurs difficulties in the
details as we look at this bill
we are troubled by a number of
pieces including procurement
issues potential anti donation
problem maintenance of effort
and supplement versus supplant
issues that arise in the
structure of this bill we
reminded us of the committee the
districts still have maintained
as Hey roll to the staffs and
many service providers during
this hybridization even though
services weren't completely
given that creates potential on
funded mandates so for the
reason of these technical issues
and we've noted concerns by the
attorney general's office we're
gonna have to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to Krista.
Morning Christina up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Krista
Coolidge and the director of
exceptional programs for
Farmington school we stand in
opposition to this bill not
because we are unaware of the
hardships families have suffered
through this pandemic it has
been brutal on all of us
however many districts have
still done our best efforts to
provide all services as outlined
in student's IEP we have
families who have chosen not to
receive the services that we are
offering and therefore we feel
that it would not be appropriate
for us to have to reimburse
those families for those types
of services thank you.
Thank you.
We'll go to credits.
Good morning Chris you have a
two minute.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
We can.
Outstanding good morning Mr
chairman members of this
committee crystals on a on the
register lobbyist for real
rational public schools.
And we stand with all respect we
stand in opposition office piece
of legislation that is Senator
cemento
and technical issues with the
frame work of this legislation
our quality stand rounds present
you of those specific if our
districts.
Mr Chairman this requires a
twenty five percent off
operational funds for the state
equities issue going to be
moving to separate accounts to
reinforce parents and axillary
Services we we really cannot
support this at this moment and
as you all probably already now
Senator off school districts are
asking the Legislature Hey
that's what to get in making
sure that they are now Monday
with not appropriation attached
to it just because of the
conditions that we are right now
off of this pandemic this bill
also assumes that the parents
have been getting their child
services from outside providers
during the pandemic Mr chairman
and just let you know that Roger
public school have.
Right now working really hard
with families in our community
and the with the staff to
continue providing the services
are in school during this time
and for those reasons we we
respectfully oppose this piece
of legislation and we are here
to work together with the
sponsor committed work on
something that I would
Cappelletti one thank you so
much Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Is there anybody else that wish
to speak in opposition.
Chairman.
Good morning you have a two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman on
ensuring rally I am the high
school and middle school
principal imports under New
Mexico my interest in this bill
is our again to repeat what Stan
and other states that obviously
we want to support our students
in special education however.
What we have had issues with is
a repeat of what the are you
from Farmington has asked that
we have.
Unmarked presented part where
the patient population that we
have to offer the services to
and for whatever reason they are
not Services.
I have several questions
regarding procurement and issues
on funding how we handle those
and I don't know how we would
monetary guarantee that students
would receive the services that
the funding is supposed to work.
Also how would be maintained
that the services are available
we know that in New Mexico.
Service providers are very.
Deficient and I I I just don't
see how that would be something
that would be possible to happen
how would House Bill to thirteen
support educators as well we're
from a small district I don't
know I know many people here are
from parts districts and it
seems that they were not able to
get the services.
We have offered an abundance of
services and are even your extra
time to students at the rate
that compensatory time finding
distance impossible I don't know
how small districts to cooperate
would be able to do it thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
rather later rival Lillie Mae.
We have a two minute.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you yes I was in and that the
committee I appreciate the time.
Mr chairman of for many reasons
that have already been say I
won't go into the details the
AG's concerns issues of school
districts having to set up funds
and some of the.
Concerns regarding anti donation
supplement supplement versus a
plant Mr chairman we are from
the school were so station also
have concerns about this bill
and would stand in opposition to
it again I was arrested my name
the linear TCR representing
Mexico school board association
and I think the committee for
allowing me to express our
concern thank you.
Course thank you Willie Mae.
Anybody else wish to speak.
All right so we will come to
committee and first illustrious
Representative Stapleton please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you and if Sweetser
Representative Sweetser good
morning to me to you and the
rest of the committee
Representative Sweetser
I I share the plight.
Of all special ed students and
all students because I know up
front as an educator and a
parent that remote learning
presents many challenges for
students with disabilities and
and and more so I'm many of our
students all students are
falling behind I'm.
This during this call with the
situation that exists but.
I thank them this should be a
way out for the students and
there should be a plan in place
so how to deal with that.
But from reading the bill I'm I
think Representative Sweetser
that it would create a lot of
unintended.
Consequences in circumstances
that.
Maybe you on I don't even see it
coming and for example
If we want to pass this bill and
it was to get in place and be
I'm enacted.
What we would not we would see
come next would be.
The bilingual candidates.
The kids.
Maybe they Yazzie Martinez at
risk students grew up with their
parents that during this time
which is true they're not
getting a is sufficient
education I'm falling behind and
so these parents will come bill
what David said.
All of the at risk money and
give it to us so we can.
Six children education correctly
then you have which is the
special ed money's federal
dollars match with St Dallas and
then you have the ELL students
will it's probably the same
thing that getting that the type
of education that they so desire
the bilingual kids the same
thing so and then you have to
add one and one is for all
districts and then what you
would have happened with that is
that.
For example I have a student.
That we student special ed
students.
And
one student.
I get to the school give me my
share of my money so that I can
provide for my kids that I can
hire somebody to put to provide
for my kids all because I'm an
educator but I'm not.
Eight thirty five.
You have to be in in the school
districts across the state you
have to be certified in order to
teach special ed you have to
have the scales and so I'm I'm
not sure many of the parents
that may have pulled their kids
out because they feel they don't
want to comment they don't want
to get sick and they don't feel
that what they required so they
decide I'm gonna pull my kid out
but now I'm one of the state and
get the money from me.
For my child because I was what
from all.
Home and yet at the same time I
have to teach my kids so I need
reimbursement for that.
If that we want to do that I
think that a lot of parents will
come forth and said we need
money to do that for us as well
because and I realize that
autism children.
Children's.
But the students with special
needs have a great need
I'm because of the circumstances
surrounding the IEP and so
I I I'm just sharing with you
what what are some of the things
that could come up because of
this bill and then I'm.
It will be in the in the.
And now that the bill only
requires school districts to
create and maintain.
Education services fund but
under the bill students not
enrolled in a district.
Would be eligible for
reimbursement for example those
students never went to that
particular school I'm.
That's student.
Goes to a private school
somewhere all all all all in
that school district.
Around and we quest money from a
certain school district with the
students I'm what the from the
from the from the SCG so I'm
that's one of the things that's
mention and
And.
The same way that I'm required.
To put in place and I do
students.
The districts are required to do
that then what happened with
those parents who don't have an
ID the special and some of.
That would need that services
and there is a specific
requirements.
The federal guidelines that
apply to special ed students.
How there's nothing in the bill
that says the outline of what
the parents are going to do.
All.
Hi your are they certified in
special ed to do the services to
those students.
And
Finally I just want to say I'm.
All students.
Are required to receive.
A sufficient education.
And it's also.
After the family provides the
required documentation the
school district shall reimburse
the family services that fall
within the student's IEP so I I
realize that that has to be
established what.
I'm concerned about the fallout
if this bill was still passed
what happened education as a
whole for all students I'm
Representative Sweetser I I
should I should have a concern
of the bill but I think it needs
some work.
And some and some other things.
Thank you for the students what
do you think.
Because I really I I I I I see
what you're trying to do.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Williams
Stapleton and while I didn't
actually hear question in there
I do understand where you're
coming from I was hoping that I
could have agency undergoing
address some of the concerns
that you raise Mr chair.
Please.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Stapleton.
There's two parts of the bill
that I really want to highlight
that I think will help certainly
not take away all of your
concerns but will help maybe
lessen some of your concerns
number one the bill says that
students are only eligible to be
reimbursed based on the amount
that they generate in the state
equalization guarantee meaning
if a student is not enrolled in
a public school as we heard and
public comment they can't they
don't generate any money through
the special ed unit value in the
state was Asian guarantee
funding formula so the cap is
zero for them I'm and so I think
that concerned about students
who aren't enrolled in public
schools is addressed in that
section as well and then the
second thing I want to highlight
is this is tied to COVID
nineteen this is not a long term
I'm missing that we're trying to
put in place of that special
education families will always
have this funding available no
matter what's happening in the
school system it is hopefully a
very short term temporary thanks
for students that are struggling
and I appreciate the
acknowledgement that all of our
students are struggling and this
could be said for many groups of
students but this piece of
legislation chose to target
those that we feel are the most
in need which are our special
education students so I hope
that helps.
Mr chairman and Representative
Sweetser and miss out of gone
I'm you know that Representative
the chairman and the national
medal has a bill to provide
funding for
Well prior year funding for the
school districts because of the
loss of kids and I think you are
aware Representative Sweetser Mr
Chairman representative sweets
and miss out on that school
district does not get the money
if the kids I'm not at the
school they don't get the money
so you.
These are for kids that don't
attend the public school so will
that money come instead of the
money coming from the district
are you requested in this bill
that the money come strictly
straight from PED from the SCG
to the parents because they
don't they're not in the school
district the school district
will not receive that funding.
If they've never been in the
school district and that's why I
brought up the idea of anybody
who's never been to that live
maybe live in Albuquerque but
never been to a public school
this bill and just applied for
that money and that's a problem
and then a lot of these jobs
schools some also.
I don't
let kids for whatever reason and
then what happens in that case I
mean.
I.
It is but I'm I'm not and with
this there is some complications
Representative sweet stuff going
forward with the bail as I see
it as a person who works in the
school district.
I'm.
Your intention the high do you
have Israel is going I agree
with that high wholeheartedly
because I'm concerned of not
only special ed kids all
students that are hurting in my
district I always tell you guys
that I see I see this model with
five kids and I call what's
going between I'm Donald.
I have been trying to get
service to to have our kids get
services and.
When talking.
I special ed kids so districts
need to do something I agree
with that the state needs to do
something during this call be
done but it's all of our
children are suffering and all
of a parent so having a
difficult time and specially is
probably a more difficult time
but this bill the way it is
written does not I'm.
that.
What is needed to maintain.
Education services because it
doesn't say anything about I'm a
parent of a special.
And so the district first
outlined the plan with my
provider that shows that that
provider is certified and then
set up some kind of plan just
like you do want to be in the
plan it has to be somebody that
is a question I'm cert not any
an anyone given those services
to those students and this bill
doesn't show with that is this
bill just said give the money to
the parents thank you
Representative sweet so thank
you miss out on bond thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative next on
my list as Representative Lotta.
Representative what are your
muted.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you are Representative
Sweetser I I concur with many of
the points that are the our
floor leader need and I also
have some questions Mr chair
that I like to to to ask is so I
I understand that the that this
is about eight inequity in the
in the system but what happens
with those parents or families
Mr chair who can't afford the
services and aren't able to get
reimbursed for the services.
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lotta
thank you for that that is
another very valid point but
that is not addressed in this
bill I mean it is R. as as floor
leader Stapleton pointed out
there's a Mary add of concerns
across districts and across all
all of the victims needed issues
through this comment schooling
problem but this is a specific
bill only to say to parents who
have sought outside help for
their students to fulfill the
needs that have been identified
through the I. E. P. that have
been unable to be provided
through that I do that the
narrow scope of this bill
Representative Lara Mr chair.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you representative
I just still have concerns about
those parents who can't afford
those services
Mr chair also Representative
Stapleton asked us or maybe some
many of my points but the one
that I have is more of a
technical question Mr chair is
so what a special ed teacher on
his or her off trying to be able
to provide these services to the
families.
Representative Lara I would
defer to miss out of gone for
that one Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lotta
we would look to PED to
promulgate the role about how
these funds I'm how these funds
are approved and I'm what
allowable District disbursements
could look like and we would
hope that that promulgated rule
would address that.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that answer I have a I have
another one so what happens is
all the there's just not no turn
training into the weeds and try
to figure this out on out on the
local of finance we look at it
Mr chair is so you these funds
are set aside in in this new
account so what what happens of
all those funds aren't
encumbered business fund
continue to roll over or does or
dessert or just a money move
into the into the operating
budget of the school district
because they are or how how was
that supposed to work Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lara the
funds could only be completely
utilized if every student with
an IP utilize the maximum of the
funding allowed.
To them through the district and
as and gone already pointed out
this is a short term.
Issue we hope only through the
pandemic so it wouldn't be an
ongoing concern and I with
Yeltsin this on a gone for any
further comment.
Mr chair representative what I
I'm I would just add on to what
representatives returns said and
I say that as soon as the public
health order expires those funds
would revert back to the general
fund for the school district.
Thank you Mr chairman I and one
other question so is this a yeah
I don't I don't really recall
seeing this in the bill but is
with this the real issue
retroactive.
Thank you for that
Representative Lara Mr chair we
had not address that it was
certainly a concern a valid
concern that was brought up by
one of the
the come into that one of the
parents who commented early on
and that would certainly be
something that we could look at
unfortunately it would still
have to be tied to.
The
the funding that was generated
to the districts so that
particular parent who commented
that she had to withdraw her
child from the school we would
be unable to
compensate for that since that
child is not generating any and
special and funds through the
SCG formula and again Mr
chairman I would defer to miss
out on for additional comment.
Mr chair representative Lotta
I'm again I think we our hope is
that the PED's rules could
determine that we did not write
the legislation with the idea
that it would be retroactive I'm
certainly not through the
beginning of the pandemic in if
adult retroactive only through
the beginning of this academic
year since that's how the
funding works I'm understanding
that early on in the pandemic
things were very crazy and
hectic and we didn't know how to
address these issues so that was
not the intention but could be
incorporated the roll if that
was something that we wanted to
pursue.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you for those answers so I
I have another you know you have
Mr chair you are.
we it was mentioned earlier that
there that the that the PED will
probably get the rules for this
however that's not stated in the
bill and I'm wondering if that
should be part of the bill as
well again we're gonna be asking
PED to do this to to promulgate
the rules I think that should be
at least included into the bill
Mr chair our any opinions on
the.
Mr chair this article.
Mr chair members of the
committee that is certainly the
intense budget needs to be
stated we can certainly look
into that adding that language I
was under the assumption that
since it does deal with state
equalization guaranteed funds
and special education services
that the public education
department would oversee the
implementation.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
know I once again I fully
understand this bill and
understanding intent I have
someone very close to me who is
an artistic student and she I
don't use you as a his mother is
a single mom with two other kids
and I know that she can afford.
To to provide to hire outside
services four four four four
percent and I and I and I feel
that this that's a really
critical point for me Mr chair
is you know that that trial that
students still deserves the
services still deserves to be
get access to those services
however because his mother can't
afford it he is then not be able
to get those the the
reimbursement for the services
so I think that's a really part
of point thank you Mr chairman
that's that's all I have.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
Representative care please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Sweetser and
everybody for bringing this it's
it's really important and it
pinpoints one of the biggest
issues we've had
I'm.
I personally think that the bill
needs to be rolled over for
further discussion with the LFC
and PED that to see what's
possible and I don't know Mr
chairman of that would be
appropriate if R. Elia C.
director
can make any comments if that's
appropriate I would appreciate
hearing our something about it.
The if you have a specific
question but I think just a
blanket opinion.
It's out of order.
Okay thank you for that
clarification Mr chairman
I'll just say
Representative I want to
recommend that you roll it over
and look deeper into it because
the SCG funding is very relevant
I know many of our special
education students there are MPs
transcend academics they involve
medical issues T. services
things like that and then create
to creatively speaking we have
extended learning and K. five
plus programs that are coming up
and maybe there is some
innovative and creative ways to
address the needs of our special
education students more
specifically through that so I
want to recommend that you roll
over the bill so that more in
depth consultation can take
place thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chair and good
morning.
Representative Trujillo morning
is that better I think I double.
good morning Representative
Sweetser I hope you're doing
well I am
and also raising my voice to
unfortunately.
Ask you to roll this over as
well because it does have a lot
of issues of concern that
haven't been addressed in this
conversation today are you
created a conundrum bye bye
bringing it forward because it
the the goal is very very
We wanted to just the the the
skills in the issues of concern
that parents with kids with
autism have and I know one of
your
Your
Sponsors very well and I and up
my heart reaches out to her
because I know she struggles
to let my again is we don't have
a mechanism right now that
exists to try to do what you're
trying to do and I see a lot of
you know Representative Sweetser
in appropriations we'd we'd end
up having a difficult process if
it were to go there I think that
you need to rethink how we're
gonna do this.
And maybe give it more time in
the oven and I thank you for
being four causes a truly
important issue thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow please.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Sweetser for this I've been
listening to the comments and
and I am.
I've seen first hand I I I hear
from the committee that they've
seen as well how difficult COVID
virtual learning has been I
heard mention of autism quite a
bit today and and with the
family's permission you know I
am I'm gonna tell a story that I
think has identified for me the
struggles that families and
school districts are going
through right now
this child is probably going
through puberty and is very it
is it is a very high needs
autistic child and even just
those three weeks of no school
and in that particular district
which I'm from a small districts
everyone's gonna going talking
about in and I'm into that it
for the district and I'm into
that for the family everybody
involved
the child has regressed to the
point they are no longer their
diapers they're not speaking
they want pressure here they
will not brush your teeth they
are aggressive I visited the
home and I sat with the family
which are multiple families
living together I tried extended
family living together trying to
care for this child that house
is everything's locked
everything is either removed or
it is absolutely heartbreaking.
What I observed and then I heard
the frustration from the
district of not knowing how to
meet this child needs even in a
hybrid setting because there is
such a sentry integration issue
and there's so much disruption
in daily life no fault of the
district at this point and just
nothing to be done except to
create sustainability for this
child would have to happen in
the home this trial is still
enrolled in the public school
and the hybrid model is not
working because of the some
three integration issues that is
I was completely overwhelms
sitting at the table and
watching this family trying to
function and watching his child.
In a fetal position.
Lost and different here then
low income than minorities and
at risk is that we have federal
mandates that were never wavered
these those there is never
wavered the federal mandates for
Children IEPs.
And we do contract outside of
school I hear people talking
about the spread teacher meeting
to be special needs but we
contract all the time we have
this call therapists speech
therapists we have all kinds of
people coming on the campuses
that are not licensed by PED
that have third party contracts
with school districts and
these restricted I I do PED's
have demonstrated expense they
have this is restricted IP's two
people currently enrolled in
public school.
For an a re demonstrated
reimbursements of a demonstrated
expense that's part of the I. E.
P. so it's not going to work
it's not internet it's not I
mean those IP's most of them
were established prior to
comment at the end of maybe you
know maybe there's been
adjustments of COVID but most of
those IP's for these kids are
pre existing the districts are
aware who the students are I
believe that the will of the
districts would be to work
directly with these parents and
figure out what they would be
able to to to provide
reimbursable but what I heard
was the family struggling what I
heard was the district
struggling I heard everyone
saying we don't know how to meet
their needs.
And.
Mr Chairman representative
Sweetser is it your
understanding that we held have
held schools harmless for the
school year and they are
receiving a hundred percent of
the funds that were generated.
Mr chair Representative Dow yes
that is my understanding.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Sweetser and
is it your understanding you are
on appropriate appropriations
but in each of the versions of
the bills that I've seen it's
our intention to hold school
harmless next school year as
well regardless of their
enrollment yes Mr chair
Representative Dow there is
still discussion going on of
course those budgets are not
finalized but there certainly is
a lot of momentum to recognize
the difficulties that districts
have had and to try not in in No
Way penalize their budget so
that they can can move forward
without their student count and
and there funding allotment so
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Sweetser so
in this case we listen to
testimony of families and I
think it's been verified by
members of this committee that
many of the children with
families with special needs
children Abbey descend rolled
them from the schools they don't
have an IP anymore they're not
receiving services anymore they
have been completely descend
role which in my mind if we're
holding them harmless they're
still gonna get the dollars this
year they're still getting the
dollars next year the school
districts are proposing that
they can't afford this because
they didn't reduce any other
costs they've they've kept all
the staff that kept audiences
but they do have a reduced cost
in serving children special
needs because so many families
have this and rules so that I it
seems to me that the parents who
have hang in there instead I
want to be part of the public
school system I want to figure
out a solution for my child I'll
take the hybrid there should be
funds available actually it's
federally mandated in state then
that that those dollars go to
those students but it it it's
yeah I don't know there'll be
such a burden as is being
suggested because even though
they've had this enrollment of
those families we've heard
families testified today that
they descend role their children
are getting a services but we
all the districts harmless that
districts should be able to
reasonably go in and talk with
these families and work together
and figure out what services
could be added Mr chairman
Representative Sweetser is that
how you envision this working.
Representative Mr chair
absolutely I mean we are we are
looking at trying to help
parents parents as
Representative Lara pointed out
who cannot afford the additional
costs to their family budget of
providing services that are in
our for whatever reason unable
to be provided to the district
but they have hung in and as as
enroll in the districts so
Representative Lara was exactly
right there are a lot of
families that can't afford the
services that are still somehow
trying to get them and this bill
is completely and targeted to
try to help those families who
are trying to provide the
services outside of the
structure of the school district
with money that should have have
helped them through the school
district if if that makes sense
thank you yes yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Sweetser so I'm
thinking about this family and
actually desruption that it's
because district and the family
even something as simple as
assisting the child on and off
of the school bus has become.
It's it's everybody is really
struggling and it really makes
sense to me that the school
district to the benefit of the
school district the benefit of
the of the family that this
child be served in one setting
and that we are already required
by law to have alternative plans
at the districts can't meet the
needs they already have to do
alternative plan so I I honestly
don't this as something
different than what's already
federally and state mandated and
that I do a requires I see it
different than our other special
needs children other bilingual
at risk the other categories
because there are special
federal laws around children
with disabilities
but I I I do see some things in
the bill that need to be amended
I think this committee have
shown there will they've they've
put everyone said intense they
agree with it and what I've seen
from this committee in the past
as we have a strong commitment
to a bill and the intense the
bill that we move it forward and
we ask that it be worked on
between here in the next
committee it's very rare that we
that we roll over bill at this
time in the session whenever we
all agree that it's something
that needs to be done I have for
technical issues are little
things that need to be tweeted
tweet so that can move forward
and meets intent so I mean it's
it's you're the primary sponsor
you you'll get to make that
choice but I would move that we
move it forward and that we work
with the folks with concerns to
fix it before the next committee
hearing thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Representative Madrid please.
Thank you Mr chairman in thank
you.
Representative Sweetser for
bringing this I can certainly
relate to what you've discussed
and and been reading the FIR why
there is a lot of implications
of difficulties difficulties I
want to be clear to all of our
members of the committee there
has been a gross negligence in
this past year of not meeting
these types of needs I can speak
because of the store to of one
of German it's on my block whose
high functioning autism and in
the years time I watched him
grow up just over sixty seventy
pounds in weight just because
there's no activities that fits
in the palm of side reaming
fenced area and I I am
heartbroken to say the least and
to know
the the bill has its
difficulties I'm I'm really
grateful Representative doubt
that I think this is the time of
the committee with the stage of
the game this needs to be moved
along helped along granted it
may not make it away but I think
we're moving the pencil by
saying we acknowledges we go
back to LFC during the off of
session and we'll discuss and
discuss enough to still
happening and I think we as a
community need to step up and
and see we can address these
concerns I think we're all
January of this too minority
leader Stapleton she's got
points I think we've got good
people in this community with
others but I look on the screen
diss we can work this out which
is for otherwise we're doing
nothing and I think it also puts
leverage back on PED to get a
better grasp of this and get
them involved in this process it
is a logistical cost but it is
that more of a logistical error
to not make an endeavor to help
this cost the equitable for
those are outlining like ****
like.
Attendees Representative is
reaches our your money Rep
Rebecca Dow we're all lenders in
the outlines of just not to that
to that point and I think it's
something that is a state I like
to see we to do that thank you
again for bringing it.
Representative Sweetser and
Rebecca Dow but I think it's so
to allow us to really to
consider thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative you
audio switch to speak.
Okay.
I will I will use.
My time thank you Representative
Sweetser for bringing this
forward I think there is an
agreement that special education
System here in in in New Mexico
certainly needs a close look at
and that's why we schedule
successes special education
bills for that date so we can
kind of get a a broader picture
before I go into into my
comments I mean what I would
like to comment that you know in
this committee yeah we're we're
certainly willing to to work on
bills but I think that certainly
to say that we've passed on
bills with the the intent of
having people work on it is is
simply not true in this
committee we like to work on
where the Education Committee
and have good clean bills that
impact on public schools to
really be given a good careful
consideration in this committee
and I do have grave grave
concerns about the implications
of this bill so but with that
being said on on page two
Representative
Subsection B.
Can you kind of I'm I'm a little
bit confused about the language
and subsection B.
And it it it goes to line line
who have paid out of pocket for
education services can you kind
of draw this out for me and how
that might be determined in this
subsection.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
thank you for your close reading
of the bill so that refers back
to line seven reimburse
municipalities of special
education students with IEPs
through the school district who
have paid out of pocket for
special education services so
we're looking at the families
who have paid out of pocket.
And and thank you for that for a
Representative
So so how might that be
determined in what sort of ways
I mean I think we heard from
Representative moderated said
there may be families that are
in the situation where they have
been for for financial reasons
been able to to retain such
services on their own but but
how might we be able to make
that determination.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
and of course there are families
who stretch their budget through
lines of credit and credit cards
who are providing these services
really beyond the means of the
family income at this point in
time and and those are the ones
were worried about the with
their children first day the
perhaps leverage you know with
with with drastic financial
consequences trying to get
services for their children at
the developmental needs that
they're at knowing that a year
or two down the road they will
be in a different developmental
need and they're trying not to
lose that so so Mr chair I
appreciate the question and and
it certainly goes to families
who are seeking reimbursement
for services that they have
provided outside of the
structure of the school and who
have the receipts for those
services so so there's been some
discussion this morning that
people would just want the
school district to pay them but
that there is a mechanism to
this bill actually have to show
receipts for those services that
have been provided.
Representative I I appreciate
that answer so if if we're are
seeking to reimburse
municipalities for
some of the costs they may have
incurred during this pandemic
certainly the FIR points to to
potentially potential violations
of maintenance of effort
causes federally do you have any
comment about that.
Mr chair I do not but I would
defer to my experts are going to
see if she did.
I knew in education or are you
on there.
Mr chair representative seats
are members of the committee our
understanding is that certain
expenses would be allowable to
count towards MOE said that it
would put the state in our in a
struggle in terms of maintaining
maintenance of effort as you now
and so that's certainly
something that we could look
into and work with PED on if we
need clarification about what
those expenses need to be
donated to so that we don't have
any and all the issues but there
are certainly special education
services outlined in the IEP
that would be allowable that
would not because in Emory issue
and Mr chair Representative
Sweetser and members of the
committee just a follow up on
your on years question from
before I just want to say I
think everyone is walking a fine
line in this question about I'm
how the anti donation clause
really creates an issue in
situations like this and I know
that that was a question
previously as well we would love
to find a way to make it so that
every parent even those parents
that don't have the means to
open their checkbook and write a
check or pull out a credit card
I'm in wait to be in reimbursed
by by the state would be able to
access these funds we simply
have not been able to find a way
to do that without violating the
anti donation clause so I want
to be clear we are working
within the parameters of the law
and specifically the anti
donation clause in making this a
reimbursable expense as opposed
to finding a way to just grant
out funds so that every parent
and every family has access to a
program like this and I'm I
believe Representative Sweetser
Representative Dow would be
opened to mechanisms to do so we
just don't believe that the law
allows for it.
No I I I certainly appreciate
that I mean I think with with
legislation like as it's
currently drafted I mean to
jeopardize fifty three million
dollars in federal funding is
certainly nothing to you to be
scoffing at nor is the fact that
we be taking a substantial
amount in special education
funding from the school
districts the other the other
thing I would like to ask a
question about is
I know a lot a lost my thread
here
excuse me
our our our charter schools part
of this because I see a lot of
of school district talk with the
charter schools also with this
also apply to charter schools in
the bill.
This article Mr chair.
Mr chair representative seats
are members of the committee it
was the original intent of the
bill for it to apply towards all
local education agencies which
as you know would be school
districts and state authorized
charter schools I'm so that is
certainly something that we
could work on clarifying as we
work on the other taxes that
have been noted this morning.
And and Representative so so
that's currently as it's drafted
a no but something to look
closer at sect Representative.
Okay and I and I certainly
appreciate you all answering
these questions and and
certainly I appreciate that you
know we're getting close to the
mid point of the session and
those are wanting to get through
I I just I have some pretty
grave concerns when it comes to
what we may do be doing with
Special education funding what
we may be jeopardizing so so I I
will be rolling this over but I
I I will be taking a pay pretty
close look Representative at the
the forms that may be worked out
before putting this back on the
schedule because I think they're
really some foundational
problems with with an idea like
this I I certainly commend you
for for really thinking and and
trying to put these families at
the for front I think it's it's
very necessary I just think
structurally what we're trying
to do is is is certainly a great
cause for concern so
if you would reach out certainly
to to our staff and Ellie and
see and others LFC to really get
a handle on some of these issues
but also I would like to have
further conversations as well in
the different iterations that it
takes prior to scheduling this
again because I think we do have
some some pretty severe and
impactful things that we're
looking toward as we move
forward but with that will roll
the bill if you all would
continue your work on it
and if you had any closing
comments representatives
certainly entertain them thank
you Mr chairman thank you
committee members for the
important and heartfelt and
discussion this morning and I
certainly respect the direction
that the chair as now given us
and we will work with PED an
alley ASEAN LFC and and see if
we can come back with a bill
that is again with the families
at the forefront of this and and
certainly doesn't harm harm
districts and delays so thank
you for the guidance and thank
you committee members for your
time this morning.
Certainly thank you all.
All right so with that we will
roll over house bill two
thirteen.
we'll go to House Bill to twenty
two so Representative Thompson
in your expert if you would
raise your hands please.
In the attendees less other go.
Thank you representative care.
All right hi Representative
Thomson good morning.
Is your expert is that all three
of these people secretary
You're right those out I'm not
sure.
Alice McCoy and Robert Bundy
enhances to people raising their
no he's he's not an expert I
mean.
But he's not one of my experts.
He's an expert in something else
he.
A lot of things all right.
Alright so will promote
analysts.
Give her a moment to be
situated.
And everybody else around House
Bill to twenty two.
I think we're all there we've
had enough wait time we're gonna
click on everything okay.
Representative Thomson good
morning welcome please when
you're ready thank you thank you
Mr chairman members of the
esteemed Education Committee I'm
I'm bringing forward House Bill
to twenty two which for those of
you old enough to remember there
used to be a TV show called room
two twenty two about as school
actually
It was then built for it for
special education and as most of
you know I started my first job
in special ed over thirty four
years ago I'm and my son who has
severe autism will be thirty
next week so he started in the
public schools at age three so I
have also have that history and
and those of you who served on
Ellie yes the in the last
interim we're treated to my M..
If someone happiness shall I say
when we discussed the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit and kids with
disabilities were frequently put
off to the side if mentioned at
all and and I I made it my
mission to to stop that from
happening and and we are working
in that direction Mr chair
members of the committee with
with my ten terms as I'm calling
them we did start a eight and
our workgroup all calls with the
people Administration from head
from the governor's office from
CYFD the early childhood
department D. O. H. all kinds of
people so we're working on
transforming special education
I'm and for those of you who are
educators are who have been
around education a long time and
actually if you've been out of
an elected for any length of
time you have heard special
education for stories you have
been part of special education
or stories where you sat in on
an I EP and and the family had
requested something and you
heard and administrators say
well either we'll give it to you
if you promise not to tell
anybody else because then
everybody all want it or we
can't give it to you because if
we do then everybody's going to
want to and it's going to break
our bank and that's not how
we're supposed to educate our
children
it the special education system
the laws are incredibly
convoluted and there's a lot of
technicalities and people are
just not we expect somebody
who's and and I want to talk
about about my family I had been
in the system for about ten
years before my son came along
with the diagnosis of autism and
I was lost within the system and
I think about you know I had a a
great husband my father in law
majored in special ed in college
we had a great support system
and we struggled terribly and
our son did not get what.
He deserved it what he needed
and what I had frequently
thought was you know I wish
there was a place I could go
with the complaint and get some
help eventually we did have to
go to a lawyer and we did get it
and go stated agreement at which
time the school essentially
said.
Well good good luck with your
agreement we're doing things the
way we always did and we had to
move our son so what this bill
is about is giving families a
place to go outside of PED so
there's no appearance of
non partisanship Cellect shall I
say there's no and and and those
of you again who been in
education for a long time know
that special ed families and
PED's relationship has been now
rocky to say the very least and
most kids with parents of kids
with disabilities are not a
hundred percent trusting up PED
because of the long history of
of bot bad things going on and
with that Mr chair I will allow
allow my expert to go into more
detail about the the bill I'm
thank you so much all of you.
Please.
We had Alice.
Representative thank you Mr
chair good morning Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
presents this important
governor's party fell this
morning last summer
Representative Thomson the
governor PED and DD PC Matt with
special education experts and
advocates strategize how the
state can transform the special
education system so that it
works for students and families
are this meeting a
transformation team led by
Representative Thompson the
governor's office PED anti PC
was for since August the
transformation team and its work
groups have met every two to
three weeks to identify
immediate solutions to support
special education students and
families as well as craft a
comprehensive sustainable plan
for special education answer
students with disabilities in
our work the constant message we
have heard over and over again
is this students and families
need our help.
Parents and families of students
with disabilities face countless
barriers in virtually every
aspect of their lives yet we
expect these families the teach
themselves a complex area of law
advocate for their students
rights and somehow hold schools
accountable if they fail to
serve the students today we
present this special education
on but acts to provide critical
support that overwhelms and
underserved students and
families need.
Special education but identifies
investigates and assist students
and families and resolving
special education concerns a
inform students and families
about special education
resources in their community and
they work with local state and
federal governments to insure
quality students special
education services are provided
statewide I'm but will analyze
monitor and recommend changes to
law rules and policies relating
to special education and
publishing annual report
outlining the state of the
special education system.
The but will collaborate with
PED student advocacy and family
support organizations such as
parents reaching out epics
disability rights New Mexico to
name a few and groups that work
with educators therapists and
other service providers to
ensure that students and
families are fully informed of
their options and receive the
support they need to access
those options this bill is in no
way meant to supplant the
dispute resolution process these
are in place impact it's there
to support them it's there to
ensure that families and
students know about them and can
access them.
The purpose of this bill is to
provide an independent dedicated
resource to families that is
guaranteed by the state of New
Mexico I know enacted this bill
we sent a strong clear message
to New Mexico students and
families that we hear them we
care about them we are committed
to ensuring they receive the
support they want and need.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak this morning thank you Mr
chair members.
Thank you.
So does that conclude your
presentation are you all open
for questions yes I will ask
them for questions thank you
great thank you all so much so
we will go to the attendees will
start off with the opposition
okay.
We have certain people jump and
then we'll start off with
opposition those opposed to
house bill two twenty two.
Those in opposition all right.
All right Christina you'll have
up to two minutes good morning
welcome.
Good morning this dramatic
hello.
Still members of the committee
my name is Christina Velasquez I
have been asked for two years I
am currently a special education
director in the valley of to
look at.
I'm I would like to say for the
record I do not oppose this bill
I think it's long overdue the
only aspect of the bill that I
find problematic is creating
additional investigatory agency
outside of the federally out why
due process
as has been said.
The conflict between districts
families districts in the PED
creates distrust and when you go
through the dispute resolution
process it creates even more
distressed
because people don't feel heard
and they don't feel validated.
the bill in and of itself I
think it's long overdue a state
agency for advocacy for families
and parents is overdue however
the investigatory piece creates
more conflict in a system that
is already torrez with it so
thank you very much for your
time.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to Justin.
Morning Justin you have up to
two minutes thank you thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Justin
Gosset on the director special
services across that schools
first let me to say that I also
agree with the premise of the
bill giving parents another
Avenue to resolve differences in
schools never about idea but New
Mexico already has organizations
available to parents the other
parent liaison liaison program
parent reaching out education
for parents of Indian children
with special needs.
The bill analysis points out
that the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
shows the state and districts
failed to provide quality
programs I'd be the first to
tell you there's room for
improvement and I work every day
to improve outcomes for students
disability but an advocate is
gonna get to the heart of the
issues the issues are a lack of
qualified special ed teachers
related service providers like
speech pathologists school
psychologists therapists
audiologists.
I've been unable to hire in my
district a psychologist for the
last three years audiologist two
years half of my therapist now
tell therapist I'm currently
short I special education
teachers in my classrooms that
are hard to fill
the issues are significant and
there's also issues around a
special education funding and
lack community resources
advocates won't resolve those
issues PED already has robust
resolution options for students
with disabilities the assigned
neutral third party facilitators
and mediate mediators.
The bill also points out the
office the investments have a
right to legal counsel available
to them I would agree they need
training on special ed Lawson
and regulations are cumbersome
but having legal counsel makes
this very adversarial.
And makes this very difficult
for school districts to move
forward without having legal
counsel themselves I fear that
it's going to in cars more cost
to districts as we move more to
baby due process hearings than
resolving at a local level
ultimately I feel the on budget
meant is redundant and not
addressing the real in equities
pointed out need jobs Martinez
case but could be another way to
advocate for students with
disabilities if written
appropriately.
Thank you.
Okay I was on mute.
We'll go to support support
these lists for House Bill to
twenty two.
By raising your hand if you wish
to speak.
What things get sorted out with
the hands four colony one.
All right so we have a few if
you would please be brief you'll
have up to two minutes please do
not repeat things that have been
said you can just allude to
them.
So enjoy.
You have two minutes good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
representative Thompson thank
you for bringing this important
bill and.
Before the committee I'm I have.
I apologize that was my child's
toy.
I am part of the special needs
child as I stated earlier.
What I did not say is that I am
also an active attorney and I'm
an act because I'm currently
staying home managing my son's
therapies and.
As long as I'm alive my child
will always have an attorney at
their IEPs and sadly I've had to
use my law degree in order to
Act as advocate for my son in
the IEP process unfortunately
not every child has the
opportunity or advantage I'm and
I think that this bill but
definitely balanced budget I'm
would benefit the rest of that
children within the public
school system so I'm very
grateful to you representative
Thompson and and to all the
supporters of this bill thank
you very much.
Okay madam secretary you have up
to two minutes good morning good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee M. and Elizabeth
Groginsky secretary of the early
childhood education and care
department I'm also a member of
the public education departments
transformation of the special
education workgroup and I'm here
today to stand in very strong
support of house bill two twenty
two and the committee the
transformation workgroup has
prioritized this bill as an
important step in our efforts as
the agency that administers the
individuals with disabilities
Education Act part C. for
infants and toddlers with
developmental disabilities and
delays we know it is critically
important that parents have
multiple avenues and
opportunities to express their
concerns so we want to just
thank representative Thompson
for her leadership and bringing
this bill forward thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank thank you.
All right so we'll go to laurel.
Morning morally I booked two
minutes.
You may be muted.
Thank.
Thank you very much Mr chair of
thank you representative
Thompson and thank you also to
the committee for the
opportunity to speak.
Hi I am an attorney with
disability rights New Mexico.
And
at at this really writes New
Mexico we are very committed to
measures that resolve matters
effectively at a low level and
particularly in the in this
context in a landscape we're
achieving right remedies for
students with disabilities is so
difficult still as we look at
this bill there are some pieces
that I think.
More at some some conversation
in light of the fact that those
manatees are so difficult to
achieve as Representative
Thompson ourself is talked about
and others have already spoken
about.
One of the concerns that I have
and that we at disability rights
New Mexico have is about
preservation of other procedural
safeguards for students and for
future employees while the bill
purports to do that there is
reference to such things as
timely access to the services of
the office and there's also
Timely notification by the
office if there is not going to
be a resolution
stated but I think it is
important we talk about
timeliness as being a matter of
preservation rights particularly
where.
Where a state complaint for
instance needs to be filed
within one year of of the the
event set out in the complaint
and two years for due process
request
also mention of the procedural
safeguards notice would be a
good idea I think in this bill
one other
big big topic that I think needs
to be discussed by the committee
is the extent to which the
office intends to rely on the
work of volunteers again giving
the the difficulty of this area
and the the dense thus the
density.
Thank you laurel that was your
two minutes.
Julie.
Really good morning.
Julie you are with us.
We branding.
All right we'll come back to you
C..
Deborah.
They're very good morning you
have up to two minutes good
morning my name is Deborah
Gilmour I am the children youth
and families departments new
director of its new office of
children's rights and I ask for
your grace is in my first public
testimony managed to jointly and
not testify at the right time
earlier please allow the record
to reflect that a CYFD does not
take a position on House Bill to
thirteen CYFD stands in strong
support of house bill two twenty
two.
As.
Noted earlier our national
research confirms what we as an
agency know from experience that
youth with disabilities are at
increased risk of experiencing
child abuse and neglect used to
use nationally with disabilities
who come to the child protection
agencies attention I'm more
likely to be placed out of home
and less likely to reunify their
commonly removed nationally do
to quote parents all inability
to cope or quote child's
behavior on quote we recognize
the urgency of that are
supporting these children and
their families and the extra
attention needed to help close
the academic gaps for children
with disabilities in our care
recognizing that CYFD is office
of children's rights well of
educational rights is a key
focus area and having a special
education but it's been as we
would with house bill twenty two
to twenty twos passage will
facilitate better educational
services supports and outcomes
for our children by streamlining
our communication processes to
facilitate information sharing
serving as that neutral and
trusted point of contact when we
are in the log jam and helping
educators and caretakers to
think outside the box of our
resources to develop will system
services and supports a special
education eight education but
it's been excuse me can also
lift up crossed training needs
across agency gaps in our state
systems a special education but
it's been will strengthen our
ability to ensure that all of
our New Mexico children have an
equitable opportunity to succeed
academic.
Thank you Deborah that was your
two minutes Katie.
Good morning Katie you have up
to two minutes.
Warning Mr chair and members of
the committee I'm Katie stone
I'm a parent of two children who
were once served by special
education services when they
were in school I also serve as a
parent advocate on the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning council I
come here to stand in support of
H. B. two twenty two when my
children were in the special
education system the best source
of information for me was other
parents however they weren't
always accurate reliable or
available for helping me
navigate the systems when
problems arose the only place I
could find help was the office
of an education attorney getting
accurate helpful information
should not be a chore for
parents and students we have
enough on our plates
understanding the complexity of
special education law and the
services children with
disabilities require was a major
challenge for us envisioning a
future where families have
someone to turn to you can find
pathways to solution for their
concerns without having to
resort to legal action imagine
an impartial dedicated authority
to can analyze special education
policy rules and law the
nonprofits that have taken up
this advocacy role in our state
are in adequate to provide these
resources many of us who have
tried to use those services to
fill this gap in our system have
been left with our problems on
result this is a solid bill it
is a creative inexpensive
solution to a long standing
problem faced by parents and
students of special education
thank you so much for
considering this bill and giving
it a do pass and thank you to
the Sanchez.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to the
toll.
Joe good morning about two
minutes.
The morning chairman and members
of the committee my name is Joel
Davis parent of a child
receiving special education
services in Rio Rancho public
schools chair of the policy
committee for elevate the
spectrum an appointee for the
developmental disabilities
planning council families and
guardians with children in
special education of known and
experienced this function and
intentional barriers to
receiving.
A free affordable public
education in a research least
restrictive environment for
decades the system we've known
it's been difficult broken
before the pandemic and has been
further exposed as a result of
the pandemic this bill would
provide much needed oversight to
special education delivery
outside of PED provide support
to families and guardians to
help navigate the many hurdles
and barriers to receive
appropriate services and
supports for their children our
family has two attorneys in our
household and we found the
process to be very difficult and
take years to understand
municipalities across the state
are desperate for adequate staff
supports and services for
special education students and
this would go a long way in
helping those children receive
services timely and quickly
because we all know that early
intervention is the key in this
row thank you chairman and
members the committee and I
strongly urge you to support
this bill.
Eight thank you to all.
All right we'll go to Pamela.
Morning you'll have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Pam Stafford I am the
registered lobbyist for the ark
New Mexico the arc New Mexico is
a not for profit.
The statewide agency providing
advocacy for individuals with
developmental disabilities as
such we received numerous phone
calls the pre COVID our advocacy
program probably.
We got about seventy five
percent of its calls from
parents related to I eat peas
and the difficulties with
special education and we
recognize as an advocacy agency.
That we can do our best and it's
not enough and we strongly
support this bill.
Right thank you and what.
All right go to Steve's.
Morning Steve yep two minutes.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
CBC on his government relations
director within the New Mexico
on behalf of our members we
stand in support of this bill we
believe this bill is a step in
the right direction to create a
public education that ensure
student equity in opportunity.
But we also believe that more
needs to be done around
sufficiently funding special
education for example dealing
with the significant issue of
special ed teacher shortages.
Some of our special ed teachers
are simply overwhelmed with the
number of Kate Macer.
We thank the sponsors for
bringing this legislation for
and we ask that this committee
voted in favor of this bill but
also take into consideration the
concerns of sufficiently funding
special education and delivering
the educational students those
are thank you.
Thank you.
All right we'll go to use
Secretary Stewart.
Good morning Mr Secretary of up
to two minutes good morning Mr
chair good morning members of
the committee I'm Ryan Stewart
secretary for the public
education department I just want
to say thank you as well to the
representative for her or her
ongoing working tireless
advocacy and in partnership in
this effort Public Education
Department we stand in support
of this bill we've had the
opportunity to work for four
months now on a on a variety of
of issues that will continue to
be tackling and we feel this is
one tangible way to make sure
that we've got strong support
for families where ever they may
need them at the place it's
going to be most convenient for
them we know the public
education department for for
many years the relationship with
with families and special
education and the department
has been challenging we continue
to do everything in our power to
make sure that we have positive
relationships but we see this as
a great opportunity to make sure
that families have somewhere
they can turn no matter where
they are no matter what their
needs to make sure that they
have the help necessary to help
them navigate through the the
world of special education and
most importantly make sure that
we get services delivered to the
student in a way that is
proficient and that is meeting
the needs of the individual
child absolutely to the best of
of our ability to make sure that
they they have those resources
available so thank you and we
stands for fiscal.
Great thank you.
All right we'll go to Ellen.
Good morning Ellen you have up
to two minutes thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Ellen plants with the
disability coalition and we
stand in very strong support of
this bill as numerous previous
speakers have made clear special
education can be very
complicated and the result is
that when a family is fighting
for the rights of the skins of
they are in a situation of a
significant power imbalance
where they're going up against
an entity that has significantly
more resources than they do and
they need help in understanding
their rights their children's
rights and and navigating that
system and we believe that
having an independent
ombudsperson would really help
in that regard we also believe
that the policy function of the
but office to collect data and
make recommendations and inform
public policy making is also a
very important part of this
measure so we do stand in
support and we urge the
committee support as well thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right elevate the spectrum
if you could MNLF are you to
speak however if you would
identify yourself personally
well.
Thank.
We go to charity.
Morning sherry you have up to
two minutes.
Hi good morning.
I would like to say that as a
parent of a student with
disability and as a parent
coming from the reservation
someone mentioned timeline and
preservation of rights the
reservation and low income
families have an extensive
database which would support the
needs of students and families
based on on meet supports and
someone also mentioned that the
licensure of people to support
our families on the reservation
is barrier which is something
that I can stay in need to
because I have utilized early
childhood support staff are
epics pro step high audiologist
and the alright I would like to
highlight is that for students
and families of disabilities who
are possibly and in college
right now are transitioning to
college the support services for
them if needed based on on the
transition and as a parent of a
student with a learning
disability my student recently
reached out to the poverty and
Law Center out of farming tend
to report that she needs support
with her education right now and
we were back right now she's
still protected by her IEP and
under the five four which would
allow for them to reach out to
the school to support and
accommodate my student better so
again please look out for
students and families with
disabilities and those students
who may transition and big one
to college the staff for for the
ark of New Mexico came on and
said that they are doing seventy
five percent of calls when the
program pandemic started well my
student was one of those people
that caught the ark of New
Mexico and shot through the
cracks so we are going through
the system and again based on
loss of trust and loyalty to
support our families base.
On the system it is hard to
navigate so being a true
advocate is to research and
understand policy and know where
you thank you sherry that was
two minutes.
When.
Good morning Clinton you have up
to two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate this opportunity I
won't take to manage our support
and would echo the testimony in
the past I personally am here as
a grandparent and that and as a
advocate for.
Special education and children
with disabilities in my previous
life as a state senator S. S.
and as a grandparent I stand in
strong support of just piece of
legislation is organizational
structures work well and the
division of aging in the past
and and I think it would be a
benefit to do this for to our
children thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Great thank you.
All right Robert.
Morning Robert two minutes.
it's a little faint but we can
hear you.
It's a little bit better there
you go.
Thanks to.
I am on the border of the blues.
Okay.
Thanks thanks thanks thanks so
this makes sense.
Thanks.
Is.
Thanks thank K..
The.
Right services because.
Instead.
When I was.
I was doing that is elementary
school and I was why Hey
Kleiser.
Hello thanks for the and that
was very scary the.
And.
I don't want students what is
this what I think.
And that is why.
That is built into it is thank
you.
Okay are there
Any more questions I'm now
sharing because our chair then
is presenting and state
government any more questions.
Thank you Mr but yes if you can
make it.
So.
Thanks.
Well you guys.
All these.
Six.
Thank.
With disabilities.
Well being.
Is.
This
is.
How do you see it
The eighty.
Hello.
Police officers.
Thank you Mr Bundy does anybody
any more of our committee
members have questions.
Madam chair madam chair yes.
Representative Stapleton.
You asking for members to ask
questions at this time.
I'm I'm
I'm sorry I just came back from
another committees so I'm
checking to see who has
questions.
Representative Williams
Stapleton do have a question
that I see that Representative
Lane has a question yes yes I do
madam chair
Madam chair representative
Thompson.
I'm as with the of the bill I
support the braid intent and I
support the great intent of this
bill I I didn't I but I was just
going as the other bill
questions that came up in the
LESC committee that I mean and
Alice's.
A question about and
Madam chair
the first question I have for
Representative
Thompson is the one in the
analysis that states that the
That the office some the state
special education but
would be under the office of the
state would be under the state's
developmental disabilities
planning council
however house in the office of
special education but then went
on to the all the side of the P.
C. may call into question the
neutrality and impartiality with
which but typically expected to
function.
I'm.
What do you think about that we
see that that's written there.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Stapleton I'm we
we talked about this at great
length about keeping it under
the PED umbrella but as I said
in my opening I'm families are
very distrustful of PED and it's
a long standing long held
Adversarial relationship and and
and right now PED does have of
people who who can help to sort
out special education issues
what we have seen through the
years and I'm not talking about
that that Representative Dr
Stewart because he he hasn't
been around that long but
through the years families as as
one of just Katie stone said and
other people referred to
basically families are at the
point where you get a lawyer you
don't even bother going to PED
because you will be patted on
the head we needed up we talked
at great length about where this
this program should be our and
we knew that it should not be
PED for those reasons we look at
other organizations and it seems
like GDP the was the best bet
yes they are an advocacy
organization and and essentially
that's what we want that we want
but program to be is an advocate
for families I'm in if it's just
say HM I'm not interested party
or party with no expertise we
don't feel like the families
will get the representation that
they deserve and the kids will
get the services that they are
entitled to and really need.
Miss madam chair and
representative Thompson the
developmental disabilities
planning council is on the what
agency currently it's kind of
madam chair and Representative
Stapleton it's kind thank it's
kind of an orphan it is not I
served on the board that's why I
know this I served as chair for
three years it's it's just it's
a federally mandated program
that doesn't fall under any
agency I'm not quite sure how
what's called how it's
classify it does not fall under
any agency because it's a
federally mandated program and I
will let our that you're at the
executive director of GDP C.
talk a little bit more about
exactly what their their
umbrella looks like.
Thank you madam chair
representative Thompson at
Representative Stapleton out so
the DPC is a network of TV
councils across the nation we
every state has one I'm in New
Mexico we are our own agency we
have our own budgets and we also
have federal funding to do
hierarchies that are set fire
council members are council
members are appointed by the
governor and that we are
currently in the middle of I'm a
five year planning process for
our next five year plan which
will be in fact in this next
federal fiscal year
mandate the federal mandate that
we have is to do advocacy work
and systems change work I'm as
well as capacity building in the
state of New Mexico this is in
our federal statute at the very
much falls within the purview I
have and the work that we're
supposed here in Mexico.
I'm Representative Thomson
If that is the case.
Then in the
In the analysis where it talks
about.
I'm we.
Confidentiality of students
records.
And the.
Okay G. indicated.
That.
Grant access to the students
educational records from the New
Mexico public education
department.
Any school district or a public
school.
Carry out the office
responsibilities violates the
family educational rights and
privacy act as known as the
Buckley amendment protecting the
privacy of a student's education
records as defined in the act I
guess it's because the
developmental disabilities
council is not part of the
educational system within that
state.
I'm make up all of agencies.
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair and now
Representative Stapleton
families will will make the
request it they will there will
be a have a signature the
families will have to give or if
the person is over eighteen and
their own guardian give
permission to our it's not like
it that defeat that but at DPC
can just thank.
I hear there's interesting stuff
happening in Silver City let me
go color child record and see
that's not how it's going to
work madam chair and members it
will be a family who has an
issue
will we'll call up email
whatever the but program and say
this is what's happening and
they will sign a release to
allow it's not like it's going
to the records are just going to
be dealt for for just anybody
for any reason.
So I'm.
You're saying that the office so
all we need is wrong in that it
doesn't violate the Buckley
amendment.
Madam chair and Representative
Stapleton I am not an attorney.
I'm sorry sorry madam chair
sorry I didn't refer back.
But I do know that as a parent
we were we signed a release and
people were allowed access to
those records are attorneys were
allowed access to those records
and not director makori is
actually attorneys I'm gonna let
her up at anything else thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative Thompson and
Stapleton
So with the consensus from the
family and getting appropriate
consents there shouldn't be any
violations of any
confidentiality lots.
Madam chair representative
Thompson and then also the
analysis indicated that the that
the the
The DD PC office currently holds
that provides the legal counsel.
And and now it would be to say
absolutely and and he said I'm
certain again the billing ten
was for that and need to find
council so we would be providing
the council I guess your your
Yes Representative it's time CEO
expert witness might have that
what would be the what do.
Thank you madam chair
representative Stapleton we are
considering different options at
the moment we're open to the OAG
if they want to be involved I
think we were really looking at
either an in house counsel or
outside counsel that we would
retain I'm for that purpose.
So so that's the case
Representative missed Madam
chair representative Thompson
how does that align with the
collaboration between the PED at
this developmental disabilities
council so again these services
to these children and families.
Thank you madam chair
representative so for the
question out we don't intend
ten use the council necessarily
I'm to take you know adversarial
Positions although you know.
We were.
I think the main purpose of the
council is to be able to
to advise we are I'm sorry
outside legal counsel so we
don't have confused counseling
council I'm legal counselors to
advise on that on what the
current state of the law is make
sure that we're following
special education lies you know
IDA and all of that and special
education laws very complex so
we just wanna make sure we have
the expertise there and that
we're providing the correct
information and comprehensive
information to help families.
So then madam chair and
representative Thompson if if
that is the case I'm.
Right now.
PED you have to have consent
from students those students
parents so thank you not a tool
for records to be given out to
any individual any group on the
PED I'm the disabilities council
would that staying up all with
anybody who want an inspection
of public records be able to to
get it.
Madam chair and Representative
Stapleton it as I said before it
will just be the but but percent
who would be accessing those
records now that the council is
kind that okay DD PC it's kind
of just the umbrella agency that
we have decided to put the put
the the program under they will
not at the end and now director
record will be cut will be
overseeing it but essentially
that that the council the
development disabilities
planning council will not they
won't have any access to any
records or anything like that it
will just be for the person or
persons who are working directly
with that family and school
districts to trying get problems
and issues resolved.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Thompson.
Thank you crossing over chairs
we missed one public comment so
Julie reading you have two
minutes.
You're on your late.
Yes we can hear you I am really
branding I'm a mother to special
needs children and Committee
sorry madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Julie
branding I'm here to support
this bill I just wanted to give
a really quick
real life story of why this bill
is really important my son has
autism and before COVID hit he
was having behaviors are really
difficult in the school and they
kept sending them to the
principal's office and I was
going IEP meeting so that we
could remove that problem of him
going to the principal's office
and they refuse they kept
sending him to the principal's
office which was causing more
problems I even brought in an
independent nonprofit advocate
they were not equipped to help I
could not turn to PED if I had
had an independent outside
resource it would have helped us
significantly in this situation
to understand the rules and
understand to be an advocate for
my son for these reasons I
support this bill and I asked
for to pass thank you.
Thank you.
Okay are
Our next speaker our next
panelist is Representative Lane
followed by Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair
My question for Charlie Thompson
centers around I think I need
some help understanding why a
particular paragraph is included
in this bill so if I could turn
our attention to page six of the
bill.
There is section seven.
And essentially madam chair I
understand section seven I it's
it's a really important section
but essentially what it does
that make sure.
That students files remain
confidential they're not subject
to it bro and of course there's
federal statutory provisions on
this as well.
but my specific question
Deals with subparagraph two
which starts on line eleven of
page six.
And so typically and and I've
dealt with it bro for for well
over a decade in the municipal
contacts representing
municipalities and in in
handling and responding in
interpreting it brought in
so paragraph one is is pretty
straight for it but paragraph
two allows for.
Personer student to give oral
consent.
To
confidentiality being waved.
And so I think madam chair like
it's just some clarification as
to why we would allow for oral
consent just from a legal
perspective I think this may
open up
potential litigation of well any
time you you don't have informed
consent in writing and you allow
for oral consent I think there's
the potential for litigation so
I could just get some
clarification madam chair thank
you.
Thank you madam chair
representative why and how I can
speak to that I'm in the world
of disabilities we have to make
all of these process these
accessible to FedEx and it is
you know well known that some
folks just cannot put things in
writing because of their the
barriers that they face at face
because of their disabilities so
it's really important that we
have that kind of accessibility
in their and I think quite
noting and requiring that it's
documented immediately
no at the time and at you know
we can puts safeguards in place
to make sure that this consent
is is is accurate and true but
it's very important to have
something else in there we have
at at agency right now outdated
and antiquated
Regulations and might ask
guardianship rules that require
writing and it has been a major
barrier for folks who have tried
to access the complete process
in office so we're in the middle
changing that snaps so we just
want to go ahead and
address that right away as we
put in the statute instead of
making it hard for access that's
the whole point of our offices
to be.
Thank you madam chair and and
I'm certainly not suggesting we
needed to put up on needed
hurdles I actually just wanna
make sure that the students
privacy are are well protected
and respected so that's that's
really my one question.
and so help me to maybe if I get
some more contacts that might
help me to understand the need
for this subparagraph so if I'm
a student under the age of
eighteen.
Is my current and or guardian
required to sign to have my
confidential materials disclosed
madam chair.
All that Representative director
McCoy answer that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative flying out yes so
that the concerns really must be
given by a parent for children
under eighteen and to consider
would be given by the judge the
students themselves if they are
eighteen.
And the writing or not I'm
really doesn't a fact the ages
to see whoever the person giving
consent as if they need.
Assistance with the writing
aspect of it then we give that
assistance so you know the
disability could be
faced by just the students
themselves or could be faced by
their parent or legal guardian
or you know whichever family
member has the authority to get
that consent so we want to make
sure it captured everybody who
would be accessing our services
in give the consent for us
access records.
Thank you madam chair.
and I think for the reason why
we we usually in in the law
require of confidentiality.
Provisions to be in writing is
we want to make sure that the
person that's waving the
confidentiality actually knows
what they're doing because often
times I should say often times I
I'd say it's a possibility madam
chair that the person
explaining to the other person
who would be waving their rights
that they maybe don't do the job
explaining what they're waving
entirely and so they may not
fully understand what in fact
they're waving it so if you put
in writing that everybody knows
it's clear
and so I think that's that's the
only reason why highlight this
is I I at the end of the day I
think what this bill is trying
to do is important but I also
know that we want to make sure
that our students and and by
extension their parents or
guardians aren't waving things
that they don't necessarily
understand and so you know as an
attorney if if once you start
getting the oral consent then it
becomes more of a he said she
said and I do I do recognize
that it's.
To be documented immediately but
it still doesn't remove the he
said she said element of oral
testimony
I think it's a cleaner process
just to have it in writing and
it seems like madam chair than
the narrow place for where this
would applies if you have a
student who's actually eighteen.
and has legal authority to waive
this on his or her own behalf
but maybe because of a
disability doesn't have the
ability to put that in writing I
think that would be the natural
place for this this would apply
because it seems like if you
have a students under eighteen
that doesn't have the ability to
to put into writing that they're
agreeing to waive
confidentiality that that his or
her parent or guardian to do the
same so those are my comments
thank you madam chair.
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman Thompson for
bringing this bill it is like a
deja vu I think every year we
came in the same year and every
year that we've been our elected
someone has brought forth some
sort of effort to figure out how
we go outside of an agency to
give people a voice outside
agency because so many of the
processes we have for people to
appear are there just in our
circular and so you appeal
within the same agency that has
the same boss or has the same
appointed appointed power and
what I see that I like best
about this is that it's outside
of PED and so I I know exactly
why you're bringing it we we
work with very similar
populations mines more at risk
so more folks involved with see
what CYFD but many of them have
IEPs and so I see this from the
simple thing of trying to get a
foster child with an IEP bus to
a school that's you know they
were living in one district a
move to another I mean I this is
so I needed and I get why you're
bringing it in it's so you know
last sixty day session
Representative for Hart and I
had an ombudsman bill for CYFD.
And I it feels like deja vu
listening to the questions well
well it's a confidentiality
issue well that the people
involved are getting their
consent well you know it's this
issue and you know it's that
issue and will you know it but
but what you're doing is you're
trying to get.
Resolution for people outside of
a system that's inner circular
Madam Madam chair representative
Thompson is that correct is that
what you're trying to do.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Representative
Dow you pretty much hit on the
head we would like as I said
before you know we thought about
putting it within PED but many
of the people who are.
Rents that I know have have been
in that circle for decades and
just as an aside madam chair
some of you may not know that if
you have an I. E. P. you can
actually stay in the public
schools until you're you're you
turn twenty two so if you turn
twenty two in September you can
graduate that following year so
you're over twenty two and a
half by the time you graduate
and and that's why we're talking
so much about guardians in those
kind of things because my son
did go to school he turned
twenty three in February and
graduated that may so so that's
why it's it's not just those
those few seniors to Jean it's
twenty two your in special ed
madam chair yes thank thank you
madam chair thank you chairman
Thompson and I realize there are
some technical issues with the
bill and I I've read that the
FIR is and and probably you know
you'll probably make some
amendments along the way and
that I you know at this year we
at some of us who are trying to
find the same sort of solutions
within CYFD said well let's have
it go to the sub to Care
coordinating council and members
of the subs to Corning Care
Council turns out are many of
the same you know people
appointed by the governor there
is secretary there they are
people who are at the will of
the secretary or the governor so
you may or may not and and and
by the way not this governor I'm
speaking in twenty two years are
my at we I've gone through two
Republican governors of the
second Democrat governor lots
and lots of secretaries and it
doesn't seem to matter you know
this these breakdowns don't seem
to matter who are the members of
the developmental disability
council I do you consider them
independent and they could
operate they can make these
decisions and they wouldn't be
they wouldn't be suppressed of
an ombudsman is here.
Madam chair and Representative
Dow I as I say I served six
years on the DD PC including
three years as chair and we were
very independent yes we were the
by the governor when I served I
I'm not even sure the governor
knew we existed actually I'm
because it's a it's a small
agency and the majority of money
comes through the federal funds
I do believe they they I'm it's
it's a volunteer gig we all know
about that and so they're there
because they have a passion
around people with disabilities
and so I I do them as very
independent and and I I have not
ever heard of someone being
removed from that duty counsel
for I'm standing up for for
people with disabilities because
that that's what that's what the
the our job up that counsel is.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chairman Thompson
Yes I just I'm seeing a lot of
similarities I I'd sent you an
email but I would just ask that
the members of their interest to
take a look at house bill two
eighty four because this is like
a another attempt it's for CYFD
but but but an attempt to try to
find this outside of an age the
way that we can provide
accountability
at in the world CYFD there's an
equivalent to the steps to care
court are the development
disability council which is
called a sub to Care Corning
council but they are advisory
they don't they and so it was
like well do we put it there and
we look at the membership and
thought well are going to get
around it but I I'm glad that we
heard this bill gives me a lot
of practice for two eighty four
when it comes up I think to get
the exact same questions about
confidentiality you know people
are seeking help in there's and
I don't want to be confidential
I want my story told I want
people to know what's happening
to my child I want people to
know what's happening to my
family and I'm looking for help
in resolution and so even though
there are issues and even the
work you know in a point of the
committee here were bills that
get rolled may not move forward
I we just rolled up another bill
because I had technical issues
and I hope that they don't do
this to this bill because
apparently we want to get all
right before moving forward I'm
gonna vote to move the bill
forward because I think it needs
to be heard needs to continue
thank you Mr chairman our madam
chair thank you Representative
Thomson.
Thank you are there any other
committee members that have
questions at this time.
One thing I'm thank you
representative Thompson for
bringing this forth as someone
who's served on the EPA
committees for years and have
been called so many times from
parents I really think having
the but
will really make a significant
us.
For parents and guardians to
have access so I just want to
thank you for bringing forth
this bill thank you I have a
motion or do you want to.
Madam chair I move to pass.
We have.
Okay second from.
Motion Representative Figueroa
as second from Representative
Dow.
Representative do you want to
say anything before we take the
vote to close.
Madam chair thank you all for
listening or for the great
questions and I really do hope
you will.
Yes this bill I think it's
really important for students
with disabilities throughout New
Mexico madam chair.
Okay madam secretary can you
call the roll yes Representative
although not all yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative dal yes.
Representative roof Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative land that.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative stable ten yes.
Representative Swetser yes.
Madam chair.
Yes I'm sorry I skipped one
I'll go back to Representative
Christine Trujillo yes now we go
back to Representative madam
chair yes.
I slowed to thirteen two zero we
have a to pass.
Thank you representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
With that will move on to our
third bill which is special
education teacher licenses.
This.
Madam chair for witness will be
Helen burns Steen so issue and
raised her hand in the attendees
to come over and let me know
when you are ready for me to
start okay.
Just wait for a moment.
Dr Byrne sting can you raise
your hand.
Issues.
One major one one line I'm.
Hold on for a second.
let me make sure she's not
testifying in another committee.
He probably is chair she has
several in state government this
morning so I can start without
if needed.
We're checking.
Okay yes show try to come.
will contact her.
As she is currently testifying
and another committee okay
Representative go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
committee Committee this is a
educator workforce bill is about
recruitment and retention of
teachers and is focused in
particular on the special
education workforce the bill was
inspired by information that
came out in the interim
Education Committee studies
committee.
and specifically the statistic
that sixty eight percent of our
new teacher licensure is arching
teachers in alternative
pathways.
This signal to me that we need
to look very carefully at our
alternative pathways in that is
now of the major.
Preparation for our teachers we
have to make sure that it is
strong this.
Mexico deserve well prepared
teachers is specially.
Well herbal students.
And often in our shortage areas
alternative pathway licensors
teachers are serving our most
vulnerable most at risk most low
income most mobile students.
He
also does the opportunity to be
strongly prepared we know that
we lose most of the teachers
that we lose in the first five
years and it is because they
lack of preparation the ability
to handle classroom classroom
management.
You know turning licensure
programs.
She deserve the opportunity to
practice in the classroom with
aspirin highly impacted teacher.
That will help us reduce churn
reduce teacher turnover and pair
them better prepare them to
handle their own classrooms.
School districts deserve
stability.
Teachers turn is very extensive
and estimated that it can cost
in district twenty thousand
dollars every time they lose and
have to replace a new teacher.
So students can districts all
deserve strong preparation
programs now I want to clarify
this bill does not replace Madam
chair mentoring programs
mentoring programs teachers who
are working in their classroom
still need to happen for the
first second minimum years of
the new teachers lights they
need access to an expert teacher
but what this bill addresses is
supervised practice.
In the classroom I'm a highly
effective teacher.
One of the shorter bills you're
going to read madam chair.
Paragraphs of new material in
there is fairly directs.
The question might want a
special ed teachers who.
If we have to look at the
alternative pathway licensure
system for all teachers and all
licenses but this was an attempt
to narrow the focus as we begin
phasing in a change.
We're looking at special and as
our second highest shortage area
in the states.
And we are also looking at
special education students as
one of the named plaintiff
groups in the Yazzie Martinez
K..
So it seems like a good pilot.
And to working in this space
change the alternative licensure
program.
In as we figure this out it will
likely lead to change of the
alternative pathway licensure
for all areas but this seems
like a natural passed for a
pilot that we can work out the
Kinks how to make this function
across the state.
Senator over in Alice sees them
indicated that what this bill
does.
Might be considered a barrier to
those who are trying to obtain a
teaching license through the
alternative path.
What this bill does is add
supervised practice for fifteen
weeks to the alternative
licensure path and I would
contend that is not a barrier.
That is an opportunity and that
is an attraction that will help
us recruit folks to this pathway
rather than being thrown in at
the deep end.
Stinkers when money you are the
teacher in the classroom though
you have never tried before.
This says nope we are going to
put you in the classroom a
highly effective teacher your
fifteen weeks to watch how it's
done to begin taking over
responsibilities and then you'll
be a teacher of record in a
classroom.
Yes I believe that will be
actually and and traction to
folks who want to follow this
licensure pass.
We have some evidence from.
Teacher residencies systems.
As in the case.
Residents are only paid ten
thousand dollars a year instead.
A new teacher salary of forty
thousand dollars.
They still have twice as many
applications as they have spots
to give.
That to me is an indicator that
is why I say this use and
traction for folks to know that
they would have the chance to
practice before they are
responsible for a classroom.
I would also point out the bill
does not specify that teachers
following this alternative
licensure pathway cannot be paid
teacher residencies.
Where teacher candidates to
receive some pay some minimal
paying fall under this
alternative licensure path.
To allow madam chair with your
permission expert witness
Ernestine to add any details if
you would like to the
introduction of this bill.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee just a
few things about our
alternative licensed special ed
teachers.
We have two different programs
in APS that support our
alternative licensed teachers
one of courses is mentoring and
the other one is our peer
assistance program in what we
have found sure research is that
those candidates that goes
through alternative licensure
where there are not fully
prepared when they take over a
classroom lack the knowledge and
experience and some very
important areas the first area
is lesson planning the second
one is behavioral management the
third is knowledge of students
and how to assess their learning
and of course it's special
signal or they don't necessarily
have the background about the
various disabilities and what we
have found both in Albuquerque
and in nation wide research is
that those teachers who are
under prepared to take over the
full responsibility of teaching
especially teaching our most
vulnerable students and special
that tend to really struggle and
often do not stay in the
profession and as the sponsor
mentioned teacher churn is very
costly to our districts and our
state it is much more
We're not just cost efficient
but obviously better for our
students if the teachers are
prepared what we have found in a
program that we started in H.
ATS specifically as a partner
with us the amendment and their
special and alternative
licensure program is when we
pair them with a that is fully
credentialed practicing teacher
first semester they are much
more prepared and feel much more
successful as they take on the
responsibility teaching in their
own special ed classroom.
ATS has felt so strongly about
getting special ed teachers
because we have such a shortage
that they do pay
some state and to these teachers
as they go through their
practical experience I will say
that lately at the college of
education at UNM we have very
few people going into special ed
graduating and and applying to
work in APS as few as eight in
any given semester with this
program that we have hi really
preparing special ed teachers to
work in the field and going
through that semester of
practical experience we now have
over fifty highly qualified
special ed teachers in our
district that we didn't have
before so I can't overstate the
importance of being prepared to
work with special ed students
and the last thing I'd like to
mention you just heard from
representative Thompson on the
fact that we have so many bills
over the last few sessions
really focusing on the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit in very few
focusing on the importance of
special ed students and this
goes a long way in that focus
thank you very much.
Thank you.
is there anything else you want
to say Representative Figueroa.
No.
Chair I would point out that the
bill lease flexibility in the
hands of local districts and all
of the different universities
that are doing the coursework
for the alternative pathway
licensure to figure out what
system is going to work best to
accomplish this in their area
and we have spoken with PED
we've spoken with
superintendents than their
ideas ways to to supply the
expert teacher is needed if the
school site doesn't have it we
can use our agencies we're
leaving it open and would you
mind not noticed on First Street
of the bill madam chair isn't
affected date of July twenty
twenty two because you want to
one year to districts and
universities the community
universities four year
universities that are doing
these coursework pieces how they
want to plan and how they want
to make it work in their
different areas because every
school situation is different.
and with that will stand for
questions chair.
Thank you we we will go to our
attendees first
I'm going to ask people in
support of house bill two sixty
six to raise their hands.
If you are in support.
And I want to remind our
attendees are you will be given
two minutes and then
you will be muted so try to keep
your comments brief again try
not to repeat what other people
of St and with that we will
start with Christine college.
Chris.
Thank you madam chair on Good
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Krista
Coolidge and the director of
exceptional programs for funding
to school I am also a thirty
five year special educator not
too many of us around I'm I I do
support this bill however I
would ask that that language
around level three eighty
special education teacher be
reconsidered we had very very
strong level two special
education teachers with
significant amount of experience
and knowledge and who are
exceptional
Supporters of our new teachers I
would also remind the committee
as has been said many times this
morning that we are experiencing
a significant shortage of
special education teachers
across our state and we have
small districts that may not
have any level three a special
education teachers I do have
some concerns around the
appropriation or lack of because
I agree with Dr Bernstein in
that we should be compensating
those teachers who are carrying
heavy caseloads and trying to
mentor some of our new teachers
so again I agree fully with the
intent of the law but I do have
concerns regarding a few of the
details thank you for your time
thank you Chris.
We long.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee actually one
with the American federation of
teachers New Mexico for the sake
of time just want to appreciate
the sponsoring the expert
witness their work on that.
Actually it's hard to hear you.
Madam chair you able to hear me
now my apologies we can hear you
now I am so sorry about that
again my name is actually long
with the American federation of
teachers New Mexico just want to
thank the sponsor on the expert
witness Dr Byrne Steen they
covered most of what I was gonna
say perfectly with that AFP New
Mexico stands in strong support
of the bill thank you madam
chair thank you.
Our next speaker is Jeremy or
Yankee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee as the previous
speaker mention those of the
sponsor and the expert witness
fully captured all this on
behalf of senator Pueblo and
governors have Rio we fully
support the show thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is Ellen pines.
Or sorry Elena I mispronounced
your name you got it right the
first on madam chair Helen plans
representing the disability
coalition and we do stand in
support of this bill this is not
about creating barriers for
teachers this is about promoting
a better qualified and prepared
special education teaching
workforce and we believe that
that will serve the interests of
all the participants in the
system it certain students
interest because they will have
better qualified teachers it
serves the interests of the
teachers because they will be
better prepared and confident in
their ability to do their jobs
and it serves the interests of
the district as well because it
will reduce churn and enable
district for help districts to
retain well qualified teachers
so we are to the committee
support the bill thank you madam
chair thank you.
Our next speaker is Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair of members
of the committee on Jim Jackson
just speaking for myself this
morning as a long time advocate
for persons with disabilities
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill forward first I just
remind the the committee that
the students with disabilities
are a component of the Yazzie
Martinez a lawsuit and
settlement agreement and we
think it's important that the
this is just one step in helping
them access appropriate services
well there is in fact is
everyone acknowledges a serious
shortage of special ed teachers
and so these alternative
pathways are a really good way
of making sure that we're we're
meeting this workforce need but
it is also important to make
sure that these teachers are
well trained and effectively
working with special ed students
so
on the the end of the so in in
response we would just to
encourage the committee to
support this bill if there are
improvements that will
strengthen the bill even more
than a great but we encourage
you to give this to do to us
thanks.
Thank you our next speaker is
Steve sinus.
It is going to.
Good morning I am sure and chair
and members of the committee CCI
is government relations director
with any in New Mexico on behalf
of our members we stand in
support of this bill it's
aligned with our legislative
goals and it's a right step in
meeting the needs of students
with disabilities we hope that
this bill will provide the
adequate training for teachers
to better serve our students by
providing them classroom
experience or hands on training
so we're very very happy about
that
we think the the sponsor for
report this bill only asset this
committee voted in favor thank
you.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is Pamela
Stafford.
Morning madam chair person and
members of the committee the arc
New Mexico state my name is
Pamela Stafford with the our New
Mexico and we stand in support
of this effort to increase the
number of qualified
professionals in this critical
area.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is sherry
Belsen.
What does not get taken away
chair and committee my name is
sherry bassin and I'm from the
pueblo of Zuni I support this
bill as a parent I have a
student with disability and at
times I had to be cut to the
school to assist with the hit
behavior situations and at times
it was inflicting with how I was
trying to support my family so
that position and shift that I
took was that I started to
substitute for my district and
that allowed me to be in the
school is my students should
have any problems that need
addressing but as long as well
to help my district with that
shortage of teachers so that
twenty thousand dollars to
replace a teacher
really something that we should
consider when we are training
our on teachers and the
mentorship programs that we have
in our community I do appreciate
them because it does keep the
young teachers coming into our
community here for the duration
of their tying when they start
and again as a parent I would
appreciate maybe support
services for families to also
encourage them to become
supports of the school systems
in that fashion so that they can
also support the school as well
as their family with extra
support and income thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have anybody else who
wishes to.
speak in favor of House Bill to
sixty six our panel right.
Good morning.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Hootie I'm a registered lobbies
for the Pueblo service that will
kill Wingate centrally P. and
SUNY.
And I would like to stand in
support on behalf of these
pueblos
it's already hard enough to find
teach there's an districts that
need special education teachers
but more so in rural areas like
the pueblos I just described and
hope that the committee will
move forward to accept that.
Bill in place and I thank the
sponsor for bringing this to the
committee.
Thank you.
Thank you Pamela our next
speaker is song treat a PO J..
Chair committee I shorten sweet
my name is Sandra priority and
toss well to coat and I stand in
support of house bill two sixty
six thank you.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is Valerie
bills
Salary bills.
Salary.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I stand
in support of H. B..
House Bill to sixty six I
believe we should give the.
S. support to have qualified
special education teachers with
all the schools in the states of
state of New Mexico thank you
thank you Valerie our next
speaker is normal QPR okay.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you the sponsors of the
bill.
My name is Norman where can the
former governor for the pueblo
of Zuni currently working as a
tribal relations liaison at the
University of New Mexico Center
for native American health and a
great grandparent grandparent
and apparent mentors student I
stand in support of this bill I
think the Yazzie Martinez really
highlighted to shortfalls to the
state has in equitably and
equally educating all children
in the state of New Mexico no
matter if they're special needs
or Jerry require other Services
to elevate their education so
that they have a more enjoyable
lifespan included academics in
the college so I stand in
support of this bill and thank
you very much thank you
governor.
I'm.
I do believe that is
Everybody speaking in favor of
the bill do we have anybody who
would like to speak in
opposition to the bill.
I see nobody who wishes to speak
in opposition to the bill will
move to our panel and
Representative lame you are
first and then Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
I appreciate this bill
Representative Figueroa.
and it is it's difficult for me
not and it's difficult not
because I'm an indecisive person
but I I really think this is a
this is a balancing
and I maybe Representative
Figueroa can help me and
determine which way I should
come out on the balancing
because.
as I hear the presentation as I
listen to public comment
it's clear to me madam chair
that you know special education
has very specific needs that
need to meet and we need to make
sure that the teachers in those
classrooms are well trained.
And highly capable because there
are specific and unique needs of
our students in those classrooms
and so on one hand it makes
sense to me that we want to in
the in the altar of licensure
want to make sure that that
those teachers are are meeting
all those requirements all those
expectations and we want to
raise the bar in that sense and
and that's that's my terminology
raise the bar
but then on the the other side
of the balancing scale is what
seems to be the reality what
will happen is as you implement
those additional measures.
It's going to be given more
difficult for people to get the
alternate licensure within the
special education arena and so
it seems to me that it might end
up limiting the number of people
who become alternative licensure
special education teachers.
And so the balance seems to me
to be.
Do we want fewer but more
qualified special educators or
do we want more special
educators that maybe at least
initially art as well qualified
and that's that's what I'm
grappling with right now
honestly I really am grappling
with it so it if if madam chair
of Representative York and maybe
help me
figure out how to handle that
balance I appreciate some
insight thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for an
excellent question and I would
frame it as.
Not more difficult but more
tractive
there's a possibility that we
might have fewer but more
qualified but if they are more
qualified and the stay in the we
will build a workforce to meet
the needs of our students so our
students deserve well prepared
well qualified teachers if we
have more of their less
qualified we truly serving our
students.
Yes my point number one madam
chair and and number two is
going to be are you truly
believe that this will actually
attract.
Posted to the special education
field
yes if the perhaps using
different content areas of
licensure they can get a first
year teachers pay faster.
This is fifteen weeks it's not a
super long time and it is
fifteen weeks and that they get
to work hand in hand with an
expert highly qualified teacher.
And for many
many here who have gone.
Who are teachers and remember in
that first year experience we
lose teachers in the first three
years because they don't have
the necessary preparation and
support.
So in the end this is going to
build up I truly believe I would
not have sponsored the bill this
is going to build up our special
education workforce in in the
long term and and I believe in
the short term thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair for the
and thank you Representative for
your that is helpful
It but maybe I could ask madam
chair for Representative figure
just maybe just flush out a
little bit more just want one
point she made was that
She believes that this would
help attract act and I don't
want to score so but I think
what she says is essentially to
help attract people that may be
interested in special education
it might actually attract more
of those type of of persons to
become an altar licensed
teachers so Madam maybe she
could just give me a little more
detail and to make sure I
understand that points well
thank you.
Absolutely madam chair and
representative
The alternative pathway is.
You're.
Classroom.
You're responsible for those
students and their education
full time all day that's the
jobs and you do classes at night
to hopefully help you figure out
how to do what you're doing what
is essentially being thrown in
the deep end.
And I believe that allowing in
teachers the chance to practice
under supervision is going to be
more attractive than being
thrown and I'm real.
That's what I meant by it being
attractive thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair that that
further exploration actually
does make sense Municipal thank
you for the responses those are
my questions.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
See if I can turn is saying well
just hold up I guess I'm also
balancing Representative late
almost eight my question but I'm
a little little bit more to ask
a.
Madam chair representative.
So what I what I understand of
this bill there there is
currently currently a pathway to
alternative licensure and
Under the current system of T.
of becoming a teacher I is my
understanding that you have to
you're required to do some
student teaching where you are
under another teacher in order
to get it licensure and can you
add a little bit to that for me.
Sure madam chair and
representative
Representative is correct for
the traditional pathway the
traditional pathway to a
licensure is through college and
four year university institution
and that does involve a student
teaching requirement so as you
can and then in the traditional
pathway going to four years of
college college and then does
have a student teaching
opportunity.
What this bill addresses is the
alternative pathway to licensure
and in the alternative pathway
to licensure someone who maybe
is looking for a second career
someone who already has a
bachelor's degree says I want to
be a teacher and they dropped in
front of students.
To be a teacher and education
courses in the evening.
And.
This bill says.
The specially as special
education with the needs of the
students can start orders
let practice teaching first for
fifteen weeks and then they can
become the teacher of record of
a classroom and it continue
taking any course work they need
in the evenings or on the
weekends
but he just asked the student
teaching component that is built
in just as you said to them
traditional pathway acts into
the alternative pathway thanks
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative a I think it's a
great idea I'm a little
concerned it will cut down on
the number of teachers
available.
Do we have any other questions
from panelists.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you Representative for
reading this bill I you know I I
was so like to see new and
inventive ways to bring in more
teachers into classrooms however
I do have a question madam chair
is.
Many of our rural school
districts may not have a level
three special education teacher
that can mentor these are these
alternative licensure
of candidates is there an
alternative or or is there
something that that that can can
still be allowed to allow these
are potential teachers to to
continue to work to get trained
in the proper manner manager.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative in
conversations with PED about how
to address this in rural areas
because if if in our tiny
schools there might be only one
special education teacher and if
that position is making there is
no one for this tier candidates
to do their student teaching
their prime additional
opportunity with
so we talked about various
possibilities and one of them is
having the REC find the
specialist to work to work in
the world school with the
teacher can and it in the
classroom that currently doesn't
have the teacher so they would
be in that that master teacher
would work out of the are you
see in the the teacher of record
for that classroom of students
that's one possibility
like I said is goes into effect
in a year so that districts can
have a chance to look around and
say okay how are we going to do
this with our closest college
that is providing the
alternative pathways course work
because that piece.
Going to.
And then we can see where or
where the needs are and how we
want to creatively solve this
problem and as the find this
shifting opportunity this
practice opportunity.
Process state including our most
rural districts.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative figure I have
another question and this is
just a something that popped
into my head so eight you madam
chair if I were he any
administrator at the moment
elementary school and I really
like this person and I encourage
this person to use to follow the
the alternative licensure
program for special ed because I
have a I have a position that I
need to be still however I don't
have a level three mentor in my
screen to do that but the
elementary school down the
street us.
And I'm worried that if me as an
administrator trying to recruit
this person madam chair.
We'll go to the other screen
signed state and work there
instead as opposed to my screen
so I understand that either I
don't know if you have an answer
for that.
Representative but I just sort
of that out there Madam.
Madam chair representative yet
there's a very realistic
situation there is certainly
happen and what I would just say
madam chair isn't in teacher
candidates could go down the
street and do their practice
teaching compliment in the
classroom of that level three
licensed teacher down the street
noting that Isshin was waiting
for them and your screen of the
street as soon as they're
fifteen weeks to stop.
Thanks madam chair.
Representative large you have
anymore questions.
I'm sure that's all I have thank
you okay Representative Williams
Stapleton is next in the
Representative Dow.
Madam chair I for making a
motion for do passed.
Second.
Representative we still have
more questions but back to you
thank you.
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative
Figueroa for bringing the bill
I'm what in order to get an
alternative Lysons is it still
the requirement that these folks
have a bachelor's and either a
master's and doctorate degree.
Madam chair and representative
as I understand your question
correctly yes it is a
requirement bachelor's or
master's or PhD for the
alternative licensure path.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Figueroa
so why is there an assumption
that they don't have classroom
experience for that they you
know they're they're under
degree programmer I have seen
people like the in LA I mean at
and EA and then go on to get
their degree while they're
working as an EA or I mean like
what I guess maybe it's just
different rural areas than it is
and metropolitan areas do these
apprenticeship programs exist in
rural New Mexico I'm not aware
of it.
Madam chair and representative
these are prime just yet
programs and described well okay
I shouldn't say they don't exist
at all yet they're not a
requirement yet the opportunity
is been provided in some places
around the state this bill
proposes to do is to send
everyone across the state
deserves to practice because not
just are in areas specialized
students to discern highly
qualified and really well
prepared teachers
and is Dr Berns dean is here I
would let her address and she
knows so many programs that are
currently in existence elsewhere
around the state.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee in
order to get an alternative
license you have to have a
higher ed institution offering
an alternative licensure program
so currently if you have a
community college or a
university they can offer that
program
to and I I don't know if they
offered distance learning for
these programs or not because
I'm not an expert in that area
but candidate has to be enrolled
in a program in order to get any
alternative license.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Figueroa thank you for that L.
and I'm not concerned about the
alternate licensure that's
working throughout rural New
Mexico I'm concerned my question
is the adequacy of one a level
three sped teacher in most of
the rural districts I know we
haven't had any not one sped
teacher at one of my migrant
schools.
Has not had a sped teacher the
entire school year much less a
level three eight that teacher
so they would not be able to
complete the apprentice program
and I know that school district
would rather have someone with a
bachelor's and a master's and
someone in that classroom
supporting the students.
That has been properly trained
and and until today was
considered highly qualified and
completed out turn of licensure
who today would have to go find
another fifteen weeks
apprenticeship program somewhere
that to my knowledge does not
exist in my district on asking
about the adequacy of access to
the apprenticeship the six the
fifteen week apprenticeship
portion.
Your and Representative the this
would not apply to anyone who
currently holds alternative
licensure for so it's not
retroactive if if that's your
concern when it comes to filling
a space that is currently open
madam chair.
Hey it is it is adding the
opportunity to practice
not anywhere else licensure
currently works means that the
course work is being provided
because that is part of the
alternative licensure even
someone who has a bachelor's or
master's is doing the Bill
internet of licensure course
work around their teaching all
this as it is the opportunity to
practice and that is going to
take some creative work to make
sure every school in the
district can have that experts
teacher there for that fifteen
weeks that's why and madam chair
as I said we've been talking
with PED about how to utilize
the REC and the different higher
education institutions to
provide those master teachers
and make sure they're available
to do and not because.
Is this some of our smaller
schools don't have like you said
Representative and madam chair
any special ed teacher on site
here it doesn't matter what
level of licensure they don't
have one that because this is
such a severe shortage in our
state but doesn't mean that
someone who wants to go into
this field doesn't deserve it
and doesn't need the opportunity
to practice it is incumbent upon
us to make sure they have that
opportunity we have to find.
Madam chair I know we're doing
this if you needed to add
something to answer the
Representative question or not.
Representative
Chair.
Shares and Representative Dow I
would really appreciate
answer just for a moment the
issue that you bring up this so
important we lack.
Qualified special ed teachers
across the state and the
question I think that this bill
addresses is how we start to
build a teaching force.
That will stay in our classrooms
and both the research and our
experiences across the state
show us that if you are not well
prepared to teach in the area
you get assigned you are less
likely to stay so how can are
smaller districts and that was a
level two and level three tier
yes the people who go into our
classrooms leave within their
first three years before they're
even eligible to advance so I
think the representative and the
PED have a great solution to use
the REC in order to to provide
the support necessary during
this apprenticeship I want to
tell you that as somebody who
has a special ed degree and has
worked in special ed myself
I have found among my general
and colleagues that we have had
over years many conversations
about the fact that when they're
special ed students have needs
in our classrooms they are not
well equipped because they don't
have the background and the
experience to address the needs
of special ed kids who are in
general at settings and we would
have long conversations about
how to adapt instruction about
what disabilities are and how
they manifest in the classroom
and I just think in order to
really provide what the special
ed kids deserve this will be a
step toward that as well as a
step toward helping those
teacher stay in in every
district.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
Figueroa thank you for that
Ellen I think that the issue of
assuming that the local school
districts and that the school
boards and superintendents and
principals haven't put in place
a teacher mentor program or they
haven't put in place any sort of
other supports at each I guess
my issues with the term
apprenticeship who provides the
apprenticeship program what is
the printer program and as we
heard and other bills today a
good suggestion is the REC I
want I want to know who offers
the program and even if we pay
which this bill doesn't have
appropriation if we paid to put
as bad level three a teacher to
support at the R. E. C. in each
of the regional air the rural
areas so that there was a three
eighty that would take money
it's not addressed in the bill
it can't be assured in the bill
it's not happening in the bill.
So at this point it assumes that
the local school districts and
superintendents and principals
are not taking the necessary
steps to to mentor or to support
their new folks that are coming
at the turn of licensure I don't
know that to be true that
they're not getting in some
alternate who provides the
apprenticeship what how is that
delivered let's assume tomorrow
we have a surplus of level three
a sped teachers and there's one
in every REC I'm assuming that
they will be sharing they
wouldn't be face to face on
campus one per one to one.
And so that the if the
apprentice eight if the the
three tier existed every REC
let's just say that's what it
did what with the sixteen what
with the fifteen weeks look like
and who's providing the
apprenticeship where is the
printer ship he's come from.
Madam chair representative that
was a lot of pieces all at once
and madam chair I'd like to
clarify one of the back this is
not intended to imply that
districts are not providing
mentors or support districts are
desperate for these teachers and
they are doing everything they
can to support them and to keep
them but the one thing they
haven't been able to and to
provide at this point is that
practice supervised practice and
it is one on one as in this bill
it is one on one practice in the
classroom of a highly qualified
teacher who is teaching the
course while these candidates
learning how to teach the
students so it is in fact the
student teaching experience that
is part of our traditional
pathway we are going to find
this practice for students in
the alternative pathway because
it is so important.
and it is it is not a
replacement for mentorship
mentorship still has to happen
but mentorship usually to
provide is a teacher on site you
can go to with questions who may
or may not be able to come in
and observe you teaching your
kids and providing feedback that
might be part of the mentorship
program in line not mentorship
is is a widely variable terms
but EDD's not one on one
supervised practice teaching
with the back.
On your teaching
so that that's one and the
second question is how is it
going to be provided again I
will point you that is why the
affected date of this bill is
twenty twenty two because every
district in the state is
different needs and different
way to attack this issue in our
highly urban areas we've got
some ten teacher residency
programs in place that are
working toward this and that
might be the Avenue we go in the
future in the most remote remote
in rural places it's going a
little different is going to
have a highly different state.
When we talk to superintendents
madam chair and the at the about
rural districts.
A lot of different possibilities
if there is a teacher on site or
a future in New Year bye
District and alternative
licensure candidates mining
teach my
district the student teaching
this supervised practice
whatever you call it.
In that other teachers classroom
and that other district again
has Representative Lara
mentioned knowing that vision is
waiting for them is over here in
this district that's okay.
The
teacher record and finish their
alternative licensure pathway
and there but they have had that
opportunity to practice with
supervision and it is so crucial
and other the other opportunity
that has been discussed madam
chair to have that extra teacher
in the REC to go out and be the
supervised teacher record and
use that fifteen weeks of
practice supervision with the
Canada and we're all school site
that's another way to do it
There are a variety of ways to
go at this what we're doing in
this bill is saying that it's
important and we're gonna make
sure everyone in the alternative
pathways how's this opportunity
just like they do in the
traditional pathway.
And then.
As we are figuring it out over
the next year will know what we
need to come back with and say
okay we're going to this
university in this place wants
to do teacher residencies and
handle it this way this district
wants to do it a different way
will know how the state needs to
support because we have time to
make the plan is going to work
in their district thanks madam
chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Figueroa so in your mind this
person this three eight teacher
would be hired by the RAC and
they would travel to the rural
school and move move throughout
the rural school to help support
the teachers pursuing L. turn of
lights and I and my mind up or
that could be one scenario and
so the are you see with me
appropriation to hire that
person and then how much is the
apprenticeship program going to
cost and is that something that
the districts pay for.
You madam chair and
representative again districts
will handle it differently I
think you doctor burns Steen
talked about the way in P. S. as
in district has decided to
handle it and their need is so
great that they have managed to
scrape together funds and I
believe they paid the residents
they can't it is going through
the alternative licensure
program who are practicing with
the teacher and maintain them a
stipend and it is a measly
stipend is ten thousand dollars
for the year
but like I said they have twice
as many applications as the of
spaces for because so many
people want that opportunity to
practice in a rural district in
my different and then in
conversation with one
superintendent we talk about
right now when you hire an
alternative licensure teacher
you have forty thousand dollars
a year because they come in at a
level one licensure well as
industry under this system my
state we're gonna pay you a long
term subs wage.
Many with benefits maybe not I
mean they have to figure out
what's going to work we're gonna
pay you considerably less to be
student teacher or practice
teacher under this master
teacher well the classroom and
that still is waiting for you.
Has a long term sub so too long
term assessed either he's still
don't add up to forty one
thousand so for the district is
still financially feasible
that's one way for them to do it
We're gonna we're gonna have to
be creative we're gonna have to
let the districts figure out
what works for them and the
situations that they have madam
chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Figueroa and by the way I don't
think ten thousand dollars type
and is the Lee at all.
In the early childhood world the
state and that we give early
childhood people in the in the
ECECD world for doing the same
thing is two hundred fifty
dollars a semester not even ten
cents an hour if they're working
full time you know it's so ten
thousand great but it not
everybody participate in those
programs because rural districts
don't have the scale of
operation it sounds like
Albuquerque public schools and
had which a lot of the members
on this committee serve on has
something that works for
Albuquerque public schools and
it sounds like over whatever
period of time that they have
been doing this they've fact
figure out how to get fifty
people through this program but
I don't think those are the
numbers in rural New Mexico I
also didn't hear the
superintendents association
speak in favor of the bill and
with the fact that we have to
find three a teachers in the
fact that we have to figure out
how to what this apprenticeship
program is I don't know the cost
I just I I think it needs more
conversation and I appreciate
the chairman being so willing to
make sure that we fully that
bills before they leave this
committee I'm thank you Mr
chairman.
Members of the committee have
questions.
Representative I do have some
questions my first question is
some of the people among the
attendees talked about the
possibility of level two
teachers coming from an
elementary school where the
majority of our special
education teachers were
excellent but we're level two
would you consider not saying
that it has to be under a level
three eighty cents many rural
districts do not have three a
sped teacher.
Madam chair point and and
knowing many level to licensure
teacher special ed and other
content areas myself who are
excellent I would consider
making that change.
Thank you representative I think
that's important in order to
address the concerns throughout
the state my second question is
on page three I believe between
lines four to fifteen
While taking related and inter
woven course work in a post
secondary educational
institution so that would imply
a residence kind of model or
cohort model that would be
doable at larger districts is
that correct.
To the course work that is
currently required on the
alternative pathways licensure
is just spelled out it is not
something new so it is done and
a variety of institutions across
the state anything that
currently has an alternative
licensure pathway.
It.
Your question is.
This may be a question for
doctor burn sting.
I.
The nature of rural schools
can a district request a waiver
from the requirement that a
person has to have the
apprenticeship or or supervised
internship whatever you want to
call it because because there
are districts where it would be
impossible to carry out the
mandate.
And a waiver exist.
Madam chair I believe you'd
directed that question to doctor
burns stays on a letter answer
and but I would point out of the
bill doesn't specify necessarily
win in the alternative licensure
pathway the apprenticeship or
the practice teaching practice
needs to take place it doesn't
necessarily have to take place
in the first fifteen weeks
doctor burns State.
Thank you.
Representative is and members of
the committee I am not an expert
on what is able to be wavered
and what is not but I can say
that there are many creative
ways that school districts can
work with their partners for
example their partners are you
see to find this kind of an
internship so that practical
experience necessary to be
successful with special
appearances available so
whether or not the actual
sixteen weeks can be waived or
whether or not they can ask for
a waiver to have a level two
person B.
the teacher who provides the
internship those are all things
that I am not sure in terms of.
how to PED does and does not
grant waivers.
Thank you is there anybody who
can address that.
Okay.
Thank you I just feel it's
important Representative.
That in the process of
flexibility that exist I I do
want to say representative that
I want to thank you for putting
the start date and twenty twenty
two
that's excellent I do see that
Mr saying from PED.
Is.
And I wonder.
Mr saying if you can speak to
the waiver question and if you
can if you can raise your hand.
Okay Mr saying that can you
address the waiver question.
So madam chair can you hear me
yes.
Okay great so madam chair.
Representative I just want to
clarify the question we're
asking whether or not PED would
be able to grant waivers
exceptional waivers essentially
if if the school district
couldn't meet the requirements
of this bill is that the
question yes that's correct.
So so generally speaking I think
what I would say is that PED
would probably need some sort of
explicit permission or
provisions in the bill in order
to to wave
provisions in some in some
statutes obviously there's
there's some provisions that
would allow us to weigh that
under certain circumstances.
As far as I remember this bill
doesn't currently have to be
able to waive any sort of
statutory requirements that it
would need.
Official permission essentially.
Thank you Mr saying this so in
other words it would have to be
a statute tear a statutory
requirement with in the
legislation that would allow it
if the district was unable to
meet the requirement madam chair
Yes I believe so otherwise we we
could probably grants exceptions
to a lot of things with I don't
and I doubt that that's the
legislature's intent.
Thank you Mr saying that.
Representative I would just ask
that.
That be in the bill either
allowing a highly qualified
level two tier
and allowing a waiver and
exceptional situations
where it's impossible for a
district to meet the
requirement.
I would.
Ask you to consider that and
move being the bill on.
And that's the extent of my our
question.
Okay we do have a motion for a
new at madam chair so since you
could suggest a number of of
changes I'm an asset we rolled
this bill over as well and not
accept it because you suggested
a few changes Mr sent out from
PED was talking about language
that may need to be included to
give that sort of flexibility
and then on additional amendment
may be needed to cover your
initial point so NASA we roll
this over please bring those
amendments so that we can hear
this as soon as possible but
that'll be something that we do
not accept at this time so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
So we are going to roll it over
I apologize Representative
I think it needs to be addressed
based on to our questions from
other panel members so we will
roll over and with that we will
move on to health bill eighty
four committee substitute.
Will return did share Romero.
Thank you madam chair all right
so I'm.
Representative Lente so house
bill eighty four so we've
already gone through public
testimony we've already gone
through the original bill also
We have a committee substitute
for house bill eighty four is
that correct yes Mister chairman
okay so we won't need to
recapped anything except for the
changes that you've made in the
committee substitute okay.
Absolutely Mr Chairman if you
don't mind I have to be experts
that will help me answer any
more detailed questions if that
is allowable.
Please okay and those of you
when he's reading off your names
if you would do it slowly and
one by one when Representative
when they read your name please
raise your hand in the attendees
list and I can promote you we
have doctor Christine sams.
Dr Christine Senators next we
have Representative informer
share this Education Committee
Rick Miera.
And then finally we have doctor
on your rooted.
Dr hundred those are the three
Mr chairman that I'd like to
have.
Brought in just please.
Okay.
We there are more if you would
raise your hand again please.
All right there you go.
You should be in as leader
Merioles.
He's still there for some reason
promote ten list.
There you go all right Mr
chairman I have one last person
in case a legal question comes
up Melissa Candelaria if you
would please Melissa kind of
area raise your hand.
And that's the New Mexico
there's a set of long poverty
right so fund that account you
would add your name please for
future reference.
Okay so if you could walk it can
I have a the.
A motion for the committees and.
I'll move it for discussion
Representative Lente place thank
you very much Mr chairman so I
want to first thank you the
chairman and the committee for
encouraging me to to move in and
improve the bill with the staff
members of the alias team I
believe that the committee said
is a poll it's integrity into
the substance of the reason why
we're pushing this piece of
legislation but increase those
technical changes to help make
clear the intent of these bills
and so I want to first thank Dr
director gradual maybe she's a
doctor would director good deal
as well as a Mr Simon for their
time both last week Wednesday
and Thursday to sit with myself
and the team from the tribal
educationalist and make those
technical changes so we were
able to clean up the bill and
care for the bill and and again
allow me to recap that this bill
is again about equity in
education funding the goal is to
make the SCG funding more
equitable targeted and find that
local control and so within the
committee seventh self it
creates a clarity and how we can
help to achieve this type of
goal and so I want to highlight
the very important changes that
were made from the original bill
to the creating committee
substitute the first is the
committee substitute removes the
early childhood education units
from this bill which will reduce
the fiscal impact.
The second part is that it
clarifies that the native
language program units are for
distribution to tribes and not
to schools I know there was a
question on is this double
dipping or not but again this I
think this clarifies that and
that this funding will allow of
tries to expand language
learning within their own
communities and this can also
supplement school based
institutions well restrictions
I'm sorry.
The third part is that the
committee substitute specifies
how at risk program units will
be calculated for school
districts and for tribes and
really quickly Mr chairman I
like to focus on the third point
here for the at risk index
because this addresses the main
question that you Mr Chairman
rays at our last meeting and so
the LFC staff suggested to
separate the asked the at risk
calculation for the schools from
the at risk calculation for
tribes.
What we've done is that through
a separate at risk factor for
native American students hell
yes the staff thought that this
would avoid complicating the
existing at risk formula and I
agree that the simpler we can
make this bill better and so at
this point this will allow us to
clear for the tribe's only
tribes are only eligible for at
risk program units generated by
native American students not by
the other at risk student groups
and so for the new factor the
native American students provide
an equal number of program it's
to school districts and tribal
governments to be eligible for
these native American program
units of the school districts
and the tribes must provide that
programs.
Are aligned with in fact the
Indian Education Act which will
enable us to try to these funds
directly to the native American
students and if I need to
conclude.
The committee substitute makes a
number of other technical
amendments suggested by the LTSE
staff I will go into detail but
I can if the chair so would wish
but again we have a number of
experts with me should they want
to go into detail as well with
that Mr chairman and committee
members I was stand for any
questions.
Right questions from committee.
I look so excited.
Mr chair with two passed the
amended bill
of the bill that's not
appropriate motion we can have
the appropriate motion.
I do not
I'm sorry yes.
A do not pass on who do not
thank you I move a do not pass
on.
Bill eighty four and to do
passed from the amended bill.
Committee substitute for house
bill eighty four.
The teacher Mr chair.
And also I can that great thank
you so much so so before I I ate
I take that motion from
committee thank you all for for
really working collaboratively
on this I think it's super super
important that that certainly up
bill of this scale and this
magnitude and I think the
sentiment from the committee is
is truly refined and really
looked at so I appreciate you
all on making a commitment
certainly our staff Ellie as C.
and and and you Representative
Lente and ensure you are experts
here
one thing that I I do want to
flag because and I mentioned
this during our impacted debate
consent looking into the future
what we're certainly going to be
having to really delve into a
lot of the nitty gritty of fall
our state equalization guarantee
because so much of of the bills
that we do have coming to us
seek to re distributed it re
directed redefine it in various
ways and and that's something
that is going to affect very
broadly our entire school system
and headed into the future and
and that's something that I
certainly don't take very
lightly and I know that you all
share the a sentiment
in terms of of.
Of expertise so I mean I think
we all are fairly new most of us
have come in in the past ten
years and it's like we tell
people and in the legislature is
that this being a a part time
gig for all of us is is not much
time but the impacts that we
that we seek to create can be
great and are great and scale
but I think certainly this is is
a welcome addition and certainly
a welcome discussion to be
having as far as our SCG and
thank you representative for for
this discussion in your
attention to it as well as your
experts and and certainly are
a legislative education study
committee staffer for working on
on fine tuning at my request
this this language so with that
except the motion for a do not
pass on house bill eighty four
but it to pass and Committee
substitute for House Bill you
for Representative Trujillo
second by Representative Roybal
coming into madam secretary
called the roll on that motion
please.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
No.
Representative Dowell no.
Representative.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative lane no.
Representative Lara here's.
Representative let that yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative who are Baca my
at all yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative vice chair
Garrett yes.
Chairman yes.
I am vote two of ten to four is
the to pass as the past.
All right so you have a do not
pass and has ability for but a
D. passant Committee substate
for House ability for thank you
Representative Lente thank you
for your work thank you director
dental thank you experts thank
you Joey I'm so with that that
concludes our meeting we will be
reconvening at eight o'clock on
Wednesday morning and just
anybody had any comments
questions or concerns.
Okay want to hear more bills
take one off the table just for
fun now okay all right have a
nice rest of your day everybody
we will see you on Wednesday.
Do you want to meet North
Representative.
On that.
Merry.
I'm gonna have a meeting
afterwards Sir now do do you
have built for one state.
I do want to send them to me.
Send them to me.
I think we should meet okay so
I'll text him and ask him if you
can
okay good okay how would you
give me okay.
