Representative.
Last year there here.
We do have a quorum all right so
we have a quorum good morning
everybody I hope you all are
doing well Representative Nibert
who has a couple other bills in
other committees this morning so
if it's okay with the committee
if we're able to go first.
With one third being made aware.
All right.
Good partial communication.
So co sponsored it there.
This is.
As.
All right so when you all are
ready good morning good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we're here today with
a very the gentleman general
grizzle from New Mexico military
institute the star screen of the
self list ladies and gentleman
in New Mexico military institute
was established in eighteen
ninety one and it's every to
enrollment is right at one
thousand students of the
students come from around the
world with two does include
forty five states a US
territories and thirty five
foreign countries nations Mr
chairman what we are seeking to
do here is having the
legislative scholarship which
there are a hundred and twelve
of that have been established I
just program payment of have
been established and we are so
much wanting to ensure that the
showing people that do go there
under the high school program
can stay if they want to through
the scholarships that will
afford them the bit availability
to go to the junior college
joining me today is
representative Greg Nibert and
Greg I'd like for you to just
thank the to see this is very
before we turn it over to
general crystal.
Mr chairman committee that's
exactly right all this bill does
is allow the General Motors
scholarship recipients to
receive four years of
scholarships during their high
school education and then two
additional years if they choose
to go to the junior college
right now the scholarship is
limited to four years so we're
just taking that cap off so they
can do all six years at the New
Mexico military institute if
they so choose thank you Mr
chair Mr chairman members of the
committee at this time I would
like to live general.
General crystal to start General
levels of thanks for a little
bit further and to of what we're
trying to accomplish here to
help the shown people up.
It's general.
Chairman members the committee
and of that would be in great.
I think the three star general.
Thank you very much appreciate
the opportunity to visit with
you this morning about this we
because of the nose it was
initiated in nineteen eighty
nine and two things have
occurred during my tenure one
was initially that the the
scholarship was limited to your
this and if you need to use it
and it just didn't get used and
when I got here and we saw that
we only using about seventy of
the scholarships each year to
working with the Legislature we
have an agreement to you still
control that till July first of
each year and then after that we
can use place for L. Mexico to
meet all the criteria since then
we've been able to use all one
hundred and twelve every year
what that has done is a lot of
bring it on again Roger we had
about twenty percent
representation of the court from
the state of New Mexico now that
averages about one third about
thirty three percent of the
cadets are from the state of New
Mexico it is because of programs
like this that have allowed us
to be able to do that so as we
look at going forward we have
very few students that state for
that fifteen a six year after
they graduate from high school
the one of the reasons is always
financial and so if we can open
those last two years of the next
you know the bill does not ask
for any funding disability to do
that we believe will have a
tremendous impact on retention
so that we can keep those
students here if you at the nose
now to the opportunity
scholarship didn't they will
have a free education to stay
here in the state of New Mexico
and the work of the the nose
come first and it pays fifty
percent of the total cost within
the Mexico military institute
the opportunity scholarship is
slash dollars show this relieves
the pressure on the phone off to
go shoot well if you will
because we're going to pay half
of the through the nose
scholarship to again.
And for mentors for us and we
see this is a great opportunity
to it's not that tracked more
students from the state of New
Mexico I don't know how many
young people coming into the
ninth tenth grader really
looking five six years into the
future maybe the parents are but
when they reach that high school
graduation time it's a great
opportunity to remind if they
can continue their education
right there that
basically at no cost in the
state should the nose picture
fifty percent of the cost of
attending it and then my and
that's just not distinguish
between tuition or books or.
It should be percent of the
total cost and we're very proud
of that we're able to maintain
the the cost for in state
students to attend New Mexico
military institute for the
entire year that sixteen
thousand dollars and that
includes room board tuition fees
books and the uniforms witcher
an expensive part of the show
fifty percent that's paid for
right off the bat so this is a
very important bill we
appreciate your support on it
and I'd be glad to answer any
questions I could about in MMI
or the bill.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of one thing that that
Richard Knowles was born
December twentieth nineteen
sixty.
He served in the one hundred
ninety six light improve
treatment infantry brigade.
And during the Vietnam War he
also served as a representative
in the state of New Mexico for
sixteen years he served from
nineteen eighty three to
nineteen ninety.
He passed away September the
eighteenth two thousand thirteen
and he is buried he was called
Russell is some and he is buried
at Arlington National Cemetery
this is a great way to honor
this man who understood the
importance of helping these
young people become leaders in
our nation and Mr chairman
members of the committee at this
time we will stand for any
questions you may have.
Thank you so much for that so we
will go to the audience if
you're online and you support
house bill one forty five if
you'd please indicate very hand.
Those in our audiences in
support of house bill one forty
five that wish to speak if you
would raise your hand okay.
Please have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning.
Chair members of the.
The committee I'm Steve guys Mr
director with that New Mexico
and we stand in support of this
bill.
The time we invest in our case
in our students we know it will
pay off for future we thank the
sponsor for bringing portability
and we ask that you consider.
Thank you great thank you any
other sport in the audience
there's a online opposition to
house bill one forty five.
All right we will come to
committee representative field.
Thank.
That thank you Mr chair I just
want to put in a little plug for
any money into regular kids a
little bit
Our oldest within MMI and was
accepted to west point he turned
it down with the Georgetown he
graduated from Georgetown got a
law degree from Duke and went to
work for Chris Christie
immediately out of college of
his first job he said several
other pretty impressive ones
after that.
Our second son with the NMAA
money was accepted into Texas a
and M. graduated with a degree
in engineering is worked all
over the world as an engineer
my daughter in law also within
NMAA money has the three
beautiful grandchildren right
now so I think that must be the
place to go.
I appreciate the good job you
all of the the in the thank you
Mr.
Chairman for indulging me that.
Thank you representative
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
being there General grizzle but
see again I just have a couple
of questions
I've had one person on the west
side of Albuquerque request
support for the nose scholarship
how people find out about it.
The server was managed if all
over our website if you go there
and and look into a financial
aid tab we list all the things
that we can do to support and
help someone did need financial
aid coming in a minute hi this
Forster the house and Senate go
we we provide you a packet the
in most of your procedures if
you had a candidate from within
your district right now those of
you that don't will be working
with you the effect I'll bring
some more information of this
week for the the local post
office here to distribute to you
that will explain to you how to
the turned in an application if
you someone approaches you from
within your district finally
what we do is after that July
one if we don't have a match do
you have turned in or we have
matched up within our district
your district then will contact
you and say this person fully
qualifies would you allow us to
use your scholarship for this
person so we work very hard to
match those of the starting page
which you can we would hope that
you are using this incentive
within your district to attract
students and then if not then we
proactively give you names that
have applied that are fully
acceptable and meet our
admissions criteria.
Mr chair just one more quick
question to you reach out to
ROTC leaders around the state a
high school offices didn't do do
any so that those counselors and
people working with people who
already have interest in the
military find out that it even
exists Mr Representative Garrett
absolutely I our biggest point
of contact is to school
counselors we host fares at the
institute where we invite the
counselors to come or and or
bring students and we actively
go out to their schools when
they're hosting college fairs
and opportunities for us to do
that so yes ma'am they're
probably our biggest point of
contact is the counselors at the
schools okay thank you very
much.
Thank you without further
questions what's the will of the
committee.
Mr chairman with the pass of the
one forty five all right so we
had a two passed motion by
Representative land I heard
Representative Chatfield
seconded the motion is there any
opposition to the past motion.
Thing and we have to pass on
house bill one forty five thank
you
thank you Mr chairman I'd be not
doing my job if I didn't remind
everyone of one thing a key
place billion but that is it as
a representative example of this
scholarship and what it does.
Diego Pavia Mexico state with an
intimate much to the on the
scholarship and when you
graduate high school we were the
only school in the nation at all
for that young man a scholarship
to play sports for us and if you
know we took our team to the
national championship the New
Mexico state to the bowl game it
is a brilliant student teacher
four point student will so that
that's.
The example of how we use of
scholarships for students in the
state of New Mexico all right I
appreciate that thank you all
congratulations and moving on to
the floor all right
Representative Lara please Hey
House Bill to twenty six.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
House Bill to twenty six
I hate to say this was a very
simple bill.
All it does is so so the the
issue that we're trying to
address here and I want to also
given by my my expert
opportunity to introduce himself
but the issue that we're
addressing here is a schools
school districts and charter
schools receive X. amount of
money to purchase instructional
materials.
Anything above and beyond that.
If they use operational funds of
these cash reserves those are
subject to up to the procurement
code to purchase the same
materials.
We example we had a K. twelve of
language arts adoption last
year.
Of my school district had to put
into issues an additional almost
six hundred thousand dollars to
make sure that all of our
students receive the materials
that they have so we went above
and beyond what what the the the
funding that we have for search
materials another thing I would
like to mention is.
Other than instruction materials
fun we also pay from the source
materials for dual credit.
So that's an additional money
that we have set aside two parts
of those credit instruction
materials for the for students
so this bill basically is going
to allow us the school districts
to purchase these instruction
materials the approved
instructional materials from
PED.
Without going to the procurement
code.
And with that I would like my
expert witness to introduce
myself.
Good morning Mr chairman and
representatives
I think that the key issue with
this bill to consider is copied
US copyright law.
I'm not a copyright law expert.
But I do know that the US
copyright law protects the
copyright owners.
Of to exclusively sell their
textbooks books instructional
materials.
And so we're working within the
copy US copyright law.
And that sets up essentially a
single source for purchasing
textbooks and instructional
materials.
So it's essentially.
It's essentially impossible to
purchase X. instructional
materials so district State X.
instructional materials have
gone through the state review
process.
Our level to level three
teachers have reviewed those
materials they've met the state
standards their research based.
the culturally and
linguistically relevant and
they're on the state adopted
less.
Well then the district
identifies their needs.
And based on their needs they've
identified a set of materials
from the state adopted list.
And they've aligned with the
state standards as I've said.
And so they've identified those
for their students.
Well they can't purchase those
materials from a different
publisher.
Publisher Z. cannot publish and
sell publisher wise materials.
So we're limited with copyright
law and so to me that is the
central issue if there were
multiple of publishers who can
purchase or sell the same
materials then it.
Make sense and reasonable that
they should go through
procurement law.
Procurement code regulations but
since that's not possible.
and we want our students to have
the highest quality
instructional materials that are
aligned with the state grade
level standards research based
culturally and linguistically
relevant then.
That I think that this bill
makes sense.
Thank Mr chair with that we
sample questions right thank you
for the presentation all right
so we'll go to our audience my
left hand side those in support
of house bill two twenty six
would you please indicate by
raising your hand if you wish to
speak.
Any support on my left hand
side.
All right we'll go to my right
hand side there's a sport that
wish to speak all right we'll
start here we may welcome you
have a two minutes.
Members of the committee will
inure to the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico someone's
Association and members of the
committee we support this bill
is going to remove a person
tosses and streamline the
process.
The help provide schools the
flexibility to get materials.
We provide great instructions
for fiscal sponsor for.
Introducing this past year
favorable.
Thank you others in support
please come to it.
Members of the committee I'm.
The secretary of the Public
Education Department we stand in
support of this bill because of
the different pots of money that
instruction materials can flow
through for example if it goes
through categorical
instructional materials money
it's not it doesn't have to go
through the procurement code
processes but if we go through
the SCG it does and actually
schools need the ability to
purchase that textbook that they
choose without going through an
RFP process for one money and
then not going through it for
another because the PED had
already put it on the list
chosen by
high quality instructional
teachers and administrators the
other thing is I would submit
that we want our educators to
have the opportunity to choose
the materials that meet the
needs of their students and that
is a very different process than
an RFP process it's really
looking to see if there
culturally and linguistically
relevant for that community if
they meet the standards and if
they're high quality so it's a
very different process it's not
it's not.
It is a selection process but
it's different than the
procurement code selection if
that helps to describe and if
they're purchasing out of two
pots of money having two
different processes is extremely
burdensome and cumbersome and
this really supports getting
both in classrooms more quickly
with teachers and students thank
you great thank you others in
the same row alright we'll go to
the next for those that wish to
speak in support right the next
room please.
Mr chairman stand around for the
superintendents association Mr
chairman when we change the
funding to the state
equalization guarantee from
between a lot of fun.
We created a procurement issue
and that's what this addresses
we support this as a necessary
change so that we can re open if
you will all of that procurement
process you for the rest of the
arguments I won't reiterate
those we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and ask for you to vote
in favor of.
Thank you others I wish to speak
in support of my right hand
side.
All right.
Opposition opposition to house
bill two twenty six in the room
online.
It's my time so okay welcome
back to Canadian Canadian
questions Representative.
Mr chair I don't have any
questions we have comments you
know I've been on this committee
for a long time but prior to
that lobbied with the American
federation of teachers it was
always such a hassle to try to
get our.
Text books that were vetted in
and culturally appropriate for
our students you have to jump
through a lot of hoops to get
them there was a lot of
It seems that the there were a
lot of barriers in the process
and I think for the first time
taking away this specific
barrier that exists now will
really help students I mean
teachers of actually take a lot
more responsibility and and
getting books and reading them
that and making sure that
they're appropriate for the
classroom I think that that is
huge I would have loved to have
seen more culturally cultural
the aware books in my classroom
thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Mr chair and thank you
Representative I have just just
a if you someone can just
briefly go through the process
so of purchasing how how that's
done the review and purchasing
of the of textbooks that's very
important for me because in
order for us to get to the
systemic changes that we need to
make Mr chair representative
we've got to ensure that from
the through the lowest level of
and every level that we that are
involved in the processes of
selection the text books are
actually.
Fulfilling the the Yazzie
Martinez
Recommendations of what types of
books are culturally and
linguistically
important and really Mr chair
it's my opinion that
the teachers are very much
involved in this and so I kind
of want to see what that process
is if you could Mr Chairman
representative Mr chairman I'd
like to defer to Mister burns.
Mr chair representative I'm
sorry for it to identify myself
my name's Anthony burns and I'm
the director of the
instructional materials bureau
at the public education
department
So giving you a little bit of
information about the review and
then the procurement process I
know more about the review
process and how material makes
it on the adopted list
and so that process starts with
content experts in the subject
area that's being reviewed.
Of we
we work with content experts
across the state.
To help develop the review
criteria within the overview
rubrics.
And so the once those criteria
are developed we publish those
revert X. for publishers and
content creators to
have information about how their
materials will be reviewed.
Those criteria include all of
the state content standards for
that subject area.
It also they also include
cultural quicker for cultural
linguistic relevant so they're
approximately fourteen criteria
for the force cultural and
linguistic relevance
and there are other criteria
such as assessments
technology those sorts of things
are within the review reverts.
And so
Prior to our New Mexico teacher
teams reviewing the materials.
We
We provide those what we recruit
right the reserve of full
recruitment process for level
two and level three teachers
that's written into statute to
have to be level two or level
three teachers
In that content area.
once they've once we've
recruited the teams we provide
them with extensive training to
review instructional materials
for those criteria and for the
standards.
And then.
Of the for the teachers even
we'll see the materials they
have to be determined to be
research based so has it been a
an experimental study on the
effectiveness effectiveness of
those materials
have they been reviewed by an
independent organization like at
reports those sorts of things so
once it's been determined to be
research based than our New
Mexico teachers review the
materials.
Subsequent to the review.
they have to have met
the threshold of eighty percent
or higher on the reviewer Burke.
And then there adopted at the
state level.
What's our doctors at the state
level then we have to rent to
six year agreement with those
publishers.
To provide those materials at
the lowest price in the country.
Also make them available through
the state depository.
And and other assurances.
and so that allows the smallest
districts in the state to have
access to those materials at the
lowest price possible and they
don't have to negotiate where
are larger districts have the
purchasing power to negotiate
this levels the field for all of
our
districts across the state so
whether you have a hundred
students or forty thousand
students.
You're still getting the same
price the lowest price in the
country.
So that's the review and
adoption process and then we
post that list generally in
August.
And then districts than begin
their local.
vetting that adoption process
that includes
families and community on
teachers and that sort of thing
so most of them are looking at
are reviews that are tier teams
have conducted and then there
are.
Going through the vetting
process at their local level.
And that takes place generally
in the early fall and into the
spring.
And then they've decided on
these are needs for students
these are the materials that are
available and then the narrow
that down.
And then they've maybe bring in
their tier teams to review those
materials using rubrics or
criteria that they've
established for their the needs
of their students.
And then.
They decide on a material.
And then that goes before
generally they're bored.
The board may approve it.
And then they will then purchase
those materials for the next
school year.
The they would then submit their
budget to PED.
We've we've included in the
uniform charter chart of
accounts new codes that include
instructional materials.
so that when they're using their
operational funding they can
they can submit their budgets
and track those.
mints through to operational
fund.
and so then they purchase the
materials but the questions have
come up recently about going
through a put RFP process and so
that's why
why this bill has been
introduced is to clear that up
make it very clear and allow
districts to select the highest
quality materials without of
concern that there are breaking
procurement law but also
following US copyright law.
So Mr Chairman to.
This point of clarification of
Mr chair and who actually at the
very beginning state stages you
talk about review rubrics who
come who develops those review
Rubik's so the instructional
materials bureau.
Of sorry Mr chair.
Representative.
the instructional materials
bureau.
in a consultation with
bureaus the content bureaus at
the PED's so if it's for math
then we will consult with the
math and science bureau.
We consult with them they
provide us also with
contacts who are content experts
throughout the state to then
develop the criteria within the
review rubric so these are
identified experts in that
content area
that we then work with over the
period of months to develop
those criteria thank you in the
final clarification is question
Mr chair and representative is
when you say that there vetted
at the local level all is within
the instructional.
Material guidelines that the
state is providing through these
experts in the various fields of
The the various educate of
teaching.
Models and feels is that correct
so the local so I I'm trying to
figure out so if there's a local
district school district Mr
chair that disagrees.
With the materials that are
provided by the PED is being the
culturally linguistic the
appropriate materials.
To be used.
Can't is there can they disagree
or do they have to find a way in
which to
accommodate or comply with the
PED guidelines.
Mr Chairman representative
yes districts can
can identify the materials that
best suit their needs for their
students at the local level so
they are not limited to purchase
the materials that are on the
state adopted list so if they've
determined that their students
Require particularly
material then they're not
limited in purchasing those from
the state adopt a list so the
having moved the funding to the
SCG that has allowed greater
flexibility for districts.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative it I think we'll
probably have to have more
discussion down the road on what
happens if in various scenarios
it's not appropriate for this
discussion right now we're just
dealing with this but you
answered all the questions I
needed as it pertains to this so
I appreciate Mr chair
representative thank you thank
you Representative gear.
Thank you Mr chair
representative there's excuse me
two questions.
Excuse me that were brought up
one of the LFC analysis and one
of the FIR
just want to ask you about it on
page one of the L. E. S. C. us
substantial substantive
substantive issues at the
bottom.
It says by creating an exemption
to the procurement code in and
there's also a Senate bill about
the procurement
Mexico that puts some guard
rails on what we're talking
about it says H. B. two twenty
six may reduce administrative
requirements for both school
districts in the state
purchasing office.
Although by removing competitive
sourcing for instructional
material purchases two to six
may result.
In a higher potential for
inefficiency and misuse of
public funding because vendors
would no longer be required to
compete in offering discounts to
school districts and charter
schools and either with a
central group of professionals
of be looking at it help what's
your response to that and and
I'm thinking especially of
digital materials because for us
teachers like it seems like
every month a whole slew of you
know these are wonderful
evidence based standards based
digital online things that are
going to save your students
lives so.
You can just respond to that
concern that's been brought up
value the LFC it analysis Mr
chairman vice chair to us on the
surface just finances on
services law passed over to Mr
burns so
The school districts already we.
We work on a very large as the
center of report that goes to
the PED on the purchases that
would rate which includes titles
ISBN numbers how how many were
purchased how much it was in
addition to that we also include
the the budget portion of the X.
amount of money was allocated we
spent this much and so there are
reporting requirements I I'm not
sure where that came for this
for this came from but there are
district reporting requirements
that we have to submit to Pat on
on a yearly basis and and with
that you have Mister burns if
you have anything else I
thought.
Mr chair representative
So currently there are no.
There are no competing bids
rents because of US copyright
law you can't
you know a district selecting X.
materials.
Publishers can't bid to sell X.
materials or X. textbook or X.
digital material because that's
governed by US copyright law
they would be in violation if
they sold
materials that they don't own
the copyright to it would be in
violation of copyright law so
there is no competing bids
currently.
This so
and the efficiencies I I would
see would be increased
as as a deputy secretary
Christos mentioned right now the
potentially there could be
multiple buckets of funding for
instructional materials.
and if they're in the
instructional material funds
then currently in statute
they're exempt from going
through the procurement office.
However if there are currently
currently as as it it's statute
is.
If it it's funded through SCG
they would have to go through
the procurement office.
which creates many
inefficiencies and particularly
when it comes to instructional
materials and you're purchasing
from for the upcoming school
year time is essential.
and it's not possible to get
three bids or two budget for a
set of instructional materials
because of US copyright law.
Thank you that's going to be my
only question.
Thank you Representative result.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank you Representative Lauren
your expert witness for being
here today I'm glad that
explanation for copyright law
came about because that is an
integral part of what we're
talking about here Mr chairman
of Representative Lara in
reading through some of the
notices the areas that have
marked on the L. E. S. C.
analysis on page two.
At the top of the page is
talking about some of the
procurement codes and central
purchasing of there's no
separate exemption here.
And it includes digital and
print instructional materials as
well as designated PED improved
instructional material
depositories can you tell me how
that comes about.
Mr chair of Representative I'd
like to defer to Mister
personal.
Mr chair representative.
The instructional material
depository
is mentioned in statute.
and it is required when when the
funding for instructional
materials was going through the
instructional material fund.
it provided for private schools
to
to have access to instructional
materials allocations and so it
requires in statute that private
schools purchase their
instructional materials from the
state instructional material
depository.
So there has been a depository
it just since that statute was
written I don't know how long
but it's been decades.
And that depositories in
Albuquerque.
It creates efficiencies for
districts and charter schools
it it allows them to purchase
their adopted materials through
one source instead of from
perhaps multiple publishers.
so then they get that in one
invoice they create one purchase
order and it creates an easier
method for them to inventory
those materials receive those
materials our those sorts of
things it also insurers because
we've entered into agreements
with the publishers for six
years that are on the adoption
list.
That those materials that are on
the adopt a list are sold
through the state depository.
That that ensures that the
lowest price is being offered to
all of our districts and charter
schools.
Because that's a requirement in
our agreements with those
publishers to be on the adopted
list.
Where is we know that like most
things and this is chair of
publishing that they take annual
price increases.
So if they don't purchase it
direct from the depository
there's a chance that they could
be getting a higher price by
going directly to the publisher.
Okay I appreciate that
information Mr chairman and
representative of.
But everything has to be
approved through PED and to have
to have this PED come up with
the.
Information that they need to
make sure that it's relevant to
the areas that are most
important to what schools are
being taught.
Such as the major major.
Mr Chairman representative again
we develop
Well the materials are first
determined to be research based
and once they are determined to
be research based.
We then work with content
experts in those subject areas
and we also work with experts
such as our language and culture
bureau at PED
to determine what criteria the
need to be in our review Wirth
Brooks so those
those comprehensive full course
of study materials are then
reviewed for all of those
criteria so that could take so
for example say were our review
teams are reviewing a third
grade math set of materials.
One team of teachers that could
take them up to three days to
review those materials for all
of the criteria all of the
standards within the overview
report so it's twenty four hours
looking at one grade level set
of materials so this process.
As arrived at a very
look of high quality list of
instructional materials.
Okay Mister chairman thank you
very much for that explanation
there I wouldn't sure how this
is going to work and I'm sure
that the native American
students the same scrutiny
applies to what they are.
Being issued is that correct yes
so this is a statewide of course
overview so that I'm sorry Mr
chair representative
So this process is a statewide
review so it tries to encompass
all of the needs across the
entire state.
Mr Chairman representative also
under the legislative education
study committee analysis of page
three of the bill down at the
bottom this is the adopted
multiple list of instructional
materials created to share with
the public was the summary view
is to to is completed and I'm
sure the December review is to
institute is directed under the
direction of the PED am I
understanding that correctly Mr
chairman.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
that's correct okay the summer
review institute is established
in statute okay and it is the
process of where we convene
teachers from across the state
so for example for this upcoming
review we anticipate about a
hundred and twenty five teachers
from across the state will come
together
just for about a two to two and
a half weeks period.
Review the materials.
Using the review revert X..
And then
subsequent to that and based
upon those review team scores.
Those materials either make it
on to the adopted list if the
score eighty percent or higher.
Or are not adopted and don't
make it on to the adopted list
okay thank you very much for
that explanation Mr Chairman
whenever you're talking about a
hundred and twenty five teachers
you said throughout the state.
Who does select these teachers
to do this review because it
it's extremely important.
Mr Chairman representative so
that's
a process that's done in the
instructional materials bureau
we work well there's three of us
within the bureau currently
there are my there's myself into
education administrators these
are former teachers who we
recruit through our various
means to the public education
department through our contacts
with districts past reviewers
Through the various content
bureau set PED
and it goes out to a pretty
large group of of teachers
and then based upon their
applications we scored those
applications and
Based upon a rubric that we've
developed for selecting the
materials we want to make sure
that we've we're getting a broad
group across the state from
different geographic regions
with different experiences and
but however the real wonder
requirement is they do have to
be level two or level three
teachers that's a statutory
requirement Representative have
to.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
flea thank you Representative
Ezzell I think you're asking
about the local local level
selection there's actually a
couple of tears it's the state
process that director burns has
described and then there's a
second level process where every
single only eight and charter
goes through a very similar
process with their own teachers
statute actually requires
parental input school boards are
involved so it's sort of a two
tier system we do a really
thorough vetting and then the
districts got to look at it from
the local level needs of their
students and their community.
Mr chairman I appreciate that
explanation that's exactly for
us and he can go on that I
wanted to make sure that from
the local level and that's all
we I'm gonna stress this
decision is local control local
level input I think it's very
very important Mr Chairman one
less thing I'd like to add is a
mystery that director Berntsen
Representative Lara.
The Dobson cycle of these
materials that are going get to
teach our kids it's on a six
year cycle do you think that's
up to date enough in light of
what we just experienced
whenever the pandemic kids what
happens in a situation like that
because school shut down
everything was done via the
internet talk to me here.
Mr Chairman representative
I think the six year cycle has
worked well.
I think that.
It could become too cumbersome
for districts and teachers to
learn more a new materials on a
faster cycle I think a six year
cycle seems to work out well for
funding as well we've adjusted
the cycle so that it is more
even when it comes to looking at
funding so
so the that districts can better
budget for their adoption cycle
And also I think that
that
Well I I do think the cycle has
worked well and I think it would
become too burdensome to
to to make it a shorter cycle.
Mr chairman of.
Representative Lara director
burns thank you very much for
your answers that's all Mr
chairman thank thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for being this
bill for a day I fully supported
I just want to we were involved
in the science that option
because you know I've worked
with the lab of Los Alamos
National Laboratory foundation
we're looking at middle school
science standards and we're
looking at that as a as a
organization working with this
and I I just want members to
know that these are big ticket
items I mean people could can
you tell me how much a textbook
would cost for a middle school
science about statewide.
Mr Chairman representative
Well it's been awhile since I
looked at the science
any beverage Kearney average
cost of a science textbook but I
know when looking at social
studies because that's the most
current cycle.
it was around two hundred and
thirty two hundred forty dollars
on average for just the student
addition.
About one book ones for for one
student
And I know my my calculations I
I I'd do an annual calculation
were.
Where I look at the number of
students using the stars data I
look at the number of teachers
for each of the course codes
related to that subject area.
And then I take the average
prices on the state adopted list
for those subject materials.
And the the amounts that are
calculated for social excuse me
getting over a cough for social
studies and the arts came to I
believe it was seventy five
million or somewhere just under
that
And so it is quite expensive
the costs continue to increase
as I mentioned publishers take
annual price increases and we
know also with supply chain
issues that that is also driving
the cost of materials up it is
also because some delays in
receiving materials.
I think it's important that.
Districts are looking at both
print and digital materials
in combination.
and and not one or the other I
think it's important to look at
them
both together.
Mr chair and and Representative
expert thank you I I just want
everybody to understand how how
high the stakes are when when
that option period comes up and
it's just not.
It's not summer institute I'm
just gonna say that work starts
probably a year ahead with with
kind of your the teachers
through I would say throughout
the state really kind of looking
and coming together and talking
about it and then and then it
kind of culminates I would say
that work culminates at that
twenty four what if it is state
the institute in the summer
it because of the stakes are
very high and and and the spread
it out over six years because it
is so expensive it is so
expensive to buy those textbooks
and and I just wanted to kind of
add that I guess for information
for those who didn't understand
that being part of that I was I
was kind of astonished I didn't
realize how high the stakes were
and I can just say we ran a
small size increase science
program of for just ten thousand
students in the cost for those
materials over a five year
period were nine million dollars
and that was just a small subset
five hundred teachers you know
that's it's it's an expensive
endeavor so thank you for
bringing this bill forward I
think it's really critical that
we let schools make these
decisions to bring and other
materials without having to go
you know through this huge
process I think it's really
important thank you
Representative Lara.
Thank you Representative for a
please thank you back to step
chair I move our custom built of
twenty six all right so we have
a due pass motion on helpful to
twenty six second by
Representative had a.
Is there any opposition to the
do pass I may be so bold all
right thing that you have to
pass now so to twenty six thank
you thank you for your.
All right so we have
Representative three.
If we get I understand you have
other bills and other places to
go if I may what we make the
transition
I think I see a familiar face in
the audience my mentor teacher
colleague editors to heritage
but NASA if you mind setting up
and letting us know introduce
yourself tell us why you're here
thank you
definitely representing the New
Mexico National Board certified
teachers and Representative
house bill one eighty one today
we're asking that you review
your packet we are here hoping
that you understand that the
language change at the very
quick language change from
teachers to all license
employees which makes a huge
difference for those of us who
are national board certified
teachers in the classroom moving
up to leadership positions and
admin this house bill is less
than fifty one thousand
approximately for the state.
What effect upon.
Twenty teachers that are already
in admin are ready to make that
move into admin right there on
Wednesday thank you very much
if I may be so bold my name is
Tamera Getty I am and N. B. C.
T. and I am an administrator and
I would just ask for your
support with house bill one
eighty one it does directly
affect me I am Rossell and I
currently I just moved as it
into a principal position and I
for twelve years I and National
Board certified in only five of
those years today receive the
differential soon as I move into
admin I lost it and I know the
philosophy has been in the past
to keep by teachers in the
classroom but what we're finding
out is as we mentor and teachers
that their students the increase
as well and their test scores
increases while just by being a
mentor so our current our
current state model is building
the used to be instructional
leaders and this would help us
begin to recruit those who are
already instructional leaders
into administrative positions
without bearing the financial
burden of losing that
differential so thank you very
much thank you Mr chairman thank
you all that
I'm here to present house bill
one fifty six I'd like to
introduce and who I have with me
I have lord hill he is the
senior director of operations
for Clovis schools and crystal
good tears is the actual head
nurse for the Clovis municipal
schools and this bill deals with
some of the cannabis Act we we
and got the cannabis Act passed
I guess there was a lot of
things that weren't addressed in
the sense of how it was going to
affect schools and there
currently is no standardized
statewide education plan for
school officials to use and
implement regarding cannabis use
in recognition recognition so
what this bill does is it sets
out standards for the department
of health to help the schools
maintain the training and things
that they need basically to work
on an everyday level we do have
some other bills coming up one
will be not today obviously but
at a re packaging type of thing
and I think what's laid in front
of you is the type of things
that the schools dealing with
watching kids bring these types
of items to school and it's
happening all over state so this
program develops and maintains a
cannabis use prevention resource
program and so it's evidence
based research is targeted to
school juveniles and basically
with the department of health
will do is make sure that the
school boards in the governing
bodies of charter schools have
access to all these different
resources so basically they will
have the stuff online that can
be downloaded so they can be
given to parents it can be given
to teachers that will train
staff and teachers how to
recognize of some child is
impaired how to deal with the
situation when a child comes
impaired as far as calling
poison control provide links in
materials to to to the students
to the parents and to the
administration so they can.
Learn as much as they can learn
in order how to address this
problem that's now in our
schools with marijuana
and so basically what this bill
does it and it also has an
advertising campaign for
juveniles and it's we put it
under the department of health
because we felt that was a more
appropriate agency versus the
schools because they're dealing
with so much anyway and this is
a health issue and what what
they can do want a situation
arises so we we we believe that
like if if the head nurse can
download all this material and
have it readily available when
the situations happen or or
teacher can notice that a
student is high or needs
services they can protect their
identity but still give them the
help they need and we can get
the training needed to the the
school personnel so I will defer
to Mister hill and and and also
then to our our head nurse so
that she can explain to a little
bit about the problems we're
seeing in Clovis and then I've
heard of statewide in the
schools.
Please welcome briefly Mr chair
representative thank you for
having us today.
Think some of the information
that is going to be helpful is
the the resources easily
downloadable accessible to not
only school nurses and
administrators but also to
teachers we have had plenty of
years of on the job training but
to have research based evidence.
About how to identify impairment
amongst students will be
helpful.
I think the
Something that we don't always
discusses the lost instructional
time that's going on when a
student is impaired and we don't
have the resources to identify
that student get them the help
that they need I would say on
average it's taking roughly two
hours to investigate those
students are out of the
classroom during that time
administrators are not able to
complete their instructional
walk throughs.
The other pieces the research
based again on the job training
but research based cannabis
identification impairment and
cannabis products which is new
and different for us.
Thank you.
Welcome here.
Good morning Mr chair
representative so again my name
is Chris on the director of
health related services for
Clovis schools thank you for
allowing me to speak today in
support of house bill one fifty
six I've been a nurse for ten
years for those years have been
in the school setting allow me
to share with you some of the
hardships we've been
experiencing with the increased
use and possession of cannabis
products on school campuses.
I brought this display this is
that created by curry county DWI
task force it helps visualize
the shocking resemblance between
original brands and brands are
drugs with cannabis in it
these are at our kids fingertips
and fortunately.
These edibles are on school
campuses this is not just a
teenage problem elementary
students have been found in
possession of cannabis as young
as fourth grade this information
may not be surprising to hear
especially since just days after
retail cannabis became sales
became legal in New Mexico local
news reported a story coming at
a Sandoval county for more than
a dozen elementary students
ingested edibles.
Our shared by classmate.
We have found cannabis edibles
that mimic original brands that
contain potent milligrams of THC
experts recommend one to two
point five milligrams if you're
if you're trying out of THC
products unfortunately our first
experience a student just at six
hundred milligrams of THC and as
you can see here these all seem
about serving size if you eat
one candy bar
that's that's what the student
just it was just one package.
After ingesting six hundred
milligrams of cannabis edibles
this dude was sent to the
hospital not because they were
intoxicated because they were
showing signs of an overdose.
Students who just too much can't
walk talk stand or even stay
awake not to mention the
projectile vomiting that's
unpleasant
warning labels are often
inconspicuous in comparison to
the colourful bubbly Fund
package we need to increase
awareness and help stop these
products from being made and
appealing to kids fiscal year
we've had forty two drug
hearings and I want to kind of
give you a little background and
tell you what this looks like a
granted we have four months to
go so that's a little daunting
for us that these drug kings of
increased so much.
But like Mr hill said Peter
administrators being pulled away
from their duties for an average
of about two hours per case
they're investigating in in
writing reports this also
includes one or two police
officers being pulled from the
streets of having to come in and
deal with the situation and also
write their reports.
You Mr being called the campuses
and school nurses are being
pulled away from students with
chronic health conditions such
as asthma diabetes and seizures
along with the injuries and
illnesses that happen when
students come to school.
We are ex exhausting our health
care professionals at a time of
those unprecedented shortages
are administrators and school
personnel need help with
hundreds of different cannabis
products on the market and the
demand for breeding of more
potent strains schools and
communities need informative
research educational materials
and a more proactive approach.
The first encounter with edibles
are district experience we
reached out for help we wanted
to help streamline awareness in
and let our community and
parents know what's out there
unfortunately when we called
there was nothing that existed
they did share some harm
reduction advice to say that
parents see the slide lock
boxes.
For their cannabis products
Clovis municipal schools
partnered up with local
officials and spearheaded
initiative to increase awareness
we sent a informative letters to
parents including pictures of
these types of products.
We also create recorded radio
commercial interviews and then
we we made a video commercial
to help should share this
awareness because nothing
existed the benefits of the
department of health developing
and overseeing prevention is
imperative.
Research and informative data
for our students as limited as
you can tell by the survey data
which is concerning the creek
county prevention offices shared
that twenty twenty two Survey
data identified only fifty
percent of our middle school and
high school students perceive
smoking marijuana or eating
edibles once or twice a week is
harmful twenty point nine
percent of high school students
reported riding in the car with
somebody who's under the
influence of marijuana.
I think house bill one fifty six
is the first step in the right
direction to keep our students
safe what are school personnel
get back to the job that they
love in creative writer feature
for kids thank you.
Great mills them I would stand
for any questions all right
thank you all so much for The
presentation all right so we'll
go to the audience first is
there anybody online or in the
audience in support of house
bill one fifty six please
indicate by raising your hand.
Support for.
All right we'll go to opposition
for house bill one fifty six
anybody opposed to house bill
one fifty six.
Are those that are neutral.
Okay.
So we will come to committee
saying nobody I questions
Canadian art Representative all
to Representative Lara in order
to price check here thank you Mr
chair of thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward I am that caught my eye
right away we brought that so of
the of the knock off Madam a
column of the knockoffs are are
all those you mixes all the New
Mexico product is a manufactured
here in New Mexico.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
I was told that a lot of these
projects come from out of state
but because it is it legal to
make any Mexico but they are
finding some New Mexico thank
thank you for that Mr chair so
this so here in New Mexico.
Cannabis manufacturers four of
edibles enough consumables can't
advertise their products the in
this manner is that correct Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative that is
an issue we're having I've been
in the dispensaries and caring
another bill that you can see is
attached as a as a kind of a
correlation bill to repackage
enticing products for children
so they don't look like this it
yet to get in front of committee
however that is an issue we're
addressing because it I I've
been in the dispensaries and
we're seeing it in the
dispensaries and we're seeing
them coming from other places
but that is what we're seeing in
your schools in our schools
thank thank you for
Representative Mr chair because
I too have been in the Sanchez I
haven't seen anything like that
so I'm curious as to where
they're coming from I think what
you're trying to do here Mr
chair representative is very
important yeah we're we're able
to where we need to give the
schools of the the resources
that they need you are we have a
conversation about instruction
materials earlier and I I I
understand the the need to have
this in place for schools to
give the schools opportunities
to to at least mitigate some of
that is some of the issues that
the come into the schools Mr
chair.
One of my for mentor one of my
mentors in education for a more
far from superintendents always
told me that the school is a
reflection of the community.
And so if we have these type of
things being held in the
community this is going to be
coming into the schools so the
way I see this Mr chair
representative is going to be a
multi stage approach and I think
you've already spoke about on
here that your other bills I I I
just want to say that I do agree
with the the premise I do agree
with what you're trying to do I
had to have some questions about
the the duplication on the on
the on the reporting but I think
I'm scared I'm gonna leave that
at that and Mister chair with
that thank you.
Thank you Representative here.
Thank you Mr chair I do support
this bill by the Google
practical questions
Representative Lara referred to
the duplicate reporting one to
D. O. H. and several of the
analyses say why don't we do the
reporting to the New Mexico is
that the poison center so are
you aware of that Senator yeah
madam vice chair and looked at
that and was no I maintenance is
duplicate reporting I believe
I've talked to my experts and I
don't know if sometime they
actually call poison control but
I will defer to them to see if
it is actually duplicate in
every single time.
Mr chair we do call poison
control the nursing Department
anytime the cases brought to
them.
Okay I don't know if that's
something that has to be
addressed Mr chair I'm not sure
I understanding this if it's
just me because sometimes it's
me and not the bill but
Section three B. on page three
lines five to nine says that the
department John sure that each
school board and governing body
charter school has access to the
cannabis school use prevention
resource program by July first
twenty twenty three but the bill
can't go into activation until
July first twenty twenty three
so it just seemed to me how can
they do this how can we have
them do something by July first
of this year.
When you know that it's a lot of
work because I'm you know as a
former R. K. twelve
instructional coaches like what
you deal with a kindergartner
and at my elementary school we
had several kindergartners
bringing that candy and
distributing it to people but
there's a there's a lot of
practical stuff that goes into
the program so my questions just
about the dates Mr chairman and
vice chair definitely we can
make that date a little later I
know on our other bills were
looking for an August first St
because we're trying to get it
out before school starts so
maybe August first twenty twenty
three might give a little bit
more to a I don't know how much
time they would need to get all
this information together Mr
chair madam vice chair but I
will definitely note that.
Yes because Mr chair and
representative I mean there's
always an online resource but it
does take time to prepare what
is needed and what I am here so
those are my two comments Mr
Chairman masters and very good
point thank you Representative
please thank you Mr chairman of
the thank you for these as a
teacher yeah we saw these all
the time and was before you even
become legal in detail this is
will bring it from home all the
time safety prevention is is
anyway hoping the school will
agree that is needed I will lie
to us quite known include there
drug so right now I've actually.
Making a confession like fifth
annual rate we already making
that if you are already making
the the airport of creating the
curriculum the money that time
that would be great to already
have also for at least
I know that one of their own
other books that are available
and I called to more confusion
I've ever also more than years
on these ones too so that's my
only comment if we all right
create a path is just to this is
the only ones to my thank you Mr
chair of a Representative yeah I
I understand what you're saying
I guess we're just focusing on
the cannabis issue this year
with the new passing of and all
the bills were trying to clean
up for the schools but no that's
a great point and I can defer to
the experts if you're seen
Fenton all in our schools or
this is just seems to be
cannabis problem at least what
you've experienced.
At.
Mr chair representative but we
have not seen that no be brought
to campus or any other drugs
like heroin you know we know
that the usage is out there but
as of being found in possession
at school we haven't had that
yet.
Mr chair representative I was in
my twenty five years and the
public school administration
I've seen cannabis most often
methamphetamine one time
throughout my twenty five years
and I have personally not seen
any other although we we believe
it's been used comic of skate
during my time thank you thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Mr chairman thank you
Representative and thank you
panelists.
I have several questions I'm not
sure you address and I apologize
in advance what other schools in
the state have
come to your attention as being
in the same situation as the
school the schools in Clovis and
Mr chair representative I can
tell you some of those pictures
were from McKinley County I
believe the serial we just
received those two days we are
constantly getting and
photographs of what other
schools are finding
and and my understanding is if
the teachers are having to deal
with it on their own there's
nothing in place so every
schools doing it different
handling at different but I'm
sure I will defer to my experts
I'm sure they're talking to
other schools across the state
to see if if they've been
dealing with that but I know I
was sent these pictures from
McKinley County.
At a week ago.
So Mr Chairman representative
that's a little bit you know we
I stay in close communication I
will monitor what news comes out
of our Albuquerque public
schools because that's the area
that I represent I also
monitor very carefully when we
have
meetings in the report that we
get from our area all and
cluster administrators that are
directly involved at the
schoolbased level elementary all
levels and
to tell you the truth we have
not I have not heard in
Albuquerque is a huge district I
think it's the largest district
in the state.
And I really haven't heard
reports of of what's going on
and I appreciate you telling us
about the Clovis situation so
two things that concern me one
is that.
I want to be careful about.
What we're associating as the
use of cannabis for recreational
purposes and the use of cannabis
for medical purposes and I don't
see a clear distinction in that
in the bill however
the other concern of mine is
that we're already trying to
remove the
What's the word Mr chair and
representative the.
Potential.
classification or.
Placement of our students in
this juvenile quote delinquent
quote.
Just
definitions and and and subject
them to.
Anything that would further or
that would criminalize what
they're doing because what I'm
fearing is that we spent
generations trying to remove
that stereo type from our
hello a middle school and high
school students you know the the
the the all the sh the
stereotypes that come there you
know shiftless they're they're
on drugs there this whatever it
that may be and I'm just worried
about further placing them into
this arena of stereo types and
potential for criminalization so
So it I don't want this to be
setting up our students for that
especially amount of Mr chair
and representative our students
of color who are predominantly
in these districts and who tend
to already be stereo typed so
that's one concern I don't know
if that came up during your bill
Mr chair and representative that
is a bill that I'm still waiting
to get to be set on committee
also that is to make a
possession of marijuana by a
child a delinquent act reminding
the the committee that it is
still a crime for a child to
possess marijuana just like it
is for a child to possess
alcohol so that bill that's
coming forward is going to give
us options when somebody is like
if they were drinking using
marijuana that they can go
through CYFD and they can get
the help they need if they need
that if they're over eighteen
then they're going to go through
the civil remedies but it still
is a delinquent act or needs to
be a delinquent act for the
schools to have some ability to
deal with these issues when you
have kids coming to school maybe
fourteen fifteen sixteen years
old high every day and maybe
they have a family problem that
gives you the opportunity to a
deal with it unofficially be put
him through CYFD so they can get
the residential treatment or
help that they need and ordered
through the juvenile system
whatever needs to happen because
it's still a crime for a kid to
possess it that's clearing the
statute it was made that through
the camps Act so if you court
let that to like a minor
possessing alcohol that's exact
same thing we put them through
the delinquent code they be
handicap be handled unofficially
but it gives the the
administration and teachers
another tool to help children
that doesn't mean they're going
to go to prison the records are
obviously sealed doesn't mean
they're even gonna get filed on
in juvenile court it just means
that we're gonna have
opportunities to help them so
that answers hopefully question
one as far as.
Mr chair representative that the
medical marijuana I still
believe this bill allows for a
parent to come to school as long
as they're not disrupting
anything just like the law says
and allow them to given that
marijuana or cannabis to their
child and I'll defer to experts
with that is still available as
the nurse for them to do.
And.
Mr chair representative it is of
still an option for medical
marijuana used to be giving
given at school it is a process
where they have to bring in the
correct paperwork where there's
a medical diagnosis and there is
a registered card and they have
a label on the product that has
all the information that they
need.
Mr chairman and representative I
still have
so it alcohol.
Is proven to be much more deadly
and much more harmful to the
body than anything else on that
we're describing Fenton Fenton
all in all of the other drugs
that fall into that category are
far more dangerous for more
lethal to and toxic to the body
of together with with
I'll call so Mr Chairman
representative cannabis which is
the legal terminology that we're
using cannabis actually has not
proven has not proven we had
these discussions when we were
regulating
few years ago and health and
Human Services over the summer
and and other interim committees
yes to see considerable data or
studies that point to.
Cannabis having the same lethal
or toxic or other types of
social
emotional dependencies that
these other that I just
mentioned have so if we're on
the path and I'm glad you
mentioned the other bills Mr
chair representative that you
have coming through the pipeline
because I still think that that
what we're doing is setting up
for students not in a positive
manner but in a manner in which
will continue to contribute.
Put them in this box of stereo
type and then potentially into
the criminalization of pathway
and I don't I I hesitate and and
in going into this arena when we
have what you just mentioned Mr
chair representative laws
already in place that places
restrictions and we did that for
a reason to just what you just
said to make it unlawful under
certain circumstances for to
account but anyway Mr chair
representative thank you Mr
chair representative of and it
that's a totally different bill
obviously this is and and I'll
just add it is against the law
and you Q. as a legislator made
it against the law for children
to possess it I respectfully
disagree that it's not dangerous
to children to consume large
amounts of cannabis I think
that's why that is against the
law but regardless this is to
protect our children and to
basically help the schools
protect our children so that
there's not overdoses by
products like these or kids that
are dying because they've
overdose on cannabis and it can
happen and so that as a point of
this bill that is a different
bill.
Thank you for that
so I don't have any more
questions from committee but I
had a couple so I share the
concern the vice chair Gary
brought up because if we're
adopting these we're saying
shall.
shall ensure I'm sorry page
three subsection B. the
department shall ensure each
school board and governing
charter schools access to
cannabis school that's quick
turnaround date which I think is
been recognized so if we can get
that shored up as far as an
exact date the next one comes in
subsection C. which has also
been brought up
in the FIR it's talking about
the interim committees and to
present a report on to the
legislative education study
committee and health and Human
Services Committee before
December thirty first of each
year I guess I would look for
some specifics as to what's
being reported is it going to be
the same for L. E. S. C. as the
presentation or the data would
look like for
the health and Human Services
Committee or is it going to be
something different.
Perhaps what do those
educational materials look like
on the education study committee
side and then what sort of
information is contained there
in for the health and Human
Services Committee to be a
little bit more discerning
discerning perhaps about the
content rather than the delivery
of that information
for the L. E. S. C. I think is
is super important so that we
know is legislators what we're
expecting to receive and also
our staff in these respective
interim committees know what's
they're looking out for so that
we can track
outcomes perhaps of these
programs and then I think just
straightening up the dual
reporting is there something
that is to be gained perhaps by
the door reporting or is it
something that we could leverage
from poison control into D. O.
H. to perhaps lighten that load
I think are some of the concerns
I'm gonna suggest that we
Representative had a did you
have something to add to that
okay Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and at this
just a short question but I
don't think every school has a
full time school nurse and my
correct about the
yes ma'am okay so a lot of rural
schools have a part time nurses
is that correct yes for the
thank you I just wanted to make
sure thank you Mr chair great so
I think in education we've
agreed to have good clean bills
come out of this committee I
think especially when it regards
you know what sort of materials
when they're coming out and then
the specify how specific of
information we're getting to
these interim committees so
we're still early in the process
we're still not even halfway
through
give me a moment there
Representative how keep you in
mind
but if we could get those
amendments we have a twenty four
hour rule so by the end of the
day right before
certainly happy to work with you
I know vice chair Garrett's
willing to work with you
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is a person might on this on
twice so one of the things that
now that now that we're we're
talking about this Mr chair
representative is there any cost
of the school districts for this
program well I don't think to
the school districts but when I
was noticing is and one of the
fiscal reports I just received
yesterday they were talking
about that health department may
have to hire two appointments to
employees to do this information
that was the first I'd heard of
that so I I think they said
forty some thousand dollars not
to the school so maybe that's
something to be addressed by the
pool reporting to where if we
could leverage one over the
other this thank you thank you
Mr.
Representative Mr chair it's
Representative it's the
preparation materials I think
also there I think it has some
precise amounts like a hundred
forty two thousand.
Completing Representative Eli
thank you Mr chair just a.
just a part of consideration as
this bill moves through the
process my my recommendation
because there's a few changes I
think they're going to be made
by the Sanchez she brings a
committee sub and then we have a
complete clean bill instead of
amendments I think it's it just
makes it easier read the bills
of proceeds proceed through the
process of thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative and if
that's an option I know some
some legislators you lose
ownership of the bill once you
go to the committee said that it
becomes our committees of but
I'll leave that at your
discretion Representative lane
is made his case about bringing
a committee so for it being
clean that's my preference as
well but I'll leave that to you
Representative thank
Representative Ezzell Mr
chairman and move to temporarily
table house bill one fifty six
UP so I won't accept the motion
but I will roll it over so we'll
bring it back as soon as the
representative brings the the
amendments over
yep will keep it in committee
and once we get those school
bring it back.
Okay what's the case thank you
for with cemex Committee goes to
it health and Human Services and
excitement and I know they've
been looking out for it because
Representative comes and asks me
about this bill particularly
look at that we're working on it
and I appreciate your patience
with us especially waiting
through another bill thank you
Representative welcome to have
all right so I guess in that
case I'm gonna turn this over to
our vice chair.
Well I make my way over.
It.
And for those.
In our crowded listening public
and present our next bill is
house bill two fifty six hybrid
dual credit pilot project.
Thank you.
Right.
Oriented here.
Thank you madam chair so what
you have in front of you you
rural more remember the Carol
humble break a little bit the
first bill that passed off the
house floor of the task force
for
due credit on this is a bit of a
companion bill that is a pilot
program for cyber security this
is to be run through the REC
but it is not limited to schools
within the REC to participate in
this pilot program so would be
through New Mexico tech those
are the broad reach as I have a
couple of experts allow to
introduce themselves and give a
few more details about the bill.
Right thank you thank you
committee so I'm David Bowman
I'm the director of the regional
education cooperative number one
nice to see you all again it's
been a couple weeks but that
we're out of Farmington New
Mexico but we serve schools and
education programming statewide
being administratively attached
to the PED and over to my left
is Dr Laurie Leiber who is the
director of the New Mexico
Center of cybersecurity
excellence.
I told her she had to get a
shorter million already.
But but we we we have a very
unique opportunity recently and
we're bringing together really
some expertise and some
experience from from both of our
rounds so we've been looking at
and are you see when we were
running a dual credit.
Program to the early college
high schools for a little over
here now in a few minutes of an
exceptional opportunity to
really look at one of the
experiences of our students in
dual credit in the early college
high schools the collaboration
in the offerings from the higher
education institutions and when
these things that we talked
about before and are you find in
the in the task force study bill
but.
I had the chance to to put my
head together and drive fiber
can I really
We think we're bringing an
exceptional opportunity that we
would like to test out because
it seems to hit every challenge
and every stumbling point
between students.
And the completion of higher
education course working we know
that we know pretty clearly what
some of these challenges are
in the area of cybersecurity in
particular which is what this
pilot would focus on.
There aren't teachers competent
to teach cybersecurity in our
high schools much less those
that have the eligibility
requirements in order to teach
those courses for dual credit.
But on the flip side we have
students that are interested in
that area we've got three
thousand plus jobs waiting to be
filled across New Mexico and
cybersecurity so it makes sense
to look very carefully at what
is happening with the dual
credit programs that can help
students to fulfill their dreams
eventually to fill jobs but to
do it in a way that maximizes
the potential for student
success we know that students
for the most part have to access
their course work online because
it's they don't have in the high
schools frankly.
But then who's helping the kids
at the high school level who is
competent to help the kids at
the high school level understand
and master the course content
and frankly to keep them on
track and to facilitate
discussions and assist them
through the learning process was
teachers don't exist.
we know that there are some
challenges interacting between
the higher education
institutions and the high
schools and things like our
students doing the classes are
the completed their courses are
they showing up these kinds of
things so we know that we need
to look at that collaboration
between.
High schools and higher
education.
And then when students are
taking their online courses for
the most part they're taking
courses mixed in with older
students who are perhaps
expected and capable of being
more self directed more
responsive the the kids we're
talking you know we're talking
fifteen sixteen seventeen maybe
eighteen year old kids need some
additional support so we put our
heads together Dr Liber tonight
she with the center they're very
interested in expanding into the
pool creditor mean and they have
one of the best programs in some
of the best expertise not only
in the state but nationally so
they have a lot to offer in on
our side we have our connections
with the early college high
schools and a lot of experience
around some of the challenges
and potential strategies for
overcoming those challenges as
we put our heads together.
What we came up with is the the
pilot project that you see in
the bill but in a nutshell we we
we be piling it at ten early
college high schools.
At each of those high schools
there will be a teacher who is
identified chosen by the teacher
and other high school and so on
who would go who begin a process
of attaining not only the credit
hours but also certifications in
cybersecurity so they can help
the kids with the content and at
the same time work towards being
eligible to do so dual credit
courses in high schools
themselves noni think about our
schools in the rural areas these
opportunities simply don't
exist.
But by working collaborative Lee
with the center we can begin a
process to summer institutes and
course work that continues over
three years to get teachers that
certification and meet those
eligibility requirements now we
also feel that and with students
who are taking cyber security
courses.
And now have a teacher on site
who can assist them in to
facilitate the learning process
and has some of the skills
necessary to help them with the
content.
One thing we know about dual
credit is that kids have
successfully cleaned Committee
complete dual credit courses
receive college education have a
much higher rate of completing a
four year degrees than those who
don't.
But that means that those kids
have to be successful those
losses.
Completing the courses.
Is a strong indicator of future
success.
But their kids at.
Take those courses and don't
complete them as well right now
cross our state of the average
course completion rate ranges
from about thirty to seventy
percent under the traditional
model okay on the flip side that
means fifty percent I'm sorry
thirty to thirty eight fifty to
seventy percent completes on the
flip side we're talking fifty to
thirty percent don't complete
those courses so we want to
increases says obviously by
putting in place the conditions
necessary so.
Do we think it's going to work
well yes because we've
identified with some of the
challenges are in the pilot
project.
Has specific components with in
it to mitigate those
difficulties.
But there's also a valuation
piece that's built into this
because we really do need to
test it out.
Although all the indicators
would indicate show that yes
it's going to be successful
higher passage right more kids
completing their credit hours
getting the certifications
increased pool of teachers who
are able to teach dual credit.
So it's all those pieces are in
there we think it's going to
succeed it makes sense that it
would.
But we also have an evaluation
component built in so we can
actually test the model so at
the end of the day presuming a
positive outcome we expect a
positive outcome what we have
essentially done is created a
model that can then be applied
to other schools and other
content areas and other areas
where we can increase student
success and build up our pool of
qualified dual credit
instructors within the high
school and now doctor Liber can
fill in all the gaps that I
forgot in prejudice thing I've
said wrong.
Madam chair committee members
I would just like to say I'm I
am the director of the New
Mexico cybersecurity of
excellence I've been a faculty
member in computer science at
New Mexico tech for more than
twenty years and have seen great
kids come out of our high
schools but I've also seen kids
that don't want to go to college
so part of what N. M. C. C. we
has been doing is working on the
cyber ready program that
includes career pathways not all
students should go to college.
But students should have the
opportunity to be prepared for
great careers the certification
program that's part of this dual
credit program would give kids
the opportunity of.
Take those certification exams
after they do well in the course
have that be part of the pilot
so that we can see can get them
out of high school ready for
some of those many jobs that are
open in New Mexico to help fill
part of the gap that's occurring
in cyber security and putting us
all at risk.
So that's one part of it the
other pieces it helps those
students if they go into a
career and they decide they need
more education they can get back
on those pathways to higher
education we're needed but it
gives them opportunities we want
to start with CompTIA security
plus because it is a baseline
cybersecurity certification that
students can get jobs with.
They can also use it toward
their college degrees.
And.
We think that it's really
important that and M. CCO we be
contributing to the entire state
so we've been working across
we've been working with New
Mexico highlands on graduate
education we.
Got an introduction to David
that gave us this great
opportunity to work with R. E.
C. one and we want to work with
the entire state it's part of
what we've been doing with cyber
ready.
To really help bring education
where it makes sense down to
those lower levels include
outreach to mid school all of
those sorts of things are part
of what we do but this.
Bill with the.
Opportunity to do a pilot would
be a unique.
Method of taking.
Top rated instructors into the
high schools across the state
and having their teachers help
with that instruction I think
that collaboration on education
is really a direction that has
huge potential and I appreciate
your support.
Great thank you with that madam
chair will stand for questions
thank you we will go first on
line is there anybody in line
who wants to speak in support of
house bill two fifty six.
Okay I see no one so go to us in
this room if you would like to
speak in support and your city
on this side of the room please
raise your hand.
Yes we may.
Good morning members of the
committee The New Mexico
forwards Association supports
different programs.
The.
No resistance to the better.
Aspirations in life this is for
the last favorable federation
thank you anybody else in the
back of the room want to speak
in favor of it.
Okay thank you on the side of
the room if you like to speak in
favor please raise your hand and
shared will go with you first.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee I like to speak
to something very unique about
this bill and I will do so
because I am still a certified
high school secondary science
teachers certified chemistry and
physics I'm the opportunity for
teachers high school teachers to
become
Proved by higher education is a
huge challenge I've spoken to a
number of superintendents and
ask them do you have high school
teachers that are accepted
perhaps as an adjunct faculty to
teach a dual credit courses in
high school not very many high
school teachers have that kind
of all right approval and that's
probably because of higher
institutions have different
criteria most common is either
you have a majority in the
context seal that you are going
to instruct federal credit which
is a challenge because an awful
lot of teachers arrived in the
high school building that have
their majors in education that
they don't necessarily have a
major in computer science and
certainly not and cybersecurity
but the second part all right
that is often okay hired
institutions want the dual
credit instructors at the high
school have eighteen hours in
that field and this bill.
Opens the door for the
opportunities for teachers to
gain those eighteen hours so not
only do we have students going
through the program in a pathway
we have the teacher at the high
school that can then become a
dual credit instructors in cyber
security and I would say is
specially for those schools in
rural areas the opportunity for
the students to get in a car and
drive to a campus and go into a
classroom is minimal even in
urban areas that's a challenge
because of scheduling so having
that teachers in high school
with that all right approval
from higher it is an enormous
opportunity cybersecurity we all
know.
Is a highly all right I tracked
the field right now.
And so I got my signal for two
fits but I strongly support as a
teacher and is still a survive
secondary teacher I would love
to do that if that was available
to thank you thank you so much
the gentleman of.
Joe Joseph good morning madam
chairwoman members of the
committee just as computer
Albuquerque public schools I
think this is really cool
project to to think about as we
turn to change graduation
requirements these are the.
I need to explore we've hit a
roadblock in this area because
some of the obstacles with
discuss so to allow us to expand
our CTE options and we just
actually had implemented a
cybersecurity department so
actually having students go
through this program and our
serving as interns in the
district in this department I
think would really be able to
talk with somebody thank you I
so one more hands state forty
now.
Members of the committee C.
Scania's with that in the New
Mexico government relations
director for and on behalf of
our members to stand in support
of this bill because if you look
at it from the economic plans
you what you're doing is you're
trying to address a supply and
demand thank there's plenty of
demand for.
Trying to.
Bill that market place of of of
expertise for cyber security but
we don't have we just don't have
the infrastructure the state so
I don't think that cyber
security is one of those factors
bills go away one or two or
three years there's a long term
investments so for that reason
as well I think we we release
the sponsoring for this bill and
we we just inconsiderable effect
thank you.
Thank you anybody else on the
side.
Okay with that we go to
opposition is there anybody
online who wants to speak in
opposition to house bill two
fifty six.
Thank nobody is there anybody in
the room who would like to speak
in opposition to house bill two
fifty six.
Okay with that we'll go to our
panel our first is
Representative medical Maria.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative and your experts
I I really it and excited about
this bill to be honest with you
as a current science teacher I
love that you are preparing the
teachers that don't already have
this specialty because like for
me because my all of my degrees
were health and wellness and I
didn't teach sites throughout
the my entire career
so I can't teach any AP classes
in the in science even though
I'm endorsed in it because of
the lack of of those those hours
in my degrees so the fact that
you're taking these you're
meeting the need that is greatly
needed and in the state and then
preparing the teachers in order
to prepare the students I think
that's an excellent idea
now my question is so right now
what you're proposing is you
gonna take ten schools and and I
would think tens ten teachers at
this point to go through this
pilot program
so after this is all done is
your hopes to continue to
training these teachers that are
wanting to get this a
certification also madam chair.
Well every looking at me said
I would
So it is with a three year pilot
right Hey you know we this the
first we have to actually look
at how it's implemented we're
what other issues do need to
address working to be refined
and so forth but absolutely
intent of zooming is successful
completion this to continue this
not only within cybersecurity
this particular type of a
program but also to expand it to
other areas where we see few
teachers qualified to teach hi
read hi student interest and a
strong economic motivation fort
as well you know there are
plenty of areas do that but W.
I. I will not something easy he
said it's kind of exciting and
and it is to me to one of the
reasons why it's kind of
exciting to me is I I have not
from any other school or any
other institution in our state
or outside a state that's doing
something like this we do have
some very exceptional things
happy about higher education
that look at pieces of this for
example setting instructor out
to the school to teach classes
or having the collaboration with
the teacher there to just
provide facilitation into the
can't help of the content for
example in these do seem to bear
some positive effects on student
completion.
But nobody's got this whole
package that says we're gonna
give.
In class facilitation support
management support and constant
support and grow the pool of
teachers you know each one of
these pieces that's built into
this it's just if if somebody
seen it they haven't told me and
I haven't found I think this may
be the first time somebody's
attempting something like this
so we have to look at it very
carefully obviously but yes.
Absolutely the intent is that
with the successful completion
of a pilot look at those other
areas where the same needs exist
in the same type of a same model
may be most effective C. N.
thank you madam chair and
representative of I that excites
me the one that was actually my
next question if we're gonna go
on to other things because right
now we need that there there are
teachers out there willing to
teach stuff we just don't have
the the the requirements that
that that that a college we need
this in order to be able to do
it so we can offer these kind of
things and sometimes it's harder
to find those that have those
those requirements that want to
come and teach high school so I
mean it it is it is a
it takes a of but a kind of a
different kind of person to be
able to love to dealing with
teenagers which I personally do
so so so in order to be able to
I love the fact that this could
be not only a pilot program for
the cyber security but it that
can be you can duplicated across
the board for anyone that is
wanting to has that desire to
meet the need for their
community so thank you thank you
very much thank you madam chair
if I might I would like to
expand a little bit on what Mr
Bowman said and that is that New
Mexico tech for a long time is
how the masters of science for
teachers we are in the process
of instituting a stem education
center which focuses on how do
we do K. twelve through college
education research for stem
specifically this piece fits in
well with that center and the M.
S. T. program is currently being
revised in a way that gives the
depth to teachers to be able to
be dual credit coming through
that program and so on thank you
for your comments thank you.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Thank you madam chair.
Appreciate that.
Excuse me Mr chair thank you for
bringing this bill up that I
appreciate the correlation you
just made with the state of the
program that does fit it and it
fits in extremely well.
The representative on the FIR on
page two of the and then down
and do the administrative
implications we're set a
precedent here on getting this
program going.
My concern there is.
What about oversight of all this
fun funding that's going to be
taking place can you explain
that further in depth please.
Rural communities to crack in
the Madam chair representative
built into this process is that
evaluation component which will
look at basically three things.
How is it being implemented is a
be implemented with fidelity.
One of the outcomes that result
but what's the impact in the
Anyway she for scaling up and so
forth so within that a value to
process there are is there will
be a series of reports on each
of those areas initially on the
implementation what's happening
how's it going who's involved
how much is it costing and so
forth how the funds being used
are they being used
appropriately and well.
So there are a series of.
Built into the process our
series of reports that do come
back to the PD to the
legislature and others that are
going to report on these three
areas.
Madam chair and representative
Mr battle when every said the
reports are going to be coming
back to the PED can you give me
the time line of when those
reports will be to is it going
to be here like this is a three
year program that is going to be
implemented so is it going to be
after what progress is being
made the first year for the the
end of the three year period.
Madam chair representative the
anticipation is for fort
preliminary reports to be
produced on a per semester
basis.
So you're looking at a minimum
of twice per year and then also
a full report on the annual
basis an accumulative report at
the end.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative madam chair
that's all I have thank you very
much thank you Representative.
Thank you very much madam chair
and Mr chair
where is this in the
appropriation process so this be
part of house bill two.
Madam vice chair representative
currently not part but hoping to
fit in either on the house side
or back on the Senate side so
the practice miss madam chair
Mister chair so the prognosis is
good for this being included.
madam vice chair representative
hopefully.
Thank you that's all I had I'm
in full support of this bill.
Thank you this important
question Representative corolla.
Thank you madam chair I move to
the past from the house bill
twenty six.
No second if there's a move in
second I do have a few questions
before we go to the vote
I Representative I'm excited
about it.
But question it says only early
college high schools how many
early college high schools and
why I Representative volcano
Vista high school that has
probably qualified people to do
the program so can you elaborate
on that.
I manager I'd be happy to
There's a couple reasons one
it's a pilot so we have to look
at we have to look at the
context in which the pilot
process occurs we need to do it
in a place where the weather of
the optimum conditions for full
implementation the reason why we
look at the early college high
school since two for one to our
other projects worker doing at
the RAC we already have direct
communication collaboration with
us high school so.
Preclude they already know who
we are we are do they are okay
we know what their conditions
are we do the hard part is our
with the student counts are all
the so there's a lot of just
background knowledge and
relationship but a facilitate
the implementation but the
second piece as maybe a bit more
on a practical level the early
college high schools are already
designed in such a way that
students are spending the
majority of their final few
years taking just higher
education courses they already
have their process he set up for
it having kids rules for doing
the scheduling for doing all of
those kinds of things that would
facilitate student access to
this.
So because because we're not
testing early college high
schools the models pretty well
proven we're not testing early
college versus traditional high
schools were really testing the
models we want to make sure
there is few interruptions or
barriers to full implementation.
Of the model itself and for that
reason we selected to work with
the early college high schools
through this.
And madam chair would like to
say we've discussed from the
very beginning that during the
pilot it would be early college
high schools but we certainly
want to make this available
across the entire state because
its distance and a teacher at
the school the issue for very
small schools would be can they
have a teacher doing this if
there's only a few students and
how could we work with schools
collaborative Lee to be able to
facilitate.
Maybe there's a teacher at one
of five schools that can
facilitate for five schools if
we come up with agreements for
that but that's going to take
more time to figure out and so
to be able to roll this out and
get started we wanted to start
with the groups where there's
already all of the
collaboration and
infrastructures in place.
So how many my question
presented event thank this is
how many early child.
Which sectors.
One minute early childhood early
college I do the same when he
early college high schools does
your RAC currently work with.
We are we are currently working
with eleven directly and
indirectly with all twenty.
Okay.
Thank you and let's see.
you know my only fear is that
after these high school teachers
get what's actually gonna be
twenty units of graduate credit
we're gonna go in the cyber
security field.
So okay those Wiley questions
we've had a motion from
Representative corolla and a
second from Representative
Roybal cover yadda is there
anybody in opposition to this
bill.
Single local.
Charisma and for that okay and
in the same position
Representative you have a bill
you have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair committee
and I noticed a bunch of people
here of the younger age than
older age with badges on do you
want to introduce who you are.
Hello the rights of our from
help using high school.
I am a senior this year I'm
planning on going on all of that
For the okay are you all one
group.
If you can quickly cells before
we adjourn of here why we're
here.
That's why I'm frustrated
Albuquerque high and we're all
part of New Mexico based on
which is a club and I know that
our school we meet every
Tuesday.
Every Tuesday during lunch and
we're really focused all right.
Engineering and science in
general.
Find a lot of.
Thank you.
And yet just quickly introduce
yourselves and thanks for
mentioned that it's mesa great
program.
Session.
Hi is this New Mexico with.
Thank you and I.
A school and I'm part of New
Mexico.
And Justin Bentley I.
Representative and it's the next
Gen County and I and part of
Mexico Mexico.
I'm from the G..
My name's Our Lady agents and
I'm a sophomore next to.
And teachers.
Spot club Sanchez.
With that ladies are on active.
J. Phillips has teach math
advertised Loralai and I teach a
environmental science at next
and.
Thanks bye Florence I teach math
that was on my screen.
As a.
Thank you this is some of the
kinds of students that could be
in this program that we just
talked about thank you for being
here.
see no further business we will.
