So returning members will
probably recognize some of them
as we've heard them before in
the past which is awesome our
new members welcome and you'll
be hearing these hopefully have
everything you need for this
first meeting
and this is kind of our first
day of school so
welcome and if there are any
issues will address them we can
address them with you all
just please let us know make
sure everybody has what they
need on time so that once we hit
our stride we can get there and
keep going okay but with that I
don't see representative
Thompson.
Representative Thomson.
I've heard she may be on for way
if that's the case and if so
execution committee if we move
to house one twenty five since
money I can present to
And we can go from there so will
move to house bill one twenty
five for the time.
Okay so we'll give us care
Romero moment to get his things
together and then we'll start.
And everybody it is right behind
have to.
In your a notebook and Linda
thank you so much for preparing
our notebooks we're having
trouble with this tricks so we
really appreciate that.
In Mr chair if you're ready and
if you can introduce your expert
witness as well great thank you
madam chair and I'll let him
introduce himself here in a
moment but this is house bill
one twenty five and it's
requesting a task force the put
together for to credit to credit
I think it's an important aspect
of our education system and
something that in the high
school bill that we heard on in
on Monday through the
legislative education study
committee is an important piece
of that puzzle for students
headed into college or career so
this is pulling together
The universities colleges and
the various departments together
to address some of the key
issues in the dual credit system
so allow my experts introduce
himself and if you have any
brief comments please sure I'm
always happy to be reduces the
expert
so I'm David Bowman I'm the
executive director of the four
corners regionalization
cooperative number one up in
Farmington.
Serving six districts plus the
the entire state one of the
issues that we've been looking
at statewide the last few years
is the issue of dual credit
options for students we know
that the dual credit program has
just grown exponentially over
the years providing a lot of
options for kids and in multiple
areas the other thing that we
know both locally and nationally
is that kids were graduating
from high school with.
College level credit or for more
likely to finish their four year
degrees than those students to
doubt so it behooves us to take
a very good look I think at what
what is actually happening or
dual credit environment
statewide is one of the things
that become very apparent is
that policies practices
conditions factors that either
serve as benefits are very or
students in dual credit or kind
of all over the place of the
state
the agreements of high schools
put into place with their
partner institutions of higher
education very from institution
to institution but we know there
are some very good programs are
some some exemplary programs out
there that are really helping
students make progress so we
want to take a look at what's
happening what's working can we
define some metrics to identify
those high performing programs
and then see what kind of
advantages or barriers students
might have in accessing them and
that would be the purpose of
this task force okay and with
that madam chair will stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you very much I will start
with
input from our people in the
audience do we have an online
capacity or not today.
We do madam chair.
Okay they're on the attendees
side so if you would just allow
this to the top.
And then disallow I guess.
Forgive us for.
Technical changes.
Okay but we're going to start is
there anybody opposed to this
bill.
K. C. nobody propose will start
with those in favor I'm going to
start online and Vanessa Hawker.
You are on and able to talk now.
Good morning thank you thank you
madam chair.
The New Mexico independent
community colleges of which I am
the executive director for N. M.
I. C. C. we support house bill
one twenty five if we want to
think chairman Merrill for
bringing this piece of
legislation forward ask the
witness there are many great
examples of how dual credit our
students how can we make it
better what are best practices
that are out there and we
wholeheartedly support this
thank you thank you.
A.
And we do in the.
No we don't wanna do that sorry.
Related to stick to your okay.
Okay in our audience will start
on this side will start with Mr
rounds.
Thank you madam chair members of
the body I'm stand around your
to help you win your usual
suspects.
Representative Mexico school
superintendents and the
coalition of education leaders
Khagaria eighteen different
filius is everybody good
minister school districts and
school districts.
That's more sobering to today
uniquely I I would have been
very involved as a twenty seven
year superintendent is New
Mexico I began the early college
high school process which is
part of this question you're
looking.
with that is our dual credit
issues as David talking about
this is sandy we do need to have
an opportunity to look at the
design and provide the best
process for for certified fire
education and look what happens
in the high schools we send a
strong supporter of this matter
and we would only note that in
your list of those on the
committee one of mission I think
you might want to think about
our school boards because they
become the policy body for the
administrators doing that work
and as we move that policy for
the statewide level I recommend
you might have been to the list
on the committee thank.
Morning Mr Madam chairman
members of the committee willing
they are to start Representative
The New Mexico school board
association and I have to think
stand for the comment because we
were going to say that as well
so we have to supporters back on
we know that the federal credit
courses have a positive effect
on students it helps them to
graduate from high school
because of interest that they
want to get into it there's a
lot of have to move forward on
to college and those.
Credit courses are graduating
from high school at a higher
rate than those students that
are not dual credit courses so
we totally support that of the
school board association as a
position that supports any
access to dual credit programs
and we also oppose any
restrictions to limit students
are going to do all of for the
dual credit enrollment through
that process so we're excited
that there's a task force that
will look at this and look at
the issues regarding the course
offerings the roll meant
practices the hiring practices
to credit transparency as a
password for Darius providing
some of our students from
attending courses so we
wholeheartedly support the bill
we think the sponsor permanent
forward and we do suggest if
you're interested in having a
school board member
Representative and sit on this
Task Force we certainly would be
happy to present one for you
thank you very much thank you.
Chair members of the committee
Care candidate with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter.
as a former dual credit
professor I really I'm a huge
supporter of this I've taught
social work when I won and
psychology when I want and I
physically went into the high
schools and taught those classes
and the relationships that you
form through western New Mexico
university in Grant County the
relationships that you form with
the students are lifelong and I
had many of the students who had
planned to go to college decide
to go to college and I had
wanted to students who have
become social workers as a
result of that and we're and it
was it is just so rewarding they
also then if they choose to go
to your university have a person
of contact within that
university and that only
increases their incentives to
complete college thank you very
much.
Morning madam chair please be
with Mexico State University and
we stand in support of this bill
I'm going to piggyback off of
will stay around state also
encourage you all to consider.
including members from the
French community colleges
it would be helpful to have
input from thank.
You very much I thank the
sponsor for taking on this
issue.
Thank you.
From the front.
Good morning vice chair Garrett
members of the committee thank
you for hearing this bill this
morning my name is Bobby tenants
and I am the executive director
of the regional education
cooperatives association
representing all ten of the
cooperative statewide and we
support this bill it's needed I
believe and as a former
superintendent I would
wholeheartedly support this bill
as well but I think this is very
important to rural education
there sixty nine of those
districts that we serve in your
state and grateful to our
executive director David Bowman
for working on this bill and
obtaining sponsorship for so we
do stand in support your REC
thank you New Mexico.
The.
One of the S. thank you madam
chair
And members of the committee
first of all I just want to
start by saying thank you thank
you for your hard work
commitment years NASA the to
bring the changed our public
schools are community centers to
the state so thank you very much
Alan we have four members we
support this bill it's a very
common you know common sense
bill very straightforward
we know horses will benefit with
all credit we do ask that if we
can include teachers and
students on home on the task
force I know we might get a
little bit complicated
consideration and
we think the sponsor for
bringing it forth and we ask
that you support thank you very
much.
Thank you.
good morning and chair members
of the committee it is such a
pleasure to be here with you for
a few moments system
Since.
Right I think all of this
medication have talked for years
after we connect K. twelve and
higher is and your credit is one
of those wonderful opportunities
where we build a bridge between
the two yes the same time there
are a lot of challenges and in
my eyes talking the
superintendents and directors.
What you find for very schools
and higher institutions is that
all right we have instances
where students high school
students will go to the campus
sit in a classroom we will have
opportunities where high school
students will take a course
online arriving there may not
have supported their high school
we have instances where a high
school teacher is recognized as
an adjunct faculty at a higher
rate institution and therefore
can teach the classes there
school and my point is you have
a whole panorama of
opportunities for students and
some of those students don't
have those opportunities because
they're barriers so this makes
the case for grow bus arrived
Task Force and looking at all of
the circumstances with the best
practices and being able to
advise us on how to really
connect our K. twelve higher
institutions it makes perfect
sense and it's a joy to be with
you and I hope you have a.
Thank you for.
I think this is the best proof
is there that wishes to speak.
We'll go to questions members
purposes Representative.
The office.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
The the rumor on the street is
that chair Romero's introducing
a high school graduation reform
bill and so I'm curious madam
chair if if chair more which
would be kind enough to speak to
how that bill changes anything
regard dual credit how this
study might help the initiative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative lane for the
questions at the high school
graduation bill
is still looking to emphasize to
twelve so students will be able
to to gain their high school
credit just you know in the name
high school credit as well as
college university credit for
the classes that they take so I
think that the fact that we're
introducing the the high school
bill along with the task force
to study these things is a
logical next step into looking
at the higher education system
as a whole and how it fits into
our our secondary system.
Thank you.
Representative Baca and then
Representative Ezzell thank you
madam chairman the thank you Mr
chairman I do support due credit
of my only question is regarding
an appropriation for cost
you know it was we're talking
about bring these people
together these these
stakeholders I think important
but it is our need for certain
appropriation whether there be
time for meeting new supplies
travel or otherwise that I think
would be kind of of somewhere
fit in this bill because I want
to make sure that you have the
money to do.
What it is you need to do but I
do that was my question and Mr
chairman yeah madam vice chair
and representative of Bach I
think that's a good question and
it's something we've kind of
mulled over a little bit in
looking at the task force and
we've had a few examples I think
it was
principal task force if I
remember correctly from PED that
didn't have an appropriation and
did not have
money appropriated for the
particular task force yet there
were high participation rates in
some of those programs so
currently not that there is no
appropriation and I don't see it
as necessarily necessary for the
task force.
Thank you madam chair I I again
I'm just as as sitting on the
house Appropriations I think if
you guys gonna have in person
meetings and you know talking
about people that are traveling
coming in from different places
because I want to make sure that
we
you know compensate these that
is are not being asked to pay
out of the pocket for for
certain costs associated with
this committee and and thank you
madam chair my last question
regarding this is also who pays
is it is a Correa who pays for
the dual credit is at the school
district is it to a higher ed
and I don't know if this needs
to be kind of clarified or if
it's you may already be
consistency what thank you madam
I may very quickly madam chair
and your point Representative
Bach as any one of the things is
also an option is not
necessarily travel but the fact
that we have you know wider use
of technological means to me and
to gather people together when
it's more convenient so that we
don't necessarily have to have
to drive back and forth so
course that's a possibility that
that the task force please but
Madam yes thank you madam chair
representative back up.
So the state does provide some
funding to institutions that
provide dual credit however one
thing that
it's always been kind of a sore
point honestly that I've heard
from a very high rate partners
is that is that how do credit
students or.
The callers universities do not
receive tuition for the dual
credit students so what will
often happen is those students
will be basically integrated
into classes with tuition paying
students.
And which is right helps to
mitigate the costs from higher
right side but it also means in
many cases that sometimes
instructional delivery is geared
towards an older more mature
student so that's that is
definitely something I would
expect this task force would
look at the efficacy of the and
just the weather is trying to
kind of revisit the question of
whether or not the higher rates
can receive tuition for dual
credit students with a question
to be answered and thank you
madam chair I do support this
bill.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
appreciate this bill
tremendously just a little
history behind it those
seventeen years ago a former
Attorney General Hector Balderas
night carried matching bills on
this and it was very beneficial
to our smaller school districts
such as dexter high command like
Arthur loving those types of
school and we implemented the
distance learning part of it
which then and came up for.
Our local community colleges got
involved in that it's been
nothing but beneficial to the
students it's always.
It always does a person good
whenever they hear parents say
my child will be the first one
out of our families that will
never graduate from college my
question is though madam chair
and
Chair Romero this is cut.
Of.
Why is that PED secretary to
have the final say on who's
going to be part of the press
the superintendents association
or anybody for more local
control going to be able to fill
these positions on the task
force that is my question.
Madam chair
Representative Ezzell I think
final say as far as the public
education department that we're
looking for you know some sort
of statewide initiative and
guidelines that we as a
legislature can really look into
and would certainly be happy to
once the task force is is
complete and their work in the
recommendations are made to work
with the public education
department and our
superintendents that will can do
and where the flexibility may
be.
So madam chair of chairman
Romero I appreciate your
response but I know that
whenever I went home last year
in here before I was being
hammered with local control
local control local control and
to me that's very important
because I think when we do have
these meetings of our particular
district for all the
superintendents and principals
get together it is very
beneficial to hear what they all
have the same as more often than
not they are all in agreement on
what should happen so I think
that the representation from.
I don't want this and and I
don't want to send crest here
but yes in a way I know why will
come off sounding that way.
Why would the secretary of H. G.
D. in the secretary of PED be
the one that does the selection
whenever they're really not to I
don't want to see.
This committee stacked.
Okay if you get my drift.
We have lots of smaller schools
I feel that are being under
represented.
And therefore.
Whether we're talking about the
secretary PED in particular at
the the turnover that comes with
that particular office is
disturbing to me and I think we
need more of a.
Committee make up of those that
do have boots on the ground
madam chair thank you very much.
Like to make any response to
that I'm I'm Madam chair
representative so I think within
the
guidelines of the bill some of
the members that are to be
appointed are school
superintendents
and high school principals as
well so.
We're leaving it in their hands
so that's a point well taken but
I also trusted member we have is
willing to work with both urban
and rural school districts to
make sure that the appointment
is not and to use your words
stacked in one favor the other
because I can see that as a
detriment but I think it's
incumbent to leave it in their
hands and that there will be
representation from these
numbers there.
Madam chair chair Romero I
appreciate the response rate
there I did see that but it
still gives us a little bit of
concern there one thing that I
do want to point out to the
audience that they are not.
Able to fully meet these that I
know sometimes there's problems
at the reef resulted is in part
of it under the FIR two.
let's see and we're the next to
last paragraph forces the SCG
does disburses funds.
And I I do.
I am impressed at what I'm
seeing here the dual credit
students consists constituted
sixty three percent of
enrollment and isolated
community college.
And then it goes on to talk
about the dual credit hours
being in the funding formula is.
And it's.
They got a little bit problem
there.
So I.
Madam chair and chairman Romero
how are we going to solve that
problem and he does get the
funding.
Is it rolled in their district
or is it
I don't know I just I just know
that this does help their ACT
score.
If I may madam chair
representative to be self.
I think I think you're
pinpointing one of the central
reasons for bringing this bill
forward in the first place.
Which is that while there are
some support for students taking
these courses that we in.
Indisputable of the advantage
that this brings to students
were able to successfully clean
complete their high.
Complete college credits.
The the funding formula itself
maybe one of those issues that
this task force could take a
look at to see whether or not it
is supporting restricting or
frankly is outside the scope of
influence on the number and the
of students are taking dual
credit the types of courses that
are available to the the nature
of those courses whether they're
in person on campus in person
high school online and so forth
so you I think you're asking
you're asking a critical
question.
One that we ourselves asked when
we started thinking about this
entire topic but because it's so
critical it behooves the state
honestly to take a look at that
question and see we come up with
a reasonable answer.
And madam chair I I really
appreciate your response but I
know that there might be K. I
don't know if this is the right
terminology or not double funded
students would that be an
appropriate analogy of what we
might be seeing whenever this
study to further.
Madam chair representative
result I will go back to the
point that currently the the
institutions do not receive
tuition credit for those
students
so low but looking at the SCG
and whether or not that's going
to allow funding to flow to the
area to support that would be
something that would be of value
to this committee for this task
force and madam chair
Representative chairman Romero I
agree wholeheartedly with that
because that was one of the.
This that we faced whenever the
And gas tank.
The distance learning program
went into effect.
And.
Thank our local community
colleges did welcome the
students but the problem was the
funding part of it so maybe this
can be worked out to the vantage
of the schools and especially to
students madam chair thank you
very much.
Representative Mirabel Lloyd.
Thank you madam chair good
morning I am I have a lot of
similar concerns as
Representative Ezzell I am a
teacher in in a rural community
and and the smaller
districts so I I want to make
sure I'm a little concerned
along with the Representative
was as L. that the secretary of
public education who we've had
what like for in the last five
years for five in the last five
years and is a high turnover
rate are is this task force
going to constantly change
depending on who is sitting in
that office and and are these
going to be able to get some
continuity from that being that
they're the ones that choose
who's who who's in here.
Madam chair and representative
that's hard to predict I think
within the bill we have it's the
secretary I believe it's six
months is the task force
duration we certainly have a few
secretaries of education that
have been here for that time so
whomever is here would make the
appointments and see through
these task force despite who may
be in leadership at AGD or the
public education department
excellent thank you madam chair
and and chair Romero I have a
one one last question as far as
selecting them do you do for C.
like it gonna be like an
application process the people
that that really want to to be
part of it and then the the the
secretary of education be able
to select from that process or
is it just pure appointment at
that point
Madam chair representative I
think it's a mix of things make
the application process it could
be working with some of the
stakeholders that spoke out in
the audience to identify who has
a particular interest in their
district so that we can get
diversification and who might be
in these different school
districts that are working
exclusively with exclusively
with dual credit so that's part
of the reason leaving it up to
these figures in order to sort
that out and leveraging those
relationships that they already
have excellent thank you madam
chair Jr Romero I would love to
see teachers and students part
of this being a teacher that is
taught AP courses myself so I
would love to for them to have a
voice but thank you very much.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Mr chair.
For this bill I have just a
couple of questions I looked at
the bill and I see in all of the
to do this on the test for the
test for shelf.
Everything is
concerning administering
procedures in excess of
concerning how the tool dual
credit will work I'm wondering
if it also the task force will
also be addressing
actual course curriculum and
degree offerings of and how
those will be
how the students will be able to
access those and I have a reason
for the for the question but I
just wanted to start with that
Madam chair representative I I
think I know having worked
together where that may be
coming from but that's no that's
not part of scope of this but
like Representative lane had
mentioned is that within the
high school bill that we have
has a broad range of
possibilities that could
incorporate some of the courses
of study that you are you are
looking for an advocating for so
well it's not addressed here
specifically I think through the
high school credit bills opens
up those opportunities for more
and more dual credit
possibilities.
thank you.
Madam chair and Mr chair so
thank you for that in the end
you're correct and looking at
next that is as a whole and how
all of that's going to be
incorporated so then that final
question is
the current dual credit council
that exists will the work of the
dual credit council.
Be a merged into what the task
force work will be doing will it
be to the are they still can
operate two separate or will
they integrate their work.
If I might madam chair and
representative there would be
there would be an overlap and
integration of the two this task
forces is a very specific and
kind of narrowly defined charge
which is as a subset of the
overall emphasis statewide on
dual credit but to really look
specifically at various
components of the dual credit so
certainly the the other
organization is going to be able
to provide input and provide
some of the context in which
this may take place so we're not
duplicating basically but but
but in this case to look very
narrowly at a specific set of
criteria look for the specific
best practices some of those
issues that perhaps other
organizations is not focused on
another charge.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you with kids that will improve
the the access and very much
thank you.
Thank you and I have just one
question
Chair Romero in Mister Bowman
there's nothing that precludes
this panel from calling students
school board members teachers
and all the people that have
been referred to right in the
course of their task force me
just madam chair I think that's
a good point no there is nothing
that that would exclude anybody
from this process.
Okay thank you seen
I was I make a motion to approve
this bill madam chair thank you
Mr second.
Okay second from Representative
Ezzell is there any opposition
to this bill.
Okay help me with the correct
language.
The no opposition say no
opposition we have we had a
through pass we have a do we
have.
Four house bill one twenty five
thank you very much or thank you
members thank you madam chair
the committee.
And seeing that the presenter of
our next bills in the house we
invite representative Thompson
to come forward.
Thank you get it Mr chair
Senator Woods and ready.
so which bill do you want me to
know for thirty nine will go in
our.
Thirty nine there it is okay.
I don't know numbers of my
bills.
So Mr chair members of the
committee this is actually this
is a bill I've run many years
and I first started working on
getting
people who are not teachers
included on the three tier
system when the three tier
system was first begun.
Senator Stewart and
Representative Stewart was the
sponsor and we worked with her
really hard and and for I I for
those of you you Fund giving you
too much information let me know
but for but the support
providers that I'm talking about
here are people like
interpreters for the deaf
orientation and mobility
instructor for the blind and
speech language pathologists
occupational therapist physical
therapists social workers all
those people who are educators
but not teachers.
And the at the time when at the
in the beginning I was very
interested in it
Because it just felt like that
was the fair thing to do and
having sat on probation for four
years frequently they would come
in and say we're giving teachers
a two percent raise and I take
no educators may take no
teachers so so we the in in all
honesty I I was one of those
providers for years I'm no
longer one I'm a school physical
therapist and now and so win
races came it was an easy way to
save money and just leave out a
whole group of people and with
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
special ed is one of the the
targeted areas in these are the
people who support.
Students with disabilities and
so basically what it does is
puts the those kind of providers
on the three tier system and in
the bill it's it's a little bit
complicated because there's so
much so so much to change but
basically all it does is set out
the qualifications for level one
level two level three ancillary
or related services providers
and put them on the three tier
system so that when raise this
come around there's no more
ability to discriminate is how I
view it so with that madam chair
I stepped I'm sorry I was in a
madam chair committee Mr chair.
I'm still kind of I will stand
for questions right thank you
Representative Thomson so we
will go to public testimony so
for this I'll ask those members
that are participating V. as
soon to please indicate by
raising their hand if you wish
to speak in support of house
bill thirty nine and so while
you all do that please keep your
hands up online although to our
audience here those in support
of house bill thirty nine please
indicate by raising your hand.
Okay so I will go if you would
please keep them up when I ask
so I can make sure we get
through everybody but you'll
have up to two minutes but
prefer is better so start in the
front ma'am please he of up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you mind the line first
with disabilities multiple
disabilities and and support of
the bill an interesting title
the other the comments
thank you very much Mr chairman
of the committee Representative
Thomson thank you so much for
being here this.
Mr chair members of the
committee ability or tease
Representative Mexico for
substation and we have over the
years supported the expansion of
the teacher license are and have
always wanted professionals to
be included in there
wholeheartedly support this bill
so that our service staff is
also part of that progressive
salary increases we support it
yes but we do ask the
consideration today to attack
appropriations bill I did not
seem appropriation on because
you don't want to create future
unfunded mandates for school
districts to try to shoulder the
cost of this with her and we
couldn't for and we just that to
be considered and thank the
sponsor someone programs forward
the New Mexico scored
Association wholeheartedly
support system.
Great thank you others in the
second row ma'am please welcome
give us two minutes.
On chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we want to think of
representative Thompson for
continuing to fight this battle
F. for us
we I am aware that some of you
may have received some calls
from social workers urging you
to support to it not support
this but we are and and we
understand this is not a perfect
bill
there are still issues to be
hammered out but ultimately the
national associate particularly
in the area of hiring but the
but the national association of
social workers feels very
strongly that this nail bill
needs to go forward because
there are rural social workers
that will not receive that will
not receive the pay raises a lot
of the urban schools they
collectively bargained and have
received these the pay raises
that the teachers did last year
however many of the rural social
workers have not received does
have not have not had the same
luxury and if this bill does not
go through many of those people
will not receive pay raises so
ultimately it's for our rural
social workers that we stand
here today in support of this
bill thank you very much thank.
Thank you so we'll go to the
next round please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
my name is Lisa deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on poverty and one of the
attorneys representing the job
the plaintiffs in the other
working as lawsuit and NMC O. P.
and transform education New
Mexico stand in full support of
this bill we also think the
sponsor for her tireless work in
this area
the judging outdoor Tina's on
found that access to services
such as the real health mental
health and social services are
part of this exhibition
Education and we know that the
services improve academic
outcomes for students and
quality of life the districts
continue to lack the resources
necessary to
we provide the services our
students and we know that there
are forces the thing shortages
and that the work well so we
fully support this this bill and
and hopefully will
Thank you great thank you others
in the third row that I see that
which speak in favor all right
so we'll go to the next round so
please welcome.
Committee members meetings with
Holland president eighteen
Mexico on behalf of the yeah
stand strong support bill this
is the next needs that forward
to address a long standing
problem that many educators
contribute to the success of our
students and this legislation
seeks to ensure that districts
receive funding from the state
to equitably cater to license
program as that issue for you
let me go ciation devices like
Albuquerque Rio Rancho HB thirty
nine would not reduce our
override bargaining agreements
to would rather establish a
minimum rate of pay for this
critical group five hundred
legislative session has been
progress not perfection at the
most impressive level this
legislation is progress and help
ensure that districts across New
Mexico would have the resources
to hire professionals to serve
our students thank you.
Great thank you others in that
next road which speak in favor
of house bill thirty nine.
Next row anyone in support all
right so we'll switch to the
room we'll go buy a roll up
please up to two minutes
welcome.
Thank you Mr chair.
Members of the committee
I'm station is government
relations director for a knee
New Mexico and on behalf of our
members we support this bill
because it brings to light.
The issue of the ongoing
shortage of educators all across
the state and it also offers a
viable and effective in long
term solution to this problem.
This legislation will bring
equity in pay.
For all not for school
professionals and we packed the
retention recruitment of
educators that we so desperately
need.
But most importantly has
mentioned right now it will have
a significant impact on the
students he has a Martinez I
thank the sponsor for bring
forth this bill and we ask that
you consider putting the paper
press.
Thank you others I wish to speak
in favor Sir my name is crystal
Roy Mr chair at the level of the
committee I representative of
of of our New Mexico
Representative people with
intellectual disabilities
throughout the state we stand
strong support of this bill and
would like to thank
Representative Thomson for
retire was offered and pursuing
actions for the rights of people
with disabilities throughout the
state thank you for.
Thank thank you others in that
row okay we'll go to the next
room from the end please chair
members of the committee Jim
Jackson here for disability
rights New Mexico this is a bill
that's going to support of
variety professionals who serve
our students with disabilities
in the public schools and we
strongly support it and
appreciate the sponsoring this
fourth thank you.
Right thank you others in that
row wish speaking support.
The back rows any support okay
so we will go to our online list
of supporters so we'll start off
with Ellen.
Good morning Ellen welcome here
with us you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members the committee and happy
to be here virtually with you
this morning my name is Ellen
burns Steen and president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
I represent almost one thousand
support related service
educators we're all working in
public schools to ensure that we
staff our schools based on the
needs of the students and it's
recommended that every school
have a mental physical health
team comprised of teachers and
other support staff what we need
to do is to ensure that local
districts have the support that
they need to attract and retain
all of these person as we have
with the teachers as we have
increase their salaries it is
recommended that in general
education we have one to five
hundred students for social
workers one to two hundred fifty
students for a school counselors
and a school nurse in every
single school many districts
like Albuquerque have used
scarce discretionary funds to
ensure that we have equitable
salaries for all the person we
need for the needs of our
students and I support this bill
and thank the sponsor for her on
going efforts to ensure that
every district is able to
attract and retain the essential
personnel that we all need thank
you.
Thank thank you.
All right so we'll go to the NM
chapter in A. S. W. if you would
please identify who you are
specifically and then you have
up to two minutes.
Welcome to our thank you thank
you.
This is my guitar and executive
director for the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and so just
to support but everybody has
said already and I guess the
other thing that I would add one
of the complications is when you
when bills like this are written
and people are left out we're
districts it's left to
interpretation I think that
becomes problematic so if we
could just be cognizant of that
at least but we are very
enthusiastically in support of
this bill and we appreciate
being recognized and it's
probably one of the few places
that your license bachelor
social workers can get
recognized and it creates a
pathway of mentorship and
professional development excuse
me.
So
so that's what I would just
so thank you right thank you.
All right so we'll go to our
audience here and online if
you're online and here in
opposition to house bill thirty
nine if you would please
indicate by raising your hand
those in our audience here with
us in opposition to house bill
thirty nine please indicate by
raising your hand.
Okay we have one but I suspect
that needs to be lowered there
we go I have the capability
awesome so we have no opposition
right welcome to committee so
Representative Baca.
Please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative Thompson I
just have a couple questions I I
understand the need for this but
I think
for the list of people that are
included under this umbrella
What what what job losses are
categories are actually included
under this instructional support
provider.
And.
The Mr chair that the title of
this bill is duly licensed so
that means people who are
licensed as a speech language
pathologist and licensed by PED
so it it can it's a variety of
it's social workers physical
therapists occupational
therapists speech and language
pathologists audiologists
interpreters for the deaf
orientation and mobility for
students who are blind
recreation therapist at a
different school districts have
different you know and in I know
internally they have a lot of
recreation therapists other
districts don't have that so
it's pretty much anybody who is
a licensed professional in their
professional with the second
license in in with PED and thank
you Mr chairman I guess that's
just what I want to make sure is
because there is a difference of
in over between school districts
that we make sure we catch
people like sign language
interpreter otherwise so I think
that's what I want to make sure
that there is
that basically definition or
ability for local control and
and that also goes Mr chairman
and of Representative.
For the local control for
percent districts there to go
above and beyond this they they
may even have a separate solar
schedule for ancillary
providers.
Does your bill in anyway.
Them from having local control
decision making Mr chair no
these are these are floors if
and and I will be perfectly
honest chances are not good you
will get a physical therapist at
fifty thousand dollars a year
because I mean even now I
haven't been practicing for
three years I get probably five
emails a week with job offers so
the districts understand that
they're going to have to pay but
this is this is yes create a
floor and and that districts can
pay as much more as they are
willing to are able to and and
yes APS has that that has a
three tiers as separate salary
schedule for for ancillary type
folks but this will not
interfere with the with that
local control of for the
bargaining between the unions
and the districts as to what to
pay it just makes the floor and
the most important thing at this
point I think is to make sure
that would raises are given now
that group is that that money
people don't have a way to just
put that group out the state no
you don't get the race thank you
Mr chairman my last question is
regarding the funding we know
that many of these as for
positions are funded through the
SCG right.
So this but some of these
categories are not.
And you know as far as I know
like there's each like answer
unit like a speech language
pathologist may generate twenty
five units as far as on the SCG.
But not everyone of these people
that are going to be covered
under this broad umbrella which
I I I agree how we can address
it and how what kind of
impact will that have on local
school districts in being able
to meet the requirements or the
standard for those minimum
Salars Mr chairman this Mr chair
and representative Baca I'm.
We already exist in the schools
and we're already getting paid
at and I'm not sure what the
process Pacific we what what
professionals here sign language
interpreters are are include I
mean everyone is included like I
said Bernalillo schools Mr chair
has recreation therapist I do
not know how they are funded but
Bernalillo schools have made
that the decision to use those
people and so they figured out a
way I'm not going to you know
prescribed Mr chair
representative Baca exactly what
the first few federations of
this bill listed out
exactly who the professionals
were but then we realize that
different districts that do
different things and if we
listed them out we would leave
out somebody so we've left it by
being duly licensed and if if
the SCG it is twenty five times
the student value per FTE for
these positions if the school
district has figured out a way
to pay recreation therapists
that are not on on the SCG then
good for them but it doesn't
this if the school district
can't do it then maybe can't do
it I mean and that this isn't
going to change that.
It is thank you please Mr
chairman and reps you just you
and I had a conversation no
actually with thousand charge of
oversaw special ed for nine
years and in as we so I I
definitely have a passion for
the so please understand might
might Michael for asking the
question is it to say Hey this
isn't what we need to do it's
more about for small rural
districts you know there has to
be a mechanism within the SCG or
the funding formula to help with
providing that extra funds to
flow through the state to the
local districts to will make
that and I understand that many
small districts go through are
you cease and regional
cooperatives and that's what I
want to bring up about is in the
funding formula is are going to
be you know with this category
how will be done other that Mr
chairman I'll follow up and want
to get more time thank three
thank you Representative
Representative Garrett please
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
forth.
kind of going off of
Representative Baca said there
there are concerns about how
people enter the system who are
in the system for example most
physical therapists now get Ph.D
it's so would they have to enter
at a level one or a social
worker who has a master's of
social work is been practicing
for ten years feels called to
enter the public school system.
How do we deal with the salary
and the levels for these people.
Mr chair representative Garrett
so.
Essentially you know if you have
a PhD in physical therapy you're
not going to go work at a school
for fifty thousand dollars the
so it's up to the district to
figure out and what is back in
the old days many districts used
contract people which is more
expensive because you have to
pay for that the agency and all
of that stuff it so basically
the school district if you want
to hire a Ph.D physical although
it's it's doctor phys DPT is
what it's called if you want to
hire a DPT and it's going to cut
you know the mandate you
interview a man they say we
won't work for less than seventy
thousand dollars that districts
can decide whether they're going
to hire them or whether they're
not in terms of the levels we
just tried to make it somewhat
similar or similar essentially
the same as the teachers but it
doesn't preclude any district
from hiring anyone at whatever
rate they need to pay to get
that person.
Okay so Mister chairman and
Representative this is my
concern that how we because this
is really really really
important so I just want to make
sure that we get it right
because I'm I have a friend as a
physical therapist I would like
to work in a school because of
his kids for example.
I don't want to preclude I I
don't want to force a situation
where they have to go in at
level one when they have these
qualifications that would really
qualify them for level three
that's my concern that we don't
make it unattractive by having
people that could entered a
higher level how can we do that
that's my question Mr chair and
Representative Garrett I'm in
the in the past it has been you
know if you you were of hospital
physical therapist for twenty
years they would count that that
as and put you on level three
essentially so I'd imagine a lot
of that will come from rural you
know figuring out with each
discipline what what makes sense
and I didn't want to get so
prescriptive in this that you
know for for a a psychologist
it's this this
It also leave some discretion to
the school district and that
means and essentially.
If if someone comes in as a
level one and they're making
level three rate it's it may not
look so great on paper that your
level one but you're making a
lot and most people care about
what they're making not what
level they are.
Right so Mr chair representative
it seems like some of this could
be worked out and PED with rules
as to what constitutes level one
level two level three I just
think it's important to do that
madam chair at I'm sorry Mr
chair Representative Garrett
it's actually and I'm of the
same opinion and as someone said
you know no bill is perfect I
know I've never done a perfect
bill so this I've been doing
this for many years and this is
what has turned out and yet we
can always come back and tweak
it if we find that so but I I
believe it's really important
that we get this on the books AS
a.
Okay thank you this from my
questions Mr chair thank you
Representative Representative
Trujillo I move to support this
bill.
Two passed to pass out the new
B..
I'm very new.
All right so we have a due pass
motion second by Representative
Roybal K. before I go to that
motion Representative itself
with questions please.
Mr.
Chairman thank you very much
representative Thompson a couple
questions I have why are we
using the language and your bill
starting on page one and it goes
throughout because I've circle
to do what is the difference
between too little and too late
and it's kind of confusing does
that need to be claimed that Mr
chairman and representative Mr
Mr chair and representative you
sell dual license means that
they have to licenses not duly
licensed they're licensed by the
speech and language pathology
board their license by the
occupational therapy board and
then there second license is
with the public education
department.
Okay then it can be confusing to
somebody that is reading it
Lujan is talking about the dual
license is structural support
program administrators and then
the.
Duly license instructional
support program administration
so I I didn't know if that was
going to create a problem later
on whenever somebody is trying
to make political to their
district Mr chairman and
representative Thompson in light
of the.
Concerns Representative Baca
brought up especially for more
rural schools I too might have a
problem with this if we are
already providing the schools
with the funding.
Why are we let's see here.
At a ccording to what I'm
reading in the FIR I believe
this is yes it is the F. I. R.
and I'm sure you have read Mr
Chairman representative Thompson
under significant issues the
thirty saying that the dual
license instructional support
providers already make above the
level three licensure threshold
of seventy thousand dollars are
you in agreement with that Mr
chair and representative is out
I'm I don't have the numbers in
front of me but I I'm assuming
that PED is honest and so yes
okay well Mr chairman and
representative Thompson this
particular bill as in it's
important right now there is no
appropriation for this bill and
it if this passes it will not go
into the the appropriation
amount that is showing for
twenty twenty four is pretty
substantial.
Madam chair and.
Scopes opportunity Mr chair and
representative maybe they'll
basically with these types of
providers you don't get funding
to tell you have them
essentially so if if if let's
say we'd hires a an occupational
therapist they will get twenty
five times the unit value for
that FTP so it's not like we're
giving them money if they're not
providing those services so the
money only comes when there's a
body in the position.
Mr chairman and representative
Thompson thank you for that but
it also indicates here that PED
has already estimated that the
four million dollars that most
school districts and charter
schools already pay related
service providers more than the
three a three tier minute
minimum salaries so I'm kind of
confused why there's no
appropriation now that PED or I
think it's PED let's see this
together.
L. E. S. C. I guess or PED
estimate it's gotten the next
you're going to be between three
million and six million dollars
so kind of kind of clear this up
for me okay Mr chair and
representative you sell a lot of
school districts have a lot of
openings for these kind of
positions so that money isn't
being used
so basically what it will be and
just as is noted in the fiscal
impact report most of those
types of providers are already
making more than the minimums so
if let's say with that with the
three tier anymore you know some
tiny school district is able to
get up a social worker then that
money will come out of what's it
but it's not allocated until
there's a person in that
position so I'm like SCG you
know for each student you get
this much money and whatever for
these positions it's funded when
there is someone in the position
so the money is in PED but it's
not allocated because there's so
many
they could positions so
hopefully part of this bill will
help school districts to be able
to.
Fill those positions so that the
students get the services that
they need okay.
Mr Chairman representative
Thompson one final thing I know
that you do get all the.
Analysis from the different
different areas and the this one
is from PED.
And on the.
This.
Next let's play two more
importantly the last page of.
This analysis is pointing out
that maybe the amendment and
amendment might be in place are
you saying that for each one of
them is like eleven different.
Providers that are listed there.
It is with that who who who is
the now pre frosted.
all I have is.
New Mexico state educational
retirement board a New Mexico
Public School Insurance
Authority those are the only
analysis that I have.
This is for house bill thirty
nine and what they're suggesting
is
amending subsection a.
Of section one.
Which says that the the
concluding sentence right the
primary responsibilities of
daily license instructional
support and duly license
instructional support program
administration professions are
to assistance for students and
teachers and to improve the
professional practices unethical
conduct of their members.
Which I think is important.
The members part of then it goes
on to read the sponsor the bill
my wish to consider defining the
dual license instructional
support providers and dual
license instructional support
program administrators.
Senate list them all agency are
you finding that Representative
Mr chairman.
The.
Is that the one that from
Gregory frosted.
Yes is there on your back yes
yes I thank you yeah and and as
I said before Mr chair and
representative Ezzell.
We have in the past put all of
these people these listed these
people in there but there are
other as I said like Bernalillo
schools have recreation
therapists that many other
schools do not so if we start
listing out who it is if the
school district has someone that
fits the duly licensed category
but isn't on this list then
they're left out and the idea is
to bring in all educators to the
three tier system Mr Chairman
representative Thompson I don't
mean to be labor this particular
issue you said earlier that this
was not a perfect bill I like to
pass on perfect bills were it's
going to go through each
committee and have star rating
okay before it comes to the
floor I think that
When they were talking about.
Well it's going to affect and
everything especially our more
rural areas not Bernalillo
county I don't want to talk
about them anymore I'm talking
about our rural areas here I
thank the members at it will be
very.
Efficient and helping this bill
and.
I don't know if that ever PED is
say you might want to add these
listing right here.
it gives me a little bit of
concern I understand what you're
trying to do I do support it we
do need to help.
Our rural schools are the ones
that even that they may be
getting the funding for it.
Getting the person to fill those
roles may be quite a bit of a
problem Mr speaker thank Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you Representative could I
just quickly I I wasn't
Bernalillo county it's the town
of Bernalillo because and also
as I said I have had this in
I've had these listed before and
we don't want to you know if if
the school district rural school
district can find someone who is
licensed as a vocational
rehabilitation therapists and
and we don't list them on their
then they will not be able to be
on the three tier system so
we're trying to leave it more
open to local control and people
who work in this department is
part of of education know what
duly licensed people are they
it's you know it sounds like a
foreign language to a lot of
people but the people who are
doing this work know exactly
what that means Mr Chairman
representative Thompson thank
you for that clarification there
but I think it's also important
that we the members.
I agree with what PED is saying
right here when I was talking
about the members of antiseptics
native section one.
So Mister chairman thank you for
clarifying that for me and
It might be those professionals
the to read this not
interchanging do will and duly
but it is kind of confusing to
the line that is just reading it
for the first time Mr chairman
thank you very much thank you
Representative these also before
you go to the motion I just
wanna say thank you
representative Thompson for
bringing this bill over here
right we have heard this bill
for as long as I've been chair
of this committee and we have
gone back and forth like
representative Thompson
indicates and we've rolled the
bill several times to talk about
several of the issues that were
brought up and I I think well I
agree with the representatives
L. about trying to get as near
perfect bills as possible
especially related to education
matters is that I think we've
heard this bill several times
we've been through the it's all
the issues that have been
brought up and I think
Representative Thomson has says
really done her homework which
is why she's sitting up there as
the loan sponsor with no experts
and is able to answer all of
these questions
in detail so I certainly
appreciate that we have a to
pass a motion by Representative
Trujillo we have a second by
Representative Roybal coming
into Mr Chairman representative
if the substitute motion for two
passed with no risk okay so we
have a substitute motion for you
to pass no recommendations so
this would mean that the
Education Committee for new
members does not recommend the
bill but it still moves on to
subsequent committees all right
so with that being said do we
have a second on that motion.
And
lacks a second so then I'll go
back to my original motion which
is a to pass with the
recommendations so we would be
approving this bill to move
forward if you vote yes votes of
no it would stay in committee so
madam secretary if you call the
roll on a do pass with
recommendations motion.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Ezzell thank.
Representative.
What are the.
Yes.
That yes.
Yes.
Representative yes.
Representative.
My in laws more yeah yes.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Vice chair here at yes.
Senator is down.
Just.
Representative as long as you're
in the state I believe the rules
to say you have to cast a vote.
We could still unanswered if you
wish.
Thank.
She said as long as you're in
the room I'm being told those
are the house rules which
providing.
Is yes thanks to.
Yes.
Probation center by a vote of
nine.
Yeses and zero knows you have a
to pass on house bill thirty
nine thank you Representative
hopefully this is the year.
All right so next we have
Representative our house bill
forty three we have
Representative Thomson.
Please representative Thompson
thank you Mr Mr chair and
members this this bill is
another one that you've heard
for many years we made it as far
as the Senate floor one year and
someone got to be in our upper
under their settle and the rail
that but I will just say that
the last time we ran this it
passed the house
by a.
Fifty eight days and seven knows
so so it's a popular bill we've
been working on it for years
essentially what it does is that
it in the health classes of the
school or high school wherever
they're taught that affirmative
consent to be taught as the
standard for sexual activity
essentially so that not saying
no doesn't mean yes not being
passed out are being passed out
doesn't mean yes being unable to
speak does that mean yes only
yes means yes that's my subtitle
for this bill so I have an
expert in we have a huge
coalition of folks who have
worked on this for five years I
don't know something like that
so I'm gonna let my expert go
from there.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name's just Clark
and the director prevention for
the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs in that
role I support prevention
educators across New Mexico who
provide life changing
affirmative consent education.
Affirmative consent education
help students understand that
sexual violence is not only the
stranger assaults so often
presented in media and which
rarely resembles housekeeper
people actually assaulted in
real life but also that people
we care about and are in
relationship with can cross
boundaries and cause harm among
students for whom the latter is
true having their experience
named in a classroom can be the
first move to accessing support.
On that affirmative consent
education give students tools to
build and navigate relationships
that they want on their terms I
personally spent ten years
teaching affirmative consent to
students across northern New
Mexico and the number one
comment I got from teachers who
were present during our sessions
was that they wish they would
have had this education when
they were young.
That would have saved them years
of confusion and sometimes
extraordinary pain HB forty
three will help us ensure that
ten years from now today's
students won't have to say the
same.
Thank you.
Thank you all stand for
questions yes all right thank
you so much so we will go to.
The members online we will go to
support for house bill forty
three if you can indicate by
raising your hand and then just
keep them up and then we for our
in person audience I'll start
off on my right hand side those
of you that wish to speak in
favor of house bill forty three
please indicate by raising your
hands.
Okay so we'll start from front
and will move to the back of the
room so please.
Jordan.
You have up to two minutes
welcome thank thank you Mr chair
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children
I would really want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
back again I think it's a shame
that we even have to have this
discussion but I also think is
really necessary that we have
this bill we urge your support
of our high school students and
hope that you will help to
protect them from sexual assault
and better educate them about
their rights by passing this
legislation.
Great thank you all for a little
late but please.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association social
workers New Mexico chapter and I
apologize
I've membership that are so
excited about this bill if they
keep texting me and I keep.
I'm but we we are in strong
support of this bill there is I
hate to use the word confusion
but there seems to be a lot of
community confusion among many
students about what what is
acceptable and what is not and
so I think that it's really
important that we take a look at
this bill and provide the
education that is necessary to
our students so that they are
well aware of what is acceptable
and what is not and that people
have the right to be free from
sexual abuse and harassment
thank you all right thank you
all right so we'll continue on
with their there is nobody else
in the room were Mr please
welcome you have up to two
minutes.
To to to to to take a decision.
Introduced myself and then that
this on the Navajo language
cofounder of indigenous women
right
the political education director
I was informed.
educator.
I also got into double sausage
education to my experience
Having also of sexual.
And then the LFC.
Still have to like have
sex with my.
So it would be nice to have
these conversations with
children for more and in the
school education system
College.
This is for our use
call.
This is.
Fiscal analyst for the past
great thank you so much in that
row please welcome.
Many many holiday theme Mexico I
stand in strong support of the
bill I have to do is a voice for
educators also Department
through teacher I wholeheartedly
believe this piece of
legislation is necessary as we
continuously move towards
marketing trauma informed
practices in our schools and
communities I take my job very
seriously to create a safe space
at least the learning rate
students but think about your
this is a natural continuation
of that really necessary
important mark thank you.
Please our New Mexico please
welcome.
Chairman and members Jeff
Williams with Santa Fe now and
we strongly support this bill
thank you thank.
Thank you any others on my right
hand side all right so go to my
left hand side does it wish to
speak okay we'll start again
from front work our way toward
the back of the room so please.
Two minutes.
Mr chair members of the
committee stations with in the
New Mexico G. R. director
and on behalf of our members we
support this bill because the
right thing to do for students
we all know that we're wired.
naturally to respond to fear.
Either thank you.
The freeze up or we take lunch.
We can do that and this is the
intent of this bill to do better
to empower and educate our
students
to learn how to respond to a
situation.
When they're.
The situation of danger.
And so we really support this
bill and we would ask the
sponsor that the instructional
material being delivered also in
not only English but also
Spanish Navajo into the wind tax
we appreciate that thank you
thank you all right others
please thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is crystal why public policy
officer for the urban Mexico
Representative with disabilities
intellectual developmental
disabilities throughout the
state it's average that the
statistics show that people with
disabilities are seven times
more likely to be sexually
assaulted and normally sexually
assaulted by someone that they
know of a family member or
friend the schools over so the
art of New Mexico strongly
stands in support of us the
hopefully toward some of that
federal so so so proud of her at
eight years estimated
approximately ninety percent of
people with disabilities will be
social is all of at some point
during the course of the realize
so teaching affirmative consent
at early age extremely
beneficial thank you okay thank
you so others the next row.
Please welcome.
This and we're with you we have
come here whether.
Severance there so we have this
bill because we now that
prevention is he comes to sexual
violence many of you have heard
of this bill before us expires
before December I would like to
thank everyone who has voted on
additional position always yes
participation that only this.
Right thank you others in the
same row.
All right so we'll move to the
next does it wish to speak in
support please.
Morning my name is Jennifer.
Mission on the status of women
and we stand in support of this
bill studies have shown that
reducing sexual assault at early
age
really understanding more
clearly what is consent and what
is not can increase long term
reduction of sexual assault
communities and has.
Mexico we stand strongly
supported additional thank you
great others in the same or
other which speak please
welcome.
Mr chair members of the my name
is Monet artifact and I am here
on behalf of the New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee we strongly support H.
B. forty three because it
requires that every student be
educated about affirmative
consent it is not focused on
punishment but is focused on
providing positive guidance to
educational institutions thank
you for your.
Thank you others and replace Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is I am a high
school senior editor with girls
Inc of Santa Fe I've been
working in the community on
affirmative consent for three
years.
Thank you for consent middle and
high school is a small step
toward giving everyone a common
understanding of consent it was
understanding of consent and
start the process of change for
the next.
Teaching affirmative consent
provides invaluable schools for
students helping with critical
communication foundations
navigating a personal that.
Great thank you for under.
Members of the committee well
this morning statewide my name
is Erica Davis current by the
community activist organizer and
director of advocacy a group of
farmers what Lee lacing as girls
we know has been around for a
couple of decades we have a
close with the youth and this is
a high priority for all students
across the state so we're so
excited for this do pass that
we're about to get today thank
you.
Thank you so much others in the
same row all right we'll move to
the next row please welcome.
Marshall Martinez executive
director of equality New Mexico
where the statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization.
Also be take you students are
three times more likely to
experience some form of sexual
violence that are heterosexual
and cisgender counterparts and
so on behalf of queer and trans
youth who are begging for
protection and safety in our
schools and communities
everywhere we urged passage of
this bill and once again want to
say thank you so much to the
sponsor was continuously come
back and continuously I to make
sure the young people know the
rules because we cannot expect
people to follow rules if they
don't.
Thank you please.
Chair members of the committee
Linda stable for the New Mexico
coalition against domestic
violence and we strongly support
this bill if we can teach people
when they're in school hopefully
that the outcomes will be much
better and the reduction of.
Thank you please morning Mr
chair members of the committee
members the next on the director
of advocacy at the change of the
resources New Mexico.
The house bill forty three from
first hand experience I can yes
affirmative consent as much
needed as a community organizer
are working transgender gender
non conforming and non binary
people the daily basis and in
twenty nineteen so why are yes
you've reached the resiliency
survey here in New Mexico found
that trans youth which one half
times more likely to experience
sexual assault.
Here's to happen with education
prevention I strongly urge you
to support this bill.
Right thank you others in the
same row all right we'll remove
to the next row please thank
you.
I remember that the Meyer Evans
and I'm here with the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice and as a
person of faith I stand in full
support of this bill
About permanent consent helps to
frame their understanding of
their own bodily autonomy how to
respect their partners all the
time we and the importance of
provides tools all and trauma
and young people need to learn
how to make these moral healthy
decisions about their
relationships at teaching about
affirmative consent school will
help them to develop their
personal relations.
love commitment mutuality
safety.
Right now if there's anybody
else in page speaking support in
the room anyway.
All right the secure to our
online folks I have a few that
are still waiting for house bill
forty three to speak in support
so we'll go to our online group
the first handed that I have is
Andrew.
Good morning.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Andrew
Ackles I graduated from New
Mexico state in December and I
am and strong support.
A long time preventing sexual
violence this bill also
addresses it as it happens
currently there are zero
policies on the books in New
Mexico that directly address
sexual violence on college
campuses HB forty three would be
the first law of its kind in New
Mexico as it creates pathways
for students to receive free
support off campus and protect
survivors from retaliation when
reporting with an estimated one
in ten students experiencing
sexual violence during their
time on campus for about ten
thousand New Mexicans students
this year alone we must do more
as state to make sure our
communities have access to the
resources they so desperately
need committee I urge you to
vote yes on H. B. forty three
thank you for your time right
thank you.
All right so we'll go to
southwest women's law center if
you would identify who you are
please enter with us you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Hello good morning Mr chair.
He these are from the southwest
winds lost.
When I was twenty one someone
told me with the definition of
affirmative consent once at that
time it was a double major in
college with a three point nine
GPA and was there on a full ride
scholarship yes this is the
first time I'd heard this
definition I thought back to all
my previous encounters and
realize how many times I truly
didn't give consent and how I
thought my failure to say no was
kids it took me far too long to
learn what affirmative consent
was and to use it to protect
myself and better my
relationships we can assume that
students already know what
affirmative consent is and how
to use it today you have the
opportunity to make learning
affirmative consent requirement
before it's too late for our
needs this is a small step can
make a huge difference for our
students thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to the New
Mexico chapter in a S. W..
Good morning you're back with us
welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee and again to
the representative from bringing
this to the forefront and so
trying not to repeat anything
that's already been said
The bill has a lot of language
around trauma the trauma
responsive trauma informed and
so.
And I don't want to say anything
that you know nothing happens
with with to say anything that
might delay but I think there's
some further thought that could
happen about what that means
because it's not just in
In in behavior in you know it's
it's included in your physical
environment so are you assessing
the schools in the grounds and
the buildings and and stuff like
that which it may be in in
other.
Other large
licensing facility licensing
regulations but so I wanted to
add that in just the idea that
it kind of goes hand in hand
with you know
Giving it to us presenting to
history and how and how people
have been marginalized and
oppressed and how power in the
story has been used against
certain populations I feel like
to educate the education
you know misogyny and all that
stuff has to kind of go hand in
hand with that so I just wanted
to to put that on back somewhat
I guess
But I do appreciate that I do
appreciate that of the bill and
and the items in New
yeah and I we would offer our
our support and our services to
make any amendments if if
possible
it was one that said
what is victims and those things
are right two minutes thank you
so much for.
All right so we have southwest
women's Law Center.
We had already heard the and we
can of sorry yes Mr chair thank
you so much.
All right Chelsea.
Rachel so you have up to two
minutes please.
Hello my name is Chelsea coupon
I am an alumni of the university
of New Mexico I graduated in
twenty nineteen to macleod and
recipient of the alumni
citizenship award on new years
of twenty eighteen I was
assaulted and it was not until
may eighth that I received a
call back from the women's
organization on campus to offer
me counseling it was thirty
eight days before I was able to
speak to a counselor after it
crisis center that's master I
almost lost my life.
due to the egregious treatment
of me by my fellow student
government representatives and
university faculty.
And my professors I almost lost
my perfect academic standing and
because I fought to receive
accommodations that I was of I
lost my recommendation letters
to medical school
this bill will help keep.
Future physicians and providers.
within the community and without
bills like this more students
will lose their lives and
because this bill has been
passed six years earlier.
New Mexico is short one let the
not.
psychiatrists that would have
been able to serve our
community.
I am in support of this bill
because of the resources that
will allocate to students like
me.
Thank you thank you for joining
us.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is there anybody in
the room that's in opposition to
house bill forty three.
All right those online is there
any opposition to house bill
forty three.
Give it some wait time.
All right doesn't look like it
so we'll come back to committee
Representative Baca please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for this bill it's not that I'm
opposed any I just have some
clarifying questions regarding
the process or procedure for
this bill so Mister chairman one
of the the questions that I have
is whenever we have reporting it
seems like a lot of
responsibility falls upon the
educational institution where
it's been my experience that
when we have a report of
something like this it is turned
over to law enforcement so
that's one area that I it's
unclear to me as far as how that
will be handled because from
what I've been experience what
working with this if somebody
comes to me a student or
otherwise in in thirty years
immediate when they say that
this has to take place I
immediately called law
enforcement otherwise so they
can do the proper intake CYFD
referral and otherwise so
Mr chairman and and
representative Thompson does any
part of this that you've
outlined here.
Does that kind of overlap fall
into the actual law enforcement
responsibilities of that and I'm
not talking about the in the I'm
not talking about the the
education or the training I'll
talk about once there has been a
report of an act.
Does that is there some
crossover there and are we
getting in some areas that it is
a long Forsman function Mr
Chairman.
Okay you would please just make
sure to identify yourself Mr
chair representative I my name's
Alexandria Taylor and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs thank you for
your question Representative
Baca the answer is it does not
so this bill is about the
standards that must be taught
within the one health credit
from gates to high school and so
the investigatory process for as
years explaining when a student
comes forward would still take
affect as it's already outlined
in school policy and state law.
Mr chairman I'm gonna point
exactly where I'm kind of
looking at it's actually on page
ten of the bill.
On.
It outlines procedure okay
so the procedure starting on
line fourteen.
An initial response with the
schools person to report of an
incident including written
notification to the complaint.
about the bill would be of in
contact information of off
campus resources
Providing real information in
writing to the complaint about
the preserving evidence okay
when we're talking about
preserving evidence for talking
that that is a function in my
opinion of a police or otherwise
to me as a law is a institution
to preserve evidence to begin to
take statements for this that
maybe later and result in a
criminal case it might I'm not
I'm not an attorney.
But right there I think that
puts a huge amount of burden on
the institution and I I believe
that maybe some of those
procedures outlined Mr chairman.
You may actually be a law
enforcement function Mr
Chairman.
Mr chair and representative Baca
so if this is not only about
sexual assault there are you
know sexual harassment did
things that wouldn't involve law
enforcement so and to be
perfectly honest frequently
survivors victims don't want the
police involved and because of a
lot of things I'm I'm a survivor
of a date rape in college and I
didn't go to the police because
I because of how women were
treated back then it was always
you know your own fault
essentially so
In in the preserving up evidence
is more directed towards the
individual that you know the
school isn't going to be
responsible for preserving the
underwear for instance or
something like that so I would
say did you want to.
Add on chair Mister chair
representative Akhil thank you
Representative Thomson it is
also a function of how advocacy
around when someone comes
forward that's part of being
trauma informed acknowledging
that someone made delayed
disclosure or delay their
participation in ongoing process
so they may report to their
campus they may report to
somebody on campus not even
campus police and it could be
months it could be years it
could be never that they choose
to move forward with a criminal
criminal report to law
enforcement and so along the
process it's just advisement
that preserving evidence of
should they choose to later
disclosed to law enforcement is
necessary in order to move
forward and so it's a it's a
part of the trauma informed
response that the bill is
seeking to establish.
Mr Chairman I'm not I'm not
going to belabor this point too
so please understand this as a
as a parent of three children of
and a daughter it's it's not
that's not.
Might might my questions
regarding this is regarding as
it as an educator I have a duty
to report if somebody says that
this is been happening Leger
otherwise the immediately or
given their opportunity due
process and if they if in fact
do
Say that they this happened my
part my process you stop in law
enforcement is immediately
contacted because if I were to
say you know what if it was some
of.
Reporter mean I said Rick
preserve all evidence and.
Anything else that may be
associated with that that then
I.
I am the person responsible for
and not a law enforcement agent
I would hate to as a not a
police officer as I'm not a
person who deals with this kind
of trauma I think those
procedures that section right
there were talks about
procedures and responsibilities
of an institution I think it's
were it gets kind of.
The the that's where
professionals in Mr and I know
that's that's not an easy answer
but I'm I'm telling you up front
for those are here it's not
about the need for this it's not
about that it's more if I'm
advocating for victims then if
there is this I need to make
sure that the law enforcement
and those people that are
appropriately trained and as a
K. twelve school there's not
some training for as a secondary
institution there may be
resources for so that's that's
our and my last question Mr
chairman is about the graduation
requirements okay now I do know
that the dinners rumored right
that there's gonna be a
graduation requirement bill I
just wonder why section three is
included.
as part of this because I I know
that this may actually this may
actually change so thank you Mr
chairman
I I can the is it for if you to
get back to me but that is
something that as a an attorney.
I do think that there there may
be some.
Some legal.
Kind of challenges are issues to
that process and procedure was a
report for claimant has come
forth thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I don't have anybody
else on my lists which are.
Please.
Mr Chairman representative I
have a just a couple of
questions on it right now so
just to clarify because this is
two parts right so this is the
colleges adopting a set policy
and procedure of for like the
reporting and then what they're
gonna do the whole procedure and
then and then of course what
they could do after incidents a
place right so I do colleges
have anything is or is it up to
them at this point right now
that we would the like what
what's what's in set in place
right now.
Colleges and universities Matt
Mr chair committee colleges and
universities already have title
nine.
Officers program officers with
in those spaces as do K. through
twelve should have title nine
Representative who get training
in responding and investigating
responding to and investigating
sexual assault and harassment
okay I'm thank you Mr chair and
representative my other just
clarification so this really is
as far as because when I first
was discussing this and and or
or reading through this I was
very concerned about the
investigation part of it but I
But I kind of as I was reading
further into it it this is not
to have to do with high school
investigation though of of of
minors which is a different
story this is college
investigations and policy and
procedures with adults am I
correct.
That is correct okay thank you
thank you Mr chair and
representative
I so.
Can you explain to me exactly I
mean I know it's in here but
just to clarify what is the
exact things that you want in
that policy and procedure for
colleges.
So it's it's on Mr chair it's
laid out on page one and.
Public or private post secondary
educational institution that
receives funds state funds for
student financial assistance
shall adopt detailed trauma
informed policies trauma
informed responses for the
investigation of L. of
allegations of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence and harassment or
stalking involving a student
faculty member or employee
contractor or region both on and
off campus.
Mr chair and representative I
appreciate your response I.
I am very hopeful for this
because with the the lady that
spoke online of not being able
to get the services because they
weren't
set in place that when this
happens this person should go
and and and give her the the
counseling that she needs
immediately not waiting a month
and a half later that because it
is trauma and and of being being
a woman or other and and then
our gay and lesbian community
building anyone that has had put
through this trauma should be
able to and if this to be able
to receive those services right
away because it's it's part
physical but it is so much more
emotional and and and so and if
that help can get in there
faster
I I appreciate that thank you
thank you Mr.
Great thank you so much I don't
have anybody else Representative
Trujillo.
With the appropriate language I
move it to pass if we have it is
to pass on house bill forty
three second by Representative
Roybal Caballero.
All right madam secretary if you
call the roll on a two passed
house bill forty three please
Representative Baca.
No.
Representative.
Representative that.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative had and that yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
My involvement plan.
Yes.
Representative well I have a.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Vice chair.
Yes.
Yes.
All right so by a vote of eight
to to you have a do pass on
house bill forty three.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee for
being patient with my crazy of
course no thank you for being
patient with us as well it was
mutual thank you all right
everybody so for committee
members if we could sell them
for a moment I want to turn your
attention to the legislative
education study committee
Data in reference guide that we
have for this year that are
wonderful staff LFC put together
the other thing I'm gonna hand
down the rose is you all have to
ask for.
This handout to be sent out
which is all of the staff
members for the legislative
education study committee
information on the policy that
they work on and contact
information for our folks so I'm
gonna hand these down the line
it should be enough if you don't
get one let me know it's kind of
we're doing this it's like being
back in school all right.
What.
Without anything else we will
reconvene on Friday thank you
all.
We'll send a new.
And.
