He's made of the treatment share
Representative group all coming
at all.
Thank.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo Vice president I'm here
vice chair Garrett there are.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum
chairman all right awesome thank
you good morning everybody have
a little bit of a late start
this morning I hope you all were
able to arrest is nice we had a
early floor session we got out
early and then we have a late
morning so.
all right so we'll get started
house memorial twenty four so
Representative Baldonado you're
putting this on for us is that
correct.
B. yes Mr chairman all right
well.
Okay good morning everybody
house memorial twenty four this
is Representative Taos bill on
pretty pretty straightforward
it's a it's a memorial
requesting PED.
To take a good hard look at the
at risk index and how that
affects our kids and how that
money is is or isn't.
Really getting focused and
deliver to where it really needs
to be Ezzell you know we talk
about this all the time in our
committee here and so hopefully
we can get to PED to.
So to get a focus on on how
those dollars are are being
delivered if there's anything we
can do to to make that better so
with that Mr chairman I'll I'll
stand for questions.
Right thank you Representative
so we'll go to the attendees
list is there anybody here in
support of house memorial twenty
four.
Opposition to house memorial
twenty four.
In difference to house memorial
twenty four.
See more hands I do that okay.
So come to Canadian Canadian
question.
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative my only question
is have we done a memorial like
this before.
Mr chairman and Representative
Sweetser I don't know I I don't
know the answer to that question
maybe maybe the terminals and
Representative are you getting
at the is this something we've
seen before this legislative
session.
No my question Mr Chairman
representative is simply
memorials.
Are different than bills as we
all know they don't carry the
weight and so I we ask PED to do
this before and not not gotten
results sources the first time
we're actually officially asking
them okay.
Sorry I was I was completing my
question with your question and
to one
I don't recall that we've had a
memorial to look specifically
more at targeting at risk
funding certainly in the LFC
we've looked at
the issue is that our current at
risk funding.
And the mechanism to target
those students that is having
because we use the school lunch
forms which isn't exactly the
best indicator of of reaching
our at risk population so their
problems with that but as far as
the memorials specifically
directing us to look at are at
risk funding I think is
something new because I would
say probably because we've
invested so much more money in
the at risk index that it's
actually starting to make make
the progress that that we've
intended it to make but this
problem of identifying students
and channeling that money since
it goes to the districts and
then dispersed amongst the
districts in the schools I
should say from there has given
rise to kind of this issue like
is there an inequity are we
truly pinpointing targeting the
students that that it needs to
hopefully that clarifies things
a little bit yes thank you Mr
chair and and just again for the
memorial state we're based if
this were to pass we're
basically sending a message that
this is important to the house
and Committee and the
legislature as a whole and
hoping that PED will do it is is
that a fair statement Mr chair
representative Mr Chairman
representative the through I
think that is at the exactly
what we're trying to say is that
you know we've had presentations
throughout the summer we had a
of a group that had put together
a.
very unique way of trying to
focus on on at risk we've heard
from them and
And you know I mean it makes
sense that you you want to you
know we would put all these
dollars out there we want to
deliver him to the actual school
district the school down to the
kid that really needs that you
know that extra help and and and
that target so that's the idea
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman that's.
Districts thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Mr chairman thank you thank you
Representative along the same
lines I seem to recall that
Do in their long term plan that
was presented to us as part of
their overall assessment and
evaluations of them include at
risk factors thanking the index
and all part of these terms
responses that were not just
associated with
methane is Yazzie but were part
of the rollout of the new
secretaries on plan which when
he Mr chair when the secretary
first took on the position he
pre Senate to L. E. S. C. and
then to the committee I believe
their long term goals and
objectives as the new PED
secretary and then as the
questions became more
predominant Mr chair and
committee concerning directly
how all these different factors
that were delineated in the
court order.
That that he then came back in
presented some updates as per
our request either through the
L. E. S. C. process LFC process
so my question is is this not
alright already that plan we are
what do you know Mr chair
representative that that they
Are not addressing at risk index
or are you Mr Chairman
representative doing what
Representative Sweetser said
that indicate in the chair that
giving a little bit more teeth
to the to the process through
the memorial is your objective
is the objective Mr chairman and
Representative thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Roybal coming
it is exactly that I mean you
know I I I I have no doubt that
that that Secretary Stewart and
his staff are very aware about
what we're talking about when it
comes to at risk and and and
they probably would agree to
some to some degree at least
some of them would would
probably agree that that we're
not delivering dollars a we we
we should be and so this this is
just an attempt to just raise a
flag and just just put a little
more focus on on this
conversation and and and
hopefully we can we can start to
to develop a way that makes
sense that the targets that
risk.
Mr chair.
thank you Representative and so
I agree with what both the chair
and representative
Sweetser indicated that that
really is the only purpose now
we need to make sure that we
track it appropriately because
often times as has been my
experience I introduced early on
as a new legislator I was
encouraged to introduce certain
certain millennials in order to
do exactly what you're doing
give give from our priority or
voice higher thanks to the
Department on to carry out
certain.
Legislative requests and I
learned in after two years and
then after four years that those
memorials we're not track
appropriately and the work
had not been done and so
consequently had a residual
effect on the bills that then
came out in twenty fifteen
twenty sixteen and so it's
really important that if we want
response that we make sure that
we we just the legislative arm
sponsors of these bills kind of
hold the accountability and and
we make sure that we request the
the information we need on
throughout the process so that
would be my only earn points
because I had to learn the hard
way.
As a legislator so thank you Mr
chair and Representative thank
you thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative actually my
question was asked thank you
great Representative Lara
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Baldonado for
bringing this forward you know I
on I'm always interested in New
and I was
Like to see a.
You new ways of working on the
on the on the budget and on the
formula and how things work but
I have a question Mr chair
representative so who are we
putting the burden on are we
putting on the brakes on PED or
the school districts in order
how to spend that money.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative Lara the the
memorial asked PED to look at it
and I don't know if you're
asking that for us actual where
the where the dollars are spent
is that your question Mr
Chairman representative maybe if
you can get a deductible for me
please arbitration so so Mister
chairman of the Lotte the more
is simply you know points to PED
to look at this you know and and
and and with the assistance of
of outside experts
surely the LFC I'm sure has
looked at this that link that to
some degree but you know I'm
sure they'll they'll have a and
we're participating Roland
things but the actual
spending of the dollars I mean
at from what I understand every
school district you know we
that's that local control piece
that we've always you know
parked on and and maybe maybe
some districts do it better than
others you know in terms of
delivering those dollars to the
right to the right place but but
I think that that focus I mean
we we we we're gonna throw money
at it we need to make sure that
it's actually getting to the to
the the goal that we're you know
that we're sending out for so on
a plan to do question Mr
chairman.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you did because you know that
that's really important we talk
about local control and how the
school districts spend our money
and and you're right some
districts would better than
others and I I think
in addition to asking PED to
look at it I think maybe we
should also consider seeing what
works and what doesn't work with
the district you know implement
some of the best practices that
that some of the school
districts of use that they use
is very effectively.
So up Mr chair representative
you know I I I'm gonna support
the memorial I think it is
important to study it however
you know we need to make sure at
least the communication between
PED and the school districts
flows very smoothly and a two
way direction because of you
know as as as sometimes it may
or may not happen yeah we
allocate the funds PED
distributes the funds that the
it's spent in a different manner
at the school district and so
you know as long as we keep that
into consideration that you know
I think that's very important so
out thank you for bringing this
forward Representative and thank
you Mr chair that's all I have.
Thank you thank you further
questions.
All right so I'm thank you
Representative for for for
putting this on I yeah I guess.
To the best you could how does
this memorial relate to the
different iterations of the bill
that Representative Dow had
brought forward before because
she had put together a bill
looking at at risk.
Reorganizing the formula which
it's distributed
to schools how is this for
instance how related is is this
memorial so Mr chairman and and
you know in our body many times
a bill starts and doesn't get
very far and and and and the
legislature will will will move
to a memorial to still get
something in front of folks and
so on this doesn't go into
detail as to you know how the
formula exists or what it does
but it it just simply targets
that that that Pat Woods down
would study it and and maybe
develop for okay developing a
new at risk index
In order to deliver those
dollars.
Yeah for sure I mean I I I think
that the at risk index is
becoming a an important piece of
of our state equalization
guarantee
And and I see this effort in
house memorial twenty four is
being very complimentary to that
house joint memorial that we
just passed in our last meeting
to look at the state
equalization guarantee in total
in more holistically to to
redefine like I mentioned the
other day what equity is.
Where school districts will
how they will be getting this
money how much money they'll be
getting will be going toward
their needs and then certainly
with the at risk index that
we're certainly targeting those
schools that in a in a very in a
more precise way and I know PED
has a bill that's making its way
through the Senate now that
tries to do this but it's adding
another index on we're indexing
the index
seeming way and and
that will need to be a part of
this puzzle puzzle should it
should it make its way over to
us and and to the governor's
desk
But their approaches is trying
to get at this question of how
we can better target the schools
with the funding they need based
on their populations so I think
it'll be an interesting interim
we certainly have a lot of
topics to be taking on and I
think that's a great compliment
to those efforts so thank you
for bringing this forward
help there's Representative Dow.
Connecting audio.
Representative Dow did you wish
to make a comment on your
memorial we were we just to
questions we're just about to to
table it so if.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I came just to
see bills on planes.
Now it's.
The committee and and our senior
member.
Great so what that'll entertain
a motion from the committee.
Mr Chairman move a do pass of
house memorial twenty four
I seconded Mr chair
all right so we have a due pass
motion by Representative lane a
second by Representative
Sweetser is there any opposition
to the past.
All right see none you have to
do pass on house memorial twenty
four thank you Mr members also.
So we will go.
To Senate bill seventy seven did
not trust my memory will pull
Senator Kernan in Senator Kernan
knows the drill all right.
Welcome Senator Kernan did we
need to pull anybody else from
the attendees list for you.
Chair and why connectivity you
are did you need us to summon
anybody from the attendees list
as an expert yes Mister chair I
do have three experts I have
doctor Gristle General Bristol
with New Mexico military
institute Dr Caldwell with
eastern New Mexico university
and I have doctor Larry
Sanderson from New Mexico junior
college.
All right.
Welcome everybody I think that's
everybody.
My squares jumbled here.
This call.
Didn't make the jump.
Okay.
I think we have everybody on
board so when you're ready
Senator Senate bill seventy
seven please thank you very much
Mr chair and basically what
Senate bill seventy seven does
is.
The regional to back to pilot
program in southeastern New
Mexico and our hope is to
complete what was attempted
installed in a statewide effort
with regard to making transfers
from community colleges to
universities Smith and and
without loss of credit so as you
recall the tribe sector several
years ago addressed the common
core numbering system and I
think universities and colleges
have done a very good job of
making sure those numbers are
are consistent with them where
we kind of fell down was with
the general education common
core classes because sometimes
it's difficult to get the
syllabus
A line so that we can learn from
from a community college or an
independent college to
university and so I think what
I'd like to do is is called on a
general Gristle first in the end
Dr Caldwell and then Dr
Sanderson is here to answer
questions but I would not to
experts say few words and they
can explain what their their
effort is going to be.
Please.
But Mr chair thank you very much
Senator Kernan for sponsoring
this bill what we have here in
the southeast corner of the
state is opportunity for seven
schools six two year schools and
one for your regional institute
to work together for end to
create pathways for our students
as Senator Kernan said there's
been a lot of work in this area
but it just didn't complete the
process when you get down to
that classroom level where the
faculty and the staff get
together in really sink the
curriculum the criteria to
accept credits between schools
and our close proximity here
gives us this opportunity to do
that really no more than an hour
and a half for many school we
have the opportunity to use that
we have six two year
institutions some community
schools from branch campuses but
we all would work together on
behalf of our students to create
this pathway so that what we
want to do is create a situation
so that it is two plus two
concept so when someone is
sitting in a concert in the
classroom in any one of those
six two year schools it's the
same as if they were sitting in
the classroom ready for when
they transfer from here after
cheating Association archer
Association science they movies
Troy seamlessly with absolutely
no loss of credits they
continued their bachelor's there
and all of the credits transfer
the other thing that's important
for our students chair New
Mexico is they still retain the
ability to use the opportunity
scholarship the lottery
scholarship when they make that
move they're being recorded here
in the southeast very heavily by
Texas tech Texas tech offers
that ability to transfer those
credits without loss of credit
Texas tech offers reduced rates
for their tuition if they will
entice our students from the
southeast corner of New Mexico
so we think this plan is very.
A simple that we're just asking
for you to endorse us the
ability to work together on
behalf of the students here in
the southeast quadrant to
created this pathway from the to
your screen to the for your
school we also believe this will
give us the ability to work with
our local public school
districts and show them the
ability to wait to start working
with us in due credit graduation
so that we actually moved from
the public school to the higher
education to your schools on to
the four year schools in a crew
seamless manner so again thank
you for this opportunity we hope
you'll support us in this
endeavor.
Right thank you general so I'm
Dr Caldwell.
Was listening.
Thank you chairman Romero and
members of the committee a good
morning Senator Kernan guests
and everyone thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak
with you about this great
opportunity for the east side
I'm Patrice Caldwell speaking on
behalf of the in in your system
and president sat in in your
role as well and in New York so
our effort to partner with the
east side colleagues to enhance
the transfer process and help
students persist to a four year
degree in New Mexico is the
entire intentioned this pilot
project it's a modest initiative
created by partners with a long
history of sharing students up
and down the east side of the
state we discussed how to form
this partnership collect data
report results work out the
Kinks and we think we can build
a very solid plan for the next
phase of transfer technician for
the entire state of New Mexico
building on the solid foundation
that has already been sent by HB
we know we do not require
legislation to do this work and
we are not asking for money we
welcome this legislation to be
accountable for this work
insurance results with our
colleagues across the state the
higher education department and
with you.
Eastern is absolutely committed
to these partners this
collaborative our students and
this pilot project we think
Senator Kernan for her support
of this bill and I thank you for
the opportunity to press the
committee.
And I'll turn the podium back to
Senator Kernan or whoever she
wishes Senator.
Well thank you Mr chair I think
we're ready if there are
questions we're ready great
thank you senator thank you
experts we will go to the
attendees list so those in
support of.
Senate bill seventy seven.
All right.
So go to Serra.
Morning Sir you of up to two
minutes please.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee surface sterile senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chambers in full support of
this bill and we think Senator
Kernan for bringing it forward
chamber believes in the value of
the articulation and transfer
provisions in this bill elitist
mother transitions between
higher education institutions
so students can earn their
credentials faster and with less
that the smaller scale pilot
program proposed in this bill
may also result in some valuable
data and systems that lend
themselves to future statewide
implementation again for the
good of all of our post
secondary students and so for
these reasons we urge the
committee support for this bill
thank you.
Great thank you others in
support.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is their opposition
Senate bill seventy seven.
Do.
No Representative Madrid is
speaking out of turn but that's
alright come on.
All right.
So Representative Garrett
please.
We've come chairman thank you
senator
Yeah I have just two questions
thank you for explaining what
one of my questions was why do
you need a bill and that was
answered and then my question is
Section one C. number seven that
any other post secondary
educational public institution
that request could participate
how do you and and that some of
the students may end up but NMSC
or another university so will
you track them I know we have
the post secondary education
articulation Act that was
supposed to do a lot of what
you're doing but this seems like
the grassroots let's really do
this so so will you track those
students that start out of the
junior colleges but don't go to
eight eastern.
So Mr chair and representative
let me let General crystal
responded that because I know
many of his students and New
Mexico military institute will
transfer to New Mexico state and
we are we're very aware of
getting any encouraging that
that is not this is not an
attempt to re direct people to
to a different tab for your
school that Dr grizzly as
general crystal if you will
respond to that as well let him
answer.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan
Representative Garrett this.
Program we we track every
student that leaves New Mexico
military institute and where
they go every student and I'm
sure Dr Sanderson that New
Mexico junior college will tell
you the same thing we track them
there in the national clearing
house so that we want to know
where they go and if they
complete the bachelor's degree
after they leave the the the two
year institution so the
straightforward answer questions
absolutely yes ma'am we will
track them wherever they go into
in the state or out of the state
but in this particular program
we will track them to see that
their success rate is different
we think if we can show them
that pathway that shows them the
ways that their grades will
transfer their credits will
transfer to the eastern in this
pilot program.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you general grizzle yeah because
this is good data to show that
we really are improving those
articulation agreements
particularly in the southeast
and it's good to hear about the
Texas tech competition had no
idea but to contribute to the
greater effectiveness of our
articulation so thank you very
much.
Thank you thank you
Representative other questions.
All right
So before I go to a motion no
thank you thank you Senator
Kernan for bringing this forward
I think that sort of
articulation it's it's very much
needed
as part of my working with which
she
you know they've they've tried
to make it easier for college
credits to transfer from our
state institutions to elsewhere
around the country and I know
we've had a lot of work here to
to ensure that
Credits are transferable make it
easier for for students to to
travel the the country and with
the in our state to to continue
their higher education and I
think higher education as we
discussed is something that in
the legislature we get bits and
pieces of but not in the as a
holistic whole and hopefully
that's something we're gonna be
able to remedy but this is is
very much needed and I I think a
great pilot project to start off
with on but before we go to a
motion did you wish to to close
Senator Kernan.
With thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate my experts I think
they've done a great job of
explaining and appreciate the
questions and I think we're
right to go to work thank you
right here.
So with that committee hall
entertainment shin.
Chair I move a do pass for
Senate bill seventy seven.
All right so we have to do pass
motion I'll give that one to
Senator and here Representative
Roybal Caballero
Is there any opposition to the
do passed motion.
All right what's your and
squares all right seeing none
you have a do pass on Senate
bill seventy seven thank you
Senator Kernan.
You very much Mr chairman
committee thank you right thank
thank you experts for being here
all right
so that was quick committee
Please things are in flux and
moving fast
so be sure to listen to the
announcements on the house floor
on the agenda will go out at
some point
with that in the next twenty
four hours so be looking for
that and then be sure to pay
attention to the time as well
okay like I said things are in
flux so times bills changing
Representative Figueroa Jeff
question Madam thank you Mr
chair is a procedural question
because I was presenting a bill
and arrive to committee late
when you do a bill that says
seeing no objection okay
counting all who are present in
favor of a bill and I counted as
present or not.
Representative Figueroa so if
you have your camera on anything
typically are Secretary earning
that as I do that too is present
and accounted to is the vote
thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary I don't know if
you have if you have opposition
to that
but I'm taking it based on the
school principal that like my
students with their cameras are
still there
maybe even the even though they
may have their camera and I I
know that they're not to
Representative lines as well so.
Okay but yes check the time
change we may may not have the
time change for Friday
but other than that if there
aren't any other questions have
a nice rest your day will see
you all on Friday hi everybody
thank you.
Good luck with your shocked.
yeah can we meet quickly I have
like ten fifteen minutes okay
okay.
