Representative
Oral Caballero.
Representative Collins.
Representative Torres Valeskas.
Here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice chair
Here.
Carrot
OK.
We do have a forum.
OK, welcome everybody. Just to
let you know, we will only hear
one bill today and at his house
bill 71, early childhood
education and care fund
transfers, and with that, I will
ask a representative and expert
to start.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
members of the committee. I'm
pleased to introduce the early
uh education and care fund
Transfer Act. Currently, the
early childhood education and
care fund annually distributes
an amount equal to 5%.
of a 3 year average of funds a
year in value of 250 million,
whichever is, whichever is
greater. This bill seeks to
increase the minimum annual
distribution from the fund to at
least 500 million, an amount
that would allow ECD to increase
access to services, uh, for
10,000 more children. After
endowing this fund with 300
million.
In 2020, we have seen the fun
grow.
to just over $9 million to the
careful stewardship of the state
Investment council. Because of
the substantial growth of the
fund, uh, projections now
anticipate distribution.
Distributions could exceed 500
million by 2028 or 2029. This
bill speeds up the timeline to
see these much needed funds
distributed towards making sure
children in New Mexico are
receiving the best possible
education and care for.
From the day they are born.
I apologize for my voice, and so
I'm gonna uh this, I, I'm gonna
introduce my, my, I'm have you
introduce yourself, how's that?
Um, cause I know I'm hard to
understand, so I apologize.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the House Education
Committee. I'm Elizabeth
Kraginsky and I'm the secretary
for the early childhood
education and care department.
Very pleased to be here, um, on
Happy Valentine's Day, uh, and
to talk about this bill.
So with, with that, madam chair,
we, we stand for questions. I do
wanna, um, to bring to your
attention the um the laminated
sheets cause if it'll help um.
describes what we're talking
about and we can go into more
detail with that. I, I'm sure
with, with your questions, but
with that, we will stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
and with that, we'll start with
audience. Um, I'm going to ask
if anybody in the audience is in
opposition to this bill. See,
nobody in opposition in the
audience? Is there anybody
online who is in opposition to
this bill. If you are, raise
your hand online.
Nobody is in opposition, and I
will say that as needed, we do
have a a translator, OK, and
with this, I'll start with
people in the room.
are in support of the.
Bill, I want to remind you that
if somebody says exactly what
you were gonna say.
Um, say something like I agree
with them, don't repeat
everything that they said.
OK, so people in support of the
bill, if you will, um, if you're
on this side, raise your hand.
OK.
Um, I think what we'll do, what
should we do?
Um
Yeah,
Maybe
start in the front row.
So if you're, if you're in
support and you want to speak
and you're in the front row,
raise your hand.
And are
Oh
Yeah
OK.
OK, we have our first.
He's, he's the smart kid in the
classroom. OK, JD, you have the
mic, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm JD
Bullington, a registered
lobbyist for the Pueblo of
Laguna, and I just wanted to let
you all know that the Pueblo of
Laguna supports this bill, you
know, we're continuing to move
in the right direction, putting
more and more resources where it
matters to towards our earliest,
uh, children in the state. Thank
you.
You will have up to 2 minutes,
we prefer if you don't use the 2
minutes, our timer today is
Representative Baca, who's a
former offensive lineman from
the UNM.
OK, next senator, thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Hello, may I
have 3 minutes since he left 1
on the table, OK, and I went to
high school with Representative
Baca, by the way, so thank you
Madam Vice Chair. I think you
all know how I feel about this.
I rarely do. I come over and
testify on a on on a House bill,
but I had to be here this
morning to support my friend
Representative Gallegos, the
department and all of these
wonderful people that provide
this work, uh, there is not a
single day that goes by that I
don't eat, sleep and drink and
think about what we've done here
in New Mexico, and it's been uh
So tremendous that other states
are now following New Mexico's
lead in many, many ways,
especially this one right here,
finding ways to creatively fund
these things is just remarkable,
uh, doing this type of transfer
and this type of work is going
to make these things sort of
that 123 or 9 critical steps of
the puzzle that have to be put
in there, and I think this is
definitely one of the bigger
ones, so I wanted to show up
today and provide my support.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh, next row, raise your
hand.
OK, uh, row 3.
Yeah, that's
that row.
OK
And you, again, 2 minutes, so if
Representative Baca tells you
time as time.
Um, whennotaree nombrede una
Um, whennotaree nombrede
unamiroimento senior members
demires Ruby Rodriguez or Guoa
Marea bogadaad in Mexicotepais
sentencesalta deportunidad de
mijos
so embro delcentro deadogo.
A
sore problems easy
paraguarderia condo de dose
laura Jonopodrimelujo de
de de travaja
A
sore problems easy
paraguarderia condo de dose
laura Jonopodrimelujo de
de de travaja
acido establilio paramijoresara
pero al juntas lia
parala guardia gratis.
Andrea sales er total papa
de la panevente exonera los
copagos para los padres perros
senoresstratosis estaines padres
familiaoya pomo saola
distribution
decay primere fan
tantoquelasdressoro tengamoto
rojos infant studios losses
possier mental cer apoo
porquelos ninos de Mexico.
Thank you, does our translator
want to
Translate in. Yes, ma'am.
For those who don't speak
Spanish.
OK. Good, good morning.
Mr. President and members of the
committee, uh, my name is Ruby
Rodriguez. I'm a proud mother
and certified attorney in
Mexico. I emigrated to this
country 7 years ago with my 2
children who were 15 and 7 years
old at the time due to a lack of
job opportunities in my country
and to provide a better future
for my children. I am a member
of El Centro and today I am here
to talk about a problem that
many parents face.
3 years ago when I was expecting
my 3rd child, I started applying
for childcare assistance.
Through ECE because
Earning $12 an hour, I could not
afford to stop working.
When my baby was 6 weeks old.
Everything was set for him to
start daycare. However, after
combining my husband's and my
income, ECE determined that we
no longer qualified for free
childcare, and I would have to
pay $1000 a month.
But that was my entire salary.
My earnings were no longer for
paying rent but just for paying
for child care.
Since the pandemic in 2020, ECE
has waived co-payments for
parents.
But members of the committee.
Our contracts with ECE state in
very fine print that we will be
notified when this exemption
ends. What will parents do then?
Today we support HB 71 to
increase the annual distribution
from the early childhood Trust
Fund, not only so that mothers
Can work out of necessity but
also for our professional
growth, so that we can have free
access to safe childcare and
also because numerous studies
show that children who receive
early education have much
greater professional
opportunities in the future.
Support HB 71 because children
are the future of New Mexico.
Our next speaker.
Good morning everybody. Uh, good
morning, President and members
of the committee, uh, I'll be
speaking in, um, for our member
Mirna Lascano. She was unable to
be here because she's actually a
childcare worker. So, um, my
name is Mirna Lascano. I am a
proud mother of 4 daughters in
Albuquerque has been my home for
18 years for several of those
years. I worked as an assistant
in a daycare. And now I'm also a
childcare, uh
worker from my house. I am a
member of El Centro and I'm also
proud to be a, to have been um
An essential worker contributing
to the state's economy. I have
earned my certification and how
parents who need to leave their
little ones with my care. Um,
knowing their children are in
good hands today. I can also
share how proud I feel thanks to
the early childhood education,
helping my daughters receive,
um, their education. They have
found great success in their
studies. One of them has
graduated with their master's
degree in public health and the
other is 2 years away from
completing her studies to become
a teacher. I know many of you
guys here are.
I'm also proud that along with
El Centro and allies, we were
able to knock on thousands of
doors in 2022 to secure the um
Guarantee of early childhood
education through the ballot
initiative, which we want with
70% of support. So I'm here to
urge you to vote yes to
supporting HB 71 to increase the
annual distribution for early
childhood education Trust Fund,
so parents like um the parents
of my students could continue to
work and have access to their
childcare and their education.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, next row.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Carrie Armijo, I'm the
cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority. We stand
in proud support of this bill.
I'm very proud as a New Mexican,
a native New Mexican of the
investments that we're making in
our children, uh, in the state
of New Mexico and uh I just
wanted to kind of offer a
different perspective too, which
is, uh, that the Medicaid
program is very dependent on
distributions from the fund, uh,
distributions from the fund have
gone to support increased.
reimbursement rates for children
and maternal health services,
uh, the addition of new services
like Doaa and lactation
consultants, um, and other
critical services such as home
visiting. So, uh, we urge your
support and we thank you for
these long-term investments in
New Mexico's kids. Thanks.
Uh, please stop for one moment.
Is the zoom working?
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next
Anybody else on this side of the
room.
OK, if not, we'll go to the my
left, your right.
Uh, row one.
Anybody would like to speak in
row one.
Ale
in Albuquerque.
Gino
de leintipo de system
Gino
de leintipo detests
Katetenga
A.
Approximate calic grasses.
Good morning. My name is Javier
Solis, and I am a member of OA.
I think uh from parents, thank
you to Representative Gallegos
for supporting, for presenting
HB 71. This is a bill.
That offers financial support
for early childhood education
that parents like me want.
We, this will finance smaller
ratio between teachers and
students, and we'll finally be
able to put a stop to the high
teacher turnover by providing
higher wages and guaranteeing in
that way guaranteeing that my
son will always have the same
teacher who is dedicated and
will never have to become used
to having a new teacher every
month.
Thank you.
Thank you.
My next person.
And Buenos Diasinres caring
Gonzalez.
Is the gracias.
Is.
They
That yes the trans Good morning.
My name is Karen Gonzalez, and I
am here representing Olay. We
would like to thank
Representative Gallegos for
sponsoring HB 71. This bill is
the only way to make sure that
the budget this year includes
funds for salary increases for
early childhood educators.
Please approve this bill.
Um, to vote no would be to
accept.
Poverty wages for the teachers
who care for and educate.
The youngest New Mexicans. Thank
you.
Next.
Hello, good morning, everyone.
My name is Adri Perez. I am a
member of OA. I have worked as
an early educator for 4 years.
It was included in ECECD's paper
at parity program, which gave me
my first living as an early
educator.
A wage that reflects my
education, credentials and
experience.
Most of my colleagues, however,
still have very low wages.
want to thank Representative
Gallegos for sponsoring house
Bill 71.
By passing this legislation, EC
ECD will be able to expand its
wage and career ladder to
include more of my colleagues,
and bring an end to the
centuries of poverty.
women like me
would do a sensual work of
providing high quality.
Education for our youngest
children.
Thank you all for listening.
Thank you.
Uh, next
Or anybody else.
On this
Good morning. Thank you to the
chair and vice chair. Thank you,
Representative Gallegos, for
your leadership. My name is
Rebecca Barron Reese. I work at
growing up in New Mexico, which
is an early childhood nonprofit
delivering direct services to
children and families in Santa
Fe and Ria Riba counties, as
well as some other programmatic
work statewide, working in the
home-based childcare programs
across the state. Um, we're here
in support of this bill. We
think that this system requires
ongoing and sustained
investments in order to truly
build a prenatal to 5 system
that our families can rely on.
There's been such incredible
growth and investment over the
years, and we thank the
legislature for their work on
that. We believe it needs to
continue and to really meet this
moment in order to support
families, how they are, where
they are, um, and with all the
resources that we are so lucky
to have. So, I do hope you
support this bill today. Thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Luna Tedro, and
I'm a provider in Farmington,
New Mexico, and more
importantly, I am the policy
chair for the New Mexico Early
Childhood Association, which
represents over 1/3 of the
licensed childcare centers in
New Mexico. We worked very hard
with Representative Doreen and
took in trust to the value that
she had in seeing early
childhood in the state of New
Mexico. We have made such great
strides, and we don't want to
lose that momentum. We ask that
you please continue
to fund to make the early
childhood system hole in New
Mexico, and without this
funding, we can't continue that
work. So please continue and
fund um fund our programs. Thank
you.
Thank you next.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jacob Vil with New Mexico Voices
for Children, uh, a lot of
people who spoke before me
talked about the visionary
leadership, uh, that created
this fund and what we've been
able to do with it, I would just
add that at a time.
behavioral health, public safety
and educational outcomes are of
concern to all New Mexicans. Uh,
we have the chance to continue
building and funding a system
that makes a difference when
it's most impactful in those
prenatal to 5 years, um, that's
when most brain growth occurs
and when early experiences are
most pivotal. There's a lot of
work to be done, as you've
heard, the $500 million
distribution will allow us to
sustain and expand a universal
uh early care and education and
address.
critical gaps like the wage
issue, poverty wages for
providers as well as improving
families access to things like
home visiting and ensuring the
sustainability of providers. So
we thank you Representative
Gallegos for bringing this bill,
and we stand in strong support.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lance
Senna, policy director for the
Center for Civic Policy. I won't
repeat the points that were
already made, but just want to
state again as part of the
coalition that really um put
forward the land grant permanent
fund, um, and taking over a
decade to get us here, um, and
also stating that today is
Valentine's Day and recommitting
our love not just for New
Mexicans, for our children, but
also to our early childhood
educators.
Um, and with that, I urge your
support as CCP dense and strong
support. Thank you.
Hello, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, my name is Melissa Lopez
Sullivan and I stand in support
of HB 71. I have been serving as
the first executive director of
the New Mexico Doula Association
since 2019, and I'm also
commissioner on the status of
women here in New Mexico. I am a
a full spectrum doula certified
lactation counselor, student
midwife, and community advocate.
Our work with ECECD represents 3
years of deep work among
communities.
- ba s ed organizations, doulas,
healthcare providers, policy
advocates, the Department of
Health, and the Medicaid offices
to craft innovative policies
that bridge gaps between
maternal and infant health and
prenatal to 3 early childhood
education. The work is built on
the wisdom and labor of all of
those who've come before us, and
I stand here today on the
shoulders of our ancestors,
whose knowledge of birth and
parenting surpasses time
Memorial, immemorial. HB 71 is
about more than funding, it's
about honoring our past,
protecting our present, and
recognizing and building a
future for the generations to
come. We are creating a system
where parents and children are
centered in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you. Is there anybody else
who wish to speak in support.
seen
Nobody else will go online. Is
there anybody online who wishes
to speak in support, raise your
Good morning. My name is Valeria
Holloway, and I'm, I'm from Be
of the Southwest Daycare here in
Las Cruces, New Mexico, and I
know everybody has um repeated
or said a lot of things and I am
in totally agreeance with the um
HP 71.
Um, Bill, um, but the only thing
I'm will, will add is that
without this investment, we will
continue to lose passionate
experienced teachers, and our
children will pay the price. New
Mexico has made great progress
in early child education and we
cannot stop now. We are here
today to ask you guys, the
leaders to fund this proposal
and ensure that every child in
our state has access to quality
early learning with teachers who
are respected and fairly
compensated. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much and our
next speaker is, and I cannot
see it, Angela Garcia, Angela
Garcia, you're next.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee as
stated, my name is Angela
Garcia. I own the toybox Early
Learning centers here in Las
Cruces, serving approximately
300 children in our community
and I'm also the president of
Full Circle Advocacy Group and
community services representing
childcare providers and families
in New Mexico, also offering
home visiting. We stand in
strong support of HB 71 and
thank Representative Gallegos
for always being a champion for
New Mexican children. For the
first time, we're seeing
families
breathe a little with no copays
and access to high-quality
childcare. We're seeing children
thrive in enriching environments
with high quality curriculums.
We're seeing educators finally
being recognized for the
professionals they are providing
this amazing work. They are
almost seeing that pain as
professionals as well, but
that's what this is for. This
is, this is to continue that
work under the amazing
leadership of Secretary
Gorginsky and the early
childhood education and care
department, our early learning
communities have risen to.
the challenge. Currently ranking
number 13 in early childhood
education in the, in the nation.
We're being looked at as leaders
in America because of the
investments New Mexico has made
because of the investments as
legislators have made.
And we are very excited for HB
71 to continue that work because
the best is yet to come. Thank
you so much.
Thank you. Next is April, April,
and mute yourself and you have 2
minutes.
Thank you so much. Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you, Senator
Gallegos and Secretary Gerginsky
for your support to our
families. My name is April
Spalding, and I am the executive
director for Abrazo's Family
Support Services. We serve New
Mexico's most vulnerable
population, children birth to 3
with developmental delays and
disabilities and their families
through the family infant
toddler program, or you'll often
hear it referred to as fit. Of
all the areas that New Mexico
struggles are fit program is the
shining light, as we are
ranked number one in the nation
for identifying children who
need services.
This program, unfortunately, has
been underfunded for years, and
we are on the precipice to
either thrive or potentially
fail due to our inability to
attract and retain staff to
provide these services.
Our team of professionals are
certified, they're licensed,
they hold bachelor's, masters,
and even PhD level education.
This level of needed expertise
costs money, money which New
Mexico has access to through the
trust fund.
I'm respectfully requesting that
you approve House Bill 71 in
order to ensure the department
is able to access the funds
needed to continue this
entitlement program, which is
proven to improve the lives of
children and their families, not
to mention saves the schools and
our state system funds by
intervening at the youngest
ages. Thank you so much for your
time.
Thank you and our final online
speaker is Eileen, Eileen and
unmute yourself, you have 2
minutes.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Eileen Lopez and I'm the
executive director of education
for the OKON Department of
Education regarding House Bill
71, OK we get is in strong
support to increase this
funding. Okieni has been
fortunate enough to receive
funding from the tribal
Investment strategy Fund that
has been vital to our early
childhood program and
initiatives by assisting us with
language revitalization,
increased professional
development opportunities,
providing at home learning kits
for
students and their families and
for the recruitment and
retention of staff, primarily
teachers. Through this funding,
we have been able to recruit and
fill all the teacher positions
for our tribal Head Start
program, which we have not been
able to accomplish since
pre-COVID.
Again, Okeow Winge is in strong
support of House Bill 71 to
increase funding for not only
our early childhood programs,
but others throughout the state.
Thank you for your time and
allowing me to speak.
Thank you, uh, Angelique Tafoya,
you're next.
Please submute yourself,
Angelique.
OK. And with that, we'll turn to
our members for questions, or
first as representative, uh, Roy
Caballero.
Thank you Madam Chair and um
thank you for representative
chair and Madam Secretary.
Primeramente, uh, Madam
Chasquiros de lasci.
You express sadles estamos
conscientes.
The todo loo.
I gas.
And then
uh lamas.
A.
Loss
Yeah and this could be those.
Este.
Monteneros.
rises to recurso necessarios.
But.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I wanted to, um.
Say thank you for the
information that you provided.
This is very valuable. The
breakdown.
I'm, I'm very always very
concerned about our investment
and the return and the most
valuable return on our
investment is our children and
our children's future.
And that's what this is all
about and then and and so I just
really want to say thank you for
that. And Madam Chair, I also
want to um
The state that just from my
personal experiences, and I
think I've shared that with uh
Representative Che Gallos that
for over 20 years, I, um, ran an
in-home daycare.
Child development and care
program for over 20 years. And
It was the most powerful.
Uh, part of my 20 year part of
my longer career because I saw
firsthand the benefits.
Um, of providing
Subsidized care for our
children.
Because
20 years later, after we saw
them as toddlers, Madam Chair, I
would run into them.
As high school students.
College students and they would.
Say thank you
Because they came up in a child
development program that
prepared them. And so the
approach cradle to career is
absolutely
The best return on investment
that we can make. I don't have.
Any particular question, but the
final point I wanted to make,
Madam Chair, is that the parents
were able to
Invest their time in completing
their adult basic education,
pursue.
The careers of their choice.
Um, and then end up with.
Really strong viable uh
employment and that.
Sustained
Gave them sustainability and and
something to look forward to in
their future, so it complements
everything that.
This does, is it complements
exactly what we want to talk
about.
Breaking cycles of poverty and
creating cycles of opportunity.
I want to say thank you and
encourage all of the members of
our committee to vote yes and
hopefully all our colleagues on
the floor to vote yes. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
It we've represented Chatfield
and Mirabal Moya and then
Vincent.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Madam Secretary, I had promised
you to sit down with me about
this bill and didn't make it.
I apologize, I.
I've been in a little trot.
Um
So Red Bill, read the
commentary.
I, I support the work you do. I
have confidence in you. I
appreciate what you've done in
our small rural areas that I
represent.
I, uh
I support the bill.
My fear is this.
I have found in life that a grad
slow gradual progression, uh,
usually leads to an organized.
Um, way of doing things.
Do something.
I mean this bill doubles the
payout.
And it can oftentimes
the people
The mechanism that puts it on
the ground, you know that? I
know that.
Uh, so
That I support the bill, yes,
that I suppose for the program,
yes.
I think doubling
Pay out, it might be a little
bit too big of a bite.
I have concerns about that.
I know it's a long, it has a
longer process to go through,
and so.
Uh
Give you a chance to
Do that.
Speak about that.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Chatfield, thank
you so much for those words and
while I, while I understand what
you're saying, you know, last
year, the legislature increased
it to 250 the year before, 150,
you know, from 30, I think each
year the department has taken
those investments very
seriously. Um, in addition, we
had the $450 million of federal
relief money that came through
the agency. I hope you all can
see that uh this agency is very
transparent and very
accountable, and we take our
role as public servants and as
good stewards.
of the public dollars very
seriously so we don't want to
lose the momentum we feel that
the momentum we're building is
very positive. The
transformational change
happening in our tribal
communities in our rural
communities all across New
Mexico is something that uh we
want to keep going and we know
that we have to have measures
along the way to make sure that
we're getting into every single
community and we're reaching the
classroom educator, the home
visitor, the early intervention
providers, so I hear your
caution and I appreciate it.
Um, but I want you to know that
we have an amazing team at ECECD
who is uh built a strong agency,
a strong internal structure, and
we continue to work on that
these investments will be put to
good use, they'll reach your
communities, I think at 90% of
the money that comes into our
agency goes right out into your
community so uh we, we
appreciate um your leadership
and your support and understand
um, did you want to add?
I was wanting to to reiterate
again is that the increase is
also gonna increase the amount
of children that will be served
and we're looking at 10,000
children. And so I think that's
really talks about investment
and paying off of of investment.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
So, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
agree with you. I, I agree that
you've been a good steward of
the money that has been sent
your way in the past and like I
say, I
I appreciate your attention to
our rural areas.
Just have a little concern
about.
Pretty big bite.
it
Thank you.
Representative
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much. Um, I, um, I
have just a few questions. Um,
right now, so many people in uh
in the audience mentioned about
wages and the difference of
wages, what is the current
average wage of of of a of a
health or a childcare worker.
Or anyone in any of these
programs.
Teachers.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Morbo Moya, I'm,
I would need to get back to you
exactly on that because we do
have the 4 programs pre-K,
childcare, early intervention
and home visiting, uh, and so
they vary we have coming online
here in the next few months a
professional development
information system that will
capture all of that data on our
current workforce, so I can't
give you an average across the
early childhood profession, but
that is exactly the work that
the department will be doing in
the next.
It'll probably take 6 to 8
months to get everybody into the
system, um, but right now we
cost model our childcare, um,
for an entry level person coming
into childcare making at least
$15 an hour, this investment
would take that to $18 an hour,
and that that we think is very
important, again, a teacher is
gonna make 24, 26, but we don't
think anybody trying to attract
quality people into childcare at
$15 an hour at entry level,
that's, that's a hard sell
because it's such intense.
relationship-based work and we
want people who you know have
those skills and have those
abilities, so that's, that's a
big piece of this about 74
million of of the governor's
budget ask in our special
appropriation would go to just
make that change.
Um, um, thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, and, um, and Madam
Secretary, I, I 100% agree with
you about the, the, the job that
they do because I've taught PE
to pre-K kids and oh my God.
Yeah, it, it, it is definitely
hurting kittens, um, but it is
so, so much fun and, uh, but,
but like, and, and I've often
said like for the little ones
like this, you couldn't pay me
enough that I am not.
It, it is, it is a true calling,
and I 100% admire those that are
called to do this. That is so
not me. I'll take my teenagers
any day, um, but, uh, but yeah,
so, so those and, and, and I
agree with you that $15 an hour,
yikes, my, my kid can make that
at McDonald's.
Um, and so, and, and not have
the responsibility they they're
they're just uh their their only
thing is to hopefully get not
someone's order right and and
not someone's life and, and, you
know, um, so, so it is important
to be able to get that help and
where, where people know that
they are valued and then they in
turn value their um value more
their job, um, how do these, um,
Madam Chair, how do these, um,
facilities receive the funding
right now, is it like an
application process?
Is it, is it like how, how does
that whole process work?
Yes, madam Chair, uh, such a
great question, uh, for
childcare, it really comes
through the eligibility of the
family, so the family comes to
the department and is determined
whether they're eligible to
receive the childcare, and then
we pay the provider directly on
behalf of the family for that
care for early intervention, um,
they do a combination, they they
get paid by rates uh for the
different services, home
visiting does contract. They do
an application and then they
apply for that and we give them
a per child rate that we pay
them through their contract.
And for pre-K, um right now
today, our pre-K application
closes, and so they apply and
through a competitive process,
and then we pay them through
grant process to the um
entities, either school-based or
community-based entities, and we
pay them, um, they invoice us
monthly and we pay them. OK,
perfect. Thank you very much.
Now, um, Madam Chair, do they,
do they, uh, those, uh those
ones that you like your grant
process, do they have to account
for, I mean, because I
understand like the
reimbursement if it's following
the family and and it's and it's
a the the child and the family's
um eligibility, uh, but those,
those uh facilities that they
get that grant process or grant
monies. Do they have to give an
account of exactly what that's
uh that money is used for and
and how is that actually, or is
that part of your, your data
system that is going to keep all
of this stuff together at this
point too, hopefully.
Madam Chair, and these are such
great questions, thank you, um,
they do, we have um what we call
pre-K managers and home visiting
coordinators who monitor the
spending, we have a a set budget
template so we know where they
budget their money and then
that's monitored as we received
the invoices and then we support
providers with technical
assistance or other needs they
may have, um, as they're
spending may change or they may
have more staffing costs and so
yeah, there it is a certain line
items that they have to spend
the money within.
Thank you. Um, so, so my, my, my
concern is just that as long as,
as long as the money is going
where it's intended.
Um, then, then, uh, because I
think if, if we don't have a
mechanism, uh, Madam Chair,
that, that is, um.
Correctly
Locating that money, um, uh,
this is taxpayer money and, and
I, and I, and I, and, and for
once I kind of sound like Sunny,
and he's not even here, um, but,
but like I kind of agree with uh
with with Chatfield of of I'm,
I'm hoping that this amount is
sustainable.
Um, because, uh, because while I
think it's much needed.
I don't want it to get up to
that level and then for whatever
reason have to be dropped and
then people that that were
depending on this are no longer.
Um, so, so, uh, but, but I do
appreciate like there's there's
so much value in this, um, and I
do think that, uh, those uh
those families because I, I was,
I was the single mom like I
think one of the the the ladies
that was talking that um at at
one point in time, I didn't.
I think and then luckily I was
in California at that time. If I
didn't get childcare assistance,
I would have been working for a
complete loss, like I didn't
make enough money to completely
pay for, uh, for that. So if it
weren't for that, I would not
have been able to to to survive
in um uh as a single mom, um, at
that point in time, so I truly
believe in that process. So
thank you, thank you so much.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you presenters and
secretary, my good friend,
Representative Gallegos.
This, this one is gonna be hard
for me.
And I'm gonna tell you why I'm
probably not gonna support it
because I don't understand it.
And I want that to just, I want
the public to know that as well
as the committee.
And I sit on.
Appropriations
And
You have a huge budget.
And some of the things that I
heard the other day is one of my
questions is.
When do we start teaching
parents.
How to do your job.
And we don't, and the government
don't have to go in and teach
these kids that we get the
parents to do it, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Vincent, and um I
definitely want to spend some
more time with you, um, and
talking about what this, what
this does, but you know I think
as I talked about at the house
appropriations meeting earlier,
that is where home visiting
becomes such a critical part we
wanna have every family have
access to home visiting, so part
of our plans are building out
our family connects, which is
every baby born in New Mexico
gets at least 1 if not 2 visits
that then connects that family.
They need early intervention if
they need childcare.
if they need transportation,
housing and support. So it
really does begin then because
every family wants to have, have
be successful, um, but if they
don't have the resources,
extended family or they have,
you know, not had good um
parenting themselves, it's so
important that home visiting is
ubiquitous, that everybody has
that, then that connects them to
other things. Many people need
childcare, uh, we have um uh
heard a great story from a woman
the other day. It was really the
alignment of her early
interventionists, her home
visitor.
And her childcare provider
working together that allowed
her to continue to work and her
two year old twins who were born
at 3.5 pounds, uh, we're on
meeting all developed milestones
at 2 years old because of those
services coming together. She
didn't have to quit her job. She
had the support she needed.
That's what this is about and
that's why the investment seems
large, but it really is the
complement of all those
programs, helping families be
everything they want to be for
their child.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you secretary, and I do
look forward to having you
educate me and the thing that I
appreciate the most about this
committee is I've almost talked
to everybody on this committee,
and I've learned something new
from everybody here.
And I do want to have a, I wanna
have a good, clear mind and I
want to be able to make good
decisions.
When we're talking about our
kids, but some of the things
that, who do, who do these
teachers work for Madam Chair.
Represented, uh, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair.
Sorry, I, I we still madam
chair, OK, and the
representative Vincent, uh, it
depends, so we have our
school-based programs that
deliver pre-K that work for the
local education agencies or
public charter schools we have
our community-based programs,
they're either um uh private
nonprofit or for-profit
businesses that the teachers
work for, uh, so it could be any
of that or they're a family
childcare provider, and so
they're in their home and
they're a sole proprietor.
Um, and I do want to say too
that you have two counties where
we have what we call our local
early childhood system building
coalitions, we just had a 100%
Otero come on board and then the
peace coalition in Riidoso
through Region 9. This budget
also supports their work to
bring the community together
because it's strong communities
that support strong families who
support their children, so I
think that's a lot of what the
building work is too that is
embedded in this budget and
again, that's, I look forward to
having more conversations with
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Secretary.
And, you know, just some of the
things that I heard the other
day and I wasn't thinking this
direction, but it, it made me
think.
is when you say there's there is
organizations for profit.
What I heard
And I want you to confirm this
is.
One of the representatives said
that two of his friends became
rich.
Wealthy
Over these programs.
And it bothers me to know that
we're taking, I, I, I love it
when people make money. I really
do, Madam chair, please, I
don't, I don't want nobody
thinking that. If you're making
money, I'm thankful, you know, I
want to see people do good, but
if we have people taking
advantage of the system.
That means they're taking
advantage of the body, that
means that they're taking
advantage of the child.
And do I want teachers to make
good money, you bet. One of the
things you'll probably hardly
ever see me vote against a
teacher getting a raise because
I want to see people do good.
That's what makes the world
spin.
And
On the way up here, I saw that
subway.
Subway sandwich, the sandwich
shop.
They, um, they give a $14,000
sign-on bonus.
If you'll stay for one year.
And then we have our frontline
medical workers.
And our nurses, our home health,
our hospice people.
They're making less money than
than than that.
And I'm not saying that sandwich
builders are any more or less
important. I want to see
everybody make a good fair wage.
But when I vote on something, I
have to know in my heart that
it's the right thing.
And that we're doing the right
thing and then
Madam Chair, the last thing that
I wanted to ask was,
As volatile is oil and gas.
And with this amount of money
that you're asking for.
If, if the oil and gas was to
take a dive, how long would
this, how long would this money
hold out for?
Madam Chair,
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Vincent, I, I
don't know that I can answer
that exact question, this graph
on the back of the shows kind of
how we're we're getting at the
distribution a little earlier,
but the, the fund is, um, um,
the projections are, what is it,
the annual or is about 6.7% is
what the fund is earning each
year. And so we hope that that
fund will continue to grow at
that level and with these
distributions, the corpus should
remain um strong. We do have a
another a senate.
Joint resolution to
constitutionally ensure that
this fund is there for prenatal
to 5 services, uh, and so we
hope that that also will be
supported by the body.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Secretary, and I look
forward to working with you. And
if I even thought that there was
a problem with this bill not
getting through. I, I would be
voting different today. But
while we're in committee, and I
hope everybody understands my
position until I can fully get
my arms wrapped around this, and
I'll, you're gonna have to tutor
me a little bit on this, on
this, uh, program that
After I get that in my mind when
it gets to the floor, I'll give
you a different, I'll give you a
different vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Cullen.
Um, and
I do have some reservations as
well as representative Vincent
had pointed out, um, I've heard
also and I've also seen private
entities making quite a bit of
money and though, you know, I'm
conservative. I believe
everybody should make as much
money as they can. I'm good with
that, you know, uh.
So, but
On the backs of the government
is always
With me, so that'll be something
that I would like to
To talk with you about as well,
getting a little bit more
information and since I am new
and if get new, but I, I was
kind of around when we started
this program in 2020 when in
education, so, um.
And I'm sure where I'm from is
we had uh Rio Rancho, we had
Shining Stars, we love shining
stars, we, um, or when we
decided to build the new pre
pre-K program over there.
My concern is this last year,
you, uh, I believe that if, if.
A rulemaking process trying to
have our schools go to full time
at.
We ended up backing off of that
because we found that.
Yeah.
I understand.
I think be believe Senator
Brandt had worked on that saying
that you cannot force us to go
to full pre-K.
At the time.
Because it would have um reduced
the amount of kids that we could
serve the shining stars now.
Madam Chair, we are, um, they
are going to be expanding the
program, they're going to be
taking part of Questa also, um,
I to.
At full day is my understanding.
Um, madam chair, so.
My question is, is, are you
gonna look at trying to require
through the process it to
require.
That we go fully.
All daycare. I mean, for pre-K,
I mean.
Childcare
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Cohen, I need to
spend some more time with you as
well, so, uh, thank you for
that, uh, no, we, we are not in
the pre-K application that is
closing today has the option for
basic what we call basic part
day 4 hours a day, uh, and full
day, so that is an option that
is for um any entity,
school-based or community-based,
um, we do, we do look for um
making sure that families have
access to both choices in their
community because families need
different things, so we're
really happy.
with the work that, um, uh, the
Rio Rancho School District is
doing and taking a look kind of
at at.
Offering both to families in the
district.
And I think just I wanna pick up
on yours and Representative
Vincent's point about, um, the
accountability of where the
dollars are being spent because
when we build our cost models,
we do build it on things like,
uh, what the wages should be,
what the um benefits should be
the time out of classroom, time
for planning, making sure that
there are substitutes and so I
think there is more and I'd love
to get your thoughts more we can
do as a department to make sure
that those dollars are being
used um as representative
Mayoral Moya said.
as intended that the legislature
appropriated to us, we told you
how we're setting our rates and
what it's based on and that our
processes make sure that those
dollars are actually reaching
the children and the families,
uh, and the people who are doing
the care and education, so I
appreciate both of you raising
that and, um, it is a focus of
the department as well to be.
Good stewards and be accountable
to all of you um for the work
and the investments.
Yes, that's definitely want to
talk to you about that because
there's been a lot of kind of I
don't know if it's rumors,
misinformation, or if there's.
to some things the programs and
the payouts, um, and then my
other question, Adam Chair is
brick and mortar, um, I would
assume that.
For the private entities, we are
not providing any type of brick
and mortar.
Um, incentives, money towards.
You
Bill childcare.
Would that be accurate?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Collin, no, we, we do last year,
the legislature appropriated 1.8
million to our department, uh,
that we have now, uh,
transferred to the New Mexico
Finance Authority, uh, there is
10 million in the governor's
budget this year to add to that
fund, uh, the LFC put that money
directly to uh Mexico Finance
Authority, so both executive and
LFC have that 10 million in
There, we did a lot of
investment with that federal
relief money about over almost
13 million went out into the
community to build a brick and
uh we can't build, sorry, we can
renovate and we can support kind
of the development, we can't
actually use the dollars to
purchase, um, a building, but we
can help them, um, support, and
we have expanded over 3000
childcare slots uh through those
investments, so there is funding
to support.
Community-based providers and
expanding their businesses.
Humanit, so I just to clarify so
that I can so because that was
something that I had talked
about was, um.
Like if you were going to
require, if they were gonna
require school districts to go
say full time. I believe that
you should also build.
Care centers. I know that what
we were looking at is that they
could only renovate uh the
existing, that's why questa is
my understanding is going is
renovation cause you cannot
build up. You can't build a new
building based off of money.
Would that be accurate?
Uh, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Cohen, yes, you
can't use our dollars to
actually do the purchase
building, but you could use our
dollars to do all the
renovation, the planning, the
design, paying the staff in
those 1st 6 months as you're
enrolling families materials so
um it's kind of a combination it
has to be other funding sources
to buy or purchase, but then our
dollars could be used to support
our dollars, dollars that are
going through the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, um,
so my question is, is that, so
private entities, not public but
private entities can also use
those funds as well.
OK.
Right, and then, um,
And do we, uh, madam chair, do
we have data on the success of
the programs, particularly in
the pre-K.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Cole, the the legislative
finance Committee did a
longitudinal study of a New
Mexico pre-K starting with that
first cohort, they presented on
it the other day at the House
Appropriations, they have found
there's about a 6 to $16 return
for every $1 invested in New
Mexico pre-K.
This past year we worked
partnered with the public
education department and the
UCLA Center for Healthier
Children, Families and
Communities, and we collected
population of school readiness
data on 98% of our
kindergartners, so we plan to
use that measure year over year
to be able to see at a census
track level, how young children
are learning and developing
because the measure is really
designed as an accountability to
the birth to force system. You
know, we want to see change over
time, the trajectory for.
whole populations of young
children changing in New Mexico
as a result of these significant
and substantial investments in
the prenatal to 4 system.
Thank you, Madam, um.
So
If I recall correctly.
Um
The family that earns up to
100,000 a year, if I was correct
on my calculations are around
there, that they can qualify for
free childcare.
That be accurate.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Cullen, it's for a family of 4.
It's up to I think 124,000.
And qualify for free childcare.
Like can you give it to him?
Or
400% of the federal poverty
level and then they can stay on
up to 425% if they get raises
and increases. OK, and, um,
And
And I just want to be.
that I do support early.
Childhood, um, era and
cake, we had a great program in
our district. It's in my oldest,
who is now in her 30s, went
through.
Uh, pre-K, um, and did a a a
world of good, she was really
uh.
Ready for kindergarten when so
I'm definitely um.
Supportive of it, um, but I
think that there's some details
that I would like to drill down,
um, and talk with you about um
concerns that I've been hearing.
And um
But uh.
We just want to make sure that,
you know, our money is being
well spent and that we're
getting the debt and the return
that we're but we wanna see her.
children and my grandson does
get some services.
is based off of these programs.
So thank you. Uh, next is
Representative Gonzalez and
Carrola Baca, and Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just have a couple maybe of
clarifying questions, especially
being new, new to the committee,
um, one, and, and you somewhat
addressed it, um, addressing
representative Cullen, um, and,
and, but there was a mention
earlier about qualification of
childcare, um, so if you might
be able just to summarize um who
is eligible for childcare as it
just states, you know, who is
eligible for childcare. Um, what
are the basic requirements to be
eligible for that benefit. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Gonzalez. Uh, so
for childcare, you can be
eligible either through because
you have what we call a
qualifying activity, which means
that you're working and your
child is under the age of 13,
uh, so childcare covers um costs
all the way from 6 weeks up to
through 12 years of age.
Uh, and then you could also be
in school.
Um, you could be
Working, we did a lot of um good
rulemaking during the early days
of the pandemic around even if
you're teleworking or working at
home, you can still qualify for
childcare because you do need to
work and and have your child in
care. So it is, those are the
two main reasons, but there's
also hardship like if one parent
isn't working, but they have,
you know, they have either um a
disability or some reason that
it would be hard for them to
care for the child. You can also
qualify um for childcare. We
work closely with our of our
childcare.
centers that work with um
families experiencing
homelessness, so many children
come in under that qualifying
activity. I just in in the sense
that they're at risk and so
helping that family get a job or
get to school, um, so those are
some of the ways that family,
those are the ways that families
can qualify for childcare
assistance.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And then just
one, it's one of I guess maybe
clarifying question, um.
I love the way that you hand
this out and I to see the
increase in programming that you
are able to do, um, and besides,
you know, maybe the obvious
benefits to increasing is the
increase to all of these very
valuable programs. Um, is there
some other, um, maybe input as
to why the urgency, you know,
to, to the increase, um, yeah,
or just, you know, um, why
jumping is it, is there, is
there something impending versus
waiting out the fund, you know,
why besides offering lots of
great things, um, you know,
there's some other
um, you know, thoughts behind
that.
Uh, Madam Chair, um
Representative Gonzalez, such a
great question, I think to what
uh Representative Gallego said
to have 10,000 children to be
able to reach universal pre-K
for our 3s and our 4s to be able
to make sure that our educators
are paid the wages that this
committee has been so strong on
that and the early educators
can't wait, uh, we can't wait as
we heard the $15 or the $14,000
bonus, uh, we want to attract,
um the best and keep them and
retain them and so I think those
are the things that really can't
wait.
in terms of how we pay our early
childhood professionals that
includes our early intervention,
our home visiting, our childcare
and our pre-K. Um, we don't want
to deny services to New Mexicans
that are eligible for those
services when we have the
resources to do it. So I would
say that's the sense of urgency
and being able to see the
positive outcomes that we know
we've already seen and we'll
continue to see by these
investments, through these
investments.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. You know, just
thank you for that insight, um,
you know, again, all these great
benefits, um, but you know,
thank you for adding insight as
to what should happen, should we
not, you know, approve the
increase. But thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Grola.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you for that presentation,
muchas gracias for uh
Bogarpostale.
I have some a couple of
questions. Um, most of the
families that I had the honor to
serve as a teacher, um, care for
their families, care for their
kids. Most of them are very
stressed with resources that um
probably my experience growing
up to the families care for
basic needs food, roof, um.
Making sure that kids had got
clean to school, but um to be
able to have a successful
academic schooling, what else is
needed for that, we need to
provide for kids.
Um, besides basically needs,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Grola, I think what we see here
with early childhood is again I
go back to home visiting and how
home visiting really provides
that amazing prenatally, so the
family before the baby's even
born, they're learning and
they're being supported with a,
a quality home visitor who is
helping them navigate that and
then connecting them with things
like housing resources,
transport.
ation Those are the biggest
needs that we see as a home
visitors are working with
families.
Behavioral health substance use.
So it becomes that connector to
all the other supports that a
family needs to be strong and,
you know, and build those
relationships with their child
in very positive ways.
Thank you, madam chair. Madam
Chair, if I could just add, so
working in the social service
field, we see so many times that
um having some that home
visiting component, um, is
really is life changing for for
some of these parents because as
a new parent, they may not have
those resources, but they have
the ability to at least have
somebody go in and you know
maybe they don't understand what
postpartum is. Maybe they don't
understand, you know, if I, if
I'm low on food and I.
and I'm overwhelmed that there
is uh uh.
Uh, a helping hand and just
being able to have that, uh,
alleviate some of that stress,
so and I'm so sorry I'm so hard
to understand you,
I'm also um thinking about in uh
exposure social cognitive, and
reading and some that parents
and family cares but just are
too busy with real situation
right in their lives. Um, I was
part of that group who went
through the whole state when
before the department was
created to gather data.
In the communities um were
developed into the department
now that was what, 6 years ago,
maybe 5 years ago.
So the kids who first benefit,
Madam Chair, from this program
are now going what uh?
Kindergarten, first grade.
So I'm really looking forward to
see them in middle school.
Uh, to see that real impact of
these services in kids in the
long run, but we had to really
get there, right? If we stop
now, we're not gonna see it. So,
um, do we have any data right
now, Madam Chair, that is
showing us kids who participate
in programs and I know somebody
was asking already the success
of the program, but do we have
and maybe it's too early to have
this data, but do we have any
data, uh, comparing kids who are
participating in every child
education versus the ones who
Not
Mac, Madam Chair, Representative
Gorola, we have some great data
in our family infant toddler
program, we track um how
children are learning and
developing those are infants and
toddlers with developmental
delays and disabilities, and so
we have really rich data there.
We also have very rich data for
our home visiting programs like
that parent child relationship
postpartum access to postpartum,
uh, access to um prenatal
services, so there is a lot of
that data in our pre-K, um, we
use the classroom assessment.
Scoring system and we go into
every pre-K classroom and we
look at the quality of
instruction, classroom
organization, uh, um, emotional
support, uh, will be expanding
that hopefully to our childcare
as well, um, but so through
childcare, our focus program
through the state does look at
different things, but they're
more inputs than outcomes, and
we want to get more focused on
outcomes, um, within our
childcare system and Madam
chair
and secretary. I really will
encourage you to.
keep that data so we can't
continue advocating for this
programs, um, and we are really
based on data. I know as a
teacher I'm sometimes argue that
because we can see success in
different ways. And we can
continue gathering like reading,
math learning in in all the
areas that will be so helpful in
the future. And one last
question, Madam Chair, um, how
does that wage and career ladder
look like.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Grola, I do want
to mention one more thing on the
data, it's a project that has
been federally funded, um,
starting back in 2013, called
the Early Childhood Integrated
Data System, uh, we just through
some other federal money have
created an actual warehouse, so
we're working with um a local,
um, data scientist company here
in the state of New Mexico, but
we should within a year be able
to see how children who are in
all these different programs,
what their outcomes look like on
the i station.
Kindergarten, um, in math and
literacy, so I do, I, that's a
bad thing I missed to say, and
then we're also part of the New
Mexico longitudinal data system
work, which will also be looking
at our outcomes. Um, and then
the wage scale and career
lattice, we are working through
the state's early childhood
education and care advisory
Council, its subcommittee on
Early Childhood Professionals
and the National Early Childhood
Workforce Center to actually
design and develop that wage
scale and career lattice, it's a
6 month process that started
about a month ago.
And so that should be coming,
um, coming online, but it'll
look at things like years of
experience, educational levels,
roles that the early childhood
professional holds and what
those roles should then be
compensated at, um, and so
those.
Those are some of the ways that
it, it will look, but we haven't
fully defined it because we're
working with the community
across early intervention, home
visiting, childcare, and pre-K.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Baca
and then Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Chan, Madam Vice
Chair.
Um
I have some concerns.
And I will
Hopefully, um
Get some answers. I will be kind
of precise.
And so please
So, um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Where is the public schools on
their stance on this. I, I've
seen lots of home care
providers, private providers.
Where are our public schools,
our K-12 schools stance on this.
Yeah, I, I miss uh.
Madam chair, um, a
representative Baca, um, such a
good question. I've talked to
Stan Ros, he hasn't, um, um.
Said he's not for it, um, when I
was down in Las Cruces meeting
with both the Gadsden
superintendent Dempsey and uh
Superintendent Ruiz, they were
very supportive. We have had
very strong feedback from our
school districts in terms of the
way the department has
supported, um, early childhood
education and now with the
preschool special education
coordinator in our department.
There's a true opportunity for
us to even be stronger and
funding, uh, and being um
innovative in our preschool
special education services.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Now,
Looking at the data, and looking
at the numbers.
The greatest investment has
actually been made.
private preschools.
And not necessarily in our K-12
schools.
As far as we look at funding.
So, um, I, I do have.
Uh, some questions.
Um
Mr. Chairman
In our current SCG funding, the
funding for public schools can
funds be used?
For private business.
And if you need to defer to the
people there to your right, you
can.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Baca.
I just want to clarify the
question, can SCG funds, public
school funds be used for private
providers? Is that the question?
Yes
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
I would say
Only in the, in the form of
contracts, probably districts do
use operational funds to to fund
private contracts, um, in the
case of early childhood, I don't
know that that's the case.
Thank you. The answer is.
Just as you said, it's not for
Privately funded can be used for
private schools or other types
of schools.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the other, we
talked about it with the
greatest investment in
In private.
I'm gonna ask about questions
about
The data we talked about this
and I support.
I support preschool. I support.
Um, public schools.
And I, I, I've met with the
secretary who I will say.
Her and I have a very good
working relationship. We have
mutual respect.
And she knew I was going to ask
some of these questions, OK?
So, I, I know that on the K-12
stuff, what is our data say and
how do we collect data?
About the effectiveness of these
programs.
In private
Uh, enterprises or private
schools.
Including home-based centers.
Um
Mr. Chair
And Mr. Chair.
Representative Baca, um, as I
said, the, the data that we um
are gonna work with the early
childhood integrated data system
covers all children served
regardless of setting, whether
it's community based or
school-based. So that's how
we'll track um the outcomes of
young children who receive
services in our communities.
Thank you as, as we know, um,
that is.
Very important to me and also.
Fiscal responsibility is uh.
Mr. Chairman, when we talk about
this and we talked about the
rates that the reimbursement
that are uh reimbursements that
are sent out to our
For private.
Mr. Chairman, I want to know
what is the cost of serving a
kid in one of these private
enterprises as opposed to the
cost of serving a kid in a
regular.
School, 3 and 4 year program.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
the rate we um pay is the same
to both community-based and
school-based, it's dependent on
the age of children they're
serving and whether it's a mixed
age or a 3 year old or a 4 year
old classroom, but um both
settings get the same rate, um.
Or the children served in pre-K.
So, uh, what is that rate, um,
Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary.
For um mixed day, OK, so they
can also serve them either 1080
hours a year, and it's.
12,000.
500? 12,500 for a.
4 year old or 34 year old.
You, you got it right, and then
we'll get those to you, but yes,
and I think it's about 15,000 or
a 3 year old mixed state.
Oh, I'm asking, OK.
You can, you can text. You wanna
come up?
This is Sandy Trujillo Medina.
She's our division director for
early care education and
nutrition, which supports
childcare.
Pre-K.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, so for our
um mixed age and our 3Y, that
rate is 17,000 for our um.
For white we're looking at the
12,500, the secretary was
talking about.
And then, of course, for our
basic rate, which would be the
half day.
Um, you're gonna see those rates
cut in half, right, because the
number of.
Thank you, um
Mister Chair, and Madam
Secretary.
$17,000 a kid.
Um, so when a class in our
schools, I believe in our
preschools that, uh, Mr. Charas
it a, a 4 to 1 ratio for our 3
and 4 year programs.
Or is it a,
a representative of my
apologies, um.
I've got lots of information in
my head today. I've got lots of
questions in my head, so we'll
we'll take a go at this I get a
little nervous when I come up
here as well, so my apologies,
150,750 is what we're talking
about. It is not 17.
That will be the highest rate
that you will see for a pre-K 3
Y and mixed age.
Thank you and
can be in that classroom.
OK, so
Can I do some math over there? I
got
16 students at $15,000 a
student.
15,700.
Any of my math. I don't see my,
my financial guys I see you
guys.
Can you, can you do it?
240.
So approximately between 240 and
250. I could actually see that.
These are just reading glasses.
You made the nurse, thank you
for that.
$255,000.
For classroom.
Her program, and then you, you
kind of begin to start seeing.
Some of the concerns that are
there, um.
Because the school districts are
responsible for paying benefits.
And a retirement of these
employees are the uh Mr.
Chairman, are the, the employees
of these private enterprises or
they also
Being received or receiving
benefits, employment, I mean,
insurance retirements.
across the board
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baca, that is, that is built
into the rate and I want to make
a clarification of the 15,000.
Those are programs offering 1380
hours of instruction and 90
hours of parent engagement a
year.
That is longer than your
traditional public school year,
most of those programs are being
offered in our community based
for families who needs so just
to be clear, it's not the same
as a 10 months.
School year.
Thank you. That, that does help.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, the other question
that I have is,
Um
How much in reversions did the
ECECD have in this last fiscal
year.
And the, the second part of that
question is, if, if this were to
pass in the amount will be
increased to 500,000.
What happens to unspent monies.
Um
In this fun that would be drawn
from this fund.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
the unspent money from the trust
fund goes back into the trust
fund.
Um, and I, um, I see less than
1% is what we reverted last year
from the general fund.
Less than 1% of a budget of
what, what was your, I mean, I
know we talked about.
Blessing them so.
80.
This year, but not last year it
wasn't.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The other,
the other question, and I, I
talked about.
Pay for employees, and we talked
about.
Raising the rate from 15 to 18,
um, Mr. Chairman.
I do believe that currently our
current EA in our schools are
making 15 as I'm working as a
kindergarten assistant. I know
that a couple years ago.
I ran a Bay will be with my
colleagues, which took them up
to 25,000. This year we're,
we're hopefully passing a bill
that would take it up to 30,000.
Which would be in line with that
18, but that's not the case.
We're talking parody.
We may have private care
providers.
Making more than our public
school employees.
Yeah, are you, are you aware of
that, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Baca, another important um thing
to note is that I think there is
uh in the, I don't know if it's
in the LESC budget, but again,
raising those um levels of
teachers to 55, 65 to 75, that
have that parody, so
recognizing, um.
That that early childhood
professionals in a pre-K
classroom.
The level of um instruction and
assessment and things that they
have to do, um, I think that the
way that we have set up the
rate.
For pre-K in all settings,
whether regardless of the
setting that the rate per child
is a reflective of.
Again, what we need in order to
keep up with the parody that
we're seeing uh continue
investments in educators, which
are is so important to get the
outcomes we want. I might have
lost track of your questions, so
if you want to repeat um.
More than happy to, we're, we're
talking about, you're saying
about earlier so but I, I think
you're just be you actually
opened up to my next question.
You must have anticipated it.
So we talk about parity and we
talk about
Hey
These childcare.
Providers, teachers
Do they have the same
certification requirements.
To be a teacher, in other words,
a bachelor's and I see some
people shaking their heads and
the answer, I, I see you back
there, you're looking right over
the secretaries. Does that
include for home programs as
well. Are these people, are they
licensed through?
PED that they would be receiving
the same pay as a
Uh, a teacher in a K-12 school.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
they are required to have, um, a
bachelor's in early childhood
for the teacher and an
associate's degree for the
assistant teacher, they are not
required in community-based
settings to have licensure
because of the, there is not any
value for, you know, in the
community base, but they do have
to have those credentials.
Or be working towards them and
we.
Sandy can attest to to the work
that we've been doing to track
that and monitor that and make
sure that that is um that is
happening because that's been a
standard since 2005.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. Uh, the question you
asked and was asked earlier
about.
What qualifies a person to be
eligible for this, and I believe
you said or was said.
That they had to.
They could be in school.
They could be employed or in
some cases they could be uh
receiving it as a hardship. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
that's in reference to
childcare. Pre-K is free for New
Mexicans who have a 3 year old
or a 4 year old.
Thank you. Um, I just, as far as
for the childcare.
to meet those criteria, is it
that they only meet that
criteria upon entry into that
program, or is it verified, um,
At some kind of other interval,
like, in other words, I, I right
now I'm providing, I'm
qualifying for childcare. I'm in
school.
Is at once
That I qualify, I always
qualify, or do we check every 6
months or a year to make sure
that the same criteria is met.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, I love these questions.
These are so good, you're really
getting into the childcare, um,
so, uh, federal law requires
that families be eligible for at
least 12 months, so we don't
check um within 12 months, they
get to remain eligible unless
they have like they move out of
state or something, then they
have to report to us and um.
tell us so they have to live in
the state also, I should have
said that's another eligibility
criteria.
Thank you and my, my last
question, and I know that I'm
But we talked about the money. I
think it was $1.8 million.
That could be used for uh
capital.
Kind of requests.
So Mr. Chairman,
If I am a home care provider and
I have
I provide these services in my
home. Can I get monies for
renovation to my own home.
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
yeah, as long as the renovations
are related to either expanding
access or improving quality of
your childcare center, yes.
Thank you, Mr.
Representative Lata.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary and
Representative for bringing this
bill forward.
Uh, I'm getting flashbacks from
like 2020.
Um,
So Madam Secretary,
Representative, uh, Madam Char,
it, it, can you explain to me,
please?
What
The for-profit and non-profit
providers of early childhood.
Uh, programs do that the school
districts don't do.
Chair of Representative Lata,
thank you, thank you for that
question. Uh, they provide
childcare for families, and they
also provide home visiting.
And they provide in pre-K, so
they really provide the full
full gamut and that's the way
most.
prenatal to 5 services in this
country are delivered is
through, um, the private sector.
Thank you for that, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So, uh,
These services provided from
7:30 to 2:30 in the afternoon
only, or do they expand into the
evenings or even earlier in the
morning, perhaps the weekends.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Latta for our childcare,
especially our family childcare,
they're often open at 6:30 in
the morning and, and.
open till 6 p.m. Uh, many of our
centers as well, very few of
them operate in those hours if
they're doing pre-K only, they
might, but most of them are
operating.
7 to 7 and also um operating
many on the weekends, but we do
need, need more providers to be
offering that non-traditional
hour care. But yes, they, they
offer the gamut and I think our
early intervention programs,
they meet families where they
are, where they're needed, and
they go into their homes, they
provide the services in
families' homes or at a
community place in their natural
environment. So these are um
organizations that are meeting
families where they are and and
providing the services their
children are eligible for.
Thank you for that, Madam
Secretary, and uh and manager,
so it's safe to assume that
these things happen on the
weekends.
Thank you. So, uh,
You know, there's been
commentary made about uh the
private providers and what they
do. So are, are the private
providers that provide these
types of services in the state.
Corporations, are they funded
by, you know, they hedge hedge
funds?
Yeah, is it, is it, you know, is
it like, do we see Madam Chair
and and Madam Secretary and
Representative, you know, are
these like the Walmarts or the
Costco's of of of childhood
education, early childhood
education.
Mr. Chair Representative Latta,
we have very large centers,
multi-site centers, some of them
are national chains, but, um,
most of the care in our state is
done by New Mexico started in
family childcare, expanded to a
center, uh, and so they are of
all sizes, um, they could be as
small as 25 children served to
as large as 250 children,
served, uh, and then again,
family childcare, which is
limited to either 6 or 12
children.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chair. 111 more
thing is, so, um,
In the past or what's happening
now.
Uh, is it true, or do you have
evidence that
Either private healthcare
providers, private pre-K
providers, or non-profitre
providers.
are losing staff.
To the school districts because
they can't compete as far as pay
and benefits.
Mr. Chair, um
Representativelato, we, we
definitely hear this
anecdotally, it's been something
I think historical in early
childhood, uh going back to all
my 30 years in early childhood
that the early childhood
community gets people trained
and get the professional
development and then when they
have the opportunity to join a
school district and have all the
other benefits, sometimes they
do lose them, but the pre-K
parody program and the infant
toddler parody has helped us
retain those individuals in
community-based settings because
we can match if there are
Level 3 teacher, you know,
working community-based, we can
pay them that 75,000 through the
pre-K parody. So leveling the
playing field and making sure
that families have choice.
That's the bottom line, they
need to have choice of school,
community, family, child care,
whatever works best for their
child and for their needs.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Madam, so then that said,
This is
Why we're having the ask in
order to increase that.
In order to provide this parity
to more to more people in order
to provide these services to our
families in the state.
Um
Miniature, Madam Secretary
representative, do we know, you
know, the, the, the income level
of the of the families who are
receiving these types of
services, would you say they're
uh low income folks, people in
poverty, or, or.
What are we looking at?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Latta, I actually have that
data, I should have brought my
budget notebook but um we can
get that to the committee staff,
but you know for for pre-K,
we're at Universal for 4 year
olds, so we're seeing all many
New Mexicans benefiting across
all socioeconomic.
With childcare, we have it
broken down by each of the like.
Under 100, 150, so we can
provide that to the committee,
um, but the majority of families
are still under 225% of poverty
that are receiving childcare
assistance.
Thank, thank you for that, uh,
Madam Secretary Mature, so I
just would like to make the, the
comment that, you know,
I, I'm a big fan of early
childhood education, especially
my home visiting.
Home visiting, I love my home
visiting folks.
But the, the, the, the, the, the
takeaways I'm taking from this
is we want to expand what's
already being offered.
Um, we have professionals doing
the work.
Uh, we have, there's
accountability.
Uh, not only with the education
of the children, but also uh
with the financial side of it.
Um, and we also have to remember
that many of these providers,
whether they be profit or
nonprofit or like you said,
Madam Secretary.
You're Mexicans, our neighbors.
Our friends, uh,
People who otherwise would have
opportunities to open that type
of business.
Uh, I, I want to ask me, and I
apologize. I thought I said I
was gonna finish, but it just
popped into my head. How many of
these businesses are owned by
either minorities or women.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Latta, I'd been.
Thank you for that, man. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Torres Valesques.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Um
Madam Secretary and
Representative, um,
Uh, first, just thank you for
presenting this bill. Um, I know
families um that have benefited
from the home visiting and their
families who have degrees,
college degrees, and their
families, their parents have
college degrees and they're well
educated and supported, and
still that home visiting
connection makes such an impact
on the development of their baby
and the mother's recovery and
the
connection of the family as a
unit. And so I want to thank you
for that, all the work you're
doing there. I'm also very aware
that at no other time in our
lives to our brains develop.
As quickly as expansively as
they do in the early childhood
years in terms of language, in
terms of social skills, in terms
of cognition.
And I had the opportunity to see
that in 2010 when we were first
doing some of the pre-K programs
in New Mexico, and that data was
amazing. I appreciate hearing
about the data that you are
collecting because it goes even
further and deeper and looks at
so many more pieces. I can't
wait to see it either.
Um
My question.
has to do with if you could.
Give me any examples of how
Um,
How these services are being
implemented and you don't need
to give me a full description.
But what I'm looking for is the
um protection and the
maintaining of our languages and
cultures in our tribal
communities in our rural
Hispanic communities. Um, what
are some things that your
department does to ensure that
we are preserving languages and
cultures.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Torres Velasquez
for that question, um, we are so
happy when the legislature
expanded New Mexico pre-K in
2024 after the voters approved
the land grant permanent fund.
We, uh, reached out to all
through As assistant secretary
Cotillion Sneti to all of our
tribal partners, and I think
we're at about 5, we've made
direct intergovernmental
agreements with. They offer
pre-K. They do it their
language, their tradition, their
culture.
and we support in whatever way
they want, but that has been a
tremendous effort. I, I we're, I
think we should all be so proud
of where New Mexico Pre-K is
today in the state and with this
increased distribution will be
able to have that for 3 year
olds as well across the state.
Um
Yes, we've invested almost 1.4
million just in our tribal pre-K
programs over um in the last
couple of years, so we're very
proud of that work and we're
learning a lot from their, their
efforts, uh, and love to hear,
um, you know, hear from OK Oena
today and and the work that
they're doing, so thank you.
Thank you and Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um.
When I first saw the budget for
education and I saw what y'all
were proposed to get.
I, I was kind of worried.
And I was worried that it wasn't
enough for what you're doing
now.
And, and when I look at what
you're thinking of doing what
you're proposing to do and the
number of students you're
looking at reaching, I am so
relieved.
Seriously, I am so grateful that
you are presenting this bill, so
thank you.
Representative Romero, chair
Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you all for presenting
and being here today. Um, sorry,
I was late. We have the school
board association and I was
giving a presentation over
education issues.
Which is awesome that I was able
to make.
Presentations. So, um, Madam
Chair and, and secretary, um, we
have a letter and then we have
some stats here with 5 goals and
I was wondering if you could
elaborate a little bit on the
importance of early childhood
education, um, and the work that
it does to connect early
childhood, um, the K-12 system
and and career together.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you, thank
you for that question. Um, it is
truly been um incredible this,
this is, uh, I think as
Representative Roval Caballero
said the cradle to career is
such an innovative approach that
Governor Lujan Grisham has
brought here and that the
legislature has so wisely
invested in, um, people have
mentioned that the billion
neural connections that are made
in a baby's brain every second.
It's those interactions that
they have with their caregivers,
with their families that
those neural connections either
very positive and set the
architecture of the brain, uh,
in the direction of improved
school readiness. So our school
readiness, we know that when you
created this department that
that was a huge priority.
Children entering our
kindergarten doors ready to take
up that K-12 experience knowing
that if they're a year behind a
year and a half behind, 2 years
behind, uh, which we see delays
starting as early as 18 months,
uh, that you're going to have a
harder time in the K-12.
System really um getting those
children on track, so this
investment, um, I think as a
representative Torres Velasquez
said this is a moment in time of
human development we'll never
get back.
When you invest in this period
of life, this sets the
trajectory for health,
education, developmental
outcomes, economic outcomes, and
the return to the state, but
really the return in the human
capital and potential, so we see
the strong connection, the early
development instrument, I would
love to have time maybe in the
interim with Secretary Padilla
to talk with the committee about
what that data is actually going
to be used for as well as the
data we're now collecting from
kindergarten parents coming in
about their child's earliest
experience.
experiences and being able to
understand that again at the
census track level and at the
school level, making those
connections that we know are
gonna improve our state's
outcomes and literacy and math,
um.
And
drop out and graduation rates,
all the things we all care
deeply about.
And Madam Chair and
Secretary, I really appreciate
that because I think that has
been reflected in all of the
comments and questioning here
today is that nobody's
questioning. And in fact,
everybody's trying to put as you
had done an exclamation point on
the importance of the
investments that we're making
and what it has is doing and
what the potential it is for our
state and our children because
it is super fantastic. I will
say though is that um
That's part of what gives me
pause in general is that we as
you mentioned the interim
process, um, but through the
legislative Education Study
Committee, we don't have purview
into um early childhood
education and um
higher education, so we're
limited to K-12, um, and that's
where we have for years now been
coming with a bill in order to
insert ourselves because we very
much believe in as you so
eloquently put it, the cradle to
career, um.
But we would like to be able to
partner in delving into these
issues a little bit more deeply,
have our knowledgeable staff at
the legislative education Study
Committee um partner with you
all on, on these issues to where
we can get a lot of these
questions clarified, not just in
the standing committee, but
throughout the interim so that
we can continue having um um a
more nuanced discussion as it
pertains to, to early childhood
and I was wondering if you have
um, any thoughts about
incorporating the legislative
Education Study Committee into
working with you all um at the
department, um, uh, on early
childhood issues.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, I know we uh
we did a FIR on that uh that
bill.
Uh, and you know, I think that
it is important, I think I sit
in that education, um, huddle,
and I sit in the health and
human services huddle. So I, I
do believe that the only
committee that I really report
to right now our our agency is
the LFC. And so I think there's
value in understanding the
impact of our work on children
and families across health and
education, so what I can say is
that I'm I'm interested in being
able to talk more about our work
and its impact on children and
families's health and education.
educational outcomes. Madam
Chair and Madam Secretary.
So is that in support of the
bill or not?
Mr.
Chair, I will, I will come talk
with you and let's talk more
about it. I can't, I can't
comment on it right now, but I
am interested in being, in
working with the interim and
working with the LESC and the
Health and Human Services and
you know, thinking about how do
we talk about this critical
period of life across health and
education.
So, so, Madam Chair, Madam
Secretary, I, I, I don't know
how to interpret that, um,
honestly, because I would really
wish that we would have support.
This is something that's passed
the legislature unanimously for
a couple years now. Um, I know
it's difficult for us as one
branch to be asking another
branch for increased oversight,
but I find it as critically
important that that we're able
to partner with you all because
we and I don't come uh as uh.
In a role where I want to be um
Uh, in an adversarial position.
Um, it's certainly, as I
mentioned, the school board is
trying to work together with
folks so that we can get a
better, more nuanced picture of
what's going on, um, as, as the
legislative body here and we are
very fortunate to be one of the
only states to have a devoted
legislative staff to education
issues, which is something that
I certainly hope to leverage. So
I hope that's something that
that we can really get through
so that we can substantively.
with one another because one of
my frustrations I voiced it a
lot of times is that we have
bills that it pertains to early
childhood like we do now. And
it's awesome. And, and we've
gone for hour 45 minutes now on
the issues which are very much
deserves, um, but we could do so
much more to partner with you
all if we're we have that
opportunity to do that, um.
But, but certainly appreciate
your efforts and look forward to
to working um together in the
future. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Well, everybody has
spoken and I just have a few
things to say. First of all,
thank you to all the early
childhood.
Uh, advocates and practitioners,
I am the daughter of an early
childhood teacher. I first
taught early child at the age of
6, because I went to half day
kindergarten, and I was the
juice pourer for the early child
uh childhood program before I
went to kindergarten.
Um, I support the bill. I want
to say I think the fiscal impact
report, page 3
answered my question because the
real question is the sustainable
financially and
I note that actually.
Uh, from the, the, um, consensus
revenue estimating group, which
is from our incredible
economists that we have in this
state.
From fiscal year 26.
228 are the only time when this
bill would actually double or
significantly increase the
distribution.
From fiscal year 29 on, it's
sustainable, but it doesn't
double or.
You know, significantly
increased, so to me we have to
look at it financially, it's
fiscally responsible, um, and
sustainable.
And we'll take us way into the
future and to me that's one of
the most significant things that
protects the corpus, I wouldn't
even know how to say that 4
years ago. Um, I do want to add
for those of you who are new on
the community, uh, the committee
that the early childhood
education and care department
was established in 2019, um, the
first secretary and the only
secretary has been, Madam
Secretary Elizabeth.
Groginsky, can we give her a
round of applause?
You know, not all of our
departments have had that
sustainability.
And leadership, but it speaks to
her commitment and the
incredible stuff that she's
gathered that, you know, through
every vicissitude of what it
takes to start a department.
She's been there and she's never
given up.
So, um, thank you, presenter,
thank you, Representative Chair
Doreen Gallegos. Thank you,
Madam Secretary, and with that,
uh, would somebody like to make
a motion?
OK, uh, we have a motion for
Dupe from Cheroro, a 2nd from
Representative Torres Valesquez,
uh, Madam Secretary, can you
take the role?
Yes
Representative Barker? No.
Webson Chatfield.
Representative Gonzalez.
Yes.
Representative Gurola. Yes.
Representative Ladder.
Yes.
Representative Mabal Moya.
Yes.
Representative for Val
Caballero. Yes.
Representative Holland, yes.
Representative Torres Valasquez.
Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Respectfully, no.
Madam Chair.
It's gonna be.
Um, except me. Yes. OK.
That's it.
Romero.
OK, yes.
Madam Chair Garrett. Uh, yes.
That too.
10 to 2, yes. OK, um, with, uh,
10 people supporting it and to
saying no.
This time, you have a due pass
representative. Thank you so
much.
Excuse me, folks, excuse me,
folks, we do not clap or show
emotion, please, because these
are highly contested bills.
So we respect everybody's
opinion and committee. We
appreciate it. If you wish to
talk with members outside,
please do.
Thank you.
Well, we'll see you on Monday
morning. Thank you, folks.
This is a great gift to the
children.
And teachers of New Mexico and
Valentine's Day. Happy
Valentine's Day.
