The caller please
Representative Baca there
Representative Chatfield there.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative will not.
Representative.
Hey your.
Representative
yeah here.
Representative ball coming at
all Representative.
Thank you for all.
Vice chair.
Here.
We do have a quorum all right I
just I love that's committee we
help each other all right now
Representative Chandler without
further do please good morning
chairman and good morning
committee members just a few
maybe kind of administrative
items I do have an expert Mr
chair and I don't know how you
want to handle that I we've
consulted with your staff prior
to when I believe she has the
email address of the individual
okay great I believe we're going
to pull them up on our board and
bring them into our meeting is a
presenter so we'll be able to
see them up on our board over
here so that's a good thing
Representative Chandler to
committee that if you do have
especially in this committee
somebody that needs to be
present remotely through the
wonders of technology we have if
they can be seen in our
committee room and we can get
them on.
So.
Thank you Mr to that amendment
and one more administrative item
while that's happening and I
assume you let me know when he's
on his as you went on a
discussed yesterday Mr chair
there is a Committee amendment
we we sent it out to you on
Saturday night but I understand
it's the rule of the committee
that it's one of the amendment
sent out to the committee so I
don't know how you want to
handle that but Mr chair in
terms of that I says just I
certainly appreciate that and
with committee there wasn't
amendment it's been sent out
early this morning here's the
thing about it is that I think
will go ahead with the
presentation of the bill will
have testimony we'll go through
those motions.
We'll have discussion on the
bill then we can bring up the
amendment and hold it on
amendment but I want to give the
analysts time to look at the
amendment make sure we know what
we're doing before we take
action on that which may be
Wednesday if that sounds
amenable to the committee.
S. economy noble to everybody
okay so we'll do that if we
could go through the bill will
take testimony on the bill and
then after our initial questions
we can go to the amendment has a
very very good Mr chair very
much appreciate it and I just
want to acknowledge my co
sponsor Representative Roybal
Caballero she is also on this
bill
and Mr chair this is essentially
a consumer protection bill for
student loan borrowers.
And I want to start off by
saying what it is not it is not
a loan forgiveness bill so I
want to make that clear now that
is not what we're talking about
and if someone had approached me
about doing a loan forgiveness
bill my first question would
have been how can we do that in
the state of New Mexico because
I imagine it's more of a federal
issue and another sort of issue
than what we're talking about
here so this is a state issue
and the concern here is that we
have many many New Mexicans who
are student loans are are ours
for example.
We know that one in five
students borrow money from the
federal government to go to
college.
We know more than one out of
every five student loan
borrowers in New Mexico are
severely behind in their student
loan payments.
And it's not just young people
seventy percent of New Mexico
student loan borrowers are over
fifty.
Student loan servicing.
Hurts rural New Mexicans as well
because many of them are behind
in their payments also.
In there is a severe lack of
oversight of loan servicers in
New Mexico and in the country
leaving borrowers to fend for
themselves.
This bill addresses the
potential for abuse by loan
servicers.
Loan servicers are responsible
for helping borrowers access
repayment plans and options that
have a right on that that they
have a right to under federal
law taxpayers provide private
student loan loan servicers
millions of dollars each years
to help borrowers instead of
providing assistance evidence
from borrower complaints shows
that servicers are incorrectly
and applying payments and fail
to and phone important borrowers
of their rights under payment
plans.
Members of the armed services
have rights that guarantee that
student loans will be
affordable.
But abusive servicing practices
like failing to apply loan
discharge for service member
with a service connected
disability leave them saddled
with huge amounts of debt.
These are consequences that
aren't just setting borrowers
back.
Last year data from the
department of education show
that ninety nine percent of
student loan borrowers who
applied for public service loan
forgiveness were denied.
So our proposal to you Mr chair
and committee members is
developing of a paradigm for a
structure that will help
protect.
Student loan borrowers in New
Mexico from these abusive
practices and my experts will go
through in about a very high
level and briefly Mr chair what
the loan.
What the bill does I do want to
point out that ten states have
enacted similar legislation and
I would I would encourage all of
you to consider doing so for the
state of New Mexico so that we
can have our student loan
borrowers in a similar fashion
so with that Mr chair I'd like
to turn the presentation over to
our expert his name is Winston
Berkman Breen and he is the
deputy director of advocacy and
policy counsel at student
are aware protection center.
All right Mr Burke then brain
good morning be sure to on mute.
All right welcome.
Thank you chair good morning can
you hear me we can please when
you're ready.
Correct thank you so much and
thank you Representative for
that introduction and for the
chance to be here today so again
my name is Andrew support and
bring a Policy Council and W.
affix the director of the
students are protection center
were national policy nonprofit
focused on student loan debt
prior to joining the STTC I was
the director of consumer
advocacy at the New York state
department of financial services
the state's financial regulator
and was the student on this
person there are the same type
of on but person that this bill
would create for New Mexico when
I was in the late internet for
that such from these
perspectives that I offer my my
testimony today in favor of this
bill so I will be brief but
wanted to walk through as a
representative Senator the three
main things that this bill does
it's a long document that many
of the pages are dedicated to
pretty routine regulatory
provisions that the financial
institutions eviction needs when
it surprises industry and then
of course I'd be happy to answer
any questions about the bill or
about the state of student loan
market oversight nationally.
So the bill essentially does
three things first it licenses
the student loan servicing
industry in the private
companies that service federal
and private student loans are
seconded provides consumer
protections for the private
student loan market itself and
thirdly that an oversight
mechanism for the state with
respect to the student loan
market and to make sure New
Mexicans are getting the help
that they need so I briefly
address each of these three
sections our first is licensure
so until about twenty sixteen no
states license student loan
servicers it was an under
regulated industry and frankly
we're still seeing harm today
from what took place in that
prior.
then states started to license
these private companies
Representative said a ten or
eleven it's actually grown over
the last couple of years to
about eighteen states so in our
protein a majority in the
country are so no it is well
within states constitutional
right to supervise nonbank
financial institutions for
example New Mexico already
licenses check cash or check
workers money transfer successor
student services are no
different so the bills for
sixteen pages quite frankly are
just routine Division oversight
what does it mean to license how
does a license application
process work what is the license
review process that is that is
pretty standard for the division
of financial institutions and
licensure the next set of pages
page sixteen to twenty years out
business practices that are
specific to the student loan
servicing industry of these
include things like how our
process overpayments when
someone has multiple loans and
make a payment on a monthly
basis that is over the minimum
do how should be applied to the
lions complaints have a should
be handled how can account
transfers between servicers
should operate with which
happens somewhat regularly so
these are similar to state law.
Asians across the country
ensuring consistency for the act
after the industry actors but
also serves to put these
licensees on notice of what
their expectations are in New
Mexico knows sort of got chair
regulation right the next three
pages twenty twenty three lap
consumer protection practices
related to student loan
servicers and essentially
prohibits something called
unfair deceptive practices and
also from family to comply with
the business standards I just
mentioned are these two more
other states but more
importantly these companies
already subject to general
provisions against unfair
deceptive practices about the
federal and state levels so they
shouldn't have to change their
practices too much to comply
with something that there are
the subject.
So that's the first.
Trump of the bill right the
first.
Goal that accomplishes
regulating and supervising that
industry the second which is
page twenty three to thirty five
is with respect to the private
student loan market so not a
private student loan market is
about ten percent of the overall
student loan market the
remainder being federal student
loans so it's smaller but that's
still a significant financial
burden on households don't
always distinguish between the
two types of student loans I'm
sure there are some pretty well
documented problems with this
market documented by federal and
state law enforcement regulators
investigated brought actions
against actors in this market
and what this bill the second
part of the bill does it
specifically addressed those
findings right it's not so much
a hammer church now as it is a
direct response to what has
already been identified some
gonna highlight and if your
points there
so the first thing about us in
that respect is to mirror some
of the protections that exist in
the federal student loan
landscape but for private
student loans namely that if
you're someone who's living with
what's called a total or
permanent disability that
prevents you from working and
having gainful employment you
can be released from your loan
application that's true the
federal level this would make
that true also at that at the
private student loan level next
co signers are often overlooked
a growing population private
student loan borrowers the bill
would ensure that co signers had
equal access to documents as the
primary borrower the cosigned
for and that they receive equal
treatment also when lenders
offer a cosigner release
provision which they often do
make some competitive market
deprivations relative to other
lenders the bill ensures that
those lease terms are fairly
administered but someone who
qualifies for them can actually
get released from the from the
loan itself so these are this
document instances of co signers
are not being released in
building block for inappropriate
reasons of this bill would
address that finally the bill
would prevent lenders from
putting someone into default for
any reason other than non
payment so little ought to think
about but if your current under
loan some lenders might still
default you for certain
technical violation which can be
as minuscule as failing to
update your contact information
so this bill would say if your
current you can't be put into
the fall.
Lt regardless of what non
payment contact happens so this
part of the bill also includes
that prohibition against unfair
deceptive practices more
generally but again that's an
existing state and federal
standard that financial
companies have to comply with
September two in the final
section I told you I try to be
brief the final section that is
with respect to the
administration oversight of both
the spell but also of the market
itself and that runs pages
thirty five to fifty six so here
to most of the pages are run of
the mill authorities that the
director of the financial
institutions division would
needs to implement.
Any sort of financial oversight
or or program regulatory regime
and to make sure they can do
their job it empowers the
director to monitor and collect
data related to the servicing
and lending industries and to
investigate companies as needed
the bill allows for the director
to enforce for violations of
this law both administratively
and court and it also provides
for private right of action this
is particularly important
because the farmers rights can't
be enforced in their meeting
less right effectively I and I
know from my own time in state
government and working with law
enforcement agencies across the
country that you know the state
can go to court every time an
individual person has the right
to violate it that's just not
how government enforcement works
you have to build large cases it
takes a long time so having a
private right of action ensures
that people who are harmed can
be made whole on individual
basis I'm in the last part of
the service that mechanisms of
the bill creates a student loan
ombudsman role similar to the
one that I occupied for New York
state previously I it's a point
of contact New Mexicans who need
help with your loans or need
help interacting with their
lender or servicer pandemic
complaints that you are rich
education programs the interface
with on budgets and other states
and the federal level and
they'll assist the director and
monitoring the market in case
you in in reports to the
legislature.
So that's it I know that the
bill is long and covers a lot of
hope that that was a helpful
overview of the core components
and again at the happy to answer
any questions about the bill
itself or about the state of
industry oversight nationwide
thank you.
Great thank you for your stand
for questions Representative I'm
happy to entertain questions Mr
chair all right thank you so
much so we will go to our
audience so I will message the
folks joining us online if you
wish to speak in support of
house bill eighty two please
indicate on the future by
raising your hand.
All right so hang tight with us
as of you raising your hand
online on those of you wishing
to speak in support in the room
on my right hand side would you
indicate by raising your hand
please all right please you have
up to two minutes if you haven't
been with us before you have up
to two minutes but prefers
better so please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is John
director with the American
federation of teachers other
thing thank you are both too
long time sponsor are we're
carrier and a new sponsor
Representative Chandler I'm
we're here today in support of
house bill eighty two one of the
services that it to New Mexico
provided through both of our
members and non members really
any educator who is dealing with
loans of any sort or what we
call it that clinic and it's a
clinic that is run by by are you
that allows people to understand
the intricacies of student debt
servicing and what they may be
entitled to as someone who's
working in the public service
arena it is by far one of the
most popular and quickly
are not sold out because we
provided free of charge but
quickly filled classes that we
offer to educators in New Mexico
a bill like house bill eighty
two would go a long way to
ensure that what we're able to
equip borrowers on the front and
with the knowledge of what they
should be entitled to and what
rights they do have in this in
this arena.
like healthy to ensure that New
Mexico is also watching their
back to make sure that there is
some enforcement mechanism
should they be defrauded by the
deceptive practice by a lender
one of the anecdotal use when
talking about this issue is that
we in this room could
collectively by a lot of that
change the terms and then
really deceive or defraud
borrowers who are otherwise
current on their payments and
should be eligible for some of
this loan to be discharged so we
certainly urge the committee
support of this important
measure we do this is something
to make the profession education
more tractive keeps folks in the
profession and in our classrooms
so we would hope a favorable
recommendation when this bill
does come up for.
Great thank you so much anybody
else on the right hand side and
support okay we'll go to my left
hand side those in support of
house bill eighty two.
All right those of you online.
Eighteen good morning you're
with us you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Eileen van we I'm speaking on
behalf of the league of women
voters of New Mexico thank you
to the sponsors for putting this
house bill eighty two forward
the lead fully supports it we
support sufficient funding for
high quality equitable education
which requires lows for many of
our students in New Mexico and
this of bills of requiring the
licensure of the loan service
providers would definitely make
up help to protect the students
in our in our in our state in
our state so of the.
We would would would urge you to
support that bill thank you very
much thank you.
All right we'll go to Nadia good
morning money a of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning can you hear me we
can please.
Thank you so much.
Thank you at chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
important consumer rights
protection bill I'm for New
Mexico student loan debt has
really grown exponentially in
the last few years we know that
New Mexicans are burdened with
over seven billion dollars in
federal student loan that our
state has one of the highest
rates of default in the country
as the representative said it
over one at least one out of
every five borrowers is severely
behind on their loan payments.
And of the two hundred thousand
New Mexicans to make payments to
private companies we know that
these these companies operate in
the dark with very little
accountability to the borrowers
they serve I'm so this bill
would really help to
hold the industry accountable
and protect New Mexico's as
student loan borrowers
and I think I neglected to say
at the beginning and I apologize
that I'm with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and so
we strongly support this bill as
a consumer protection bill thank
you great thank you.
Family good morning Emily of up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily well
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and we stand in support
of this bill thank you to
Representative Chandler and with
a Caballero for carrying it
for all the reasons you've
already heard we we support this
bill and we see it is critical
to preventing any abuse
mismanagement of student loan
servicers and support protection
of student loan borrowers so we
urge the committee to support H.
B. eighty two thank you thank
you.
All right Erica the.
It's very.
Sorry Erica now you're with us
welcome to.
Welcome good morning Mr chair
members of the committee
giving so much love to the
Sanchez Representative Chandler
and
Representative by Patricio Cieza
way back up yet they are always
on the frontlines for New
Mexicans in a massive way and
we.
Absolutely stand stand meaning
we like are here for it anyway
and with girls Inc and the C. O.
C. New Mexico accent organize
all the places but one of the
things that I want to bring to
mention here is this is not just
a consumer protection act this
is a talent protection act
a lot of times we're watching
our students have to leave to
provide better salaries to
figure things out we're watching
our students have to figure out
how to.
Live in a space that doesn't
support them with these
predatory look private loans and
in the state of inflation this
is just another beautiful form
of protection for not just our
students and families but also
the beautiful talent that's and
with in New Mexico rural and
city so please give this a do
pass and make it easier on these
pockets you all thank you thank
you.
All right.
So that's all I have in support
we'll go to opposition so those
in opposition if you're online
please indicate by using the
right hand feature we'll get to
those in the room those in
opposition of house bill eighty
two please raise your hand.
All right we have no opposition
online in the audience welcome
to committee then Representative
Lane Europe first good morning.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
sure I have to stand for what it
called technical questions for
madam chair.
Of Mr chair on page five of the
bill.
A paragraph hi this is were the
bill to provide student
education loan.
Mr chair it it talks about the
extension of credit per million
for personal use and it goes on
to say to finance a student loan
borrowers Post education
expenses.
Ms cares about that we're
expenses.
with sponsored think sending
clues tuition and the reason I
ask that is because.
Under the framework of like five
twenty ninth in the Internal
Revenue Code expenses and
tuition or separate so I'm
wondering do.
Does this inadvertently about
tuition which I think is
probably the biggest target
you're trying to tackle Mr chair
and
Representative Lane I believe
that it does include and that's
how I interpreted it but I'm
happy to ask my experts to
illuminate us a little bit
further Mr chair.
Please Mr chairman bring.
Thank you for that question I
agree with Representative it is
intended to include that does
include that but I don't think
it's any Harmon and clarifying
the and and and and if it would
make the committee I feel more
comfortable that point.
Mr just something about I I I
think the chair mentioned that
this may come back on Wednesday
so I don't know if that's
something you want to consider
not violate you just trying to
shore up what I what I think is
the purpose of the bill and then
on that same page Mr chair a
program GA were defining who our
student loan borrowers and I
notice this ties it in there's
two different definitions in
both of these tied into
residents of New Mexico and I'm
wondering about a scenario where
we have an out of state student
who's coming to college in New
Mexico and gets a loan from a
New Mexico bar were it seems
like they would be excluded in
that scenario.
You thank you Mr chair
Representative Lane I will defer
to my experts on that question.
Thank you certainly and at and
if I understood the question
correctly out of state students
who are in New Mexico and
received a lot of the water in
New Mexico on whether this would
apply to them is that correct
that's great Mr.
I'm great into active part
response the first is that I
think in practical terms and I
appreciate the question intent
on making sure everyone is
covered we hope to covering at
that sponsor to be with me that
we want everyone with a lot of
recovered often are so stark
interact with your loan servicer
after school I want the
graduated not true for everyone
but I think for the majority of
graduates borrowers that is the
case so they may return to out
of state
residency former residency
I would argue that we would want
to cover for anyone who is in
New Mexico has alone the more
technical answers your question
no thank you for letting me take
the first point is that the
state and through the division
of financial institutions
Generally focuses on residency
residents this is true for
basically in the state and the
reason they do that is to do the
needs of the New Mexico
residents for flip your
hypothetical is out of state for
some reason but still has a
residency in New Mexico they
would still be covered by this
so in that example of an out of
state student who is here
it there may be an argument that
they fall between the cracks of
the definitions I think that
would be a strong want to
practice it would be covered but
again I I think it would be fine
if
the committee more comfortable
to amend its just to include it
in our resident Mexico or
someone who is physically within
the state the term resident
residency has implications
elsewhere in our run voting and
domicile and things of that
nature so we want to be careful
about that with the intent is
for to be an exhaustive
inexpensive protection.
Thank you Mr chairman of course
I'd you know I would response
rather make sense to check
whether or not but and then just
to.
Just one last on a just I think
I'm just more out of curiosity
Mister chair on page eight.
paragraph F. as in Frank.
So these are some criteria that
that someone applying to get a
loan servicer.
To be a loan servicer has to to
to meet in that subparagraph to
the applicant's financial
conditions sound.
I'm curious is this is this like
an industry standard is just
doesn't seem very objective to
meet someone and
what does that mean when we say
financial.
Mr chair and representative
again I will to my experts.
Okay and thank you for going to
your question so to the to the
question given an opportunity to
share that the the division of
financial institutions of better
regulations and licensing
department has reviewed the S.
and has provided their comments
are ready to the sponsor which
have been incorporated I think
she mentioned and sent a long
this is a term that they use
regularly and they're licensure
and although it is not reflected
in the bill itself the language
is language they use in other
licensing statutes of provisions
and has you know internal
relevance and and and consistent
meaning there so direct you to
to the division of financial
situations for more clarity on
how to use that term but I I
would assure you that had the
chance to look at it and misses
their routine process
for licensing and evaluating the
candidacy of applicants.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Mr Burke membrane if you would
go through the chair for all of
your discussion please
Representative Roybal coming
into next.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to Representative Chandler for
Taking this up this year I have
been the sponsor of this bill
for for many years several years
prior and one of the three one
of the things I want to convey
to the committee is that the
reason why I stepped up and in
support of sponsoring this
legislation is because I know
first hand I'm a student loan
borrower in the state of New
Mexico as many of you heard I'm
still pursuing a higher
education thank you for all
everyone retires
from the legislature that know
me I'll be able to say that I've
completed my studies however I I
I want the committee to
understand and and I want to
point out a few things that the.
All sponsor of raised and that
is that seventy percent of the
loan borrowers in New Mexico are
over fifty.
Seventy percent are over fifty.
And the other point.
I want to point out and that
includes myself and that's a big
significant number because once
you're over fifty there are
different ways in which you will
be or will have to comply with
loan payments and oftentimes Mr
chair and committee there is a
lack of understanding of what's.
Those are conditions are that
persons over fifty faith in
particular and often times
they're lumped in with all other
students and young borrowers and
so the longevity of loans is
also a big issue and there needs
to be a significant amount of
understanding and that's why the
buzz percent Associated Mr chair
what this bill is so important
because the expectation is not
only to provide oversight but
the expectation is to understand
the conversations between the
borrower and servicer to
understand how that person is
going to be able in over fifty
to comply and that's really
important and that's where this
is a strong consumer protection
Bill of the in and also the
issue Mr chair of co signers
when you enter into a loan.
On if you are in the position of
having to require Mr chair
a cosigner.
Those persons over fifty who may
have entered into the loan was a
cosigner often times.
The cosigner is an aging parent
for nineteen family member who
also have conditions that are
very different then if you are a
young borrow or and you have
younger parents and so the
collection part of and practices
that private lenders.
Use table after post signers
especially those that are
elderly and incapacitated who
happen to have signed early on
because they had the means Mr
chair to be able to support
their students their family
member are subject to those
unscrupulous predatory
practices and that's where this
becomes extremely important to
prevent those types of practices
so I wanted to highlight just
from a first hand experience of
from first hand experience I
also want to convey Mr chair to
the committee that many
conversations I've had with the
group of what we call
nontraditional witcher the older
students and how this bill
addresses almost every aspect of
what that population of students
face and I think that I just
wanted to to let the committee
know that not only are there are
multiple persons that how are
As we're not enumerated
are faced with these types of of
predatory practices and just of
hope that the committee and our
current in our discussion
further discussion if they have
any further questions I'd be
happy to also answer thank you
very much Mr chair thank you
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair I think
questions my first one is on
page six section three B.
it exempts it's exempt banks
credit unions a wholly owned
subsidiaries from provisions of
the act what avenues to those
borrows take if they're making a
private loan from those New
Mexico institutions Mr Chairman
representative it's my
understanding that the state can
not regulate in that area and
that on the the individual Mr
chair would have to work through
the federal government if my
experts thanks I spoke
incorrectly feel free if I if
it's okay with you Mr chair to
correct me but otherwise I
believe that's the answer.
Thank you Mr chair the question
that it is correct that states
have significant limitations
with respect to the regulation
of
out of state and federally
chartered banks though I will
note that the exemption here is
just from the licensing
provisions specifically not
necessarily from the broader
consumer protection parts
Related to servicing and and
landing so the bill has been
drafted in such a way to
maximize the protections that
can be applied to Mexico
borrowers while still working
with and be preemption framework
that exists between federal and
state regulations.
So Mr chairman and
Representative an expert witness
so an arms.
On this budget percent could
still deal with those loans but
those institutions don't have to
pay the five thousand dollars
licensing fee is that correct.
Mr chair that is correct and
that's generally have states
elsewhere half panhandle back
there or not brought in as a
licensee the state is not
legally permitted to do that but
practically speaking to still
work with the on bikes that work
out whatever issues of our race
happening.
Thank you.
Question is from section Page
ten section five A. of it says
it's a student loan serving in
state is conducted pursuant to a
contract awarded by the U. S.
secretary of education
Thousands of New Mexicans have a
rich loans that were not from
private companies Mr chair they
were from the federal government
I'm on my fourth private loan
servicer so am I correct in
understanding that a private
loan servicer dealing with a
federal loan does not have to
get licensed to serve New
Mexicans is that correct.
Mr chair I defer to my experts.
Mr chair thank you for that
question I think it's a great
opportunity to to to to clarify
the points of this bill would
mostly address exactly that
those instances of servicing
servicing where a private
nonprofit or for profit company
holds a light and will to
contract sorry to service
federal student loans for the
federal government the only
distinction and this is the
provisions on page ten Mr chair
is that to navigate this
preemption requirements are that
I referenced earlier states have
a trick here time it requiring
active with this bill will
automatically license will
automatically deem licensed the
contractors for the federal
government for federal student
loans it does not mean that they
are not subject to consumer
protections or the business
practices it just means that
under constitutional preemption
case law states cannot stand in
the way the federal government
choosing who they want to
contract with in the application
process at the state level could
stand in the way toward director
financial institutions to deny
an application so it gets around
that by saying on the basis of
the cop the federal contract
these companies shall be deemed
licensed but then I realized and
see they still have to comply
with the business practices and
consumer protections.
And on and virtually all of the
states that licenses industry
okay so Mister chair they I can
still go to the state spread men
but that company doesn't have to
pay the licensing fees for New
Mexico is that correct.
Mr chair these companies do
still have to pay a licensing
fee they just are not subject to
the discretion of the state to
deny a license and to the first
part of the question absolutely
asinine Mexican can still go to
the ombudsman to deal with their
loans that are serviced by these
companies okay thank you very
much that's my questions thank
thank you Representative vetted
off please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
legislators for being in this to
the to the committee
I don't really have a question I
just want everybody to know when
that hammer comes down it comes
down and I'll tell you having
had a family member of face when
these charges I mean it was the
bank of mom and dad came through
but I I just want to say that.
These loans also affects
security clearance at
laboratories and at Sandia labs
so this is the more we can do to
rectify the abuses in this
industry of the better the
better people will be in our
state so I just wanted to add
that it was it was prevalent and
it was a very real when it
happened and we met that
challenge but not all families
have access
to the bank of mom and dad so I
just want to say thank you for
bringing this legislation
forward that's all Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank you very much a
representative for.
Rescinding this bill today and
for your expert witness to be
here I am concerned that we did
not see a response from the
Attorney General is it just
because lack of time for what's
going on there I'd like a
response from him.
I think it be very worthwhile to
the.
To the bill of sale for what he
is there were several instances
maybe in your bill's clear.
I think it was on page forty
six.
On page forty six.
Line five starting with the the
student low ombudsman in
collaboration with the office of
the Attorney General the higher
it Department shell.
And it gives me concern one of
the Attorney General does not
respond to that whenever they're
going to be a part of something
I can you clarify that for you
Mr chair chair and
representative I cannot clarify
as to why the attorney general's
office has not responded Mr
chair and representative I would
interpret it to mean that they
don't have an issue with it.
Mr chairman and Representative
or if it also may narrow we
haven't seen this bill we're not
sure if we or maybe we're.
Want to participate in it so it
could be construed the way there
and I'm assuming if we're going
to put this off until Wednesday
because of the amendment that
gives on maybe by that time we
might have a response from the
attorney general's office it's a
possibility and and
Representative Ezzell I'm told
that we did get a response from
the AG's office it just came in
late so that's something
obviously we're not gonna take
action on the bill but will be
seen okay thank you for
clarifying that okay it's not my
packet of my books so I was kind
of curious here.
And Mr chairman and
representative on page seven.
I got all these pages market is
just a lot of pages that are
marked okay.
On page seven line twenty and on
page eight so
Line for a starting online for
students at.
Okay so to start start right
there.
On page seven were starts out
online twenties it the director
may require allow applications
to be made electronically
through the nationwide
multistate.
Licensing system and registry of
Representative can be used in
the system I pay all required
processing fees for the system.
When are we going to bring
regulation and licensing into
this.
It is stating that the director
and it all goes back to the
director.
So I'm kind of confused here we
giving him or her carte Blanche
to get all this stuff done or we
including regulation licensing.
Mr Mr chair and representative
the director I believe is the
director of at the licensing
department so that's to whom we
are referring
Mr chair and representative
expert I have that correct do I
not.
Mr chair that is correct the
director and is this is defined
in terms of this the director of
financial institutions division
within the regulation licensing
department.
Okay so anytime you go to get a
license get licensed in the
state of New Mexico met them Mr
chairman and Representative
you're aware of this because I'm
assuming you are member of the
Bar Association of you have to
go through all of their
qualifications to be able to get
your.
Licensing done.
And it does go.
One of the license I have for
the state of New Mexico Mr
Chairman representative is New
Mexico racing Commission
license.
And we have to be fingerprinted
I mean it takes more to get that
and then to get will I don't
know I just renewed my driver's
license so that's and I'll
different story.
But it does take quite awhile to
get it done but it does go
through a national registry.
But here I'm reading.
Is this may require.
Why why would they not go ahead
and shall require.
Online twenty on page seven.
And then on page eight under
line for is is may conduct where
we ensuring that that the
director is making all necessary
steps to ensure that what we're
getting in New Mexico to help
the students say out is somebody
that has no.
Skeletons in the closet if you
want I can go that way.
Mr Chairman representative I
think the the decision on our
part was to make it given the
director discretion as to how to
implement these provisions I can
ask my expert Mr Mr chair and
representative to online us
further but as as he mentioned
earlier this is a model that
that many states have been
following.
And Mr chair on the and said
trust to specific instances that
were mentioned the first on page
seven referencing the national
and Asian what multi state
licensing system registry which
is often referred to and and at
last that is something that
financial regulators across the
country since the Great
Recession have started to use as
an online platform to
facilitate.
The licensing application
process and the reason it's I
designated as it shall here as
opposed to our our our as a made
here
is to give director discretion
by at in our experience most
regulators prefer to use this
analyst platform and most
licensees prefer to use it
because they're using it and
every other state so that's just
an example there I would suspect
that New Mexico would also use
it but again it just to make
sure that after has discretion
and spend
to the second point
exactly as this as the sponsor
center the chair at that that
director of financial
institutions has their practice
in way of onboarding licensees
and including background checks
that they customarily are wrong
I I defer to to them whether
they need to overhaul that to
the committee itself Mr chair
but language in front of the
committee reflects the current
practices.
Okay Mister chairman of
representative in your expert
witness I appreciate the
response but sometimes the
difference between may and
Sheryl.
House a lot of weight and with
an instance like this.
We want somebody that has a
number limits character in order
I'm kind of leaning towards the
shell just picked up.
receive a right from.
Mr Chairman representative on
page forty two under lines
starting line six intersection
F. this is the cost of an
investigation or examination
conducted by the director shall
be paid by the student loan
servicer private education
Linder for the person being
investigated.
Can you explain that particular
sentence I've I've got some from
our I'm not quite understanding
what you're trying to get
accomplished stress.
Mr chair representative I will
asked my experts to answer that
if.
Thank you Mr chair I it is
customary for financial
regulators at the federal and
state level two both routinely
with a call examine what's
essentially an audit for
compliance with relevant laws
they're regulated institutions
and if enough complaints or
other indicators suggest that
there is a more particular issue
to conduct a targeted
investigation in general in
either instance the cost of that
the staff time any necessary
travel time is borne by the
regulated institution itself and
that is sort of just part of the
cost of any business and a
regulated market.
And and as I would say another
instance of.
Our understanding of how the
division of financial
institutions which is reviewed
this typically operates with
respect to a regulated and and
districts.
Okay I was just I had some
qualms or whatever comes to the
private education and.
Okay thank you for that response
and Mr chairman.
What was it right there did
market.
Mr chairman and representative
on page forty four section
twenty one is talking about the
new material the judicial
enforcement and I'm assuming
that
It doesn't have been that
particular jurisdiction over
this.
Person has the state level made
is that correct on page forty
four section twenty one.
Mr chair and representative the
provision provides that as
currently written is that the
case will be brought in the
first judicial district or other
appropriate District Court now I
would note that one of our
proposed amendments that we
haven't yet discussed Mr chair
would amend this provision to
allow fee
K. to be brought where the bar
or preciso it is that jurors yes
jurisdiction that is one of
eight that's very important Mr
chairman we have seen that in
other cases where those hearings
do need to be held in those
particular jurisdiction so if
there's an amendment coming up I
look forward to reading it
reviewing get Mr chairman thank
you very much for allowing me
these questions and thank you
Representative for your
responses and for your expert
witnesses responses.
Thank you Representative so I
don't have anybody else on the
list which is good
so as far as the amendment it
sounds like there were some jet
suggestions some agreement I
think we both mark the amendment
that you have because I think
and you one may be prepared and
in which case even if it isn't
we can come back and review it
anyway but please just make sure
you get it in by tomorrow
morning very early if that's the
case if not it would be Friday
but we just want to make sure it
gets sent out to everybody in
advance to be able to review it
and have their analyst look at
it so we'll roll house bill the
two will come back with an
amendment we've already gone
through discussion of the bill
we can look at the amendment see
what it does in the bill and
then take action the amendment
and the bill forth coming that's
and Representative Chandler
thank you very much Mr chairman
very much appreciate the
accommodation thank no thank you
so much so we will go to house
bill one thirty point if you
want to make your way
Representative Trujillo but we
also have some gas in the back
it looks like students do we
have.
They might be with.
Good morning Mr chairman.
One
research project teachers are.
Thanks for
your.
Up to the group's first point
three makers offers.
All right I don't know if each
one of you would want to
introduce yourselves to the
committee welcome we can start
all the way on the and then work
our way to the left to the
center of the room if you say
your name please.
This year from the capsule Act.
Calving good morning.
Good morning.
Primary Mr.
Hi my name is actually.
Mr chair Ortiz of course is.
Right is that everybody.
That's why all right welcome to
health education welcome you all
thank you all for being here.
Right okay if you would we we do
have house bill one forty six
and we're going to get thirty
one or introduce your guest.
I still the tech is is pathway
of destruction is a senior this
year and for architecture
following administrative stuff.
Sure my name is Fernando states
involved high school and also.
And we have reviewed thank you
great thank you so much for
being here it's awesome to have
students see the work that's
being done in their house
Education Committee all right so
we'll go on to house bill one
thirty four so Representative
Trujillo please good morning Mr
chair members of the audience
I'm here Representative house
bill one thirty four simple
title is we of requiring the
public education department to
find Mr products in school
bathrooms and it simply making
appropriation Mr chair I have
three expert witnesses up come
up when the time to speak to you
about the purpose of the bill as
they were the the brain trust in
in creating the bill and
approaching me to to
sponsor chairman introduce my
first guest will tell you her
name and tell you about the bill
if you if I might Mr chair thank
you for.
Thank you good morning chairman
committee my name is Norma Lee
and I'm one of the high school
students from Albuquerque who
worked with Representative
Trujillo to create this
legislation nationwide twenty
three percent of teenagers with
a period have a struggle to
afford menstrual products in New
Mexico period poverty or the
inaccessibility of pads and
tampons is nothing less than a
crisis of public health and
education.
It is created by economic
disparity of course but is but
it is perpetuated by stigma by
refusal to bring mensual equity
into the conversation so let's
begin the discussion four and
five teenagers who menstruate
have missed class time because
they were not able to find a pad
or tampon period poverty is an
issue defined by the impact it
is an issue of health it is an
issue intersection ality it is
an issue of education but above
all period poverty is an issue
of equity where there is stigma
there is consequence here
students do not of choice we
live between purchasing these
hygiene goods and other basic
necessities between finding a
path and scrambling to make it
to class but it between looking
for stains and holding hands
between what we deserve and what
we are given today we ask you to
make a choice for the students
who to have none we ask you to
support H. B. one thirty four.
Thank you Mr chair I have my
second witness the letters sit
there.
Show also introduce yourself and
give you her rational Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you committee members my name is
a feeling that I am the second
high school that has been
working with Representative
Ortez and Trujillo on this bill
thank you for giving me this
opportunity to support
representatives to understand
the impact that you can make by
passing this bill I think it's
important to hear what inspired
us to bring this conversation to
the state level it's a simple as
a few sticky notes a sixth
graders Nord me to and I have
all understood a certain fear
when we first walked into the
bathrooms and six great.
With the fear that we wouldn't
have enough drugs to make it
through the day the fear that
students with his path hiding
behind our sleeves but most
importantly with the fear that
play to the back of our minds
every second of the school day
focusing our worries towards our
bodies rather than our work.
This fear was so impactful that
seven years later as you can see
inspired us to do something.
We started by talking to our
principal asking her if it was
possible to integrate free
products in the bathrooms at our
own school she personally
decided to work to look into the
issue and weeks later our plan
came to fruition.
As we excitedly check each about
them for the free menstrual
products we came across the same
six great bathrooms that caused
our initial fears.
Expecting to be met within the
started their business we were
instead met with a colorful
collage of sticky notes six
graders Representative notes of
gratitude to stick on the wall
specs of the products where we
were once fearful our sixth
graders were proud.
Representatives but passing this
bill you were not only allowing
students to make it through the
school day lifting a weight off
of the minds of our youth
implanting them with confidence
you are showing them the
positivity they natural bodily
function that was never made to
cause fear.
I stand in strong affirmation of
this bill because today you have
the power to decorate the walls
of our bathrooms in the minds of
our youth thank you the the and
our third presenter Mister chair
will come right up and introduce
herself and give her rationale
for supporting this bill for a
welcome good morning when is
this Sherrin Committee my name
is Maria see us and I am one of
the other high school students
from Albuquerque who has been
working with Representative
Trujillo noted as on this
legislation so I stand before it
will play some sitting so
sitting before you today
understanding the importance of
education when I was younger my
parents with my little sister
and I to from a rural New
Mexican town to Albuquerque for
a better education they would
use of the tool that goes live
the ceiling is that we got
because I cannot be that with I
keep that which translates to
education is the only thing that
no one can take away from you so
living across New Mexico I've
seen the educational disparities
that have that affect our state
firsthand I've seen how directly
twined education is with public
health and in this case
ministration I've seen how
treating this issue is just a
woman's issue eight
discriminates against a whole
community administrators I've
seen how not having access to
menstrual products in schools
has increased the committees
ation at my own school and in my
own young self I come here today
as a student about Kenya and a
proud over he gonna
accessibility to Mr hygiene
products enables administrators
to reach their full potential
investing in our human
infrastructure the best way to
prepare for a future change
begins within our communities
change begins here therefore I
urge you to vote for the one
thirty four thank you Mr chair
of this is a simple
appropriations bill we've worked
with the public education
department I think you saw those
of you who are on LFC is see
that we had a line item of I
need initial I conditionally
five million dollars and we were
able to get three million out of
the PED.
To help for that and then LTSE
has a million in there to funded
as well I've been working with
of David Abbey who says that we
have sufficient money in there
in the budget to be able to
support this bill and the it's
simply an appropriations budget
you've heard the the
presentations by these
extremely.
wonderful young women who are
probably going to take our seats
in a few years and the change
the world but I now stand for
questions Mr chair.
Thank thank you all so much for
being here so we will go to our
audience those members.
Online that are in support of
house bill one thirty four
please indicate very your hand.
All right so we will go to.
Are in committee group if you
wish to speak please keep it
brief but you have up to two
minutes those that wish to speak
can support I'll go to my right
hand side.
Okay.
This will start up in the front
up to two minutes.
Representative nineteen is only
for the online experience Mexico
ceremony of the
I'm actually gonna be really
brief because I don't think I
could say anything that's more
precise.
People who are experiencing
these problems and the solutions
that they're advocating for
today but at and it's very easy
for this bill and urged
committee.
Great thank you others on this
site please.
Chair members of the committee I
am one of your W. secretary that
the New Mexico public education
department I have to agree that
I think of the young women here
today everything that you put on
the table was caught on I want
to thank you for your advocacy
and for sharing the stories of
something that can prove to be
quite an embarrassment and an
impediment to young girls across
the state the one thing that I
will add it is that
more young people are in danger
of toxic shock syndrome fifty
percent fifty one percent of
students have used
of hygiene products for longer
than recommended and that is a
health issue in addition to the
direction that it can cost for
their education so with that the
New Mexico public education
department stands thank you
Representative Trujillo for
bringing this forward in support
of this appropriation.
Thank you really me.
Mr chairman.
Members of the committee and one
of more consider representing
myself today as a mother of a
daughter and aunt and great aunt
with young women they went to
the public schools I think this
is a great opportunity to
support them with the school to
allow them to be ready to
present themselves in the
classroom to learn I support
this legislation also because
provided soccer constituent
they're they're also supported
please pass this legislation
right right thank you the next
row those and support that we
speak place up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for this
legislation my name is Laura and
I and the executive director
transform education Mexico the
central supporting the one
thirty four I I'm proud to say
that I was.
You know invited to share their
perspective on this and what I
was surprised to find out is
that the average cost of
financial products is in the two
thousand dollars a year we know
that many of our families New
Mexico twenty five percent
receive snap benefits and many
of those families are food
insecure imagine family having
to choose between food and
hygiene products.
As a former teacher many times
in my career I look back and any
matching funds when you when we
needed a hygiene product down
the middle of the lecture the
importance of this issue is that
period poverty is an equity
issue and our coalition stands
can pull support this and looks
forward to to pass the.
Great thank you others in that
same rather which sport I will
move to the next for those that
wish to support please will
start on the.
Thank you my name is Mike of the
city chair members of the
committee I am a former teacher
at New Mexican Community Academy
and thank you so much ladies for
all that you shared I also on
top of the Education supplies
school supplies whatever I also
paid for natural products for
students and also use time and
effort to seek donations from
the community for natural
products it is just such a
comfort to me that was one last
thing that our students have to
be think about in their
classroom their education
journey so please
support HB one thirty four and
thank you so much legislation
for you all for voting this
forward
support between working.
Right thank you others in that
summer of please welcome you
have up to two minutes morning
Mr chair and committee my name
is a height of one sided said
Julie and I are speaking on
behalf of Planned Parenthood of
the rogue state was this for a
house house bill one thirty four
because we know that this is a
crucial need is not only a
financial issue that a hygiene
issue of the bill should be.
Having axes and availability to
have hygiene products this.
Great thank you others in the
same row that wish to speak in
support.
All right we'll go to the next
room those who wish to speak in
support.
All right we'll go to my left
hand side those who wish to
speak in support I saw a star in
the back please welcome you have
two minutes.
March second factor we quality
New Mexico where the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights organization
and I first want to share my
appreciation to these young
people who give me faith that
stigma about the bodies into
which we are born will and with
my generation and I really thank
you for doing for doing this
hard work LGBTQ young people
face higher rates of
homelessness higher rates of
lack of parental support and
often times are believe in
stigmatized for our identities
and daily basis and school this
is very simple appropriation and
very simple step forward let's
leases sure that where entrance
on pulled to do experience
menstruation have one less issue
to be worried about while
sitting in the back of the
classroom trying to get the
education that will save us from
the world is been oppressing us
for so long so we sure
appreciation of the Sanchez
enter your support thank you
great thank you for joining us
anybody else in the same row.
Will move up around anybody in
that row that we speak in
support.
All right so we'll move up
speaking for please as I am
going.
All right welcome unit of two
minutes morning and.
Chairman the committee members
I. Leri sheller pediatrician
here Representative Mexico
pediatric society the state
chapter.
yes.
Thank you for the movies you
said so so elegant but we as
pediatricians are on the state.
Thank thank you anybody else in
the Rome of upper of support
move up another of those please
welcome you have a two minutes.
Hello good morning cherry
committee my name is Elliot
Americans are of a cookie and
I'm a junior account with
classical preparatory school I'm
here today yes I for this bill
because I know all too well the
unnecessary shame fear and
overall discomfort associated
with not having major product we
needed it the most you see this
year I decided against the
advice of all of my friends to
take the harder of the two math
classes offered for two years of
my screen I fear missing even
one class because even that
could set you back what feels
like weeks however a few months
ago I went to the bathroom
during this class implies that
one of my biggest fears have
been confirmed I didn't have the
products and as I frantically
texting my friends I could feel
this situation growing more and
more dire I wasn't able to
return to my math class that day
and well this could be a totally
unrelated I still don't really
understand complex series and
sequences.
When I called that day was a
much more palatable version of
the reality for many students
across New Mexico and this is
the reality for three to seven
days every month having to miss
school because of a natural
bodily function is unacceptable
and with the rigorous nature of
my schools and schools alike it
just simply isn't fair so in the
name of no more miss math
classes I urge you to support HB
one thirty four.
Thank thank you others in the
same rather wish speak please
have up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair Education
Committee my name is a hobble I
I am a senior at high school and
I thank you for allowing me to
speak today.
to demonstrate to you I am in
full support of house bill one
thirty four I want to share a
few stories of myself and
others.
to start I have a story about my
friend who got her period when
she was eight of the due to
having no match for drugs she
had to use a order to stop the
blood.
Additionally countless people
myself included have ensured
bathroom for guests during
classes will try to Jerry rig an
alternative to non existent for
drugs finally I'm an athlete.
in my athletics class that is
mandatory for all student
athletes at my screen of your
graded based on participation of
showing up to class on time
being changed out in the proper
clothing and.
Several times I was late to
class because I didn't have
anything to take care of my
period.
My great got up every time I try
to keep drugs in my locker but
other girls we need them to so I
would run out quickly.
Only once did I get fed up
enough with losing points to
tell my coach that I had a good
excuse for being late.
He said there was no such thing
as a good excuse and asked what
mine was I told my body decided
to remind me that I wasn't
pregnant that day you did that
but I think we can excuses so
that was the only time we did.
Also I'm actually the first and
only girl in my high school
football team.
By leveraging situation is a
story for another time but
I have had to either be late to
practice enormous for games I
have had to resort to using
something that wasn't meant to
be used to question the blood
flow or simply go without
because I didn't have the
supplies I needed all of these
things that led to increased
injuries decreased performance
and increased discomfort in
separation from my teammates
overall.
As you can clearly see this bill
would help level the playing
field in full sports and
academics and.
Yes these products are such
small things would be small
things can lead to such
tremendous of
differences in our dating lives
I strongly urge you to support
house bill one thirty four thank
you okay thank you so much right
on time.
All right so you have up to two
minutes please welcome.
Opportunity to speak on bill one
thirty four good morning members
of the education committee my
name is absent at and I'm a
junior come with classical
preparatory school in
Albuquerque I'm here today to
tell you why it's absolutely
essential passed bill H. B. one
thirty four I know for me
personally there but many times
when I've either find to bring
here try to school or I've got
my period in the middle class
and didn't have anyone around
that I could get Mitchell
products from so I went to the
school nurse and likely they did
have a small amount of drugs for
students but it definitely was
not a substantial amount for
even one student needs
consistent access to mental
drugs cause them or their family
faces financial and security and
to lack a consistent not mention
drugs is a more common
occurrence that you might think
especially in New Mexico as of
twenty twenty of a hundred and
five thousand.
Six hundred and twenty nine
people administrative between
the ages of twelve and forty
four live below the federal
poverty line even if there were
more federal projects in the
nurse's office some students are
simply too embarrassed to ask
other people for period products
because this is the eight with
ministration however making
paired drugs a common occurrence
in restaurants can have lasting
impact and levy the
stigmatization and shame that
many young people feel towards
their furious.
I know that even now if I'm on
my period at school I will have
to take part of course had in my
sleep or pocket in order to hide
it and I spent every class
period ages that I believe but
also not wanting to miss
excessive amounts of school to
check if I have I have this is
the same instilled by society
about periods but I truly
believe that if I grew up seeing
your products in a public
setting with the restroom I
would be less secure.
Now I know that I do my screen
was simple but keep in mind that
many schools in New Mexico there
are no match for drugs and
neither the bathroom nor in the
nurse's office so I strongly
urge you to vote in favor of the
bill H. B. one thirty four.
Thank you others a wish speaking
support please welcome.
Good morning Mr chair maybe
senior at.
The school preparatory school my
name is Keren of terror I'm here
today in the hope that you will
support H. B. one thirty four I
presented here in seventh grade
I was in English and as I made
my way to the bathroom.
I didn't have any money for
drugs to use to ask any of my
classmates I called my mom and
how to take me home yes I got
the products I needed in the end
but I missed half the day school
for it it wasn't the last time
either later that year I had to
go to the nurses office to get
the products I needed which
again cost me time I spent in
class learning about lord of the
flies for.
Because we were.
This is all too for students
like.
Without easy reliable access
security products we end up
understand your class time
worrying rather than studying
preoccupied over hygiene rather
than focus on across yes this
bill would ensure that that is
not the issue that crosses our
minds knowing that any time if
need be I can easily prevention
products I need for the hugely
this is especially true
considering all not all of my
classmates can afford these
vital products providing free
menstrual products.
Welcome to attend school without
constant worries of not having
enough supplies today I'm here
to do my seventh grade self
justice and help ensure that we
have to miss any class time over
this over in the process I know
she would be proud of this bill
and I hope you will consider.
The current bill secure in the
education they deserve please
support H. B. one thirty four to
provide financial products in
New Mexico public schools thank
you.
Thank you others we're speaking
support my left hand side.
Okay please up to two minutes
welcome the morning chair and
members of the committee that is
why I.
Classical preparatory school in
Albuquerque and today I want to
stress the importance of the
impact the house bill one thirty
four will have on students
across New Mexico.
Possible separately so it's a
charter school students of all
demographics background attended
school having access to
menstrual products at the least
of ít worries for any students
especially if periods are not
planned for me personally it's
low cost investment asking your
friends for actual product
scrambling around with nobody
around you has any and I should
be embarrassed about the loud
ripping sounds of the plastic or
hiding a camp on to my arm we're
speaking to the bathroom because
that's what I have to deal with
we're asking my friends to check
my pants of my period has
Representative is the fact of my
worries about bodily function
should not take over any
learning environment but today
was a bill like house bill one
thirty four you have the
opportunity to change that but
supporting this bill your
granting student alternative
solutions to not having dental
products whether it be in on the
issue of accessibility or plain
forgetfulness as peers are not
predictable believe me if they
were planning I would never
scheduled especially during
school.
I
want to know about sign and sign
but.
Products in bathrooms across New
Mexico also shifts away from any
negative connotations or
statements that period because
they are a normal bodily
function today I stand for
affirmation of house bill one
thirty four and I urge you all
to support thank you.
Thank you others which takes
place.
Good morning chair committee my
name is Marley Fisher and I'm a
high school senior Albuquerque
change begins with the story is
one of the people we know the
story of the stigma against
menstruation begins with the day
of the first period they would
start to hide or bleeding from
those we believe can't
understand but today we change
that story today teenagers from
my community and those around it
will tell you the experiences
that have affected them so
deeply I would begin with the
ones closest to me a student
once told me that their period
pain was so bad the pass out in
the morning had to miss school
another said their first period
was before they got to school
the blood from their hands and
their parents in the front had
to bring some because there were
no drugs available yet another
said they got their first period
in fifth grade for anyone
talking about it it's B. one
thirty four is an essential step
in the fight for virtual equity
more than anything it has the
power to educate seventeen other
states have passed similar bills
mandating Mensur products in
school bathrooms together
representatives we can add New
Mexico to the list we can create
our own endings from the store
would be done to help for that
reason I urge you to vote in
favor HB wonderful.
Thank you others I was speaking
for all right so we'll go to
online.
All right Ilene welcome back.
Given what.
A good morning again Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Eileen van we and I'm
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters of state of New
Mexico I'd like to thank the
Representative Trujillo and the
numerous sponsors of house bill
one thirty four and the students
who initiated the bill and are
educating the public the league
stands in full support of house
bill one thirty four we support
equal rights for all students
regardless of sex and we believe
that physical health support for
students are essential for high
quality equitable education
system the league advocates for
meeting basic human needs as
well and then for drugs are
basic human need the league
urges the committee to support
house bill one thirty four thank
you.
Thank you.
Hello good morning give up two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Li
looking sada I'm a high school
senior New Mexico school for the
arts in here with girls Inc of
Santa Fe today I stand in
support of house bill one thirty
four because it will help bring
the end of stigmatising Marin
periods and menstrual products I
got my first period in sixth
grade and being an elementary
school at the time many had my
period like it was my great
issue.
I didn't feel like I could talk
to anyone at my school about it
however I now know that it
wasn't shameful providing free
access to pre drugs will help
more lies administrative and
schools and help all students
feel more comfortable so I urge
you to support house bill one
thirty four thank you.
Great thank you Andrew good
morning of up to two minutes
welcome.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Andrew
I am a born and raised New
Mexican and I am in strong
support of this bill I came out
as trans my sophomore year of
high school and that same year I
missed over a dozen days of
class because I do not have
access to menstrual products at
school period poverty is an
issue of education equity and in
a state where education is a
constitutional right we should
absolutely be providing
menstrual products to our
students thank you for your time
and I urge you to follow the the
leadership of the young women
the presented this to you today
by voting yes.
Thank you Haley are actually
Lee.
Good morning welcome.
What Senator hope my name is Lee
and Lawrence though I am a
member of the public to gonna
and I am the community
engagement director with
indigenous women rising
we would like to fully support
this.
Hello House Bill when.
One thirty four sorry.
What we support this effort and
urge tribal leaders to follow
suit we would
Also like this these products to
be available to the elementary
schools
We will also have the funding
you should be available to
more available and prevent eco
friendly products using
the cost of menstrual supplies
in rural areas always cost more
than buying the same products in
towns or cities we what also.
Like to see the unencumbered
balance not revert to the
general fund but rather see this
is an ongoing expense for public
education and I would like to
thank you.
chairman Romero and the
representatives for listening
and we fully support house bill
one thirty four thank you please
thank you.
Haley morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Haley if you add a new you have
two minutes left now my my
apologies at thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am he's ox afternoon
from the southwest women's Law
Center I want to start by
thanking all the young people
here today who works bring this
bill for us last year the
subways women's Law Center
surveyed healthcare providers
and those experiencing
homelessness and found that
there is a large unmet need for
mental drugs in our community in
accessibility of drugs and Shane
hi demonstrating can have a
devastating impact on students
education I myself remember
going home early mortified
because I forgot my drugs at
home and my makeshift toilet
paper pad failed on me and this
didn't occur once this happened
numerous times so providing
reliable free access to drugs in
schools is in a in an important
step not only to addressing the
inequities of period poverty but
also in fostering safe and
supportive school environments
and because of this the
southwest southwest women's Law
Center fully supports H. B. one
card for.
Thank you.
Yes.
Actually it's Emily Emily sorry
if the hands keep going up into
welcome you have that thank you
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Emily will
Dallas New Mexico voices for
children I would like to thank
Representative Trujillo and the
other Sanchez for responding to
this student led issue that's
been brought forward I think the
voices of our students are
incredibly powerful today and
they they say all that we can
say about this issue and I'll
just add on a personal note is
administrating person who
graduated from New Mexico public
schools these stories are really
resonating with me and it brings
me a lot of help to think that
we have a chance today to begin
the end of those kinds of
stories and those kinds of
limitations on our students
academic participation so I urge
the committee to join us today
in support of H. B. one thirty
four thank you all right thank
you all right.
The.
Morning yeah here of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is near
record of the policy council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico and based out of Los
crucis I'm here today to provide
support for H. B. one thirty
four menstruating is a fact of
life of of being stuck at school
without access to patter tampon
should not be just like a lot of
other people spoken today I
certainly have my own stories
about being stuck at school
without having appropriate
products and I'm really
heartened as well that this
issue is finally being
addressed.
this bill is an important step
in releasing sticking around
menstruation and promoting
equity in our schools and I to
do pass thank you.
Thank you.
All right so Lauren good morning
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning committee chair and
members of the Education
Committee my name is what I know
much about America I live in
Albuquerque and I'm a junior at
Albuquerque high school I fully
support house bill one thirty
four as a female youth mental
health and here it's always seem
to taboo topic I like many other
students with uterus is have not
felt like this natural process
is recognized by those who hold
office and even the
administration in my on screen
last year the administration
Albuquerque high school closed
all but two restaurants in the
entire school one boys and one
girls were left open this act
was incredibly inconsiderate of
student help and needs using the
bathroom became an inconvenience
of the constant long lines
discourage students from using
restrooms on school campus being
able to use the restroom when
one needs it is a necessity
especially for students on their
period who need to exchange pads
or tampons and timely matter or
risk serious health concerns
this act alone showed me how
little my school's
administration cared about
menstrual health which is why
I'm here asking you to stand up
for New Mexico's public school
students and our health.
Further as a low income students
out of title one school I have
witnessed first hand the
tangibility of period poverty
and how difficult it can be it's
not have concrete access period
products wondering if you are
reading through or where you're
next Hader tampon will come from
should not be a student's main
concern at school but it often
it's for students who
experiences monthly cycle and it
can detract from education and
even cause lower attendance
rates I am here as a female
student to erase the stigma of
mental health and I'm asking you
to do the same by voting in
favor of house bill one thirty
four thank you thank you.
Amyris good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning committee chair and
Representative this and members
of the Education Committee my
name is Amherst Lopez and I live
in Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm currently a ninth grader
Albuquerque high school.
I'm here today to speak on
behalf of.
Of house bill one three four.
This country already expects
schools to provide toilet paper
and soap so I ask should
students human sure you have the
same access to basic supplies.
Currently many schools keeps
menstrual products in the
school's nurse's office the
problem with this is that
students must walk across campus
to treat their necessary drugs
and in my personal experience
many of my friends have needed
mensural supplies and I have to
personally achieve it from the
nurse's office and it took a
long time because nurses are
always busy with other students
help.
Also madam I think more
attention should be put to
students who can barely afford
mention drugs a study was done
tracking the impact of period
poverty amongst amongst US
teenager teenage students which
was found that twenty three
percent of students have
struggle to afford period
products.
This problem has become a
barrier in the education system
they're also they're already so
many barriers and education
system and they should not be
one of them up here it is
uncontrollable and it is not a
choice.
We do not want to keep seeing a
bandaid put on this program
instead we want to put an issue
put this issue aside.
That can be done by passing this
bill legislators I urge you to
vote in favor of the bill one
three four thank you for this
opportunity the opportunity to
speak at thank you for your
time.
Thank you community level people
men good morning of of two
minutes welcome.
Good morning and thank you so
much for the opportunity my name
is Camilla I will then I serve
as the director of the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club but I'm also a woman human
straits and have a stepdaughter
who is with an age of
menstruation I want to flag the
impacts of the changing
environment
for young women where periods
are starting earlier and earlier
so considering including
elementary school age bathrooms
I think would be something to
think about but first and
foremost I want to thank the
young women who've taken the
lead on this I think so often
Women's basic needs are left to
the side I think my older women
experience of that is walking
into the bathroom after bathroom
where there are no changing
tables so really thinking about
the things that make life
workable for women and for young
women and young women who don't
have access to the basic
supplies we need this is an
issue that I work on but in
seeing it in the agenda I felt
that as a young younger issue
women in my career standing
alongside these young women
taking the lead was the least I
could do so please pass the
legislation and thank you to the
Sanchez.
Thank you.
Jade good morning of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jack
Wasco and I'm with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs there's really
nothing I can say that is more
moving than the incredible youth
activist stories they've already
shared with you but I just.
Organizations work centers so
much around ending stigma and
supporting the learning and
health of New Mexico students we
fully support this bill and
urged the committee to do the
same thank you so much right
thank you Erica good morning of
up to two minutes welcome back.
Good morning.
Yeah.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm.
I'm really trying to get it
together right now because I'm
I'm I'm very emotional about in
the in the best way.
Who
Give these students there
flowers you all
give them their flowers give
them this legislation my name is
Erica Davis from I am the
director of advocacy and growth
okay I have worked with youth my
entire career this is such a
vital need our young people are
asking for accessibility that
they required to continually
said literally show up aside
from the research that so it
shows the deep physical pain
demonstrated bodies indoor while
we.
Well we are in ministration we
still go to class go to practice
go do towards X. cetera we're
just asking for something that
would heal the stigma shame
that's around this issue when it
is normal is the day that in as
state ending in the letter Y.
honestly are you have spoken and
they're driving us by example
please let us honor that and
follow their leadership today
with a full bipartisan support
today and I also want to take
the rest of my time if I was
they were person y'all already
know the kind of energy I bring
but I don't all of you to
applaud the students in a triple
play pandemic for taking time in
class for showing up in person
when it is a Monday to tell you
guys what they knew our students
have spoken are present is so so
so bright because of them and I
mean it I'm and ended now but
Shani to class for the students
thank you.
All right thank you so much
Erica all right we'll move on to
Manet Monet will communities two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Mona
Act artifact and I'm speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee we
strongly support H. B. one
thirty four because it's
centered and community care
essential equity in our schools
means that our students will
feel nurtured by their
institutions during a very
vulnerable time.
Although period poverty has been
in a discussed issue during New
Mexico legislative session it
affects more than half of the
population of our state no
student should have to miss
school and no person should have
to miss out on daily life
because they are unable to
afford the basic necessities
they require we strongly urge
you to vote in favor of H. B.
one thirty four also we commend
our courageous and driven youth
leaders for bringing this issue
to the people's house thank you
for your time.
Thank you.
All right Patsy good morning
give up two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Patsy
Nelson I am representing the New
Mexico Alliance for SchoolBased
Health Care and I'm a former
school nurse I'd like to thank
the sponsors for bringing this
bill and house bill one thirty
four to the committee and the
opportunity to speak our
organization over the past
several years has conducted
purion product rights to obtain
drugs and then distribute them
to school nurses we have learned
that this is an incredibly
important issue for school
students and we are very very
interested in supporting this
bill I would like to express my
pride for the incredibly
articulate and passionate
students for advocating for
their own needs and I orders
urge your support of house bill
one thirty four thank you for
letting me see thank you.
John welcome you have a two
minutes welcome.
Thank you for Romero and the
members of the committee the.
I'm John among in Sanford
director of the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice we strongly
support house bill one thirty
four.
Because we.
Embrace the bodily autonomy and
the dignity of all students
thank you very much thank you
appreciate the privative all
right so we'll go to opposition
house bill one thirty four in
the room online please indicate
by raising your hand.
All right we don't have any okay
so will come to committee
committee members steno I were
meant to be on the floor at ten
thirty again questions brief
answers brief please first on my
list Representative Chatfield
please thank you Mr Mr chair the
first thing.
Very impressed at how well
prepared well spoken your your
expert witness
certainly state is.
Bathroom good
go back to I'm good I think we
put them in the bathroom it will
be the allies will pause of
selling this unnecessary so
noted if you will because of
that I
because of the financial
services this is.
Thanks Sarah.
Great thank you so much
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward and I want to thank also
the the young people spoke up it
was there but it and I really
appreciate that I have a simple
I guess school clarifying
question on semantics I guess Mr
chair so what's the difference
between a bathroom in a
restaurant.
Mr chair.
Mr chair I I think they're used
simultaneously I don't think
that there is a specific
difference maybe in the
dictionary but in overall
consumer use I think that the
state.
Thank thank you for that up
because I'm concerned that some
people may interpret one way.
And others may interpret another
way so perhaps you may consider
using the work restaurant in
addition to about three.
Just so we can cover all our
bases but other than that that's
the only concern that I haven't
the field and just in the
meantime I do support the thank
you Mr thank you Representative
provide you know please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative the first and
foremost I as we've all said I
want to thank all of the women
women leader activists because
that's what you are your women
leader activists and yes of
Representative through he'll
they will be taking our place in
the house and the Senate and
wherever else they wish to take
that's there you're you're set
up for that already so I just
wanted to say thank you and then
just you know say that I am
absolutely appalled all the time
that we have to bring this type
of legislation forward you would
think that we would have already
been at this place and these
drugs would have been made
available but I also want to
just tell the Mr chair that the
young women listening and those
that are here present that you
just have to fight to have to
continue to fight for what you
believe in this what you're
doing and just remind of
Representative Trujillo do you
remember when we were elected in
twenty twelve and our first time
in twenty thirteen that we did
not have a restroom a women's
restroom.
In the lounge in our house.
We did not have a women's
restroom we were directed it was
the first class of the most
women elected that year that was
the first class of the most
women elected that year and even
this house of representatives
was not prepared for the wave of
women that began in twenty
thirteen and that have continued
and that now are Representative
the majority in the house of
representatives so I just wanted
to raise that that it was a
fight of for us as well and
wherever we continue to need to
fight I strongly encourage you
to continue thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative specially for
bringing these beautiful young
ladies up here I enjoyed hearing
your story you're very bright.
And I know that we probably some
of the gentleman in the room a
little bit ylides but it's a
natural part of our bodies.
We have a lot to be proud of
with our bodies.
Mr Chairman representative I do
have a couple of questions
regarding the appropriation that
of three million dollars
appropriation and I see that it
is recurring with concerned I
have your bill this is in the
an expanded or unencumbered
balance remaining at the end of
the fiscal year twenty twenty
four shall revert to the general
fund Mr Chairman can you explain
maybe.
Explained to be.
Why that is in there.
Mr chair and representative
Weisel the rationale behind it
was I.
In my opinion it was simply it
was simply legislative language
we did ask for it to be
recurring so I would have
assumed that it would have gone
in there into the same pot and
just been reused but
that's the way it ended up okay
Mr Chairman.
Matt.
Representative I also see that
the LFC analysis shows district
and charter school have cash
balances and they've grown of
exponentially over the years and
now they're up to five hundred
twenty five million.
Under PED's guidance with those
funds be able to offset the cost
of this my understanding yes and
Mr chair I think that
Jackie or someone is able to to
respond to that we do this
thankfully of spoke about it
recently okay go ahead.
Good morning Mr chair
Representative Ezzell so
technically
if asked to do so and and not
legislative appropriations
school districts could usurp
their operating funds or cash
balances to offset the cost okay
and then Mr chairman what I'm
understanding you saying is and
from the Representative is that
it would be a under the guidance
of PED but it would also be
authorized by PED for the use of
the money's.
Going to this particular.
Instances is that correct Mr
Chairman representative in this
particular case the The
appropriation language go would
go to PED so PED would
administer those funds and guide
the implementation of the act
okay Mr Chairman before you sit
down maybe you can answer this
other question for me.
Which is would PED be going out
for our of peas or would it be
up to the individual school
districts to do that.
Because it's I'm not seeing it
the bill or any of the FIR is
through the the other analysis
Mr chairman Mr chair
representative that's a good
question the language currently
says that the the department
would actually purchase
for the purchase an instant
install it doesn't say that the
department would be responsible
for purchasing for the
installation so it's possible
that they would distribute the
funds directly to school
districts and charter schools
who then be responsible for
purchasing the the
Mr Chairman representative there
there I have a problem if it is
going to be administered locally
through each one of the school
districts it seems only in the
best interest of the school
districts to have in our of P.
put in place where this is
consistently being monitored as
were stopped the machines put in
and everything else.
So that would be my
recommendation on that so thank
you for your response to Mr
chairman one of a couple of the
questions I have and I've market
somewhere from that with I see.
It is.
Under the Lucy this bill was of
the bill in Alice's was H. E. C.
H. A. F. C. under the fiscal
impact part of it do you have
that and now this is with you
representative okay yes ma'am
under fiscal impact second
paragraph about third line down.
Because this product is going to
be dispensed.
This is free or token operated.
And I get that.
Otherwise the machine could be
into the first day that a health
of all the product was put in
place.
Secular.
Teacher would it be help me out
there hi Matt Mr chair and
representative Weisel I think
those are discussions made by
the school district itself and
so there isn't any specific
language the of the notes who
will be the person who will
distribute tokens the issue is
again a local control in terms
of how they are going to
distribute the information the
the.
Pence and temperaments and Mr
chairman and Representative it
up also might have to do with
the vendors will.
So because that way they could
monitor how much product is
being used and all the steps to
but I do have to agree Mr
chairman and Representative with
Representative chat Chatfield I
do have a problem.
These machines being put
strictly boys bathrooms because
sometimes boys can be very
hurtful.
And it's hard enough especially
on the show girls whenever they
do start menstruating.
And if those machines are.
If the product is free.
Sometimes these young men can be
very callous and I don't want
see that Indian girl Mr chairman
thank you very much thank you
Representative before you go to
the next we had somebody in
public comment that's been very
persistent some and allow them
to come back if we may Travis
gland good morning you have up
to two minutes.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman members
of the committee I tried to get
on at the end of the but that
apparently didn't go through
that again thank you for for
taking the the time and allow me
to express my opposition to this
bill well I support products in
the women's for the general
gender neutral bathrooms.
Why would we spend money
pretending males have a need for
menstrual products.
If the state has three million
dollars to spend on this topic
fallacy send it to the local
districts without strings and
let the local school board
determined where it is needed
most.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right so come back to
committee thank you for that a
representative of lampreys.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative thank you ladies
of for your bravery in your
words I I commend you
I have actually Representative
Ezzell asked a lot of the
questions that I've had concerns
my my one of my major concerns
is that there is no real
language on how this is going to
get to our districts and and and
I wish we could see that a
little bit more it's a little
vague with that you know PED's
in control I'm sorry I'm I'm a
teacher I I understand how that
is in I worry about that too is
it really going to get there to
the people that actually need it
now my screen
actually has these in the in the
girls bathrooms which are
wonderful and and I and I
actually have some in my
classroom and my students noted
where they're at and and if they
need them they they they they
helped ourselves to them I along
with some of the the other
representatives I have a real.
Concerned with them being put
and and and the men's bathrooms
because right now currently with
our school the.
Stop dispensers are even safe in
our bathrooms and without
getting destroyed and vandalized
and because boys unfortunately
have too much time on their
hands often and I can just see
these plastered all over
so but if it was a token system
may be in that boy's bathroom
and the the few that are
possibly going to be able to
take advantage of that could
have that that could alleviate
it hopefully it would be a lot
harder for for them to do those
kind of things so thank you
ladies for for coming and and
I'm speaking up thank you thank
you Representative good or not
please.
Representative.
I thank you Mr chair.
I move too fast
Representative which at the top
of the bill are page we have a
better for us do this in a
second to Mr thank you so we
have a due pass motion on house
bill one thirty four
Representative Lara a second by
Representative Roybal cover yet
a madam secretary if you call
the roll on a do pass motion
and.
Representative I.
Chatfield yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Is.
Representative corolla.
Representative up yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid
Representative my doctor wrote
Maria yes.
Representative for ball coming
at all yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo resounding yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Vice chair Garrett yes in age to
run for the house is twenty one.
Chairman yes.
Tent is competitive I did of
course at ten two zero all right
ten zero you have a due pass do
not show displays of emotion
Committee please because we have
very contentious bills but for
all the students please no thank
you all very much for your
presentation and connecting
yourself so well and so
skillfully in our committee room
so thank you yes Representative
is up I would like to point out
to the sponsor of the bill and I
think everybody does understand
whenever we voiced our concerns
about these machines being in
the boy's restroom I would
strongly recommend that you have
an amendment on the bills that
does take that language out I
think my opinion thank you very
much thank you Representative
alright so we have house bill
one twelve so thank you all so
much.
We'll start trying to.
Well hi I shall return.
Yes.
The.
Supposed to be here to.
Mr Neal Bowen.
That's.
Representative.
What about.
I don't recall system.
You today I'm so sorry.
He's
here I.
All right Representative good
morning.
House bill one twelve when
you're ready for pre for the
patient please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm here to
introduce up House Bill a one
twelve to you I have with me to
experts I will briefly introduce
the bill and then let the
experts introduce themselves and
we will keep the time very
focused.
House bill one twelve.
House bill one twelve
appropriates money to the
general fund.
From the general fund to the
department of finance and
administration to be placed in
the building of student cry a
building of student resiliency
Fund for the purposes of having
a wellness room a pilot project
with up to in up to forty
schools what they will be giving
grants to set up wellness rooms
for students and I should come
out Mr chair members of the
committee that during the summer
after having introduced and
passed house memorial forty
three we went the task force in
those members who were named
within the house bill House
memorial forty three when around
the state talking with students
and families and teachers and
providers about these mental
health rooms in the schools and
overwhelmingly it was embraced
and suggested that this was a
good idea so we started down in
Alamogordo I want to know we
went all the way up to tiles and
not only that but the students
and tiles and Alamogordo all
working together to create what
they're calling a documentary on
the formation of wellness rooms
and how much they will affect
students.
I do want to just point out one
single item that and twenty
twenty one the joint statement
of the American academy of
pediatrics found out that health
professionals and supported a
study showing that a dedication
of a room that was focused on
health and wellness of children
absolutely help to make children
perform better in school and
also help them to overcome
areas when they were overwhelmed
are emotionally challenged with
that Mr chair and members of the
committee I am going to have my
my to with my two experts
introduce themselves the first
one is Leslie Kelly and see is
the director of behavioral
health for the public education
department.
I thank you Representative thank
you Mr chairperson members of
the committee I'm glad to be
here this morning I also co
chaired the task force for the
house memorial that is now this
introduction of this bill I
think we're all painfully aware
of the mental health crisis that
we're facing in this country and
feeling it even greater in our
state of New Mexico the pandemic
has brought to the surface the
issues that New Mexicans have
been facing long before a
pandemic stress and anxiety are
being experienced by New
Mexicans at alarming rates and
our youth are greatly impacted
well being is except is
essential to fix to functioning
and having
having a good life so well being
is connected in associated with
emotional regulation regulation
and we talk about these wellness
rooms providing a space for
students and adults in the case
where there's a dot wellness
rooms to have a place to check
out to have a place to take a
time out when they're feeling
overly stimulated are overly
anxious
it's a place in school for
students to go self regulate so
that they can return back to
class and better function the
alternative to that is leaving
campus missing school going out
in using drugs and alcohol I'm
making some really bad decisions
that and that the negative
consequences for the students.
So mindfulness and self
regulation has been shown in
numerous studies and research to
improve attention to improve the
attention span of of young
people and in school we all know
how very important that is it
creates changes in the brain
that correspond to
last three activity and the
ability the gate the ability to
engage in tasks especially when
emotions activated it creates
greater empathy a reduction in
stress and anxiety and self
advocacy which is what we saw on
the last presentation young
people advocating for themselves
which is what we really want so
I'll social emotional
competencies that all the social
emotional competencies that
we're supporting and teaching in
schools support young people and
adults and
We are and give them the ability
to engage in more self
regulation
there is a study that
The New Mexico social remote
sorry the social emotional
learning for New Mexico which is
a branch of SCO for the United
States they did a brief
Study on that that benefits of
wellness rooms and they found
several things that the purposes
of well this rural spaces in New
Mexico was a response to student
mental health needs and the
anticipated stress from that
pandemic they made
recommendations about
implementations and operations
they saw three Manx main
strengths that it would impact
positive climbing culture and
schools reduce behaviors that
can be disruptive to students
academic success and increase
social emotional capacity and
they Representative some of the
challenges that could occur so
I'm gonna turn it over to
Dr Neal Bowen from the HSD.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you
Representative hundred for
bringing this legislation
forward
I I'm only to speak to three
aspects of this proposed
legislation because I'm very
aware of the time I want to
point out that that having
wellness rooms placed in in our
schools the cost across the
state has the opportunity to to
affect the the infants and the
and the consequences of adverse
childhood experiences in our
communities the reason I say
that is because that the
evidence about reducing the
harms caused by having adverse
childhood experiences is is very
clear that building resilience
is a protective factor against
the long term negative outcomes
that come from from adverse
childhood experiences.
and one of the most powerful at
aspects of building resilience
in children who are impacted by
adverse childhood experiences is
having a meaningful relationship
with as as few as a single adult
who believes in the child and
these wellness rooms offer the
opportunity to build that kind
of relationship so it this
aligns very very well with our
efforts to reduce the incidence
of adverse childhood experiences
in the state of New Mexico as
I'm sure all of you are aware
New Mexico unfortunately is the
state where your children are
most likely to have three or
more adverse childhood
experiences and and just to
level set there.
For example when we look at when
we compare men with zero add
verse childhood experiences to
men with four adverse childhood
experiences the men with for our
one thousand two hundred percent
more likely to become injection
drug users this is a dramatic
impact so anything we can do to
to reduce the incidence of
adverse childhood experiences is
time and money well spent in the
state of New Mexico.
The second point I wanted to
make was just that the billion
one of the brilliant parts about
having wellness rooms is it it
it recognizes that mental
wellness is something which
affects all of us when we when
we when we come in to that
experience I'm particularly
difficulty event of one kind or
another regardless of whether we
are on on the continue on which
would result in a diagnosable
mental health condition we can
all benefit from an attention to
our mental wellness in that time
period so this is in many ways
an upstream approach to taking
care of the well being of our of
our communities.
The third aspect I wanted to
mention was just the the fact
just I'm sure we are all aware
in the room here that we are in
the midst of a behavioural
health workforce crisis and one
aspect of the proposal from
Representative Herndon is to
make use of interns who are in
school to to to staff these
wellness rooms number one that
reduces the costs of the room
the number two we will one thing
we know is when people have the
experience of of providing up
in effective listening and
holding environment for people
in distress at whatever level
and they can see the efficacy of
that we increase the probability
of them continuing along that
pipeline to become behavioural
health part of the bureau of
workforce so for those three
reasons I just want I those are
the three things I wanted to
emphasize today and I thank you
all for the time and for paying
attention to this bill.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and we stand for
questions thank you all so much
for your testimony all right so
I will do things in reverse
order they have been so those in
opposition to house bill one
twelve so opposition either in
rural online please indicate by
raising your hand I'll give it
some wait time.
This is opposition everybody
online.
Area.
Okay.
We will go to support so support
for house bill one twelve.
Please indicate by raising your
hand.
Okay so that we will do this is
will go online first and we'll
start off with those are joining
us online.
All right so you have up to two
minutes want to call your name
so the good morning give up to
two minutes welcome back.
Welcome back good morning thank
you for having me this morning
in really happy to have a job
everyday described rose Inc of
Santa Fe director of advocacy
one of the things that we have
school in our time has been the
need for a safe space in the
school since I was a kid many
moons ago we only had two types
of let's say drills and now
there are different types of
drills to that are actively
traumatizing in triggering our
students a top of the things
that we don't know what's going
on at home many of our students
rule and in the city deal with
so many things at home and in
their intergenerational homes
and within their own bodies is
there figuring out who they are
and let's not forget how Covid
has deeply impacted our students
with integrating socially in
dealing with social anxiety in
their own personal anxieties
girls and just wants to come in
stand in full support of this
bill so that we can help our
babies around themselves and
know themselves for themselves
so they can show up just as they
are in their fullness of Laurie
thank you so much for pass
through this all in advance
thanks yup.
Thank you so much all right lord
in a.
Good morning welcome back you
have up to two minutes.
Good morning again
representatives once again my
name is what I know much about
it at that I am the vice
president of Albuquerque high
school's peer health educator
group pods we support house bill
one twelve.
Which will provide funding for a
pilot program implementing
wellness rooms into public
schools in New Mexico according
to the CDC one out of three
students for mental health
during the pandemic COVID took a
heavy toll on school aged youth
and many came out of the
pandemic with declining mental
health.
This should be a top priority
for students in schools but
unfortunately very few resources
are available for students and
an educational setting with the
constant stress that accompanies
school and learning we believe
it will be beneficial for
students have a place to regain
control of their mental health
and escape the burden of anxiety
or distress in a recent survey
of freshman health classes at a
public high school eighty four
percent of students that they
would be in favor of a wellness
room and thought it would be
beneficial for high school
students I am a member of the
community and my school where I
teach will allow his students
relax in his office which is
environmentally similar to
wellness rooms and I can tell
you from personal experience as
a student under constant stress
that having a place to go to
relax for a short period of time
is incredibly impactful as
studying myself at the end of a
long day has helped me to become
more productive in my school
work and have better control of
my anxiety unfortunately this
room is not available to all
students but having seen the
positive impact of the space I
would like to advocate for room
for that anyone in the school
maintenance at I am confident
that this pilot program will
greatly increase mental health
in schools and I am for you to
support positive mental health
habits and encouraging success
by voting in favor of house bill
one twelve thank you.
Thank you Shani of up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the board
I'm coming at you from
precaution that I teach in
Albuquerque in my AP psychology
class so there might be some
background noise but
I've co chair this task force
and I think that one of the most
important things is I read a
school that we have a on the
space that was created by
students for students and that
type of advocacy and that type
of empowerment for students has
been significant in terms of
their ability to really start
driving for the things that are
best for them we often leave
student voice out of the
conversations that we have and
it's important to me that we
start including the more more
and this is something that they
wanted and this is something
that they were willing to fight
for my screen and actually
cocked and it would be wonderful
to see this happen throughout
the state thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
So Michael good morning Michael
you have a two minute focus.
Thank you my name is Michael and
I am the community schools
coordinator at the pin yes go
Independent School District I
support house bill one twelve.
We've done surveys of our
students and families to get a
sense of their experiences with
trauma we found that by the time
our students reach high school
approximately half of students
have direct household or family
experience with substance abuse
violence incarceration suicide
so when we talk about adverse
childhood experiences these the
factors we're talking about.
These numbers are far far higher
than state averages.
There is an assumption among
some people particularly outside
of our community that our
families do not want to help
that isn't true a remote
location makes it difficult to
access care and support for
these issues and as a result our
students begin to believe that
nothing can change that they
will always be burdened with
anxiety depression and despair
with no hope for finding a
better happier mental space.
how can we help our students
achieve success academically
when they're struggling to
believe that they and their
community have purpose and
value.
The mental health center in our
middle and high school building
is one way to give our students
the mental health support we so
desperately need and help them
become the best versions of
themselves in and out of the
classroom thank you okay thank
you Lisa good morning of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative earned and for
bringing this bill forward hi my
name is Lisa patch and I am
the executive director of health
services for the Alamogordo
public schools this is something
that we have been looking at and
back in December of two thousand
nineteen we took a survey
amongst our staff and asked them
what the what the barriers to
learning more in our classrooms
and ironically the top two
things were behavioral and
mental health and number two was
hygiene so at today had I think
this is really a positive day
for schools
along the mental health concerns
students need a place to go
where we have an opportunity to
teach them the coping skills
necessary I think by doing that
giving them a place to go and
that's not punitive we're going
to make our environment in the
schools a much safer place for
everyone and that happier and
healthier adults as a they learn
to navigate their emotions and
have the opportunity to go back
to class thank you
thank you.
MRS good morning welcome back
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning committee chair and
representative again and members
of the educate Committee my name
is adverse Lopez I live in
Albuquerque New Mexico and I'm
currently a ninth grader
Albuquerque high school.
I'm here today to speak on
behalf of house bill one one
two.
Madam rooms are safe space in
which children that are
undergoing a panic attack how
other things occurring that
maybe intensely stressing them
out can go to calm themselves
kept calm themselves down.
This common rooms would contain
budgets comfortable seating and
other things outcome of people
done efficiently.
Calming rooms can be part of the
pro church we approach to
address youth mental health
crisis.
Most students if not all
students have felt anxiety
stress and have of the other
problems have caused them to not
feel safe and cause them to not
want to be in a social
environment.
Our solution to this problem is
coming grooms we know that
teachers care about their
students and want to keep them
safe and healthy but when they
are teaching a class it is hard
to focus on one student's needs
when they're up up there there
are over twenty other students
to also have needs.
For the most part classrooms are
not a conductive Environment to
relax students in alternative
solution.
We conducted a survey at our
school and the survey showed
that over eighty percent of our
students wanted and felt that a
common room is necessary we
believe that these common rooms
are vital for students health
and would be a new way to
support students and keeps them
state keep students safe and
healthy.
Legislators I urge you to vote
in favor of bill one one two and
thank you for this opportunity
and your time.
Thank you all right M. Sonya
signs good morning give up to
Minfocus.
Morning thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sonya sites and I was part of
the task force as the Canadian
mental health and academic
counseling for less Chriss
public schools and I am a lead
member social emotional learning
for New Mexico I along with my
fellow of the team members of
SCO foreign markets support as
house bill one twelve as
mentioned by Leslie Kelly our
organization recently completed
a research project on twenty one
wellness spaces also known as
mental illness rooms across New
Mexico we are privileged to
listen listen to a number of
testimonies from students
educational leaders principals
teachers counselors social
workers and more and found there
to be a number of benefits as
mentioned earlier to having the
spaces on school campuses yeah
one of the most impactful
discoveries for me personally
with the student leadership and
advocacy their leadership and
advocacy on behalf of their and
their peers mental health
wellness is outstanding and all
students I interacted with on
behalf of wellness spaces speak
of how helpful this resource has
been for that lastly if you
haven't had or if you have an
opportunity to visit and spend
time alone this to my highly
encourage it I've been able to
visit many and you can spend an
extended period of time at one
here at our unless crucis high
school when they're I
experienced a type of focus that
inspired hours of work and I
believe the reason to be for
that was when I needed to I took
short breaks during these breaks
I colored I took short walks on
the track now and I think played
mindfulness games and most of
all my anxiety from this work
because it is stressful working
as all educators now was really
and.
It was.
I guess COVID and just I just
felt good in this from if felt
good to be in a space that was
tending to a lot of money in our
needs so thank you for your
support of house bill one
twelfth.
All right thank you Joe and good
morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning members of the
Education Committee my name is
John is some I live in
Albuquerque and I'm an adviser
to the peer health educator
group pause at Albuquerque high
I urge you to support house bill
one twelve to fund wellness
rooms for the past several years
even before the pandemic the
students have wanted a wellness
room and now Representative
Herndon has submitted an
excellent written bill to fund
these rooms the band the
orchestra drama of the Senate
various groups have.
Their little niches on campus
where students can go to calm
their nervous system when they
are admitted the rest of the
students however need somewhere
to go to the teenage brain is
still developing.
When they're in the classroom
their and their nervous system
is agitated the limbic system
dominates and they're not able
to learn they're in survival
mode and the need and they need
to learn the skill as we all do
of how to regulate our nervous
systems having an oasis in the
middle of the high school where
they can go that supervised and
then possibly referred after say
ten minutes if they're still
educated to a counselor for
further help there's definitely
a need for that this is a
student generated project we
have documentation of other
schools in the country where
wellness rooms have been
successfully implemented I urge
you to vote in favor of house
bill one twelve thank you.
Thank you Amy give a two minutes
welcome.
Thank you for the welcome Mr
chairman members of the
Education Committee my name is
Amy McConnell Franklin and the
founding chair of the social
emotional learning alliance for
New Mexico as mentioned we are
of an affiliate a state
affiliate local state affiliate
of the national organization for
social emotional learning for
the United States I'm also one
of the four researchers who
interviewed community members
regarding the purposes and
implementation of wellness
spaces and their diverse
manifestations around the state
I am based in tells I
interviewed educators teachers
district and state
administrators at and and a
parent here at three sites in
tells the tells high school the
announcer charter school which
serves students in kindergarten
through eighth grade and the you
know it's Garcia nurturing
center which is associate
associated also with Michael
Lowell who just a few from
conozco.
Based on our findings about the
for our research findings as
well as our expertise in the
field of social emotional skills
development I stand and support
of this bill and the wellness
spaces as being one component of
a robust approach to developing
social emotional skills that are
also culturally linguistically.
An informed and academically
supportive.
Starting with the adults in the
who are the who are in the
children's lives who can model
and teach our young people we
all need a safe and comfortable
sanctions space where we can
retreat gather our thoughts and
feelings and consider our
choices as to how to move
forward in our learning our
interactions and our behaviors I
delay we have some strategies
and tools for Rick recognizing
and navigating and regulating
our emotions and thoughts for
this reason.
I advocate for wellness spaces
as a place where students can
choose to withdraw based on
their own needs in order to
regroup and practice skills they
have already seen.
Thank you that was it thank you
so much Amy.
All right looks like we have
Amy.
That era I believe that's all
one word but welcome you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning good morning that
chair representative and valued
audience I want to thank you for
this opportunity to speak on
this vital issue my name is Andy
Martinez data and and the dean
of instruction here at south
high school the role encompasses
that of accounts there is well
and I just would love to share
with everyone that this year had
been trying for students to say
the least there had we have seen
a significant increase in the
amount of five before plans that
the students are on simply
because of the increase in
anxiety and depression including
some situations where there's
lost of life as well yes high
school stands behind to this
bill not only to hear students
voices which I'm so excited to
be part of the task force but
also to hear students speaking
out about this issue and support
for it but to take action to
listen to our students and take
action on this vital bill
this is one action that we can
really assist students with in
schools we have seen some
positive actions here and all
our elementaries with wellness
spaces or wellness rooms I guess
and at the high school we have
wellness spaces that have we've
been interviewed by and board
regarding this specific task
force so again tells high school
we stand behind this bill and
just hope to see it make
improvements and focus on our
children thank you so much thank
you all right some tree good
morning some tree of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chair members of
the committee representatives
and the public my name is Andrea
you'll need I serve as the vice
chair of the native American
democratic caucuses New Mexico
and and currently a second
semester student teacher
resident at as tech schools that
Coogler middle school
I support house bill one twelve
for the wellness rooms a hundred
percent for the last two.
Semesters I have seen students
break down in the hallways and
in corners of classrooms and we
don't currently have any kind
of.
system in place to deal with
this other than you know
personally taking ownership of
the the situations and I think
it would be a great benefit to
all schools
especially when sometimes they
can be as simple as like and
students struggling to open
their locker because their
lockers malfunctioned and
they're pressured you know to
get to class on time to not be
disciplined with tardiness or
anything like that I've also
seen other students come to the
aid of students you know and
there I'm trained I mean they're
friends and everything but I
think the wellness spaces would
provide a great recharge space
and I think the representative
for bringing this forward and
ask for your support of this
bill thank you great thank you
Erin good morning you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you
thank you for holding this
coming point discussion my name
is Erin army ho and I am a
parent of a teenager I also
bring my experience as a primary
teacher and was a contributing
researcher with the SL for New
Mexico report on wellness spaces
and I find that today I just
want to address an important
factor that's missing from
today's discussion and I just
want to bring some some and
basically to the effects of the
social media and impact that
that is making in our society
especially with the teen age
group but increasingly down to
second grade I see social media
impacting and so this really
speaks to the of the need to
disconnect and have that focus
on self and social awareness
that is going to counter facts
or at least provide an
alternative to a lot of the the
social media and the facts that
the company is going to be that
and thank you so much for having
us and I want to support the
stock great thank you Patty good
morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I can't I'm Patsy
Nelson I'm a former school nurse
and I have been working a bit
with the students at Albuquerque
high and there sponsor Joe
Newsome and the students are
indeed expressing what they need
I can't add anything more to
what they've said except that
there is a dire need for
additional wellness supports in
schools especially in the recent
years and I urge your support
for house bill one twelve thank
you so much for hearing this
bill.
Thank you all right so go to my
left hand side in the room those
in support of house bill one
twelve feet indicators are of
most are up in front please and
you have up to two minutes.
Information that I was in
support all right so there's a
wish to speak if you raise a
hand please.
Good morning Mr chairman.
The
public schools thank you for
Representative for bring this
forward and I'm again in the
school district great thank you
and I saw another hand go of all
please Sir you have a two minute
talk good morning Mr chairman
please.
Many of my name is crystal Roy
and I'm the public policy
officer for the ark of New
Mexico we represent the best
interests of individuals with
intellectual developmental
disabilities we heard strong
support of house bill one twelve
and with like to like
Representative remember
reinforced I've previously
talked about before this
experience ten years in the
mission school districts in the
city that districts that have
these types of loans units and
the district did not use up and
how well the students adapted to
of us you know somehow
beneficial they were so we would
stand a strong supporter house
bill one twelve thank you right
thank you all rights on my right
hand side this sport posted in
front please two minutes Mr
chairman members the committee
examinations of the fifty dollar
interning with the New Mexico
Center on ready at that we for
this bill for all the reasons
given here today already which
is are we really appreciate that
it advances understanding that
education while this orderly
inextricably linked project this
month for for unit stated goals
for this bill and hope you do
too thank you.
Thank you please welcome to two
minute Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Alexandria
Taylor with the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs we think Representative
Herndon for bringing this bill
of the agency I tried that that
the value of the community is
based on asking this one
question how are the children
and we heard from young people
today that the children are not
well and they're seeking the
tools to become well forty seven
percent of reported sexual
assaults in our state are
children under the age of
eighteen and so we urge you to
follow the leadership of the
young people that you've heard
from today and asking for the
tools to be well in their
learning environments thank you
great thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee was.
For the study of almost no
support patients of mental
health issues and can help
support students back in class
and there are many schools in
the state of New Mexico that
have almost we know that schools
are
very positive effects pharmacies
schools New Mexico lost close
losses are open house.
Ninety seven as well the schools
a program that does that also
for students to support them New
Mexico FOR Association also park
anybody the school safety for
school security including help
that'll help previous rooms and
housing and stuff for people
that are needed to manage the
services that are very
important.
This strongly resent Sanchez
ordered yesterday favorable
consideration.
Thank you others in support of
my right hand side wish to
speak.
Okay we've got opposition so
will come to committee
Representative Lara for some
analysts thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward I I I
commend you for doing this
because I truly believe that
this also helps with reducing
suspensions.
It's so important to allow this
is this is an explosive I'm
sorry Mr this report to allow
students to be able to a place
where they know they can talk to
someone and I appreciate that
the question that I have those
comes up comes from the FY are
where the appropriation goes to
the department of finance
administration so that PED of
which my speaking on that
Representative Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chair representative Lara so
it's would go at it right now if
you are if you to introduce
yourself please sure hi I'm Greg
frost said I am the director of
policy and legislative affairs
for the Public Education
Division it's my understanding
that the money is appropriated
to DFA because they are working
on on an integrated approach to
to this part to the problem of
mental health and behavior
health generally and and that
they are working across agencies
to support that effort.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chair so.
Of the let me in so I understand
this of the appropriation will
be allocated to DFA the DFA will
pre to to head for for for
implementation of.
Thank you that's all.
No that's all I have thank you
Representative thank thank you
Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative Eli please.
Thank.
Mr.
first question page two
paragraph.
Two one three.
So this will rent one is rumored
to provide it to me in a rural
or an area that provides some
privacy for students.
We need to release emotional and
behavioral stress by rest and
relax and so my question is
around this work privacy.
So I think of let's say a a high
school that has a fifteen
hundred kids and you've got one
room.
I don't I'm not sure how you
approximate privacy in that kind
of scenario can you.
Final detail around that.
Representative members of the
committee so in our work in the
task force and visiting schools
and talking with students around
the state there was a couple of
things that came up one was
that.
This students need to determine
how that space is going to look
within their school and so some
people had rooms and some people
had spaces and so obviously
spaces are not that private
the understanding was that
students could step out and go
into a room like the room in
Eldorado has
it's not completely private but
it has different spaces that
students can pick to go to to
self regulate and I think
another student talked about
this earlier from Albuquerque
high that if you just needed to
like on wind and and there's a
place where those fitted to
space you could draw there's a
place you can just check out and
you know close your eyes
so privacy and I'm not a hundred
percent sure that that it's
going to be
taking in the full definition of
the word but there's an
understanding when you go to
this room that kind of who you
see here you know it's it
remains confidential.
Mr chair and sighed I just.
Thank you maybe need to be lower
costs because there are some
legal ramifications in talk
about privacy
so at the maybe that's something
that for you folks to consider
as the bill moves for.
H. three I have a question
about.
lines eighteen and nineteen.
So this is saying what
application shall include for
the way I understand this is
application show clue these
items for districts that are
trying to apply for this kind of
funding and subparagraph B.
whether school personnel will be
given a salary differential for
staff and wellness room.
I have a little bit concerned Mr
chair because I worry about are
for school districts that are
already having a hard time
governed.
salary and if making this.
Requirement that whoever.
Whichever person staff this room
receives a salary differential
instead of that just being part
of their you know their their
everyday pay if that's going to
make this competitive for some
of our for school districts.
Mr chair Representative Lane I'm
sorry what is your question.
The Mr Chairman just wondering
if if this paragraph.
As a part of what application
shall include that they're going
to give a salary differential
for inhibiting are for school
districts from being competitive
for this.
Mr chair Representative Lane one
of the things that we looked at
was how we would staff these
rooms and absolutely included in
the rooms is an amount that
would be for person who would be
staffing it so that if you have
this teacher who is also
utilizing their skills because
they have those background and
skills in behavioral health
sociology and psychology that if
they are also staff in this room
that there would be a
supplemental that would be given
to them but it's all part of the
budget funding so the poor
schools are not going to be hurt
by that concept if that is
indeed what is the application
for making sure that it's
staffed.
Yeah I I understand that's.
I understand the intent that you
want there to be a seller
differential.
But I if this is a competitive
grant I don't I don't know how
many schools in apply to it but
if there's you know ninety eight
school districts and however
many schools within ninety eight
school districts and we're
talking about thousands of.
Of sight size of locations
and I just worry about.
A district having to cover a
salary differential in order to
be competitive for these grant
applications.
Page I.
and I think this is just more of
a call for us as a legislative
body Mr chair.
and I understand that this is a
pilot that work on this a pilot
program and we need to to
harvest data so to speak but I
also think that we need to be
careful as a body about.
Enacting additional reporting
requirements on schools because
that's what this this bill would
do and I'm not saying the data
would be valuable but I think we
need to be conscious each time
that we propose to do that.
To local schools.
Page six.
paragraph H. so I'm curious Mr
chair will why are we capping
the stove forty.
Public schools
if once this fund is in place
the the building student
resiliency Fund there's nothing
to preclude the the legislature
has appropriated is moving
forward by continue appropriate
in this fund and so I'm
wondering why within the
statutory framework would put
this artificial cap of forty.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative Blaine
when we looked at the how we
would create these pilot
programs one of the things we
looked at is making sure that
all thirty three additional all
thirty three counties were
considered with the school
districts within those counties
and then looking at the amount
of the appropriation that we
thought we would be able to
utilize as part of this program
and dividing that up between the
four of what trends within the
state that that was the amount
that we came up with and for the
purposes of a pilot program we
would be able to get
exceptional data with respect to
how this would play out in the
larger district you are
absolutely correct Mr chair
representative of the line the
legislature can certainly
appropriate more money and that
we can go much further than
forty but at a minimum
Representative I mean Mr chair
representative of laying we want
to make sure that there were at
least forty.
Mr I and I guess what I'm saying
is I'm not sure you can
accomplish all of that I think
it through through pad without
putting an artificial barrier in
statute and capping it at forty
and so let's say that in a year
to this program is wildly
successful now we're going to
come back in the minutes bill
because we think we've got some
pick this number that we thought
initially we could fund
I'm just not I'm I think you can
accomplish the same thing
without putting a hard number in
statute something to think think
about as the bill moves forward
whether you gain anything by
putting forty in their.
and then my last question Mr
chair program hi
I appreciate that there are
interim reports come into LFC
and LESC I think that's really
important the the issue I have
with this paragraph Mister chair
is there's no deadline for
reporting to LFC and LESC there
is a deadline reporting to the
governor's office at the end of
the the pilot program I would
recommend that you have in
statute a hard date and by which
this program must be reported to
L. E. S. C. in particular so
that we were we make sure we're
getting these annual reports as
we're building doing work during
the interim right now it's I I
think you could even argue it's
just one room for over the six
years there's nothing in the
statutory framework that would
preclude that from happening so
another thing to think about is
as you go for thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative so I
will say that we're on the floor
so members excuse but if you
keep your question short brief
please Representative Baca thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative my questions are
again going to be shortened to
the point so they're just of I
guess the question is first of
all is is stopping of this the
question that was asked is
is the is the allocation is it
we talked about differential but
as far as the salary for a
district Candace are be used for
that position.
Mr Chairman.
You
Mr chairman members of the
committee representative Baca
the answer is yes.
and thank you Mr chairman also
the depending upon who we have
in there I believe that there
should be a minimum amount of
training or specific training to
handle these emotional need
whatever that train I'm not a
I'm not a psychologist or a
counselor social worker but if
I'm going to be in their work
students are
Needing to decompress or
otherwise it would be D.
escalation training whether be
some of the types of training I
think that it should be more
than just putting a educational
assistant or a security guard in
there because of the nature of
what maker Mr chairman Mr chair
members of the committee
representative Baca the concept
for these mental health rooms
would not just for the security
guard or somebody who doesn't
have the training in their one
of the bigger concepts is
looking at how this really how
these rooms are staffed
utilizing interns from our
colleges who are studying
behavioral health sociology
psychology so that that only
what they get the aspect of
having an internship reporting
to someone who is licensed with
respect to the the work that
they're doing it would be a win
win situation we would be able
to help our students who are in
college with in the state of New
Mexico also hoping Mr chair
Representative members of the
committee representative Baca
that those individuals once they
graduate they would stay here in
our state so that's the bigger
picture I just wanted to make
sure that it that everyone
understood that.
It thank you Mr chairman and I
guess when you talk I'm all
about in terms I mean I think
that's a great opportunity to
grow up to me for us to give
them experiences but you also
talk about the the back on the
confidentiality and also
training in liability if in fact
there is an incident so you and
I'm just Mr chairman and
representative I just know that
we need to have some specific
criteria at a minimum okay they
can go above and beyond that but
we need to have somebody make
sure things are place sold for
That's good my last the point as
far as no you did say five
million dollars appropriation
and that includes two FTEs at
the at PED is that correct or
overseers of this I saw the two
at the.
Is that correct Mr chairman
members of the committee
Representative Baca that was one
of the suggestions is that in
order to manage this whole
program and process that there
be FTEs involved to is
recommended I also think one
person could do the job frankly
so that that with that came that
came through the the committee
Mr chairman so the would this
person be the one responsible
for reviewing the applications
for the school districts end is
each allocation the same in
other words if I have five
million dollars and I divide
that by forty is that an equal
amount that every school or very
you know if we determines what
will be given to every school my
understanding and I'm gonna let
Representative heard an answer
the second half that question
but PED would oversee it there
there was members of the task
force that would want to be
involved in this process going
forward that would have to be a
like any kind of RFP process
there would have to be multiple
stakeholders involved in a in a
rubric in terms of you know what
makes an acceptable application
and what doesn't all those
details have been talked about
but not actually completely
worked out we have talked about
some of the most important
things like Representative
representation statewide state
building student lad is a really
important aspect and as far as
how the money is divided out I
can't I can't speak to that but
I would I would defer to
Representative founded in thank
you my questions so this would
be on a reimbursement basis okay
so a district up from the cost
of these.
And then later go through
reimbursement process which
again for some district is kind
of problematic if the funds are
not readily available at the
inception of this program then
we actually some districts may
be at a struggle did with
difficulty Representative Greg
if you have to use it up there
if you have something that.
Mr chair representative Baca
members of the committee you
it's my understanding that
you're exactly right that this
would be below the line funding
and it would go out and
reimbursement basic based
basically to districts and so
forth for some could be
problematic yes.
Mr chairman I have no the
further questions thank you.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Representative over a.
At one is yes thank you at Mr
chair representative thank you
for bringing this the savabeel
specially like the name really
misses for caecilians
I have to make to this building
for students on their own and
most of the time we know the
resources that they need and no
in the best path I have a quorum
concern that has been shared
over so I'd seen some
initiatives that are similar to
these and I think what would
make a difference is a people
around those rooms
sometimes because of the lack of
staff is it is just another
place to be and and that's
something that I it seems to me
to be debate the the leading up
to everybody deciding who will
be the state in the rooms and
that's something that the I
would be really interested in
building stuff with that the
people who is
who has the resources the budget
resources that's one of our
consider the other one is do we
have a base line to be able I I
know that is that I think that
is going to be collected but if
we have like that the students.
The company like the school was
doing like this previous years
but the same group of students
how are they responding after
being part of these are thank
you thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative.
Cool I just want to explain that
one of the things with respect
to this piece of legislation and
and I would like to remind
everyone we still have the
opportunity to create rules that
will also be more definitive
with what will be expected and
carried out with respect to this
with respect to this legislation
so I bring that to you and that
rulemaking process is always
available every single time that
we implement the statue and it
will be implemented with respect
to this one and with respect to
making sure that no student is
ever in that room alone that is
incredibly important that was
the number one item that we
looked at when we looked at what
was happening at Eldorado high
school Mr chair members of the
committee Representative it is
important and somewhat will be
staff there every single time
that room is open and the room
is expected to be open all day
so we have thought through those
items and that when we talk
about the rules and how that
will be implemented absolutely
those items will be carried out
thank you.
Great thank you of so first
primates and representative for
about coming as Nixon list has
questions however Representative
Ezzell has some guests in the
audience issues like to
introduce very quickly.
Mr chairman members of the
committee those of you that are
here in the audience in person
those that are at home watching
the isn't I have one of the best
classes that have ever been up
here visiting me from my
particular area analysts see for
assault there.
I'm looking around at all the
shown faces that are out there
but I need to see for their
advisers are there we go.
If you Mr chairman if you will
allow me I would like to have
them come forward introduce
themselves and tell you in very
should briefly by their here
right please our advisors
welcome.
And I think it's a group of
about six twenty five young
people young people yes so good
morning Committee more insurance
thank you for for having a so
Madam Gomes I'm the assistant
principal for all high school
Roswell New Mexico and Russell
money us.
Along with their students so the
broader CTE teacher Jordan about
everything.
Hello Larry R..
And they have found out Reese is
our mess communications feature
about Mr Justin Armstrong he is
power FFA ag teacher.
You Mr hall's board meant is our
FFA ag committee constructors
some of the introduce their
students that we got to bring
down the day for sixty days a
year round.
Please welcome.
Please if you do this briefly
were in the middle of debate.
So I had.
For students here well I have
several Alicea Anya then we
elevate.
Katie Katie Holly and they
haven't heard it all right
welcome.
I have questions as well I have
created rights I'm in the Stacy
and I have asked that and we're
just arrests welcome you.
I have four sisters well I have
Mister Roger agrees misstatement
Dawson Mr.
It is number.
I wrote I again came over a this
is leave a door you can still
election brewer and.
Johnny Hernandez thank you all
right welcome you.
Thank you Sir thank you
Representative yes thank you all
for being here hopefully you're
able to stick around and see how
the process unfolds here
Representative Mr chairman
members of the committee I
thought is very advantageous
that they sent me the text when
they did because they were right
outside the home right we're in
education nice so thank you all
very much for being here.
Our.
All right Representative Roybal
Caballero back to debate on the
bill thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative I just I was
not in the room when you begin
your presentation so just for
clarification I I understand
it's a pilot project which will
demonstrate and answer probably
all of the questions that we've
had that's the purpose of a
pilot project and so I also
understand that we're attempting
to Mr chair institutionalize
approaches that will be
responding to the social
economic stresses that our
children are faced with and so
this is an incredibly important
projects so will the local
districts be the responsible
parties to implement these
projects that's the part I think
I'm I've missed.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Roybal
Caballero the answer is yes we
could not come up with one size
fits all of one item fix all is
absolutely important that east
district implements its own plan
and that they include students
and that those voices are heard
as part of that plan thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative I thought that
would be the case that the most
logical in the final point I I
wanted to make and the impact of
the importance of I am a former
special it high school teacher
I'm also a former clinical
social worker and so I've won
those hats and I understand how
important it is to have Mr chair
on site work experience
internships available to order
university students in their
third and fourth year and then
those college students that are
in their second year on in the
end need to be on site and I
think this would be a great
opportunity for them to be able
to add to their
educational and professional
development as they pursue their
degrees and these are supervised
Mr chair and representative
supervised positions by the
faculty that are training and
educating the students and so
that's the beauty of the court
the collaboration between the
institutions in this plant and
this put the school districts in
this pilot projects all thank
you for this and thank you for
giving those students the
opportunity to do their on site
training thank you and also
provide I mean Mr chair the
supervision it's needed as
outlined in the file thank you.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill I think
everybody here supports the
concept I do think there's a few
minor amendments that would make
it more clear Representative
Lane mentioned other to part of
when these reports the interment
ports are due it's not really
clear my questions about
staffing it.
The first says that two hundred
twenty thousand is used for to
Person on Mr chairman and and
Leslie I mean I'm thinking who's
doing all the reporting the
collating we we have about
operating the fund but also it's
it's even at the simple blue
level it requires
you know people can properly do
the reporting
So I'm of the opinion that.
We like to send bills out of
here that are just as perfect as
possible this is nearly perfect
but I personally think that it
needs a little bit of tweaking
so that what we send out of will
do better and inappropriate for
the next committee
appropriations.
Yes yes yes Mr chair I do have a
question about that is there
already a line item in probation
or is this a new request.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Garrett
we've had several conversations
with PED and with other
organise station no educational
entities and so the funding is
actually can be obtained through
funding sources that are already
have been allocated and
appropriated for example if you
look at the at risk program
better and that is in every
single school some of the
aspects of funding can be
obtained from there so we've
been talking about areas where
it could be obtained without
creating new funding.
Thank you for that answer
Help.
That's my comments that I.
Yes Mr chairman that's my point
I I do think we should tweak it
before we send it out
Representative editor.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative bring this bill
forward I I totally get the
intent I'm I too am worried
about kind of some of the
liability issues involved here
you know if you have student
interns if you are schools make
mistakes all the time when it
comes to handling kids that are
just having a out of control
enrollment and and we all
struggle with this we all
struggle with how and they
called the police in too soon at
at things can go haywire very
quickly I guess that's that's
what I'm worried about even
though I know this is set up to
calm everybody down and I think
it's a great idea I I think you
need to devote some money to the
in this legislation to how
you're going to.
We the services with that with
the real issues with liability I
I I think that's a huge issue in
this legislation and I think
it's a brilliant idea I've seen
a working tasks you know that
Representative say it's a it's a
good idea when you can do it but
I think I think it I think the
liability issues are huge for
schools invented in this
legislation that's all I have to
say thank you and maybe you've
already answered that line don't
realize it I should ask the
question have you have you
talked to people about how you
would then you know we've.
Legal issues with these with
different levels of people
providing services.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Herrera
one of the things that we looked
at is what would be the
liability if this room was not
there and I think the liability
would be even be greater because
we do we've seen the evidence of
it all we have to do is look at
what happened recently with the
six year old took a gun to
school inside this tier so what
we've had lots and lots of
conversations with students and
with our teachers and with
health professionals if there is
a place for students to go madam
chair Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Herrera
been there is a place for them
to have someone to talk to and
to express how they're feeling a
desperate are emotionally talent
so yes there will be some aspect
of what we're looking at but the
people that we put in in the
rooms are people who are who
will be well qualified to
address and to look at the
incidences that are brought in
every single room so I don't see
this Mr chair members of the
committee representative data
outside of any aspect of the
insurance and liability but the
schools already possess.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you madam.
Thank you I don't see any others
with questions but I do agree
with Representative Garrett that
if we can tighten up some of the
language education is the only
substantive committee that this
bill goes in we know that the
finance in Appropriations
Committee generally looks that
are the dollars there yes or no
and they checked their box
but I would like to see the
issues of press privacy explored
I'm in the use of that language
since we're going back and will
will roll the bill
the annual reports of the
reporting because I I look at
the language and it does say in
our own but I think if we put
annual report something akin to
being able to do that we can get
it on a yearly basis or every
other year that the pilot is
available and then
The questions about potential
How the money is going to flow
specifically I think was another
one that Representative Baca had
brought out but if we could just
shore this up this is the one
substantive committee we're
still pretty early in the
session to get these changes
going and as soon as you do
please bring them to you our
committee assistant and we can
get those distributed on and
then heard as soon as possible.
But with that will roll the bill
for now we'll bring it back this
is certainly not the last time
we'll hear it but yeah I think
everybody's on board with the
idea and certainly sounds very
supportive of it we just want to
button it up make sure it's good
to go to the next committee.
With that Representative.
Do you have any questions final
thoughts.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for your insights and
improvements for the legislation
course thank you all so much so
we will meet again eight thirty
on Wednesday thank you all all
actually before I address house
bill one forty six I've been
asked to rule indefinitely so
actually can we get a tabling
motion.
The table
right so we have a tabling
motion on house bill one forty
six is there any opposition to
the table.
Total stay here in our
committee.
Thank you all right so now we
will adjourn eight thirty
Wednesday morning thank you
everybody.
