Short.
Yeah.
With.
Senate.
This morning and hopefully we'll
have a chance to do that.
Yeah.
And your director for the body
at large to support you with
education.
Have a pretty illustrious team
up at the table
with me that are we will be
talking through the education.
I'll let them introduce
themselves and then i'll lead
us.
Good morning everyone thank you
for having me here today my name
is.
Pleasure to be here today to be
able to talk about our most
important part of the state
which is our students across
mexico I I also have a wonderful
team at pad and really.
I do want to just point out just
for a moment we do have a four
house today.
You want to point out.
Actually people that are
becoming teachers right now
their students they're working
to school districts if you could
just stand up real quick so that
they can see who are.
Education.
Mister chair my name is sunny
luwandi legislative finance
committee analysts for.
The.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee i'm
gregory frosted i'm assistant
secretary of education it is
wonderful to see you all in the
pledge of.
At what i'm going to do is
actually just highlight two
things in the education annual
report before I move forward
with the packet we're gonna be
following along on a packet th.
But we will reference this book
and it's for your perview and
your reference there's two parts
of this I already spoke about it
at large at the lesc that
there's two parts to the book
both the narrative around all of
the work that was done
on behalf of the lesc in the
research and study that went on
an interim and then the second
half is a data reference guide
and that is the part that is
actually very helpful for you
and your constituents two pages
that i'm gonna start with today
the first is page two in the
annual report.
Yeah.
On page two you'll see a
framework that is the vision set
forward by you all as a
committee to help transform
education in new mexico.
The allianc in its work over the
past two years the leadership of
both chairs over the past two
years and the members of the
less have set forward a
framework that includes four
components
a focus on an educator eco
system.
Developing recruiting retention
incentivising rigorous educator
prep programs
having accountability in those
areas investing and professional
development excellent school and
district leadership and
clarifying expectations by
investing in the pipeline for
its answery support staff.
The second is then focusing on
academic design early literacy
strong mathematics education
secondary and middle school
redesign career technical
education and workplace learning
cultural and glass
linguistically responsive
education that are line to new
mexico's education acts
bilingual multilingual education
systems that are world class
then strong systems of
intervention connected to
statewide ms and support for
strongly students and students
with disabilities the third
component of that framework is
the whole child education
systemic support system and that
include social emotional
learning at risk supports
extended time intervention
programming high dosage tutoring
community school transformation
or models fine arts fine and
performing arts I should say and
physical and health education
and last but not least
supporting over arching systems
that
bracket the education system at
large and those are things like
a world class date and
accountability system
understanding improving the
school funding formula improving
and clarifying rules and
responsibilities among school
districts and state governance
and insuring capable hourly
school buildings school safety
technology and transportation
are fundamentally supported and
provide access
reason I wanted to reference
that as I think that will
provide a solid foundation for
all of the budgets that are
presented here for you today
keep that in mind as your vision
as a legislature
the other page I want a
reference that where you know
it's here we will not be working
off of it today but it's also
here for you to just have is
page one thirty five and that is
actually your high level summary
so it's there for you to
reference.
With that i'm gonna move to the
packet.
And what i'll do is all go
section by section and all turn
it over all start lead and then
alternate over to mr lou from
the finance committee and I
think mr priced ad.
From the public education
department and then wrap it up
by having the secretary have an
opportunity to talk about the
vision from the public education
departme.
Your likely see some alignment
in terms of the vision of the
department and the vision of the
legislature set forward I just
spoke about so it's really at
your discretion here to think
about those things in those
recommendations.
First thing that i'm going to do
is go through the first largely
the first half of the public
school support.
Heart
or excel sheet I should say and
i'm gonna speak a little bit
about how this is read
I may review this again
representative at a hon or maybe
we can meet with her
because we wanted to introduce
her to some of the hearts of
components of reading this but
the very top you'll see prior
year program cost.
And the total recommendation for
each of the agencies are less
the executive and the lfc.
You'll see that the total there
is a similar because that's our
prior year
operating budget
so what i'm going to move down
to i'm just gonna highlight a
few and then alturn it over to
sunny in terms of the less sea
budget recommendation three
things I want to point out for
you that are significant and
different the first is on line
thirteen you'll note there that
at the aliec recommended a six
percent increase for state
personnel six percent average
you also know online fourteen
that the less sea recommended
and increase that a twenty four
close to twenty five million
dollars to support raising the
minimum salary for all school
personnel to thirty thousand
dollars and that's a minimum
salary for their lowest paid
employees and.
And last month not least provide
turn it over to mr lewis I want
to point out row or line twenty
seven and that is thirty million
dollars to support educational
reform or transf.
Those are things like clear
technical education supporting
existing requirements and
statute to support mentorship
for school districts early
literacy and community schools
that is flexible dollars for
school districts to actually
employ use and leverage those
dollars to innovate.
Mister.
A key direct money meant so the
only thing I really wanted to
highlight from the c
recommendation is that
once again the house you
recommendation.
That split into two sections one
being a flat.
I like the recommendation.
In the action.
Sixty million dollars in the
also recommendation recurring
for s e g this is the sort of
back fill that sixty million
dollar education reform.
Mister chairman and I will just
point out a couple of lines as
well one that we are concerned
about is line twenty insurance
at forty one thousand dollars at
forty one million dollars we
want to.
Pay for increase.
That is that cost is not shifted
to the schools there are also a
couple of other requirements
that the agency wants to fund in
section four which is a feminine
hygiene products last year there
was
three million set aside for that
one million was from the perfect
we're trying.
One million that is there and
also universal gifted screening
there is a new requirement mist.
And we are asking for one point
five.
As well at six and a half
million that would not fully
fund pe at last year's
at last year's cost we would
have need twenty million.
Oh sorry and I apologize that is
my.
Without mister chairman err
couple things to wrap up this
first part which is the state
equalization guarantee that
flows out to the school
districts first is you'll know
significant differences in
salary
from six percent four percent
and three percent as well as a
significant difference in line
fifteen and that is to support
the upticken key plus um and the
school calendar.
The.
At the bottom line thirty three
you're really note the
differences they are in terms of
the different approaches from
lfc and the executive in the
budget that would go to school
districts the bottom line being
all fairly similar just above
four point million
but with some differences that
less got eight point seven
percent change in the operating.
Executive is a six point six
increase to the school districts
and then the lfc at five point
four percent increase.
With that mister chairman we're
going to move on to categorical
starts at the very bottom of
that page and then.
For most traditional part of
categorical is transportation so
you'll note there at the bottom
of the page online eight thirty
eight the tabling maintenance
and operations that goes to
support school districts with
transportation there are some
differences in the local similar
the executive is total of one
point one mill one hundred and
twenty eight million dollars.
However
you'll note there that that
increase in the executive is.
See in the.
Broken out so going on to the
next page so.
Rental.
Ab and then you'll see average
salary increase for bus drivers
transportation.
You're not in the eliosi wreck.
There's a couple of things there
really paying attention to the
minimum salary increase or again
the lowest paid employees and
how that would make a difference
in terms of bus drivers
and then there's two lines one
to increase adequacy and one to
remove the population density
factor um.
This was due to the good work of
one of the alliance to learn
seat him but though he did a
pretty expensive steady over
the.
Adequacy with their operating
budgets were in the difference
that
so these dollars amounts that
you see in the lec
recommendation have to do with
that difference we particularly
heard from rule and small
districts and the amount of
money.
And that density factor and how
it might impact them so we
wanted to make sure that it was
if it was taken out it would
account for those differences.
Direct me
the only thing that I wanted to
highlight is once again line
forty six the population instead
of factor for the LFC.
Given that that.
The ideas.
I do want to move back down to
line fifty three and fifty four
I just did not a difference here
if you look at that executive
column we've tried to point out
other parts.
Where the executive has a
recommendation for this but it's
just.
Help you navigate that but if
you need more clarity.
At the lect lfc recommendatio.
You'll find th.
And.
There's there's not much else to
add for this section
other than.
The amount that we are asking
for in the other s.
And we're all in a l.
Yeah.
The.
We'll move on to.
The r.
Is
what before I do i'll just note
there that when you look at the
total of the seg including the
categorical the total in terms
of public school support on line
sixty those are
the actual percent increases to
change and upbeat.
Summarizing or
both.
Starting online sixty one we're
going to talk quickly about
recurring dollars that go below
the line to the public education
department to support particular
initiatives other than the race
of the regional education co
cooperatives which function is
arm of the public education
department
you'll note that there's a
slight increase there.
On the least sea r.
Rac is.
For a few years now that they'd
like increased support they
support rule small districts
with answers are staff.
And given
what we've found in the study
around special education we feel
like this is very needed.
Um
line sixty eight three you'll
note that there's a lot of
similarity all of us really
noting the success and continued
support around early literacy
a lot of.
Leader professional development
teacher professional development
continuing to support grads
advance placement and I be tests
for students across new mexico
difference is gonna be found in
line sixty eight
and sixty nine which we can talk
about and a little bit and
seventy the sixty eight you'll
note that the lesc has a
recommendation for eight million
dollars.
Science math given the status of
math education in new mexico
although you will find some
recommendations as mister noted
from the executive as as well as
the left seat and other parts of
the budget
the less se wanted to signal
that this type of funding
should.
Initiatives and mathematics
education.
Universal school meals we mister
chairman I might encourage you
to have a discussion about that
after this because I think
there's some good information
that we all have to share with
you there
and then parody for fire the
five twenty certificate holders.
Priority is in state law that
those educators be paid as level
one educator and this was
something that the actual the
executive and the ped wrap
forward last year there was
intention in filing on
multicultural education in that
and the amount of money that was
sent last year that was not.
With that.
After.
Uhm mister chair that the one
thing that I did want to point
out again is universal renewals
universal school meals which is
line sixty nine and the agency
request is significantly higher
than either the less sea or lfc
and we are confident that it
will be close to forty.
And we want to make sure that
this statutory requirement for
the schools to provide free
meals that that car.
Mr chairman
next to page three.
Note there on line eighty three
the percent change in operating
budget.
Also I think this I skipped over
the public education department
which is at the bottom of page
two so if you have any questions
I believe for the secretary.
But i'm in a move forward with
the section five six seven and
other non rec.
Eighty four on page three.
I'll start by pointing out a few
things and then i'll turn it
over to mister lu to point out a
few things and then I think we
have spent some time or mister
frostad you'll know in this
section that there is quite a
few
asks and the executive side the
are not reflected on either the
less you or the last sea
recommendation.
Uh.
The three things that I am going
to point out that I think are.
Really important.
That framework that is in the
beginning of your annual report
with the vision of the less sea
and that ab.
The.
Are the following
the first is lines ninety.
One.
And the second r nine ninety
two.
And ninety.
In lines ninety ninety one and
ninety two comprehensively
together are forty six.
Point two million dollars and
that is the recommendation of
the elian sea to support.
Secondary school initiatives
career technical education work
based learning internships and a
career development success pilot
that was endorsed by the less to
incentive I schools with
credentials for students it when
they earn a credential a CTE
credential say they are in a
credential on flabarterme
credential in
welding.
A credential in
um something that's related to
an it credential so once
students graduate high school
with this credential that money.
Next year based on those amount
of credentials it's a I think of
really exciting pilot because an
incentivisers what we hope to
see rather than just simply
punishing the less sea endorses
this is help being held by
senator brand but it promotes
career technical education and a
very positive way.
Those together that forty six
point two million you'll know is
going to be similar to the
total.
Altogether all the.
Of the executive recommendation
and very important given I think
the membership of the lesser as
well as I think other members
cross the legislative body.
A second thing that I would say
is on row ninety three and
that's fifteen million dollars
to support attendance.
Tendence is one of the most a a
greatest issues that were facing
as a state attendance issues and
chronic absenteeism if there's
one th.
Fund er tending to clerk's great
evidence based programming
related to attendance there are
some things that are happening
this year but not a lot and we
know that's one of the things
that superintendents are very
much struggling with.
You'll know a couple of other
things as well turned over to mr
lu because there's a lot of
similarity and other.
Thank you director warrants I
just wanted to re emphasize that
this block right here.
Appropriations and one time
section five appropriations
there'll be other state funds
that are involved in this.
Just two things I wanted to
highlight line eighty six the
olives you recommendation
includes fifty million for a
tribal education trust fun do
you know that this appropriation
is contention on an act.
You also see if the matter
throughout the end of.
As much.
Dragged out over a longer.
The other thing i'd like to
point out
ninety seven.
A big different.
This is primarily to help the
department with programming and.
The.
There are as we mentioned this
is where the biggest differences
in the budgets come into.
And a a couple of key items that
the executive is recommending
funding include the education
acts
the black education act of line
ninety nine and the hispanic
education act line one hundred
and the billing go m.
The indian education act on a
one.
Is recommended for.
I went to point out the
supplemental request that the
executive is seeking for two
different areas of k twelve plus
supplemental in mind one ten.
Because professional development
days now count toward calendar
days we have seen a.
And we are at.
Keep twelve.
Their supplemental that we are
at.
That is.
This year
to fund the the free school
lunch program.
And if if we don't.
Get the.
There will be cost shifting onto
scores.
The.
If we.
There are a number of clinical
practice pieces which are
grouped together in the
lfc budget and educator fellows
is one of those.
All all together we anticipate
being short about eight million
dollars in that area and a week
call that out particularly here
for the twenty.
For educator fellows and.
The other two that I wanted to
point out or line one twenty
nine.
And line one twenty eight.
And those are funds that the
agency uses for line
twenty nine school improvement
and transformation those are
ongoing efforts at the e.
Our highly respected.
And teach your leaders as well.
Yeah.
To take those best practices
that are identified and really
implement them across the sta.
Thank you mister chair
you'll know on line one forty
three the total the subtor nine
recurring.
Recommendations for the less see
the executive and lfc and once
again i'm.
That was very important these
are recommendations that are non
recurring that would come from
the general fund we're gonna
talk about other state funds
next but these are general funds
non recurring recommendations so
you'll note the differences in
each of those.
We're going to talk about in
terms of other state funds is
the public education reform fund
and note about the public
education reform fund this fund
exists
because what it was originally
created for
is to the sort of a savings
account for funds that were not
used with key five plus or
extended learning time
programming so when those
programs came into being an
given that there was not a
uptake that.
The legislature so hoped for in
terms of extended learning time
programming and or key five plus
those funds were then put into a
part of the public education
reform fund or created for that
purpose and those dollars are
then leveraged or used for other
initiatives that could pill it
or
use for the public education
department to use in terms of
experimenting and or
designing things to transform
education.
That being said there's really
only about fifty five million
dollars left in that public
education or foreign fund so
you'll know actually on one
seventy line one seventy that
all of the recommendations are
going to total around that
amount.
And that's essentially taking
the public education reform fund
to zero balance we don't think
it's going to be leveraged you
any more it could be in other
ways but the influx of dollars
that went to it what came from k
twelve plus or extended learning
time.
That being said.
The purpose of this is to pilot
funding for education
initiatives so you'll note there
historically that things
are put there to that purpose
and the first of those is a
really great pilot that we have
going on right now called the
family income index online one
forty five you'll note some
differences
I I will say that there is a
total amount that the executive
is recommending that is similar
to the less sea recommendation
for family income index they
just have it divided up in two
different places I believe the
less sea recommendation is
fifteen million.
What i'm going to skip to is
actually.
Line one fifty two.
Here is where you will see some
similarities among the lesd and
the lfc around educator clinical
practice really supporting the
educator recruitment retention
line one fifty three in
particular is important the is
to support teacher residency
pilots on behalf of the let's
see what we did is recommend
thirty million dollars that
could be divided up as a public
education department saw fit and
depending on the numbers of
students or educator candidates
were appropriate to support both
teacher residency programs and
educator fellows.
So we took this idea of about
fifteen million to support
teacher residents and fifteen
million to support educator
fellows as you know there are
many educator fellows across the
state it's extremely successful
it's a wonderful program that
many school districts are
leveraging.
You don't know there that the
lfc has a recommendation of.
Just under fifteen million
dollars and that is based on
some numbers that we think are
successful and continuing to
support teacher residency
programs.
You'll note there that we were
very similar with the others in
terms of paid student teaching
as well as principle residency
pilot programs.
With that mr chairman internet
over to mister lu.
Thank you directly or immense.
And one thing that I do want to
note that's different in the
olives your recommendations
that.
If you look at the sub total
online one fifty six for all of
educator clinical practice this
appropriation is going actually
if much further down.
In your spreadsheet to the very
less line one ninety five
those.
Public education reform fund
dollars in the else you recomme.
The expendable trust find.
To get a total of about eighty
million dollars.
The.
The idea behind this find as you
might have already heard is to
make now money future money
spreading out the dollars for
four years.
Agencies have time to implement
research any violate whether
these initiat.
And I think that this is very
important given that.
You know what I was looking back
at two thousand and seventeen
when there was the last major
budge.
And today you're seeing a whole
list of over fifty requests
coming from the department and
are not recurring way this is
important bec.
As we start to see that revenue
picture decline now which
initiatives should be added into
the recurring budget because
they have recurring cars.
Other than
some scattered items that start
around line one seventy one and
these are typically.
Items that are recommended that
come from other locations other
state.
So they are either interagency
transfers or.
Items that are we recommend you
funds through other m.
The first then is just to
explain what this is line one
seventy two a national board
certification scholarship fund
there is in existence of fund to
support national board
certifications and a program
that the public education
department runs its very
successful that supports
educators getting an achieving
their national boards and so the
legislature traditionally
appropriates are from that fund
every year so that money can go
to the public education
department to run that program
and this is simply doing that we
all recommend that that's a
great program you have a healthy
funds there that's actually
supporting that so an easy one
to explain in terms of all of
these.
But you'll also note some
differences particularly in the
less serac erm some strong
recommendations that were made
over the interim in relation to
the work in the study that was
done by the on behalf of the
committee and in speaking with
many superintendents and
constituents that we visited
across the state.
Erm particularly you'll see
continued support for the school
safety summit on line one
seventy six.
And the psco f in parentheses
there means recommending that it
would come from the public
school capital outlay fund.
But that was a very successful
event with that we should
continue to support that.
You're also see there are in
terms of.
Line.
One eighty four continued
support
for infrastructure around career
technical education pre k
maintenance er and that's about
sixty five million dollars also
coming from the public school
capital outlay fund
last but not least you'll see
and one eighty nine
er continuing to support
community school initiatives of
the less sea recommended that.
Six million dollars be matched
with another four million
dollars from the general fund in
non occurring dollars and this
was because there actually is a
balance in the community school
fund so for you to reappropriate
and pull that money for a total
of ten million dollars to
support community schools.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you drive to warrant.
The only thing I wanted to
highlight here is that online
one eighty three.
From the thirty million dollars.
Your recommendation includes
three million here for planning
and design for the facility.
And then also online.
One eighty seven and one eighty
eight the lfc pulls from.
Turned over to.
Mr chairman I believe i'm going
to turn it over to
mrperiod lude to finish because
the lfc is the only agency right
now that hasn't recommendation
around section nine which is a
different part of house or two
traditionally so
so last page six nine one six
ninety two.
Thank you drive to arm itself
lines one ninety two to one
ninety six are part of the gate
fund the expendable trust find
you might have heard a call the
grill find these appropriations
are to be spread out over four
years so you can if you divide
them evenly that'll be the
distribution.
Three major initiatives from
this fund which include steam
and cte initiatives special
education differentials
essentially trying to provide in
incentive for educators to go
into the classroom where we have
chronic vacancies and of course
the educator clinical practice
which will give the department
flexibility to pilot various
initiat.
Happier to answer more questions
about that if you have any
questions the only other thing I
would add is this one is ask.
With that mister chairman will
turn it over to you all for
questions or actually.
Miss chair members of the
committee both senate and house
thank you again for having this
unity I just want to take a few
minutes to talk about everything
you just hurt.
I've been able to have many.
I'm moving forward our number
one.
We also want to be able to
improve special education
services we have.
We are moving faster.
Course we want to recame recruit
and develop excellent teachers
and school leaders we all know
that there is a need for more
cash into.
That we also have.
Course all this work.
The moment communi.
And that we have many examples.
Some pretty amazing things were
double.
To do all this we need to be
able to measure what we're doing
making sure that.
That are allocated from you all
is as legislators to the agency
and making sure we continue to
make good decisions that
requires.
Accountability building systems
when it comes to data so we do
have data projects so we want to
be able to finish out so that
one it is easier to be able to.
And the course we want to make
sure that we are promoting
student health well being and.
Students to be able to come to
school.
Very quickly just something i'm
really happy about is that we it
is important for us to be able
to be staffed at the public
education department to be able
to do the work I working with
schools and school districts you
know my twenty seven.
I've never been able to see.
We have we're down to seventeen.
That's really in heard of and I
wanted.
People to come in so that we can
do the work with school.
When i've done though we need to
continue to be able to film
those positions
one is I want to kind of just
step point out.
Have good response to.
We are this second quarter have
met her goal of being an average
of thirty days and very excited
abo.
I've made some great strides and
making sure our fi.
This is going to help us.
Those are far reached.
Also i'm really excited because
we of course we.
An albuquerque analyst crucial's
office we have close to you a
hundred staff at the albuquerque
office and about a dozen staff
at the last cruise.
Of course he heard me talk about
structure literacy we have a
goal this summer of working with
ten thousand students across the
new mexico every corner of new
mexico to be able to go in and
work with them with structured
literacy.
This is been proven over
entirely time again to be the
game changed that we need if we
can have students become
confident competent readers at
the grade level is going to have
a posi.
Within their education but it's
also going to have a benefit for
them for the entire lives this
can also be.
Again we're looking at ten
thousand students this summer we
want to be able to have a very
small ratio of one to four so be
looking at hiring educators from
every district across.
In this room we talked about
educator fellows.
Um teacher prep programs we need
every one of them to be able to
come in and support us in this
effort with that we're going to
need to but two.
This work with looking at
looking i'm very excited about.
We're also looking at fifteen
million to continue on with our
letters train we've been able to
train kinder first second third
we're doing fourth grade this
year we want to build around
that out next year with our
fifth grade teachers.
That will be able to round this
out with letters training at the
elementary level we also want to
do a quick jump start for our
middle school teachers this is
part of that idea around the
middle school redesign making
sure that all all of us are
reading teachers we are kind of
getting away from that notion
that first we learn to read and
then we reach a learn we are
always learning how to read even
as a dots we continue to try to
get better what read introduce
ourselves to do you types of
genre and text and this is what
we want to do at the middle
school level and one fell sweep.
We're also asking for sixteen
million for sally differentials
I I i'm going to point out
special education but this could
actually be any area that would
be hard to fill in your area
like matt.
But our highest need across the
state new mexico in our special
education teachers we want to be
all the incentivised two groups
really one is those that are in
teacher prep programs to want to
be.
The other is we have a number of
special education license
teachers that are in the regular
clashroom we want to build a
entitlement to be able to come
back.
We're also asking for six
million for other special
education initials the number
one being and this I think we
have some really wonderful
consensus around this we have in
the school districts we have a
hundred charters that really
means we have about a hundr.
I myself in the parent also and
I have a daughter that has an ip
and even in my place of
privilege I have a hard time
sometimes knowing exactly what's
in that I p what resources are
available and what's coming next
from my daughter we want to make
sure that this is go.
For every parent.
And not only the performs that
we fill out the plan that we put
together but also support in the
actual support that happens with
in the individualized education
plan structure and the committee
and the supports that come
afterwards how.
We are already doing that work
with districts crossed to mexico
I am going to be very excited to
share with you very soon the
results of that work.
But also being able to go out
and work directly in those
districts right now we do much
of our work from channel f.
We can go into th.
Support those districts in what
they specifically need so
whether you're in science
whether you're in albuquerque
where they're here in comado or
animals we want to be able to go
in and support you whether it be
with professional development
with us a special education
programming anything that.
The.
Course we want to be able to
retain recruit and develop
teachers and school leaders were
asking for ninety four point
five million for salary
increases will be a.
Of course you can see we've got
a number of educator fellows in
the room today this is many
wildly successful program
between educator fellows teacher
residencies and painstood and
teachers we have over one
thousand one hundred and forty
seven preserves teachers in
program right now a number of
them and specific our educator
fellows have already started to
graduate that needs to be
programs alone could solve our.
So I am asking that we fully
find it these programs because
we do have those one thousand
one hundred forty seven
individuals in program right now
working in schools and i'll tell
you when I was when I first
became a teacher it took me
years to act.
These teachers now.
Getting that experience now so
when they get their own
classroom they are able to role
and be successful year one day
one are very excited we've
already got a number of stories
of these individuals going into
classrooms.
The.
We've got to two million for
principle council social
we need to be able to look at
our bench when it comes to these
three areas this is even a more
tight bench that we have we
don't have enough people to be
able to fill these positions I
should again two million for
teacher council and.
Nor asking for a half a million
for the where we're calling the
educator education is calling
media campaign this is for us to
be able to go out and recruit
teachers from other states we're
actually doing some of this work
now I in florida arizona if you
want to be a teacher.
We've had some success doing
this want to be at be able to
continue to do that to get those
teachers from across the country
to come to new mexico.
You're asking course for
improvement structure
one of the things that I have
been able to have experiences
with is k twelve plus in fact it
has a superintendent light
sometime was the outlayer with k
twelve plus I fully went in with
this did this in roswell we had
dramatic positive changes in
roswell and a very short amount
of time that the same thing and
demine.
We went from last place worst
district scoring wise for a
litter s.
In a few short years we were
able to.
And we did some a lot of the
same working loss crucis working
with some of the highest.
And.
We did that in a very short
amount of time we are out
patient most othe.
I do want to continue to support
key twelve press a plus funding
we're asking for a hundred one
million because we do have seen
an up to this year we want to
build a continue support that
it.
Where out we also looking for
thirty four million for school
improvement transformation and
turnaround there's been a lot of
questions around this i'm
there's really two initiatives
around this one is we are
currently working with those
schools that are csi and m r I
label these are the schools that
are in most need of improvement
these are requirements from the.
When I talked about some of the
work that I was able.
Also had the support
there is a proven method to be
able to go in and support school
leaders or principles teachers
and in the end is.
Within those classrooms we want
to be able to continue to do
that and we are required by
federal arrangement to be able
to do that.
Now i'm talking about working
with individual schools to be
able to do that we go and we
work with them to be able to
look at what are the recauses of
issues happening at school and
together we put together a plan
of how we're going to remedy
that and then together with that
school school district and.
We've seen a number of schools
have dramatic in.
We are also see patterns of
multiple schools in the same
district and that really tells a
different story that there are
issues that we want to be able
to support district wide.
This is where we come around
with additional funds and i'm
looking to a.
Really work with the entire
district to really give them the
recipe of what that looks like
to be.
All starts with what we do in
the to be able to provide
instructions updated instruction
be able to provide
training and at four teachers
and really working individually
with students with the
individual needs but in that to
be successful I only does a
teacher need to know about that
so does the principle.
And absolutely so does the
school board so it's working
with all the leaders that have
decision making power o.
I want to be able to replicate
those models that i've been able
to do in those districts and i'm
not going on this done that work
we've had an under number of
different districts that have
done this work we want to be
able to share this with all
districts across new mexico and
mister secretary i'm an
interruption we do have a.
Thank you mister I will do that
i'm gonna jump ahead to page
eleven and I just want to point
out a couple of things for you
or we do have two supplemental
requests this is important we
ask for your support on this one
is a twenty five million dollars
for our current uptake in key
talk plus oh we did have a
number of schools that are
taking advantage of that we want
to be able to support that so
this is a supplement.
We also
have been able to fully
implement universal lunch and
breakers programs we are asking
for a nineteen point nine
million dollars supplemental to
be able to fully find what
what's happening right now
across the state new mexico is
made a tremendous impact every
student new mexico is getting
breakfast and lunch we want to
be able to fully.
And the last thing I wanted to
talk about mister chair is just
some considerations.
You heard mister lutalk about
the gate funding i'd I do
support the idea of being able
to put some things in buckets to
be able to try to work on what's
working and really house and
flexibility within that also
having some guaranteed funding
over a four year period but I am
concerned with how it's done
it's still many times unclear to
me about what are in those
buckets and the more questions I
ask I realize there's a lot of
things in these buckets and when
we break things up over four
years it I have a concern that
none of nothing within those
buckets can be funded to be able
to be successful so III do want
to point that out as
considerations for me to be able
to i'll make sure that you have
a full understanding of.
Also considerations and mister
talked about this that there is
a fifty million dollars ask for
a travel education trust find
this would go to support our
local tads across the state new
mexico and could have a.
And also again does look like
there is a quite a bit of an
uptick in the are funding for
the public school supports a lot
of this is due to the transfer
of universal free mails from dfa
to pad of course we're gonna
continue that work and are j.
Does have breakfast and lunch as
every single day so with that
mister chair I did a skip a few
things but I do want to be able
to open.
Thank you so representative
thank you mister chairman and
thank you panel.
Just a couple things there are
so many worthwhile
lightnings we get a fund couple
that I want to highlight
one at fellows we talked about
teacher shortages we talk abo.
Could not be able to afford to
be a teacher who were meant to
be teachers so that's.
Cte is another area that I think
there was a big.
Our futures that's good for our
kids as for we need our plumbers
are egg folks we need these
things.
That's an area that I think our
legislator because that is we
talk about money for the future
we're building our future as far
as the.
School safety.
You know far students are staff
do not feel safe.
Along with.
This chairman I would like to
plan a bucket said you know
there's some things we're doing.
I really really.
Yeah.
Are schools that are.
Yeah.
The students back and forth
you're fixing a break.
You're gonna have increased
utility co.
You guys start this going into
the first part of august th.
You're gonna have increased in.
The.
What happened.
Why do we have a school board
whenever your mandating sitting
up here and sand fight that we
are going to increase our school
days.
What happened to local c.
All but what's happening in our
schools our schools are
excelling.
Whenever there is a smaller
student to teach duration
it's not going to improve just
by adding.
I could go on and on about this
but you get my drip but whenever
there is no more local control
in our school what are we
actually doi.
Mr chair.
Then traditionally a language
segmented the seg to provide an
average salary increase for all
school personnel this gives.
That language has traditionally.
Across the board level but.
And certainly it's not veto
proof but it provide.
And also flexible.
And.
Up.
Yes mister terror.
Service.
Representative this is based off
of a projection that we have on
full time employees it would go
to the districts who have full
time employees not those that
are contracted.
Mister chairman representative
lot of correct that is correct.
That's something.
With lots of.
Each of those what is that.
Mr chairman and mister chair uh
all tell you what I believe that
the bottom line numbers and then
if there's some discuss.
Mister lutour talk about
my totals reflected less
recommendation is f.
Not including an s e g because
there are some mention of cte
online twenty seven that would
go to education initiatives per
flexible dollars that could go
to ct but i'm not going to count
that i'm also not going to count
the capital outlay cte and that
is like the sixty five million
that's also being recommended by
the l.
Or lfc I will strictly count
what's in the below the line non
recurring funding so less see is
recommending forty six point two
million the executive is
recommending forty eight million
in the lfc is.
With an additional amount in the
gate that's divided between.
Thank you.
I'm interested the the executive
has the reline.
Sure mr chairman mr chair yeah I
was including also eight million
for summer inter.
It's a chair senator I would say
on a annual basis the lfc
recommendat.
And and the concern is that.
And also the data.
And I know.
The other area.
Using today money for the
future.
Yeah.
And so the more we are flush
with money education is the best
place.
How much.
That there's what's going in.
Mister representative you know
if I may actually mister
processes as a great prostatus
is.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair so we do
have a number of data items that
we are asking for to support
more efficient
more efficiently being able to
provide the data to the public
and to lawmakers
as well as.
The quality of the data and to
be able to do program evaluation
so and the cycle security and
data systems we have had we have
had appropriations in the past
not this present year but.
Cyber security in the.
Add.
That appropriation for this
current year went to do it
and we are asking for an
appropriation to be able.
That really is about being able
to ramp up.
I'm with when we have staff we
can't increase the n.
But we have this.
The data.
As well as
as well as resources to to
support program evaluation as
well and and that really is to
look at the appropriations that
we have and the programs that
they that they found and whether
or not it's their successful.
Line.
Thirty four november space
telescope data systems that is
about implementing our new data
collection.
Stars for the last several d.
The.
Standard assessment data
collection
that is funding for an api which
would support transfer.
Under management.
That right now each school.
Yeah.
If you wish for a quicker
responses you can always
yeah I think I I think I don't
need the line
mister.
So yes so what I was just
mentioning the api is meant to
do that so it it's a way to add.
To more seamlessly send data
from our our assessment vendors
through the new at fi.
Larger data system which is.
The school called their
management system as well right
now we're just collect.
And this would be an online
system where we would be able to
collect and house that data.
I would argue that that is also.
And that is I mean
we are needing to do that
generally.
We have outdated systems like so
b.
Send data out to our districts
for them to.
We are looking to replace that
and again as part of that.
Where the data not only
is available for them for a
short time but also is warehouse
so that in the future if we have
turn over in staff we don't
necessarily.
So where where on the.
To chair representative.
The
department to my knowledge
currently trained.
The never project that mister
and the works for probably three
or four years and so I think
that project is trying to
connect all the data.
For the gate funding the funding
is actually built into the gate
appropriation piece of part of
that will include evaluation.
So the department has the
flexibility if they need a
system that will help them c.
Mr chair representative yes it's
all inclusive it's an attempt to
give the department maximum
flexibility to focus on a select
few initiatives but they really
want to double down research and
evaluation effort and there'll
be an annual check in process
between lsc dear fan the
department to make sure.
For it some in some cases.
Yeah.
The data that metrics I mean
don't we want to know w.
Was working.
I think forty four and forty
five you'll have the research
around the data systems that was
provided by this and links to it
as well there is very good
research by time but one of our
analysts a great diagram of what
actually project novel is and
the.
One thing I would note in.
Budget recommendation is similar
to left season terms of the data
and data systems
as mister who noted project
novel has been an existence and
has been funded for a few years
now.
We currently have done a good
research around other states
that have very viable beautiful
data systems that are laundered
to roll on nature and connect
early childhood the twelve
system work for solutions and
higher ad and that would be
wonderful for new mexico and
some of the best examples are
actually stand alone agencies or
departments outside of those
that actually build their own
data systems that way they are
accountable they're totally
focused on data and they provide
great clear data for everyone
including the legislative
branch.
The.
The.
The.
Make note.
What.
Very speci.
The.
Then we have budget years where
we.
The.
Yeah.
Then those.
However.
What the return of armed.
If.
I'm going to be sitting.
Four.
Same we need to invest more.
But then.
We've already been.
For years.
Isn't that enough.
The.
And so what's my what what's
going to be m.
That probably.
The.
Commit it to the court order.
Commit it to removing.
Out of th.
We're exceptional we come to the
classroom exceptional because of
our l.
The.
Everybody else.
A big big **** we.
And create something different.
So that whoever brought up
earlier i.
The fact that we have.
The.
And that's what we need to do
and that's what we're because i.
And to be caught in this same
position.
The.
Decision making.
When I sit in my office going
through.
Yeah.
The closer I get to it the
louder we can hear it in the
building which means our f.
Senator.
Person if you could keep us
updated if that's working all
right.
So represent
thank you mister chair yes I do
mister secretary
give us an update
the hundred and eighty day rule
proposed.
Yeah.
In the state and as.
Then miss chair madam vice chair
yes as it were all aware public
education department has
has a rule that we would like to
be able to that has been
proposed to be able to increase.
That has been going the rule has
been created i'm sorry the rule
of language has been created we
ha.
Much feedback from teachers from
families and bi.
We had so much that we were
still collecting that were still
going through the.
So I know that you have asked me
madam by share.
I not only through.
Feedback we've already given but
I continued to have come.
Students and the course.
No no date as.
Word on the street is that
lawsuits.
Out.
My next question is and maybe
this is the same question the
govern.
And passed yet what are the
implications.
There's major budget.
At school related programs if
that bill doesn't pass what
happened.
The.
Mister chairman advised chair so
as with all of their
appropriations that are
contentioned on legislation with
the legislation is not enacted
the.
Question is
mister current.
We've had pilots in a ps
targeting.
Language learners how will we
have a test that unlike the
current test rely heavily on
english language score.
Mister chair and that advice
chair so the the regulation does
not require which assessment
would be used it just requires
that an assessment is used so it
will be up to the the local
education agency to decide
which.
The the very exciting summer
goal of ten thousand students
with two hundred two thousand
five hundred educators where is
that in the current budget.
Mister western there is a a
request within the budget for a
thirty million dollar asked for
that summer literacy program
that will include allowing us to
be able to recreate those thirty
thousand i'm sorry ten thousand
students.
Simply we have grow your own
teachers that targets
instructional assistance
capitally workers people don't
want to become teachers I would
appreciate it if although the
funding comes out of higher
education.
Thank you thank you mister
chairman thank you presenters
couple quick questions.
So online regarding them
regarding the meals of the
universal meals on line sixty
nine.
We're like one one eleven rather
there's a supplemental request
by the executive nineteen point
nine million so that's this
biscuit then we go to line sixty
nine and there's a different
budget recommendation for for FY
twenty five lfc's recommending
twenty two million.
Executives recommending forty
three.
Forty three minutes twenty two
as nineteen
is there
why the difference why the
differen.
The difference could you express
them.
The.
The way I look at this program
is like early education we don't
want we don't want it to be we
want them up the growth of this
program not to be prohibited by
financial restraints which
emphasise the importance and how
did you get to such a large
number between sector mister
chairman
mr chair senator yes the forty
three million dollar ask is to
fully implement the program for
every student in new mexico so
whether you are in los alamos or
you are in a gastin you will
have access to be able to.
Analysis indicates n.
The supplemental request that we
have for this year is going to
fall short for us to fully
implement the program.
The cost w.
Thank you miss terman thank you
sector and so the the build out
is it's at the two or three year
build out if I recall correctly
is it building out.
Or if other folks want to
just very quickly you know
mister chair senator when I look
at the language for this
requires that we do.
And so it's it's difficult for
me as secretary to say how we
build this out with you know I
want to be able to you know look
at the language and be able to.
And center my sister I I would
say from understanding better
after.
Actual department as well as the
governor's office around this
that the numb.
Some of what had it happened
private
last year was we went.
Certainly exactly what the
secretary is talking about in
terms of more students or now
taking advantage of free meals
more school districts were
participating in for emails like
us almost which hadn't done.
And I think also there was an
issue in terms of data that the
department better understands
now and is organizing around
and.
The students didn't because they
had free meals and but you still
need to do that to get the
federal funding right and so now
that I think the system veterans
understanding itself the
projection is crap.
Thank you so much mister
chairman thank you for that and
also with regards to.
With regards to the literacy the
structure did or see program we
have a line ninety seven there's
thirty million recommended by
the executive analysis and then
you jump to line
one eighty three and there's
also another thirty million by
the executive so I appreciate
the to put the spreadsheet
together but I think I just
saved us thirty million dollars
was chairman but it's some it's
listed twice expressed the
importance of that um i'll be
here a week expressed the
importance of that white how
important is that thirty minutes
the other seated direct didn't
recommend anything but I don't
think the lives he's saying no
it's an executive proposal could
you express the important that
in why should we fund that
absolutely mischair center I
this is ultimately the most
important thing that we can.
Have everything they need to be
able to percent writers and
readers there are two different
asked for thirty million so i'll
i'll be more specific we do have
a thirty million dollars for the
summer program this is where we
want to build it work with.
We also haven't asked to be able
to continue the letter's
training and we also haven't
asked to be able to continue
that structural literacy in
middle school so there's a three
separate asked and then we have
a separate thirty million
dollars request to be able to
bring all the resources together
which will in what we're calling
a literacy institute for new
mexico we are working directly
with hired institutions now of
getting some amazing feedback
from a head institutions with
all the work that we're doing
this institution will be able to
bring all those resources into a
couple of things more.
When is that it's a place for us
to be able to have educators to
be trained practice the craft
and have model classrooms within
that facility that's connected
directly to higher institutions
and school districts on the
other side for families and
parents and students it's a
place where.
Support testing interventions
and training themselves as
parents so this will be
absolutely a necessity when we
look at models across the mix
i'm sorry across the nation of
how they have been able to
tackle this this was a big part
of what they did and so we want
to be able to replicate what
other states have done and seen
the successful want to do a
faster and that's exactly what
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary then also mister
lewis made an important point
you mentioned in years past.
When we are squeezing budget.
Of supplementals or i'm sorry
about.
When he could you exp.
Sir mister chair I mentioned to
the joint committee that.
In two thousand and seventeen we
had four specials
and I think they.
The the total was only in the
tens of m.
The request that you see before
you today are in the hundreds of
millionth and there's over fift.
So there's been a historic
difference in the asked for non
rec.
Thank you for that
as you would come as german I
was on house appropriations.
Those four programs were.
When you please.
One day now you know we didn't
dream.
Have these wonderful ideas of
cutting taxes.
To overcome that
are there cheaper gap.
Lastly a constituents asking me
about behavior hold funding
they're slightly different
proposals.
Elia see an executive have a
five million dollar proposal.
Lfc zero and then teacher
residencies there's also a
difference twenty million
c proposal.
A executive at fourteen lfc at
fourteen.
Um.
So I just asked that we have
just educate the members with
regards to that and and see
what's appropriate.
The.
Maybe we have anyone.
That point.
And mr chair and.
Center I think I can just
briefly talk about the
differences in that.
For the behaviour health
supports the alcee
recommendation includes some
language for training educators
and line.
Ninety three essentially.
Actors is whether teachers are
providing a welcoming
environment that and engaging
with students and so the healthy
recommendation attempts to
consu.
The.
For the teacher residencies and
educated clinical practice
appropriations.
Supposed to the executive.
Thank you very much thank you
mister.
Thank you
first thank you for putting all
these.
Question a concern.
Previous initiatives much
behind.
I'm concerned that we.
I'm very happy to see that
tribal.
But I think i'm worried that
the.
The.
Meets any.
Yeah.
What if it is.
And mister chair representative
to your question about the
biolingual multicultural
education act in the other
education acts here.
The recurring funding streams
that are necessary for
implementation should be
arrested in section four
there were if you looked down
further in the public education
reform section appropriations
made for these acts in prior
years to do things such as
updating the prevalent testing
also to provide trainings and
conferences
we have been hearing from the
department that they haven't
been able to spend some of those
funds and so there's a concern
about whether these should be
sort of one time appropriations
whether we should reathorize
those appropriations certainly
when we did the lfc recommend
evaluation a few years ago and
by legal education we found that
there were four thousand
educators who had by legal
certifications but we're not
teaching and buy a linguist
programs and the biggest concern
from them was that.
There is too much work right
they had to create their own
materials they weren't getting
paid a substantial difference
and so I think that the issues
that you have outlined lie
mostly in our ability to
implement that at the school
district level and charge school
level.
Rather than having a one time
appropriation am interested by
the state may I think we're
interested in researching that
further I know elica has
embarked in that journey on how
he adjusted refunding formula
the center of.
Thank you I may I agree mister
chair I agree I can go.
Just because I passed up robot
doesn't mean that I have all the
tools to tisch we nobody asked
me if i.
But I think of the strategies
that are all that sort of that
the teachers need in the
classroom wavy john that I agree
that we need to have a system
and i.
I'm savvy they were mentioned as
I beat in the artist calls who
have high poverty high
language levers and there were
succeeding.
Different insurance commission
for students and eighteen
dollars that is missing and i'm
very.
Three nine.
And
l l e.
About what is needed when he's
missing so I really want to make
sure that we pull up on that and
make sure that we actually
version of her sto.
We need to make sure that we
have that.
Yeah.
That we.
Eight billion dollars.
To bring these.
The.
And we are.
I miss chair representative.
We have a lot of conversation
around teachers and princ.
But that is so much just as
important for educational
assist.
We talked a little bit earlier
about the ne.
We hire him the trainer and then
we lose th.
So yes have always inst.
And represent a headed just very
quickly but i'm gonna circle
back and double down on what you
said around the vision that is
set forward by l c and the
legislature to transform
education
this piece of legislation I
think that you proposed was very
intentional and connected to the
prior year and legislation that
went through last year to raise
the minimum salary for
educational assistance and.
All of the work that has been
done by this committee in lesc
through the interim working with
constituents is connected year
by year in a line to that vision
so I would just recognize that.
Representative the lc
recommendation really focuses
on.
Getting maximum flexibility to
local districts to make these
determinations I think in a
budget year it's very difficult
to ensure that all bills that
have contingencies the titl.
So the priority was given to
focus on the gate fund for the.
And important to make sure th.
But also to recognize that
thirty thousand say in bond is
very different.
The educators.
Another thing.
Different ways I mean it won't
be talk about.
I went through.
Yeah.
And thank you.
So.
Certainly mr chairman.
I think there's
maybe six over arching themes
there are reflected than the
lesc budget that get at the
addressing the matter the
innocent last suit
as well as would apart and
parcel transforming the system
for new mexico think those two
things are synonymous for me
and I think is a committee you
all have embraced that the first
is really the emphasis signed
human capital employees that are
the backbone that served the
system they are the most
important and education they are
critical that is where most of
the budget goes
when we invest in education over
ninety percent oh two.
Human capital and those that
make the difference are the
educators in the classroom.
Though is to make the difference
or the teachers in the classroom
and that can be that's the most
important thing that we could do
that was a major finding in the
lawsuit is high quality
educators making it competitive
making it a valuable profession
continuing that work I think is
maybe the most important it also
by default supports the economic
development of our communities
across the state there's a
number of ways that you have
recommended that in your budget
aggressively and salary but also
for the lowest plate employees
and I think providing flexible
dollars by lingual multicultural
stipends a lot of the research
was around that
and the educator clinical
practice teacher residency is
and fellows principle
preparation but that alone is
maybe the first second is really
in terms of.
Connecting the secondary school
experience for educators are for
students with their pathway
forward in life you see the bulk
of work around create technical
education work based learning
all of those things you'll see
the legislation that will come
out come out that was a held by
you mister chairman and
graduation requirements for
comprehensively how that system
make work is addressing the
needs of students
yeah and making things relevant
for them and you'll note that
what the judge found was that
students graduate college and
career ready and we contend I
think you do and as the
legislator as is legislature and
as a committee that includes
college career and civic
readiness.
Third I would say that one of
the things that we've addressed
is one of er the needs that
school districts are most face
critically facing and that is a
tendence we know that chronic
absenteeism school supports a
really important right now
community schools fifteen
million dollars to support
attendance all of the behaviour
health all of those wrap around
services that are video for
communities in our students and
their families very important in
terms of the students meeting
their needs
recognize and facing poverty is
it systemic issue that we have
in the state
or if I would say the workaround
instruction literacy
by linguist education certainly
but literacy we know is actively
making a difference in new
mexico four percentage points is
nothing to be a shy about that
is significant the fact that new
mexico grew four percentage
points the work that began in
twenty nineteen with the
legislation and the good work
that has happened every single
year thereafter to train first
grade second great third grade
fourth grade the work around
high quality and structural
materials that work is vital for
every single student across new
mexico to become fluid a fluent
readers vital vital work.
Fifth I would say
the work and in terms of
infrastructure supports you'll
note that there was quite a lot
of some significant difference
in terms of transportation
capital outlay those services
provide access for students as
we embark and see it how to best
support homeless students those
types of things unless you have
very strong support systems in
place smaller program approaches
or grant program approaches are
simply bandage so really
addressing those major systems I
would say mister chairman.
Yeah.
Last but not least mister
chairman the fact that you
as a committee decided to put
thirty million dollars flexible
dollars into the seg speaks to
the trust that you have in your
school districts and charter
schools across the max.
The.
They give her that I mean
because.
Thank you mister chairman I
think your first question to
direct ornament was very
appropriate because the focus of
this should be addressing the
findings of the martin is jazzi
lawsuit.
The ad the court fell short of
prescribing a dollar amount
the court said as long as you
have students.
All students rate particularly
you're at restorance or college
career and civics ready that is
your true north
it's up to the legislature and
the executive branch to
determine the appropriate amount
and how to get there and since
the last suit you've put in one
point three billion dollars
which is a f.
And I think the challenge there
for you know you've spent year
after year making appropriations
changing substantive law and one
of the biggest expenditures that
you've done is extend the squeer
and provide a ramp for
additional time if districts
choose to.
That was probably the largest
dollar figure initiative that
the court contemplat.
I think the question remains at
this point is.
Given our revenue situation this
large surge of oil and gas
revenue that we anticipate will
flat line in the next decade.
How do you ensure that the
remaining initiatives and a.
Providing.
As you saw with the public
education reform fund once that
fun was depleted.
The legislature was put in the
position of having to determine
which initiatives will no.
So
with the gate fund.
Rather than having a immediately
depletion of funds in having to
slash budgets.
Why not have a fund that
provides consistent funding over
a set time period so that
agencies have the ability to
ensure that these programs have
a few years of study before
determining whether.
That's essentially the concept
behind the government
accountability trust fund.
And two doctor warrants.
Points.
One of the biggest things that
we need to work on at this point
since we've sort of tackled the
quantity issue is the quality of
instruction and so the
recommendations from section I
am primarily focused on two big
issues one.
The.
And ensuring that there's a lot
of focus on developing educators
and giving him that clinical
practice.
I remember looking at the
nineteen seventy four.
Minutes when the.
There was a senator in lfc that
said our educators need more
time in the classroom they need
mor.
And I think that fifty years
late.
I think it's really important
to.
One ensure that.
After the gate essentially gets
expended that we have a clear
picture.
It's giving us the best results
and getting us.
The.
In address in the martinis
findings but it's hard to do
that.
When it's each year you may have
twenty million for this a.
Administrations change and the
ability to have something
consistent over a longer time
period to study and make sure
that the best type of it.
Part of the combination.
Who's doing the.
To the weeds the current
proposed legislation is putting
the gate and the accountability
and.
And as you're well aware of the
age requires agencies to meet.
To make performance.
Which you can actually find and
your packets.
Bill will essentially
evalu.
So as part of the performance.
The third leg of that would be.
And determine what performance
measu.
Are the.
Now the evaluation plan can be
that the department evaluates
the program and provides a
report it could be that the
department contracts with the
third party.
That would be negotiated
between.
And in its kind of point they
want illustrate th.
Approach.
The.
Yeah.
Portion of that.
If you'd rather change it is
that emotion representative
no not okay alright so for the
time being a thirty will meet on
