Madrid.
Here.
Representatives my devaluer.
Representative but i'm one.
Representative or balcony at all
but assembly.
Why is chair.
The.
You do have a call all right
thank you so before we start off
with our agenda for today
represent latter.
Thank you mister chair i'd like
to recognize two students from
the enemies you can't program I
they have there's a shattering
you today I have ever received
and send out sender real sale
about your with me from an issue
welcome we also have mister
charles the the dean of health.
The.
Welcome good morning thank you
mister charles great welcome to
our students and our dean
alright so
we may have a little bit of feed
back with the microphones are
crackling
but hopefully that's something
that'll get solved i'm sure it
will.
Our zoom also be able to testify
so.
Reverse them and there you have
two bills today and I just want
to give everybody heads up we
certainly appreciate you being
here in person on those of you
that are joining us online
we have a sense that folks are
here for both bills which is
awesome so when it comes time
for public testimony will give
everybody two minutes to address
either one or both of the bills
house will one thirty four one
thirty five.
About doing prior to the meeting
and i'll reiterate that for the
folks that are joining us but
represent them there house bill
one thirty four please thank you
mister chairman good morning
good morning committee members
thank you all for the
opportunity to present these two
bills this morning house but one
thirty four the travel education
trust burn and house bill one
thirty five which are a minimum
to the indian education act some
of you that are on the
legislative education study
committee
committee what will recall that
these two bills were endorsed
earlier this year in in
preparation for this legislative
session so I am excited to bring
these two back and excited to
debate these and in good
confidence knowing that we all
want what's best for our
respective communities
in regardless of what part of
the mexico you might come from
and so that being stated I also
had a conversation with the
chair person with the chairman.
That the tribal education
trustword house bill one thirty
four does have a an amen meant
in regards to the makeup of the.
Task force membership and that
is of substantial of a nature
that I don't think it's fair at
the chair person I wouldn't like
that if somebody brought me
there and expected to make it on
the floor so that we thought
that it would be best to proceed
with this discussion knowing
that we will have an amendment
that would be right at a later
time in regards to specifically
to the make up of the task for
membership and and and it's
collaboration so with that being
said mister chairman and
committee members.
House bill one thirty four the
travel education trust one
establishes a new tribal
education trust fund to
strengthen the capacity of new
mexico's tribes public and
nations to support their
students and to collaborate with
public schools this long term
investment would generate stable
and consistent funding for
tribal education for many years
to come the tribal trust fun
would be overseen by the state
investment office and tries will
receive annual recurring
consistent distributions with
predictable flows of funds
travel education departments
will thereafter be able to hire
and retain staff do long term
planning in addition to
providing educational programs
and supporting the native
students in a way that they
never have had the capacity to
do before when tribes have
sufficient capacity they can
develop culturally relevant
programs that improve student
engagement and alchemists they
can teach their children the
languages their cultures they
can work republic schools and
help them to assess the meat the
needs of native american
students this is what they're in
in education act of two thousand
three requires moneys from the
new trust one must be used for
the purpose of stated in that
indian education act unless
otherwise agreed with the public
education department.
Evidence shows that when
children are secure and their
cultures language and identities
there are more they are more
engaged at school and do better
academically to increase
academic proficiency we have to
we have to treat students with
dignity our children's can't
learn if they don't feel like
they belong.
This investment in the tribal
education trust fund is intended
to enable tribe to take a more
active role in making the
version and the vision of the
indian education act in fact the
reality this will make a
difference for almost forty
thousand native american
students all across new mexico
and so at this point in time I
can reassure that this committee
that once again.
We have been endorsed by the
indian affairs committee we have
been endorsed by the legislation
education that the committee we
have funding in the lefty
framework of fifty million
dollars currently with capacity
that i've been assured to
achieve in this legislator
session that one hundred million
dollars goal that we are looking
at to establish this trust one
and with that being said ladies
and gentlemen of this committee
I will stand for any questions
unless mister chairman is your
request that I continue to move
on to the next bill right now so
thank you for that chairman will
hold off one house but one
thirty five will address them in
order but I know folks are here
probably for both of them so for
public comment will take public
comment two minutes for if
you're here to address one or
the other or both will take
public comment you'll have two
minutes to address one both or
opposition to one both
of the bills so with that being
said on.
Thank you we will go to our
audience we're ready to go to
our audience chairman.
Yeah I miss them for new
questions okay sir great thank
you so those in support on our
zoom please indicate by raising
your hand will go to folks in
the room first those on my left
hand side i'm that are here in
support that wish to speak on
house bill one thirty four and
or one thirty five please
indicate by reason your hands I
can get just a sense okay we'll
start off here so man please you
have up to two minutes welcome.
I think it's fine we have
microphones roof that also will
project on our
party.
I also.
The.
Are you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm having.
Thank you so much so whether is
in that road that same really
wish we can sport please welcome
you up to two minutes good
morning.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Great thank you all right others
in that same rather wish
speaking sport
or it will move to the next rove
in their previous speakers as it
was please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Yeah.
Thank you for joining us anybody
else in that road that was
speaking sport please memory of
up to two minutes welcome.
Thank you so much others that
wish we can sport house bill one
thirty four and thirty five
please welcome
chair members of the committee.
Thank you so much
I am the head of school
preparatory.
This passage thirty four it
works really.
With our children of our novel
native children across the
mexico.
We already know with yazi
martinez and others disparting
that exist with them tribal
organization especially travel
education that they are
underfunded so we just really
appreciate your support in house
p.
Thank you for being here anybody
else in that same other wish
speaking sport.
Alright we'll go to the next
does it wish to be conspiracy
please welcome you have up to
two minutes good morning term
members of the committee my name
is living on parking with.
Mexico.
You for being here others in
that same road there was
speaking sport.
To the next room that I can see.
Please so I can go welcome you
have up to two minutes.
Yeah.
The.
Great thank you so much for
being here please.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In the past.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And.
Thank you so much others in the
same room please spend me of up
to two minutes welcome.
Great thank you for being here
others in that same rather would
you speak.
Right we'll move to the next row
speaking house but one thirty
five when thirty four
sir.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Great thank you anybody else in
that sim room
welcome
i'm here on behalf of the
department of dinner education.
Great thank you so much anyw.
Those of you in the back do you
wish to speak in support all
right if you would please you
have after two minutes welcome.
Good morning mr chair and
members of the committee
asked me was going to colle.
Hi my name is aspect of scholars
then you know chapter a
community south of currently new
mexico and I am a student and.
I am understanding support of
house bill one thirty four and
support up creating the tribal
education trust fund and thank
you for all of the work.
In the all of the work that you
have done so support this bill
the passage of this bill will
provide monetary security to use
from all twenty three tribes but
wasn't nations including my own
then I
having this trust when the place
well truly be an investment in
the current in future indigenous
youth and their chosen operat.
Thank you for joining us
please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Yes
mister chairman members of the
commi.
I have a prepared to read school
and that information I want to
think you offer you work on bill
he wondering if establishing a
tribal education I stand in
support because it will create a
better education for the.
Future leaders what the
educational system
great thank you for being here
next please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Where do you guys.
First of all.
They can for a long.
I'm here to do a support extreme
one thirty four as a part of
star wishing a tribal funding
interest on experience with
thirty four was support for I
mean in the twenty three charges
and along what along with
education.
Career in the future.
This is important
including my own today as a part
of each me one thirty four it
would benefit us in the us
twenty three tries to
publication and when you're and
later into.
Thank you so much
welcome you have a forty minutes
please
good morning
to chair
my name is every hour right
because of an initialist
I am from a club to new mexico
and.
Which would be creating a tribal
education transfer firstly thank
you all for the work you have
done so far
with this building youth of the
twenty three tribes p.
The.
By supporting this bill you are
investing.
Communities and se.
Please welcome you up to two
minutes
chairman members of my name is
one to seven and I am from
compared to mexico my plans are
touching the sun said they
should busting out industry as
she has not personally
members of.
Or what.
The reason I am here.
I support
is because where this bill it
will be able to.
I can make standards for all
travel education.
And so that young I will
students with will have a bike
feature.
Yeah thank you mister chairman
and there was.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes
a minute good morning mister
chair and members of ma.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And also
I my chapters manually.
Grateful that.
Grateful for the bill one thirty
four and for the support that
everyone has here and I am very
supported i'm supported for the
one thirty four because it'll
help our the net aldinate and
all other nations and tried with
the education so they're able to
go accomplish the.
The.
On what they want to be so they
can help and help the community
there i'm tribes and nations etc
this will just on be a great
impact on all indigenous all the
digital new mexico and I am just
very good and i'm very thinking
first thing you have happens for
today and in the past yeah thank
you great thank you so much
anybody els.
Backwards in order all right
we'll move to my right hand
side.
Then to keep my reason hence I
get a feel okay so since this is
my first row please welcome you
up to two minutes.
The.
Yeah.
Larger today
of this legislation.
Even american student.
This.
Yeah.
He has been six years.
Since the audience working is
corporate.
Yeah.
This.
Graduation rates continued to be
low.
Remain the same.
The main high.
I tired of tel.
Story.
The one a different outcome.
We need this travel education
first one to be created.
Because we want.
You offer a problem I can
students more tutoring.
More school programs.
Where some school.
Language classes.
More if that's learning classes.
And more well that's concerned.
The funding for other
state it will come from the
travel education trustworth.
Believes that this trust one can
make a difference and if the
wise of our children
so we asked
you all to support
one thirty four.
Others in their same rather than
sport.
On three point three okay we'll
go to the next
okay we'll start on the emp
please member to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning I remember some of
the community might be mister
moralis and I would jay data
like government relations in
where everything like will not
what they probably love luck who
not and they support bill one
thirty five.
Great thank you so much is in
the same ro.
You have a few minutes welcome
second time a good morning mr
members of the committee often
warn i'm here both in my capac.
The vice president of the board
of trust
and also mentioned
the former secretary.
And I mentioned that because
these two bills are perfectly
exemplary.
The indian education act.
Both of them I think.
The trouble trust.
For travel.
Has said as a policy but
unfortunately with changes in
administrations that that
translates very differently into
the types of appropriations
trust one will ensure adequate
resources to travel communities
for communi.
The second bill has to be one
thirty five fixes an issue that
has bothered I think many of us
which is.
Creating a mechanism to
effectively deliver funds to
trouble communities the current
way that that arch that it works
in terms of reimbursements not
processed agreement process has
caused delays in funding
reaching trouble communities
which means delays and services
to our students so both of these
bills I think are consistent
with the policy they move us
forward to help us ag.
All set for the state martinez
so I produc.
The next trip
okay
you have up to two minutes
welcome good morning maybe my
name is
mobile pets in asian average
where
one.
This is the reason why not yet
so
we support these bills and left
here thank you for bringing this
up
as returned.
Great thank you so much others
in that same role
place welcome you have up to two
minutes good morning my name is
milton here on the for the
governor from the problem.
The bill because it will benefit
our children and.
Thank you for bringing her
governor please have a good
morning
and where do you know mr german
members of the committee my name
is mark mitchell.
Former governor from the bubble
of.
The.
The sponsor for bringing it
forth I believe that he's met
all the new diligence as was
stated earlier and this is a
long time coming.
My philosophy is that um.
Our ancestors paid it for in
perpetuity
we're here to ask.
Have.
Quality.
For everyone so that they too.
With that.
Great thank you
please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
You know we have been with.
So I would think two things.
The.
That is.
Institutions at least.
So I really thought that that.
Please sir you have a two minute
welcome thank you mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is jane.
Great well there is in their
road there wish to speak in
sport house go on to be fun
please give up two minutes
locker.
I'm here i'll be half of the
university of the clock
representatives.
Member members cover it out
before the s.
Spill one thirty four one thirty
five as we feel that this.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Yeah.
Throughout their educa.
Help them.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Order yasser as a yazi play.
Great thank you so much others
in their own.
Alright so anybody else in the
room that was speaking sport of
house but one thirty four one
thirty five o k place you have
up to two minutes.
Um
go to help my name.
I want to say that we stand and
strong support of.
Um
we see that from our community
and our membership we know that
if we plan to h.
And we strongly ask that the
committee will consider how all
of the communities h.
Great thank you so much others
that we should speak in sport
that are in the room.
All right we got everybody our
folks online will go to you.
So will hamina.
Well mean you're with us you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Yes yet opener mister chair and
committee met to meeting are you
guys able to hear me pretty good
okay i'm shared this cheap need
to snark your annie but it's
june twenty eight that's a
channel she had a signal auto I
come to you from the naba nation
and I made parent advocate of
first I would like to think
representative lent for getting
us all here and without him much
would not be accomplished for
all of our native children
across the state and also
representative remerrial for
sponsoring this bill I strongly
support HB one thirty four n one
thirty five as it didn't and
also as a parent I mean mother
of three beautiful children and
as it did mother are indigenous
children are sacred to us and
it's a responsibility that we
prepared him for life and in
addition to preparing them for
life education is one of the
very more important aspect so
investing in our native children
is critical now more than ever
now is the time to invest in
tribal education and provide our
children with the resources and
funding to thrive and excel and
also so that they remain
connected to their culture
language and communities which
is one of the very important
critical aspect of who we are as
indigenous people here in our
state and our children native
children deserve an incredible
education in its time that we
provide that to them on their
deserving of it and in the past
with their answers in the past
you know the score history that
type of education was deprived
from us and so now we fight for
a children to be equal be
equally be provided and have a
good incredible education as
stated so I respect the as that
the committee passed HB one
thirty four and one thirty five
and again thank you blessings to
all in the cat.
So.
Already go to leo good morning
the owe you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you miss chair members in
the committee this is near them
a policy advocate with the acu
of new mexico get a strongly
support of HB one thirty four
and one thirty five both of
these bills are critical for
providing the high quality well
fund of education that are
indigenous students a serve and
that state of new mexico is
so glad to see both of these
bills here today and and look
forward to seeing them forward
and and become long and you
thank you so much.
Great so we will go to petina.
Good morning between our welcome
you have up to two minutes
good morning to chairman members
of the committee my name is
betin a sound of all and the
education director for telstra
blow and we are in supportive
house bill one thirty four and
one thirty five our department
provides various community
services and supports with very
limited resources and having to
navigate the sporadic
disbursements of funding while
trying to create some kind of
consistency and fill in the gaps
will we wait for award letters
is a disservice to our
communities we are the experts
in our community and our
families and by receiving
consistent funding for a tribal
education departments will be
able to consistently support our
students and not just when we
got a big grant or when we you
know get our wards letters but
we are all responsible for our
children's education and that
small neighborhood to act on
that shared responsibility we
asked that you vote in favor of
these bills thank you for your
time.
Alright.
The.
Crystalline good morning you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Cristoline are you with us.
Oh I see you and muted.
Good morning got a cherry marrow
members of the house and
education committee my name is
crystalline curly speaker of the
twenty fifth nomination council
then avoidation council the
government body of the naval
nation supports establishing the
end in education trust from
however the council does not
support hb one thirty four in
its present form because of the
proposed composition and
membership of the task force
which will determine the
distributions of the fun their
proposed composition and
membership of the task force in
its current form is not in the
best interest of that only
students in the state of new
mexico we have been working with
the bill sposters to a men or to
remove the task first language
to find a compromise that will
be the best interest of all have
a students in the state we also
don't request a development of
the task force language upon
travel consultation with
requested at a minute that will
resolve these concerns thank you
for your time
thank you speaker c.
Good morning mary of up to two
minutes.
I.
Confirm killer good morning
mister chairman members of the
committee I am my name is mary
allis martinez and from taspa
blow and represent that to a
language program on the
coordinator and also language
teacher was that we are in
support of both house bills one
thirty four and one thirty five
these funds would sustain our
language programs within our
tribes and publos and supporting
the schools and our students
were and sister language and
cultures taught students
developed pride which leads to
better attendance and over all
academic improvement after
school and richmond programs
build social skills while
working towards academic
progress and in some instances
learning the language language
learning and the classroom and
shorts that are languages and
culture are being preserved
while students become confident
in navigating two worlds to be
able to be successful it is
gratifying when our students are
in the village at the schools in
the community and other
gatherings when they great to in
our language and they know how
to pronounce their tear names
and they speak the language this
is how trust and relationships
are built these funds will allow
our students and all our
programs and in our communities
to help drive with thank you
very much and we ask you for
your support in this house bills
and also like to think represent
it at length plenty and
represent every merrill thank
you and many blessings to your
old car group thank you for
being here i.
Just a.
Good morning joseph.
You have to have been sure a
joseph hernandez initiate plug
in this letter now keep business
change using better chain not
good as another I am from the
community of ship rock in
ireland speaking as a the the
chairman of the naba nation had
start policy council we are the
governing body of all eighty
eight headstock seniors.
In in new mexico we have over
thirty head start centers.
Um
as as you guys understand about
the historic program many of our
naval students they they go into
the public school system.
Recently
now boundation received.
Funding for a a new headset
center
and standing rock
if you go to any of our other
heads up sooners you can see the
need to
have these new centers
and
there has been a sturdy that
that put in place that.
For every dollar you put in
early childhood you get a six
percent.
Return of investment into the
community.
The.
I want to mention that I
do stand it in support of house
bill one thirty four one thirty
five in I urge this committee
for a unaminist support on these
two bills and I think the
sponsors four bringing this bill
forward and I especially what to
thank
the support from nabo who nation
members and and our nabo nation
government for.
Putting forward that the the
work that's needed for this
trust fun going forward for
future generations yeah thank
you.
Thank you.
The.
Morning I was with you of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning mister chair and
committee members my name is
elizabeth valence well and then
the executive director for the
new mexico sociation probably
will education namabe is in full
support of hb one thirty four
and one thirty five this bills
invest in strengthening tribal
capacity capacity to support our
needed students to tribe and
reach their all potential we
think representatives lent the
employment for supporting this
bills and urge the committee to
pass each health bill and one
thirty four one thirty five
thank you thank you so much.
Kevin good morning you have to
two minutes walk.
Evan good morning.
Good morning to near you
a little bit if you could speak
a little bit louder please are
closer to your microphone.
Good morning can hear me we can
please you have two minutes
welcome.
Good morning mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is kevin beltran i'm here and
behalf of table women united i'm
here to share support for HB one
thirty four each be one thirty
five both bills will increase
tribal education funds processes
efficiency and effective
effectiveness when it comes to
supporting their students and
community based education
services in receiving much
needed resources these bills are
highly critical furthering
travel education supports native
students here new mexico and we
strongly increase legislators to
feel the same as well I urge you
to pass and continue to advocate
for each people thirty four in
each week one thirty five thank
you thank you for joining us.
Melissa please good morning
welcome up to two minutes
good morning mr terry members of
the committee my name is
smallest to candle area i'm the
education director for the new
mexico center online poverty and
the legal council for the yazi
planets we want to think
representative lengthy for his
tireless work pushing for
policies and funding that
improves the education system
for our children we are in full
support of house bill one thirty
four and one thirty five because
need of american students have a
right to an equitable and
culturally relevant education
that enables them to thrive in
the yazi martinez case the judge
found that tutoring summer and
after school programs social
services and access to
culturally relevant learning
opportunities are important for
native students academic success
but many need of kids can access
such school base offerings due
to various barriers such as the
lack of transportation the
tribal education trust band
creates a permanent rabining
stream for tribes and their
education departments to provide
programming and services that
meet the needs of their students
where they live it's time for
the state to invest in stable
and sufficient funding for
tribes to support children to be
college career and community
ready and live up to the yasie
martinez ruling we are due to
pass out bills one thirty four
in one thirty five thank you
thank you so much.
Patty.
Good morning petty you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chair good morning
to many members staff and gas
i'm patty williams the
registered lobbyist per the nab
nation council office of the
speaker as you've heard the nab
whonation council supports that
the creation of the indian
education trust fund with the
caveat that the distribution of
the proceeds of that fund are
fair and equitable and we
understand that will be a
dressed in an amendment
and the council stands ready to
work with the sponsors to
continue working to make sure
that the distribution formula
and methodology is fair to all
students in new mexico that
would benefit from the fund
the nab honestly has passed a
resolution in fact that supports
the creation of the indian
education fund as long as the
distribution of that fund is
fair inequitable thank you
great thank you so much
curby.
Good morning curby you have up
to two minutes welcome.
The.
Hello good morning yet a bit
such a could be john seeing the
initiative touching a school
stain but that it also nothing
on the decision
i'm in support of house bill one
thirty four and one thirty five
is being chapter president and
school board member for not tiny
ness
we appreciate their support and
discombile to help support our
students had made american
students as education as the
great equalizer to help all our
students succeed in base
successful and their livelihoods
and culture and we just
appreciate your support in this
and we also are a feeder school
into as tech high school which
all some
students from all tribal
affiliations to attend the
public school so they can get
the higher education and thether
themselves so I just wanted to
say that we're allowing me to
speak.
Great thank you so much for
joining us a millenna good
morning you have up to two
minutes.
The.
Good morning cherromero and
members of the committee my name
is malina or tease registered
lobbyists for the public sample
we pay and speaking today on
behalf of governor anthony or
tease
who is in support at house bill
when thirty four thank you very
much.
Great thank you so much for
joining.
The.
All right so remember folks we
are on house bill one thirty
four will take a house bill one
thirty five.
So
first on my list is i'm travel.
Thank you mister chair good
morning too much a good thread.
Thank you for bringing ringing
this bill those of you the
normally know that I like
society some of our fundaments
today.
Were time go.
Have one question for you
I was this visit my options
visited
a day or so go by ryan crossburg
he is the president of the um e
n m u doesn't and he.
To me that he had not been able
to get
for the.
Students that he has awful best
level patchy.
And some reason he was not able
to receive funding for them and
I I see they are on the
board here on the task force uh
so.
My my request is that you.
And he showed me a little paper
there showed the d.
Funding they had received either
from the indian education fond
or from the travel education
sources so.
I am concerned that it everybody
doesn't get.
Mister if you want me to respond
with that mister chairman and
representative thank you for the
question of the inquiry and we
will follow up and have an
offline conversation about that
with you directly but I can
appreciate something that you
and I have learned as members of
the lfc committee and that is
when you have an abundance of
money like the state has now the
way you make it live longer is
that instead of instead of
implementing re occurring
programming you create trust
funds that make some money live
longer so thank you for that
comment I appreciate that well
said
represent
thank you mister chair um i'd
like.
Legislation it is a heavy left I
understand that getting all
these.
And I sincerely I think the
sponsors.
Not to take anything away from
you I just want to say the most
endearing and enlightening part
of this hearing was listening to
and.
Congratulations
you do represent our future and
I just want you to know.
Thank you represent bucket
thank you mister chairman and
thank you representative I do
have a number of questions and
comments regarding the
legislation.
Actually I don't.
As a member of an all you see I
endorse this horizontal.
More importantly as a member of
elias here had the opportunity
to visit and have dinner with
many students from the naval
preparatory institute.
I think that the only comment
that i'm going to make as
regarding the the young people
are spoke today.
I heard comments about leaders
of tomorrow future leaders.
And my comment he was you are
already leaders leaders in your
school leaders in your community
and leaders.
In our state
so my change to you is when you
finish your your studies or
whatever you do.
Come back in that only serve
your communities but just it was
who said some day be appear in
serve the state thank you chair
thank you representative robot
coming in.
The representative and.
I want it all of the students.
I'm always afraid to over
project
I want to think are the students
that came forward today
as represented back has done you
are already leaders and you all
already are exercising your
rights and so I appreciate that
and thank you for being here.
I also want to
articulate an emphasis that
would one thirty four is doing
is doing exactly what the yazi
market is last suit instructed
to do in its findings and
sometimes I I find it helpful
mister chair.
To actually refer to the case
law and findings and then one of
the finance it was very clear
that the state of new mexico has
not complied with the indian
education act and that was in
finding forty excuse me for
seventy six
the other finding is that the
indian education act.
Was meant quote was meant to
mitigate the impact of
historical trauma.
By ensuring that public schools
in new mexico are meeting the
unique cultural and linguistic
needs of native americans
students.
That's in finding number five
three oh.
The.
I find it
the finings
are really are walking orders
are instructions.
Therefore the legislature based
on these findings in this last
suit mister chair and
representative we have an
obligation
based on these funding findings
to ensure that our children have
a fair just an equitable
education.
I cannot emphasize this enough.
House bills one thirty four is
doing just that we are insuring
that we are investing planning
and planning and someone
mentioned it in the audience
that we have.
Now with the fund it gives us
the opportunity.
An access to be able to plan for
the future with security and
sustainability and so I just
want to make those those
comments because it's so very
important.
And and we have to remind them.
Constantly that there was a
reason why these acts were
placed in our constitution and
so without mister chair and
representative I just needed to
make that.
Uh firm statement in my
commitment as long as I am on
this committee and in this
legislature will be to instantly
remind us.
Of that obligati.
Thank you representative
they could be such a windows the
yes
think you're out of what are
proping in this bill take you to
lec also for all the water that
we have done with that with a
throw a community sake in game
that everybody has mentioned it
is
many many many years decades
already the this is trying to
imagine cash up with everything
right uhm
I think that all this to this
was park here to your community
is very part of you we are very
proud and like represented back
I say we want to see you here to
I just have one request is not
requesting
I know that he's gonna be
reporting and some conability
for or all these uhm but as I
need to cater with am that I
also work with minority
communities uhm.
I would have requires that some
kind of am you can give us on
feedback or what is working.
How is how are you approaching
all the needs of the communities
how are making the progress uhm
we we have those needs also know
that areas and and as long as we
try to do everything once house
fits all is not going to work so
I bought appreciate as these
process moving power you can
actually report mister
or let us know have any kind of
feedback for a how we can do
these in other areas my
community that when that I work
mostly is this is also I do have
that out of progress is just as
in showing the way that we want
to so I would appreciate that is
more like a request more like a
question but I think I
appreciate being in this
hopefully I gain with the scene
you will replicate on in other
areas thank you so much thank
you mister
thank you represent father on.
Think mr chair.
I was reason the words of
abortional activist layla watson
who once said if you have come
here to help me your wasting
your time.
But if you have come here
because your liberation is bound
up in mind then let us work
together.
None of our children can be free
until we are all free and none
of our children can succeed
until we are can succeed.
And with this trust one the
first of its kind in the country
new mexico is making a
statement.
A statement that we are saying
in our state we have many
problems poverty in justice is
senseless deaths but we are rich
and not just in our cultures
right now in our banks.
And our budget will reflect our
values
we are seeking not just to
passively embrace and deep in
our commitment to the culture
that we have here in the state
we are here to make the
commitment part of the bones of
our state.
For too long you know we've made
commitments to funding i'm in
addressing these gaps but the
continuing disproportionality
that existing the data shows
that the commitments need to be
amendment amended
we are far from parity.
Mr chair it is my belief that it
is time to not just help the
nations and tribes in our state
but to work together.
I'm in full support of this.
Thanks mister tech you
especially put the never had
students that are cited your
traditional greedy and it would
be wonderful to hear each one of
us give a similar.
The.
My question mr chairs I totally
support it my question is a
sustainability because according
to the i'd like it to last for
ever but as it exists now
it would go down because of the
twelve point five million or the
five percent which is greater
it's estimated would be eleven
years so are you anticipating
additional money
just if you can speak on how do
we make it sustainable into I
can.
Mr chairman and representative
to create dollars to live into
purpose of direct and to create
the the access to those dollars
is one how we can intentionally
invest those dollars in that and
not exhaust that corpus right
and so in that being said an
amendment was already prepared
and is in this committee but
because of the additional
amendment in relation to the
task force make up we intend to
just put that on one amendment
for their so what what what the
amendment will then speak to is
that the disbursement from that
trust will be at five percent
flat not twelve point five not
just five percent flat so that
in regards to inflation and
however however we can make our
money work for us the intent is
not to exhaust this trust them
but you have it utilized and use
it for as long as we can.
The.
Thank you mister chair I move a
due pass.
We have a due pass motion i'm
gonna hold off on that because
we do have an amendment
forthcoming that we've heard
from the audience about um.
Hold off on that because we are
expecting that amendment and
there were a couple of other
amendments that were going to be
rolled into one for our
consideration.
Is there further discussion.
So I just want to.
Chairman went there on the work
that you've put forward I know
this is initiative that some of
our audience members.
Really good job stating this is
that on you know we often think
of reporting requirements we've
heard that come up on.
In terms of this initiative and
I think we've seen it as a
punitive measure and we always
tend to see it as a punitive
measure which it has
traditionally been however I see
the reporting requirements in
part as frank you what can we
learn from one another as well
so not just the negative but
also the positive in what can we
learn from our different
communities and what they're
doing to help try and address
the needs of our students to try
to implement elsewhere around
the state so I want to commend
you offer your openness and
willing to do that i've taken a
look at some of what's being
proposed in its
inclusion of our legislative
education study committee in
that process and certainly as as
chairman of the the interam in
the upcoming in their own i'm
hopefully
should the speaker decide to
keep me in that role
certainly you have my commitment
in order to to
further that initiative and and
work with our staff in the rest
of our.
Be inclusive in an insurer that
the processes is transparent
and.
Um so we look forward to to
those amendments.
You have them please be sure
it's too submit them so that we.
And then we'll schedule that.
I know the next stop is
appropriations and finance I
don't think they'll be hearing
bills to the end of the next
week anyway so you think there's
plenty of time and there's the
legislative will to get the
stone.
Thank you for presenting house
but one thirty four will roll it
over to yet those amendments and
then reschedule it so thank you
has go on thirty five
thank you mr chairman house will
one thirty five was an amendment
to the indian education act of
bill is pretty straight forward
so i'll keep it short and simple
the bill amends the indian
education actions dreamline it's
funding mechanism and make it
more efficient and effective it
does not request any increase in
funding whatsoever the money in
the in an education fund and
again then we profess this
statements by not throwing the
public education department
under the bus and or any of its
employees but the fact that the
matter is is that in an
education fund has been
difficult to use for many of our
travel nations published
simply because of the in its
relevant because of the larger
versions in each of those you
are discussed with with ped last
summer but yet pd has a night
yet been able to address the the
delays so in effect the grant
awards are routinely delayed in
in many cases about half a year
in some cases a little bit more
when the award finally comes
recipients must up front the
money in hopes that they give
reimbursed eventually the entire
process continues to be a dream
on tribal capacity which is not
what the legislature intends
with this type of money's in the
intention of the appropriations
the bill six to fix that we
cannot fix what we afford any to
leave any money excuse me on the
table just because of
administrative bottle next and
restrictive funding ruling so
this bill reforms the process
for funding for tribes it
replaces an inefficient grant
process with automatic
distributions based on
intergovernment and
intergovernmental agreements it
allows tribes to carry over
funds to prevent reversions and
to continue projects beyond its
grant cycles this is a simpler
bill and last month then last
year's version it leaves it up
to the public education
department to decide how much
money to give the tribes.
And or other entities the bill
simply addresses the main
problem at hand the money we
appropriate each year is not
using a timely efficient and
effective manner and is incoming
upon us to change that with them
mister chairman I will stand for
any questions thank you so much
so we've taken public testimony
on house go on
committee members questions.
The.
Representative I move I am to
pass on bill
great thank you all right so we
have a second by representative
roy both cover yet all of them
and secretary
cast motion please
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes
yes.
To zero you have a due passion
house but one thirty five
will see you all sometimes great
thank you off and thank you all
for joining us for really
appreciate it but we don't do
russians of emotions we
appreciate it but we're gonna
transition to house fill one
ninety nine a representative
error please.
So will allow for a moment for
the transition
people move without.
Right.
Course.
That.
The.
Alright folks if we could have
ordered in our committee room
please and everybody quite down.
Representative
please has been one ninety nine
thinking mr speaker
and members of the committee
are
it is really with great pleasure
that I bring this bill before
the committee we have had many
conversations are over the
about the need to make our
schools to make the whole school
a better environment and that to
make to to provide the the needs
of a child to provide the whole
needs of a child and we looked
at our schools and we looked at
school ecosystems what we saw is
that we had many employees that
were living below the poverty
line and if we expect school
employees to come to school and
help these children and um to be
attentive to their needs we have
to be attentive to their needs
and and it really came I think
to fresh and in carl spare when
we had a group of rural
superintendence and
superintendents from major
schools districts say that we
are losing employees we cannot
compete.
Are with mcdonalds for employees
are a secretary who can run an
elementary school and make more
at a fast food chain than she
can working on our school system
and over and over they said you
know we really need to help
these um these uh sometimes part
time sometimes full time
employees and many of them are
making less than I hate to say
this twenty thousand a year.
And it was just kind of there
are a revelation I guess you
know here's kind of how we we
first you know what how many
years ago to a care of teachers
right and then we looked around
and said on my cash our
educational systems you know the
people that really help teachers
do their classroom work haven't
been taken care we came back and
we made a bill and we got them
more money and then we did that
and a.
And we came back and and talked
to leaders and schools and we
looked around always said.
And they said really glad to
help us were not able to get the
staff that we need in this
environment and of course that
was combined with the knowledge
that we're looking at a ten
point eight billion dollar
budget.
And yet the people who the
people who really provide the
foundational structure of our
school systems.
Aren't paid a living wage and
and that's why we brought this
bill forward asked committee it
has the committees endorsement.
There is a strong
support for this and
introduce excuse me my expert
witness any armored
and now i'm going to just turn
it over to her for a little bit
to give you some more background
information thank you mister
chair.
I think you mister chair
committee and representative for
erra and it's fine I reuterate a
little bit of with the
representative said
these lowest period scorm ploys
are the backbones for schools
and they do make schools run.
And our analysis did identify
employees who would likely
benefit from this thirty
thousand dollars minimum
educational assistance of
assistance school secretarias
food service providers bust
rivers and security guards for
example
and these positions are some of
the most district arts are some
the most difficult for our
school districts and charter
schools staff for all of the
recent that the representative
just stated we also just really
believe it's important that the
schools lower speed employees
are pete closer to and living
which second I just want to
explain a little bit about how
this would work so you all have
already required and funded
schools to pay their personal a
minimum wage rate of fifteen
dollars an hour for several
years now so full time employees
who work a calendar year they
should already be see earnings
higher than thirty thousand
dollars per year and this bill
would clarify that minimum wage
right now that languages and
house bill too but it's not
in the school personal act.
However employees who work
shorter full time contracts as
such as those who work a nine
month ten month school your
contract for example those could
be educational assistance food
service employees there wages
would likely increase with a
thirty thousand dollar minimum
salary and just a reminder that
school districts have a lot of
authority to determine the
length of a full time contract
for different positions so there
is and there probably should be
some variation across districts
and how this determined and then
finally I just want to emphasize
that human resources as we all
know our schools greatest assets
and that all of the other
investments that you all are
making in education simply won't
be fully realized if schools are
not fully staffed thank you.
And with that mister cherry
stand for questions alright
thank you both so we'll go to
our audience those under zoom
they wish to speak in support of
as build one ninety nine please
indicate by raising your hand on
resume.
Those in our committee room
those that we should.
Start on my left please serve
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Should I stand you may if you
choose hello
james gages.
I'd like to say that I am
individual disability.
Providers.
And without them.
We cannot survive.
Individuals with disabilities
and if you have a living wage
for these people.
Another father
in their additions one more bill
paid at the end of the month.
Because thirty thousand after
taxes.
The.
Maybe even a little savings for
that person so I believe that if
we give a fair wage.
To offer working individual with
a little bit of training maybe
endorse that guy give another.
Earning that wage.
So I believe that as all let's
support the people.
The people are the back on it we
are all people bike helping the
little guy he's going to do the
best and all of.
Thank you.
Great thank you for joining us
you have to two minutes welcome.
Um
most of our charter schools
already meet the requirement
there's a few that couple that
so so we share the
representative it's desired by
the living wage for those.
Thank you others and support
please memory of two minu.
We support their c.
Horribly to hopeful positions
like bus drivers and critical
support staff but because this
will also improve the economic
conditions of people who are
making the lease and salary in
wages and our schools
we especially appreciate that
the spell bills on the salary
increase to years that this
party passed last year as a
year's continue to play a
critical role in our classrooms.
Hi encourages retention and
improves economic outlook for
these work.
Thank you
please meant
to change the committee with
holland's president to mexico I
would obviously.
The analysis that i've minimum
living wage rate for one adult
new mexico is on average sixteen
dollars per hour yeah me for
what you work in adult minimum
late living wave twenty four
dollars crowd this would bring
the earnings of education
support writers in new mexico
closer to a national true
I also want to really stress the
as you've heard please are the
backgrounds of our schools often
the first point of contact at
the start of the school day and
the providers of consistency
institute united places are
learning it is time to do right
by them
thank you
certain
two minutes
and members of the committee my
name is.
I am also a member of the
program policy.
In november I had opportunity to
go sit in and witness senator
and my party
carty
car carty
name apologized that bill writes
this bill hospital one ninety
nine.
With a representative stands
very senator office also
hymrick as well in in favor of
the bill of rights the national
left and this bill rights is
defini.
The bill rights of the liberal
competitive ways access to high
quality and affordable health
care and health care benefits at
the mel a family that means he
professional development career
dancements attendance and
ipappings and other
meetings related to the students
and healthy work environment
with this bill as you heard and
I echo what the individuals have
said before me they are the back
of the psrps and the
paraprofessionals are the front
line staff and these definitely
deserve a little wages.
Thank you very much
great thank you and you're so
pleased mr chairman members of
the committee my name is lauria
take on the executive director
of any new mexico
thousands of new members in the
state I started transport this
legislation we believe that all
educators in the class stock to
the cafeteria the classroom and
beyond educator students this
bill is beginning to allow you
all educators barely
we stop always trying to
support.
Great thank you anybody else in
the left hand side I read my
rate hand side does which
speaking.
Alright please sir.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee john lipsheets
with the new mexico federation
of labor if l c l representing
our nearly forty thousand
members in all different sectors
private and public sectors in
every corner of the state we
stand in strong solidarity with
our educator brothers and
sisters on this bill white
really did in general of course
we're organization that believes
in fair treatment of workers and
part of that their treatment is
something that would reasonable
living
hopefully all could agree that
you know you know twelve dollars
an hour today it's just not
quite as much as it was last
year or even three years ago
wages need to go up we need to
match with inflation
and unfortunately this is just a
new really the world I would
certainly help you with all
agreed that any professional let
alone those who are taking care
of our children should be making
a fair wage a living way today
so for those reasons we very
much think the spot to
think you support thank you
anybody else in my right
please two minutes.
Yeah.
Well they are too far
from
sorry
it's a hard work that this
legislative body taken in the
last two party cell reason the
level of the three two
thousand progression twenty
twenty three legislation places
are state in the right position
to be really competitive with
other sites.
Helpful one ninety nine will
impact our educational
assistance and we're very wear a
what we are very aware of their
costumes they provide studies
needs both of the special areas
that's on education they also
make sure that
we can have the right.
Our one this year twenty twenty
four calls for increasing
education this is a conversation
to twenty dollars we have more
than forty minutes for two years
now so we are written part of
this the fact that we're
percentage of this legislation
to you yes you consider it they
will provide me that are south
in our classrooms to support.
You don't have anybody is there
any opposition to.
You don't have anything alright
so first on my list is
representative madrid madrid.
It was in the madrid.
This is reminiscent of the cover
alright we'll come back to your
madrid okay there you go
the major drum.
But thank you mister chairman
and take a representative of the
recognizing but is very much the
last of the people
should be the first of the
people that we think about in
the educational system
ever been first hand working
with these folks I can
necessarily tell you that they
say the hard times that we could
put on the past of different
things but there is no reason
like the president to address
the windfall of money that needs
to help these disyoung folks a
state there's even backed in in
the day georgia representative
georgia it and us then represent
a lot of tried to do what we
call your own and from my
previous this is my principle
idea that I thought we would be
able to do we grow our own from
the bottom up because these
people are the people of work
every day with our kids the
interact with our cheers and the
standard kids better sometimes
and even psychologist and
sociologists because they have
an experience of working with
these kids and numbers big
numbers that they can spot the
key signals of the necessities
that may be meaning and child's
life and I can't tell you what
it is to these folks they are
working in these roles or
janitors there are people that
do the heart is contactless job
in most williams are most
dependable most reliable people
are nice and a school system
into that reason this way you
ask me good administrator and
not tell you that the real
people that run the schools of
those people because they know
the hills and out and they can
get the real details and I will
say what a shame in our
educational system that we can't
recognize these people and give
them you know the opportunity
but we're mobility so on two
points one I think it's
something that we should come to
a point in a hope in the in the
move along others legislation
that is good inside that we
consider the same principle
ideas.
Of creating a former or a table
the house these people to have a
moderate increase in the in the
every year that we have an cost
of increase of living it's not
reason that I can say without
knowing the fact that I could
probably say was clearly that
there's gone too many years just
like we did last year and
increase in its ease it was back
in nineteen ninety four that we
did that last time increase
catalynos when we've done the
last increase on these floats so
I import the community members
to understand the education
system as a home and the whole
needs of aspects to felt equal
and I thank you representative
here thank you mister chairman
thank you next to my list is
representative
thank you mister thank you for
these bill is
something that we actually ask
last year I I remember asking
about this year last year how
can we support the front office
there's no nurse calls I just
remember trying to happen in my
farmer's call but try and the
first responders were there
people who makes or take home a
check of two hundred dollars a
week
and they were the people who
were protecting the students
will give them safe.
And that was just not right.
Uh we need people who mister
chair who knows the students who
are built a relationship with
them but with a salary of that
amount is if it got
are you just have one question I
guess he's going to
clarification it sees in one
place that it wouldn't be
adjusted.
With for the years is that
correct because I will head at
this
disabled like a panel of twenty
years and we have to the salary
was in move with that with that
with me it's a a for work of the
people who work this calls mr.
Mr chair representative
guerrilla you just say that one
more time if I recharge over the
years like the language of the
statute of the so mister schur.
Will this amount be upset.
Or a legislature has to come
back in ten years twelve year
five years to review it and
propose a new increase in their
salary or adjustment.
Mister turber presentatives the
way the bill is written would
would put that minimum that will
stay there until.
And and mister chaira and
representative all that we did
not put.
At a custom of living you know
we we could have done that we
could put a cost to living
amendment end
right now we were we were really
struggling frankly that we've
got to get the appropriation
bill out but we really
struggling with the amount
that's going to be in the a the
pay increase is going to be four
percent is going to be three
percent as they're going to be
six percent but we're going to
go ahead and put an
appropriation in I I think we'll
just leave this right now not
put the cost of living in
because that'll set up the whole
new series of fireworks and i'd
rather just get this through as
best we can.
Thank you mister understand that
it is going to make sure that if
we need to pay attention to this
in the future thank you mister
represent bucket thank you for
the determined to thank you for
bringing this forward.
One of the I was honored last
year to be a sponsor on the bill
that actually raised the a level
of paid to twenty five thousand.
I missed a transport the only
thing that was difficult that is
when I went back to my district.
I had to look into the eyes of
people there were not included
and so I I commend you on coming
back and raising sure that we
include some of those job
classes that may not have been
covered in our other bill.
Mister chairman and
representative as you know in a
school desert probably fifty to
sixty percent of the staff and
employees.
Or would I call support staff
are so it's important.
I also agree mister chairman
that we have to have a
competitive hourly wage
you know as you look out there
you can see for many places.
Their advertising for these
prices.
And if we're truly part of the.
Formula for improves a student
alcohols.
And pro you know as far as
progress is the support make it
short his or fed making sure
that they're transport.
The other thing I want to just
kind of close with the
determiners.
Along with helping the.
Employee were also helping
children in that found because
many of our.
Support step their kids attend
our schools so we're helping
them as far as.
You know there to raise their
standard of living
and give our folks who work so
hard.
You know a good start as a
workable liberal bullwage so I
thank you mister chairman I
thank you for bringing this
forward.
Thank you mister chair and think
it representative can't hear me.
So I have one question and then
I
did just declare if I am trying
to work the numbers so can you
tell me what the current benefit
percentages.
I don't know I remember it been
at six percent at some point
that I know has still living and
everything this has m.
Mr chair representative are you
talking about.
The employer contribution rate
for health insurance so mister
chair to be clear there's when
you're an employee there's a lot
of.
Um calculations are going to.
Calculating that all the
benefits associated that could
include could but it's the
federal income taxes stating
come taxes it's health care it's
all of all of that in this case
I think
yeah if you have that percentage
that would work representative
point five benefits reshow rate
and these calculations bec.
Slowers contributions to health
insurance and particularly will
be.
You know i'm sorry I am hearing
impaired and they didn't quite
hear the full response sure
sorry am we used to point five
benefits ratio when we did this
calculations and that's a little
bit higher than we typically do
on average and that's because we
know that these are some of the
lowest period employees and so
the employer health contribution
will be greater
thank you mister chair and
representative.
I have a little bit of headache
when it.
Not vote for a bill that's
giving raises to our employees
and never would do that my
concern is what you were just
addressing and that is the
custom living in deckso I
understand our desire to clarify
a minimum wage and that's
important especially since the
history of the state and as
we've heard articulated over and
over again
we don't they're living.
This particular sector of the
workforce is really though.
The bathroom and they're already
living at.
Below minimum wage and with all
the customer living and.
Um going up I just wanted to
refer to the less
analysis.
On the last page two at the very
bottom custom living analysis
that's really really important
because already were showing
that a family of four with two
working adults.
The minimum living weight living
way minimum living wait is
estimated to be twenty four o
three and we've all been
speaking mister chair about
living wages I I removed.
Since the day I got.
Sworn in in twenty thirteen i've
been rate.
Introducing the bill to raise
the minimum wage to fifteen
dollars that lasted only a few
years.
Because quickly it became a
parent that in our state
especially in a study that was
done a major housing steady that
was done a family
would need in twenty this was in
twenty.
Would need at least eighteen
dollars an hour in albert hirkey
to be able to afford a two
bedroom.
The.
I then changed the minimum wage
bill to include
costs a living index because in
our discussions we thought
mister chair it would be on.
It would just be unfair and to
have our employees not know what
to expect and to be locked into
a specific amount.
So that's where my heart.
Everyone in my district working
port not everyone but everyone
the majority of my district are
working poor and they have
multiple families living
together now under one.
Roof in order to be able to
just.
Hey the expenses are living
expect basic living expenses
such as
housing.
The.
And their constantly reminding
me and I see this across the
state.
That when you address when you
raise any type of minimum wage.
Can you please encourage your
colleagues to include a custom
living so i'm going on record.
Representative mister chair.
The.
Somehow at some point and I
don't know what that is.
Um
we need to just be bold in our
approaches and we have the
money.
We have the resources we've been
pumping in to hopefully I
assisting our local districts.
And we're now at the point where
w.
At this point mr chair and.
In the union still this anyway
they negotiate really great
contracts firm employees.
So i'd like us as a legislature.
Distance strongly insolid.
The.
Do everything in their.
Increased.
Our salaries across the board.
To make them really living
wages.
We can do it we just need to be
bold and courageous in our
approaches and then find the way
to.
Amplify and also to.
Provide.
And representative that you
understand that you believe it
you you act on it but I just
feel it.
I don't know who said it would
they said this is getting as
closer to a minimum wage while
we keep getting closer to a
minimum w.
So no matter how close we get to
that.
Fifteen sixteen wherever we're
going to be it it's not going to
catch up because.
When the minimum wage was
enacted I forget the year.
We should be already in the
at the federal level it's a
shampoo.
That were not so I just don't.
This.
The.
Mr chairman representative just
feel really strongly about this
i'm not going to.
They just have to find a way and
maybe you can help me to wait to
explain it as we go on to
consider it news letters
whatever we need to explain why
it is that we don't take those
bold a.
On the what do you still sit on
the appropriations now well we
understand the appropriation
process so I would together.
Work on on.
On a way to encourage or to give
our constituents hope.
And faith
that we keep them in mind and I
don't want this to be I know it
took us five years just to
remove the probationary period
for education assistance that's
the bill I carried for five
years it took me five years just
to remove.
The.
A probationary period that was
just outrageous so I don't want
us to go through another.
Thank you represent matter thank
you mister chair thank you
manager for bringing this
forward I this is a great thing
I sighed onto it as I believe
in.
And many other support stop put
into this as we know you know we
worked very hard last year to
get the eighty percent important
country.
And i.
The question that I have is when
we last your home and when when
we increased it to t.
I had employees that had been
with a district twenty five
thirty years who were getting
paid twenty five k.
And we have new employee.
So it was there any discussion
or or talk about.
Employees that have been there
for twenty plus years who are
barely even making that.
Umm mister chair and I
represented value I I got to
same car as soon as that bill
went through everybody that was
making twenty five thousand
called me and a I think that is
up to the local school board and
the district to decide how
they're going to handle that
compaction and they certainly
with the federal money and I
really see on heaven anymore but
they were able to make those
adjustments and I felt we felt I
felt that that should be left at
the local decision making body
for that superintendent and
that's school board to decide
how they're going to equalize or
compact those that wages are for
their their employees who had
been with them a long time and I
know what this bill does is it
at eastern sets of floor for
everybody so what we can do is
help school boards and school
superintendents at least say
this is the floor this is what
we're required to do we're not
saying you can't pay more we're
just saying this is what you're
required to do now so
and I think those decisions are
really you know I am.
Like class size I think are
should be left at the local
school to decide those things
III feel strong.
Thank you mister charles really
appreci.
You emphasize something that's
very important that's local
control.
Another question I have mister
chair is
do we have.
Umm.
Err we will put an appropriation
of mister chair and represent
her value we will put out an
appropriation bill today or
tomorrow I and start going
forward that it can vary the
amount of sparing from twenty
four million forty million right
now and began lots of other
things that play but and i've
been a rain maker that means a
fun raiser for a long time i've
raised hundreds of million
dollars i'm i'm just saying that
was what I did before I got to
the legislature but I this I do
know if you don't ask the
answers always know
so we are going to press forward
with this there is money this is
an opportunity and I I can't
think of anything.
More important than
strengthening our schools in
general and that making sure
that all of our school
employees.
Work in our uhm.
I'm gonna say a uh uh an
economically safe environment I
think that's important and I
will work toward that and I will
see what we can do on the cost
of living to represent it
thank you matter thank you
manager I I really appreciate
transfers thank you for this
thank you mister chair thank
you.
This but I did have a couple of
questions
what's the current state's
minimum way.
Mister turves these current
minimum.
And thank you for that for so
it's twelve dollars now and
then.
A fifteen dollar minu.
Thank you
but i'll say also that in
starting in twenty twenty two
the legislature included
language and house bill to that.
Add a funding and required
school districts to pay that
fifteen dollars a great in in I
appreciate that answer and you
bring up the general
appropriations act because but
we're trying to do here as.
But the difference for members
is when you put it in the
general appropriation act that's
continued that's for that ye.
Every year into the general
appropriation.
Thank you for those answers at
this time i'll entertain a
motion
I moved to a bus on build one
ninety nine so we have a new
pass motion in house but wanting
that representative
back
i'll be both so bald to ask is
there any opposition to the
dupassmotion.
Seeing known hearing none you
have to pass on house
thank you folks
thank you very much
we will see you and
I know you are hoping for a
saturday but we will see you on
