Representative exam.
Representative.
Your.
Since.
Representative Andrew is here
yes.
Representative Ladda.
Your.
Representative that year.
Representative are markup I
it'll.
Menteri Representative with me
on the Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
Senator.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser.
Here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative.
Representative Garant.
I see that Representative we
have Representative here
Representative welcome
Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado I'm
here okay.
Representative dial.
John okay.
The one that I see them on here
chair.
Here so we do have we do have a
quorum.
Great thank you so much Linda
good morning everybody happy
Monday
so I notice and I have pointed
out to me last night that some
of the things on the website say
thirty it's still says room
three oh nine I think we know
that that none of those things
are true will be sure to get
those buttoned up and squared
away but that will start
At eight o'clock unless probably
it's a Saturday or later in the
session as things kind of slow
down for us so hopefully they do
but will always start promptly
at eight o'clock okay so good
morning folks this morning we
have a presentation from Ellie
S. C. as well as LFC
This morning I'm going to I see
Charles Lee from.
LFC is in the.
Okay so pro Charles to the
panelists was there anybody else
stricter gradual that I needed
to promote to panelists you
enjoy Mr chair it so it looks
like I think we're all here
Jerry sunny myself and Charles.
Excellent well Committee so
we'll hear from LFC and LESC and
then we will take questions so
if you have questions please go
ahead and raise your hand but
remember I'll be keeping a
running list on my note pad of
those of you that have questions
so if you're hand drops I don't
think I can get you if I did
miss you of course it's an
accident and I'd be happy to
look allow you all speak and ask
your questions okay but we'll
hear the presentations and then
we'll go ahead and get with
comments and questions okay so
director dental if you would
welcome you all.
Chair I.
Last night at about nine o'clock
a power point to all of you and
then this morning I realized I
had missed two sheets of sent
those to you guys as well
we're gonna split the power
point up in just so you know
I've got to get over to Senate
that at some point this morning
they're doing their org meeting
so I'm I'm on the first ten or
twelve pages of this and then I
may pop out and popped back in
We've got.
Actively part of a presentation
that is a beefed up presentation
that we did to for new member
orientation so some of this is
going to be potentially the
fourth time some of you guys
ever heard of this there's a
little more detail on this and
so what we thought we do as an
overview of public school
formula funding
student outcomes and then school
budgeting these are things that
will come up as you guys are
debating bills
some of it's fairly technical
and so this is meant to give you
a little more detail and then
know that we are definitely
around if you guys have
questions if you want one on
ones if you need more
information than what we
provided here.
we've done a joint presentation
with legislative finance
committee legislative education
study committee staff this shows
you were going to do an overview
of the funding formula funding
trends ensure budget talk
briefly about the Martinez and
Yazzie lawsuit student outcomes
and then do sort of an education
budget one oh one next slide.
The New Mexico house and
equalize public education
funding formula and this was not
always the case pre nineteen
seventy four the state really
relied on local property tax
wealth to fund public schools.
And it was.
Problematic and that property
wealth is generated at a
property taxes are generated
really different rate per
student across school districts
dependent on
property valuations in those
communities so you have
some of yourself these districts
because of gas and oil have high
property valuation where is your
northwest central consolidated
Gallup schools have fairly low
property tax valuations so as a
policy matter the legislature at
that time in acted and equalized
education funding formula which
supported the policy that all
students should be entitled to
equal education opportunity
despite differences in local
school district wealth.
Wealth in the form of tax
collections the land grant
permanent fund revenue is
collected at the state level and
then re distributed out to
public schools so pre late
nineteen eighties we were much
more reliant on property taxes
even in our public education
funding formula and right now
only about twenty to twenty one
twenty two million is generated
in operational funding through a
half mill levy at the local
level so.
You compare that to a three
point two billion dollar budget
it is less than one percent is
generated at the local level
for operations.
The formula funds eighty nine
school districts ninety six
charter schools of a vastly
different sizes so you have
school districts that are below
one hundred students and then
you have Albuquerque is the
largest school district that has
seventy plus thousand students.
And the formula tends to fund
those schools similarly but then
also recognizes some of those
differences and has factors to
recognize those differences so
the formula is not static and
you guys continue to review the
formula on an annual basis it
has been changed over eighty
times since the nineteen
seventies and those changes are
generally intended to ensure
ensure equity and students are
generating the types of money
they need based on their
individual
individual needs.
That means
School districts and charter
schools are awarded what we call
program units based primarily on
student enrollment so as
students at the kindergarten
level will generate certain
program units student at a fifth
grade level will generate
certain program units
and then we out on different
funding program units for
different needs and then per
program participation so across
the state a student in
kindergarten generates the same
amount of funding is a student
and say Deming as a student in
Albuquerque
but then we look and see does
that student have additional
needs so if a student is special
education they will generate
additional funding if they are
participating in one of the five
programs that are funded through
the funding formula they will
generate additional funding for
their school district.
you'll often hear the term ma'am
amendment is effectively student
enrollment on a particular date
so we collected data on three
different dates October December
and February and so madam counts
are the and rolled students
qualified students that are
enrolled on those count dates.
formula funding then that's
allocated out to school
districts is based on prior year
ma'am so we look back this year
to enrollment last December and
last February to allocate funds
for school districts and charter
schools this year.
X. except.
Except for
Enrollment growth funding so
that's a place where you will
see adjustments made in the
funding formula for current year
enrollment if a school district
or charter school experiences
growth.
The formula that distributes
operational funds to school
districts and charter schools
non categorically
what that means is it is the
distribution model so it is
attempting to take the money you
appropriate distributed out to
schools
to school districts and charter
schools based on based on need
based on the factors that are
generating program units for
that district or charter.
So there's a lot of local
economy provided in the funding
formula
it often comes up the question
if the school district generates
X. amount of dollars for special
education do they have to spend
on special education and the
short answer is no there are
some requirements in the funding
formula that say you have to
meet statutory requirements and
so long as you can demonstrate
your meeting statutory
requirements it doesn't
It doesn't matter that you're
spending aligns with how you
were generating funding through
the funding formula with one
caveat
I think the only area that I can
think of that fund students a
certain way is the at risk index
the at risk index index
mandates that districts spend
money on it English learners
title one students and Google
students for evidence based
academic and non academic
services so it's fairly broad a
large percentage of kids fall
within those categories but it's
an attempt to try to make sure
those dollars aren't diluted and
spent on other types of supports
for non non at risk kids.
I think so we and sunny are
going to do at a higher level
conversation about the funding
formula so I'm gonna somewhat
skip over this except for to say
you guys don't appropriate the
total amount that schools are
assumed to have
every year for public school so
we have what's called an
equalized funding formula and
that means we look at three
local revenue sources so that's
down on number three in the
middle
you guys determine what you
think is an appropriate amount
of funding every year and then
you subtract seventy five
percent of credits for local and
federal revenue so seventy five
percent of basic impact aid
funds seventy five percent of
the half mill levy and seventy
five percent of forest reserve
funds to equal the amount of
money you appropriate so the
amount of money you appropriate
historically has been about
fifty five to sixty five million
in this last and
the program cost amount you
assume districts need to
operate.
The program cost number is
important though because that
gets you to what we call a unit
value so as we talked about
earlier districts generate
program units PED will aggregate
those program units and then
divide the program you all
program cost by program units to
equally unit value
unify you sometimes is
increasing sometimes is the it's
mostly increasing but it can
decrease if a large number of
program units are eliminated
from the funding formula without
any additional funding.
It's a lot of this stuff is done
you know program units are done
at the statutory level and then
the unit value setting is done
with PED PED the secretary sets
the unit value and has gotten
back into the practice of
working with legislative staff
as they're going through their
assumptions to make sure they're
flowing money out on the front
and a school districts and not
holding too much back
they gets flowed out in
February.
Over the next slide overview of
funding formula.
So as I mentioned earlier
program units are generally the
product of the number of
students enrolled in a given
program and the cost
differential assigned to that
program in statute
The majority of program units is
driven as you see on the bottom
in the blue bike basic
membership and so that means
students enrolled in.
Prekindergarten so three and
four year old prekindergarten
students for developmentally
delayed only developmentally
delayed three and four year olds
up through twelfth grade
enrollment generating about
fifty eight percent it is
distributing about fifty eight
percent of the funds through
those program units.
You'll see another twenty seven
percent is distributed for at
risk students through both the
special education factor in the
red and the at risk index which
is up there in the purple and
then a much smaller amount for
other things that try to
capture different costs at
different districts so the
staffing cost multiplier
allocates about five percent of
total funding to districts based
on the qualifications of
licensure level and years of
experience of their teachers
size adjustment funding which
has been a pretty big
conversation over the last few
years it was growing at a fairly
disproportionate right to other
program units it's allocating
about four percent of total
funding out to small schools
in the next few years that will
only go out to small schools and
small districts rather than
small schools and any districts
based on changes you guys made
in the twenty nineteen
legislative session and then
there are you know.
Typically programs aren't
specifically funded through the
funding formula but there are
five programs I'm guessing Sonny
and Joe you're going to talk a
little bit more about that but
bilingual fine arts P. E.
Fine arts appear limited to
elementary schools and then
kindergarten five plus an
extended learning time programs
both their new programs but in
the formula in two thousand
nineteen to.
Added additional instructional
time to the school year.
What you will see is this is a
state wide snapshot of how
funding flows through the
funding formula but if you look
at individual school districts
and charter schools you would
see.
Really different pie charts for
each
Each school district and charter
school so dependent on their
size dependent on their student
population depending on student
needs
these factors change.
next slide sunny.
Chair of the budget this this
chart shows you in FY three
schools are funded about one
point seven billion.
In FY twenty one that is jumps
to over three billion so we're
at about three point three
billion I believe three point
four billion this year that
represents almost a doubling of
funding during that time.
Next the what what I will say I
think I'll get to it it's it's
two slides up so so funding
trends that funding you will see
public schools represents forty
five percent almost forty six
percent of the overall general
fund spending
you guys authorized in FY twenty
one so unlike most states again
that rely on property tax wealth
to fund schools the most school
funding ninety three percent
ninety four percent of school
funding is coming from the state
level from general fund revenue
collections
higher ed represents another
eleven percent so you've got
fifty six fifty seven percent of
general fund revenues allocated
towards education the next
largest sector you will see
Is Medicaid and health and Human
Services another roughly twenty
five percent through that
through those to health and
Human Services in Medicaid that
leaves not a lot of money for
other other government
activities so the judicial
branch is only getting four and
a half percent all other
agencies five point three
percent outside of corrections
which gets six and a half
percent so you is the
legislature are prioritizing
education and social services
for folks through through
Medicaid to behavioral health
early childhood education
supports in some instances that
are coming through HHS and
Medicaid.
The legislature only represents
less than one percent I believe
of total funding so if that
gives you some context most of
the funding is going out to
other agencies.
The next slide if you think back
to the the comments public
school funding has doubled in
the last eighteen or so years
enrollment however was on a on a
fairly steady increase over
Over a period of time from the
early two thousands to.
Probably the last few years and
we've seen a steady decline in
enrollment that is partially
driven.
Personally driven and I think Mr
chairman I just saw your message
popped up I just sent materials
out to members and Linda so I
don't have the staff list and
didn't send them out to others.
Thank you thank you there is
just a question in the in the
chat about all members receiving
them so
If we can make sure that that
all members are included I know
everything's new we have new
members just make sure that
everybody's everybody maybe new
to this committee is included
into
And everybody's email for for
future reference if you will
shoot me a message will make
sure we get it to whoever missed
it and not I thought I had
everybody on the list my
apologies for that
so enrollment spent on a steady
decline over the last few years
and that's primarily because our
birth rates are going down as
enrollment has been decreasing
though you haven't really seen a
decrease in enrollment growth
units and that's primarily been
driven
By students moving from school
districts into charter schools
and then the Green Line is
showing you.
The green lines membership right
sunny the Green Line is
membership so showing that
steady decline in membership the
blue line on the top is also
showing that even.
Even though we have a growing
enrollment size funding was
increasing part of that again
was because of a decline or I'm
sorry an increase in the number
of charter schools statewide
service charters were being
implemented they were allowed to
generate size funding and that
was driving a lot of interesting
revenue allocations during
especially the time of
Recession years The Great
Recession side disproportionate
amount of new money go towards
charter schools and did not make
it out to school districts where
they were anticipated to be
distributed to so that
Map on the left shows you
enrollment changes and so you
will note most of the state has
shrinking enrollment even though
there may be growth state you
know particularly in Albuquerque
at charter schools the entire
student population has been
declining except for really this
the southeast part of the state
and a lot of times that will
align with the boom in gas and
oil
How the schools grew
significantly in FY twenty
with the up tick in gas and oil
and the work that was going on
down there last year.
Slide nine shows you funding
trends and share of the budget
Of the of the school budget and
and this is really focusing on.
At risk funding so this is
something you'll hear a lot
about over the next sixty days
and and even through the
enrollment it relates to the
Yazzie Martinez Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit the legislature is how
to focus on the at risk index
for a number of years yeah risk
factors allocating funds to
school districts to support a
gan title one English learner
and
Google students and recognizing
that more funding was needing
the at risk index has been more
than tripled in the recent years
in addition I mentioned to
additional programs that the
legislature established during
the twenty twenty nineteen
legislative session kindergarten
five plus and the extended
learning time program K. five
plus adds an additional twenty
five days to the elementary
school year in Charles slides
and we'll talk about the
benefits we've seen from K. five
plus in eliminating the
achievement gap and particularly
when it's coupled with kids who
have participated in
Prekindergarten and then
extended learning time programs
so an additional ten
instructional days.
Those those are really important
if you go back to two thousand
six two thousand seven two
thousand eight the state engaged
in a funding formula study and
one of the big recommendations
from that study is we needed to
have a hundred and eighty five
instructional days in order for
students to get what they in
order for teachers and educators
actually to to believe students
would get what they needed to
get out of the educational
program and we've actually been
moving the opposite direction so
we moved from I think it was
about two thousand and eleven
from having a hundred eighty
instructional days in work on an
average right now of.
Of about a hundred and seventy
when you count for your school
districts and I four days school
districts and five days school
districts together.
Participation in these two
programs
K. five plus participation has
been low it's sometimes a heavy
lift for districts we think
districts could do
a better job of thinking about
it as an extended school year
program rather than an
additional program tacked on at
the beginning of the year part
of the challenges with
participation this year where
the pandemic clearly and PED
canceled summer programs knowing
that the pandemic wasn't gonna
last summer programs to happen
extended learning time program
uptake has has been much better
than K. five plus this year.
We're really interested in both
legislative finance committee
and Legislative Education
Committee the committees
endorsed.
funding recommendations that
allow for every school district
or charter school to participate
in one of these two programs
next year because of the the
potential learning loss in the
challenges were expecting to see
with school closures this year.
Unspent funding from both of
those programs is estimated at
about a hundred and seventy
million at the end of this year
so rather than pushing those
dollars out to districts if they
didn't participate in one of the
two programs money reverts to
the public education form that
will allow you guys to
appropriate those dollars
during this legislative session.
Next slide.
A lot of those reforms put in
because of the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuits on twenty fourteen the
state was sued by two individual
plaintiff groups that alleged
New Mexico was not meeting its
constitutional obligation to
provide sufficient funding for
at risk public school students.
A court in twenty nineteen after
I think it was six weeks of
trial and millions of pages of
documentation provided down
outputs are dismal
outputs being student
proficiency.
Graduation rates college
remediation rates and therefore
that must mean inputs are
insufficient so the funding in
the programming that would be
supported by funding must be
insufficient.
Another key
key finding that the court
notice was overstate needs to be
enhanced so one of the key
arguments that was made by the
state and the lawsuit was we can
districts money and it's up to
them to decide how to use their
funding and they're not
sometimes using it as well as
they could and the court said.
That's not a good enough excuse
for low student outcomes it is
the state's responsibility to
provide adequate oversight to
school districts and that the
state and that interpretation
was viewing its authority to
narrow.
that strikes a really
interesting balance in a local
control state where we've
historically left it to school
districts to figure out how to
do their budgeting and then the
court really set the public
education department needs to
take a more active role
in that process to ensure
students or adequately served.
Slide eleven
the court's findings and
conclusions identified concerns
to be addressed but the court
really struck a balance between
separation of powers and did not
mandate the Legislature pick a
certain pathway to fix the
issues identified to their
issues identified that are that
they can be addressed
legislatively in case of
probation or statutes issues
that the executive can address
as they're implementing programs
and providing oversight and
accountability to how funds are
going flowing through the
funding formula and grant funded
programs so there were.
Three areas primarily that the
court noted
Ferrary is really the court
noted funding shortfalls
instructional materials access
to technology programming that
targeted at risk students
including extended learning time
programs prekindergarten K.
three plus which was our
precursor to kindergarten five
plus
smaller class sizes and targeted
reading programs and then the
court really went on to say
really the highest need areas
quality teachers if we don't
have quality teachers we're
gonna have a really hard time
closing the achievement gap and
we need to do a better a better
job at retaining at training.
And retaining our teachers.
In addition
a big claim that was made was
that we weren't providing the
multicultural education that our
students need with twenty three
tribes Peublo ations in the
state English learners.
The state needed to do a better
job implementing the bilingual
Education Act the Indian
Education Act and the Hispanic
Education Act.
The court in those three areas
however did not find
deficiencies in the acts
themselves but rather found
deficiencies in implementation
that those three acts would
would help us ensure that we had
a culturally and linguistically
appropriate education and that
education system for students
but we haven't done a good job
as a state implementing it.
I think we're under the well
that what what I will say fine
is thank you thinking about that
those are some of the challenges
you guys will see and and and be
debating over the legislative
session how do you ensure the
system
is adequately providing
education for public school
students probably within this
this framework and I think the
legislature has been very
deliberate about that over the
last two years
In its decision making trying to
target changes to statutes and
funding to address the findings
of the lawsuit.
Charles.
Right Charles please.
Everybody can hear me okay.
Okay great so.
Going back to what makes agency
casual just talked about and
that the court findings.
Thank you I mean the courts
found a causal link between
inputs and outputs for the
education system.
So while the legislature's
prioritize funding for education
you know for as long as I've
been working for you all.
Really your true north is
student outcomes that's
graduation rates that students
has results there's a variety of
other ways we can look at
student test results but this is
Matt from a group of researchers
and Stanford that took all of
the state's test scores for all
students across a period of time
grades three through eight.
And linked it up to a single
unified tests to be able to do
an apples to apples comparison
and our accountability system
sense no child left behind
nationally and before that you
know Texas was a pioneer in
standards based education
reforms essentially states have
been setting standards on what
my daughter who's in third grade
in our online class right now
what she needs to be able to
know and demonstrate that she
knows so you set a standard and
you want to benchmark whether or
not kids are reaching that
standard.
This map shows New Mexico's
students are below grade level
no surprise there you know when
we wreck ourselves on the Naples
we look at our own standards
based assessments the the level
of proficiency of our students
is not where we want to be.
that to Florida.
Tennessee.
And Massachusetts Massachusetts
is largely recognized as the
best education system in the
country highs proficiency rates
on the nape the national
assessment of education progress
Massachusetts students scored
about fifty percent proficient
New Mexico students are in the
mid twenties one of the lowest.
the next map.
That's not the only way to
measure educational outcomes the
education system is designed to
produce basically a year's worth
of academic growth so student
coming into third grade learns
the third great content and
should be able to demonstrate
that they have learned the third
great content at the end of the
year so and then move on to
fourth grade.
That's not the way that our
accountability systems measure
of the impact of the performance
of the education system
unfortunately so this is
something we need to start
looking at because now when we
look in New Mexico you see that
students are learning above the
national average they're making
more than they're making about a
year's worth of academic
progress one really drill down
to two and a looking at a couple
slides from here compare that to
Florida we're basically students
are not learning
a year's worth of academic
content Tennessee they were
similar to New Mexico with a
below grade average and look at
Massachusetts.
So what's happening is students
are starting out in New Mexico
schools about two and two and a
half years behind below grade
level in kindergarten when we
looked at some of our high
poverty schools a number of
years ago we found one out of
five students showing up to
kindergarten and can't identify
a single letter yet they're
expected based on our standards
to be emergent readers by the
end of kindergarten so that's a
pretty daunting task that our
school system has and it's
pretty uniform across the state
with those types of challenges
with the the kind of poverty
that we see the type of family
background so many children
children experience once they
get into school they progress
similar to their
More Fletcher affluent Joel
appears economically but once
they're out of school they fall
behind and like I said when I
start school there behind so
there's not enough catch up
growth within the education
system for students to be able
to demonstrate mastery of the
content standards that you've
sent in statute at that grade
level and that's really
important part of the response
to the school finance lawsuit
because the court didn't say
what's a sufficient amount of
student outcomes in terms of
proficiency they said the
outcomes that we're getting
right now our dismal they're
terrible but they didn't say
what's not just what was not
terrible what's constitutionally
adequate
but they said that all the
inputs that are associated with
that must be insufficient
because the outcomes whether
they're graduation rates or not
or are not where we need to be.
Next slide.
So.
These are proficiency rates are
pre pandemic for all students
you know about a third of
students are reading at grade
level about a fifth are
performing at the grade level
there's definitely other subject
matters that are just as
important as reading and math
because of the core things that
that we've been focused on we
should be talking more about
science social studies any other
metrics that we can bring into
the accountability system to get
an idea about how students are
doing but these are the two that
have been received the most
focused.
Next slide.
The graph on the top we've done
this through for a number of
different cohorts of students
where we've taken our
longitudinal data system at PED
stars and follow groups of
students across their academic
careers and what we found is and
and this is just one group from
a school year eight to thirteen
that they were making about a
year's worth of academic
progress the problem is they
were starting out many of them
are particularly low income
students starting out below
grade level and staying below
grade level so the system wasn't
able to help them catch up it's
performing the way that it's
designed but design has a flaw
when you match it up to the
types of student challenges
that's been exacerbated over the
last year we're students have
been basically out of school
since March we think that based
on our research nationally and
and apply that to New Mexico
locally with the amount of
online learning going on that
students are likely falling
further behind so we don't have
an expectation that the school
system for this academic year
even at the end of last academic
year is producing that.
annual rate of growth that we're
seeing pre pandemic that's
really important because we need
to be able to help students not
only catch up pre pandemic
levels but now post pandemic
where the management fallen
further behind your no fault of
all of the hard work of of
educators across the state.
Next slide.
So this is the real academic
achievement gap and it really
falls along economic and
language lines
Hispanic students who are not
learning English and are not
from economically disadvantaged
families I've got different
routes and and data show that
they are performing at a much
higher level than their Hispanic
peers were from low and low
income families are learning
English so the same is true
across all ethnicities and
races.
So for students that are not
from low income families they're
performing at about fifty
percent proficiency levels
remember I talked about
Massachusetts and having about
fifty percent when they were in
part we're seeing that with New
Mexico students and again this
is a group of students starting
in fifth grade following their
academic careers through eighth
grade we're seeing some modest
improvements over that period of
time where they're making more
than a year's worth of growth
because they're improving their
proficiency levels.
So for students from low income
families in this case
represented by being on free and
reduced lunch you see almost a
ten percent gain over from S.
school year fifteen to eighteen
so pretty good progress for that
group of students but still only
about twenty five twenty six
percent of them are
demonstrating that they're
proficient on those high
academic standards that you use
that as an expectation.
Students who are free and
reduced and learning English
we're very far behind in being
able to help the students only
about three and a half percent
by the time they got to eighth
grade were demonstrating
proficiency.
So a lot of work needs to be
really focused on this
particular students and and
these are the students at the
court highlighted that the state
should be paying attention to
and that's why devoted so much
new funding towards at risk
services as well as extending
the school year to provide more
learning opportunity and more
learning time for students to be
able to help catch them up to
where they need to be next
slide.
So you've made big investments
in and opportunities for
students to have a longer school
year at the same time we need to
make sure that students are
actually going to school
attendance is really a leading
indicator that we should all be
paying much closer attention to
we've come to that conclusion
I'll be presenting to the school
board association next month I'm
going to stress for school
boards to be monitoring this at
their monthly meetings
Students aren't there they're
not getting the education
interventions that they need and
there's a lot of students
missing a lot of time from
school particularly and for
whatever reason
you know I wouldn't get bogged
down in the chronic absenteeism
and truancy definitions your
students aren't there for
whatever reason academically
they're not going to perform at
the same level students who are
there and the shows this for the
the the same group of students
of this cohort starting in
school you're fifteen you can
see much bigger academic games
for students that release their
ninety five percent of the time
there's a large group of
students who are missing ten
percent of the time or more and
their scores just drop
Precipitously even though they
made some modest learning games.
The big gaps there.
You think about the traditional
school calendar missing ten at
least ten percent of the time
that's eighteen days you know
nine days.
per semester that's a lot of
instructional time of students
are missing and and some
students are missing even more
than that tracking the scores
further down that's one of the
rationales for the big
investments in the at risk index
that at risk index provides
potential social work services
that are not tied to special
education we seen if you go to
the next slide.
This doesn't have it but
The social work services that
are not tied it to special
education can help stabilize
family situations and improve
attendance.
we see a lot of mobility within
the school system I might have a
slide into in a couple of slide
showing the amount of mobility
that's going on with that end up
analysis at school sites and
found for example schools in
southeast Albuquerque where
you'll see a lot of mobility
going on between the schools in
southeast Albuquerque in the
south valley where students will
be moving back and forth back
and forth in and out of school
missing a lot of school a lot of
that is due to housing
instability for their families
as well as other unstable family
situations where students are
missing schools a large portion
of time next slide.
One area that we've been making
decent progress though I would
argue that we should be making
far better progress is and
graduation rates particularly
for native American students
there's been a tremendous amount
to a decrease as well and the
amount of remediation that's
going on for students to go to
help end up going on to college
New Mexico has one of the
highest college going rates in
the country in the top ten for
since the lottery scholarship
frankly was implementing but a
lot of students were ending up
going to college and needing to
participate in remedial courses
because high schools did not
adequately prepare them for
college expectations colleges
have been reforming how they
approach for mediation high
schools have been reforming how
they prepare students to
decrease that we're at a point
where we don't even measure
remediation anymore because of
those reforms
But New Mexico in our opinion a
staff to get to the national
average which is about eighty
five percent graduation rate in
a short amount of time with a
focus on a select few high
schools across the state we only
need about twenty six hundred
more graduates to reach the
national graduation rate we
start breaking that down by
school district and by high
school and community those are
really doable members it's
handfuls and you know smaller
districts and scores within a
larger high schools very
different results across the
state so being able to target
supports to districts there the
map on the left our high school
graduation rates you see green
is above the state average all
the other colors are are below.
The scores the map on the right
gray is third grade reading
scores that are above the state
average
the colors all the other colors
are are below the state average
at some point at some level so
really needing to kind of tailor
supports.
to districts really target
resources by PED can be helpful
to improving our overall
statewide averages next slide.
So you've made enough
investments as a legislature to
essentially provide an
additional two and a half years
worth of educational opportunity
to every student high poverty
schools in New Mexico that's a
potentially game changing now
the districts have not taking
you up on that offer as of yet
but what we see with some of our
research is that when students
participate in these
interventions whether it's pre
K. or or K. three plus in this
particular example really
stacking those interventions
that you know we're betting and
we're seeing in there and the
research that it's paying off so
this particular graph shows
groups of students who
participate in a both pre K..
K. three plus where they're
student academic achievement
shows that essentially
eliminated yet she might cap
between their non low income
students who didn't participate
in any of either of those.
NEC students who are low income
and didn't get either of those
participation levels of their
scores were much lower.
Next slide.
The court decision was
fascinating from my perspective
because it was heavily based on
what research says works the
court spent a lot of time going
through the the literature about
what works in education to get
better outcomes for students
particularly for low income
students and citing deficiencies
where we weren't finding those
things at a level for enough
students to get interventions.
LFC and Elia Elia C. do a lot of
work bringing to you all the
best research about what works
how we can tailor it to New
Mexico's unique specific
circumstances and inform policy
and and budget decisions and
that's really what form the
basis a lot of a lot of the
reform efforts of legislature's
implemented you taken the best
research whether it's presented
by NCSL our work to and through
results first which takes a lot
of randomized control trials and
we adapt that to New Mexico
specific conditions to provide
return on investment estimates
as well as impact evaluation our
own New Mexico specific
evaluation of homegrown programs
like K. three plus our own LFC
evaluations you're using
research to inform your decision
making when it comes to what to
fund and what policies to put in
place.
Next slide.
So.
Comparing the US nationally and
New Mexico nationally we know
we're not where we want to be
and that's why it's so important
to try to fund those evidence
based interventions and
education to try to bring us up
to a more competitive advantage
our students are not just
competing against other students
across the United states are
competing in a global economy
and we need to make sure they're
they're able to to get the kind
of education advantages that
they need to compete globally
throughout their lifetimes next
slide.
One thing that we learned
through that no time to lose
work at National Conference of
legislatures
it out when they compared the US
educational system to some of
the other best education systems
in the world.
Is there are no silver bullets
you can't just implement pre K.
and expect that to solve all our
problems you can just implement
K. five plus extended learning
program you can't implement some
literacy program you can't
implement just community schools
but really it takes
a multitude of of those
interventions and
And packaging of them in a
systemic in a sustained way over
a long period of time so there's
no silver bullets we find this
when we go out and work
individually with local school
sites there's some
characteristics that schools
that are beating the odds all
typically have it doesn't matter
what curriculum they're
implementing it doesn't matter
what their financing is at the
school site level if all of
those educators at that school
side have high expectations for
their students and they're all
rowing in generally the same
direction you think about again
it doesn't matter which
curriculum they're choosing as
long as they're coordinating
that both horizontally and
vertically they're paying
attention to data valuing
students multi cultural
backgrounds again setting high
expectations the schools tend to
be beating the odds the same
thing when it comes to world
class education systems
across the globe there they're
moving in the same direction
next slide.
So these are just a nape score
comparisons from a number of
different their math is on the
left reading is on the right.
The next slide.
And I just talked about the time
Lucy can bring up the next
slide.
Again common elements of high
performing education systems
children come to school ready to
learn we don't have that in New
Mexico that's one of the reasons
why we're implementing pre K.
making big investments in early
childhood to try to close that
gap or at least some of that gap
before students come to school
but we know that we're not gonna
be able to close the entire gap
and so that's the rationale for
additional learning time
opportunities you know think
about I can remember
My daughter when she was in
fourth grade she had a really
energetic.
A fourth grade teacher who in
the middle of the spring
semester emailed all the parents
and said I hate this time of
year because I have so much I
want to teach the students and
we're running out of time we
don't have enough time to cover
the content that is expected of
us you're making more time
available you're not relying on
homework to make up for that gap
you're providing a longer school
day through the extended
learning time program you're
providing a longer school year
through the K. five plus program
for elementary school.
I don't know if folks realize
that statutes contemplate that
high schoolers need a longer
amount of school you know there
to instructional time for high
school students is much longer
about twenty percent longer than
it is for children and
elementary school what we know
through research is we should be
investing early almost flipping
at but are statutes are not set
up to contemplate
additional investments of
learning time for elementary
schools K. five plus makes a
difference we also have to have
a world class teaching
profession.
Making big investments in that
teaching profession you're
making big investments through
the extended learning time
program for professional
development for those teachers
you're exchanging time for
students to be in state in
school whereas right now for
many districts professional
development is coming at the
expense of instructional time
extended learning time program
flips that makes it available
for both.
Same thing when it comes to
rigorous system of current
technical education those are
not separate programs but the
best research the LFC is bring a
book for you has been those are
embedded in everything that you
do within us high schools and
like I said those individual
reforms are connected and
aligned they're not one offs
they're not silver bullets next
slide.
So.
The state and and PED's come out
the new strategic plan it's
largely in alignment with this
we've characterized the
legislature's response to the
budget as well as reform bills
that have been and acted kind of
a a for a pronged education
reform plank the first there are
investments in high quality
teaching and school leadership
whether it's significant salary
increases funding for recruiting
injection mentorship
Big investments and
Supporting individuals who want
to become teachers there is no
financial barrier for somebody
who wants to go into the
teaching profession right now
with the teacher college
affordability scholarship
teacher loan repayment programs
that you've implemented there is
no financial merry to becoming a
teacher back to recruiting my
neighbor's kid trying to help
her become a teacher and in the
financial aid opportunities that
you may have are incredible
extended learning opportunities
particularly targeted at at risk
students the types of
investments you made in the at
risk index taking that from
being about seventy million
dollars a year of investment
you're basically before that
you're investing more in
subsidizing small schools
anywhere and at risk students
that indexes heading to around
three hundred fifty million
dollars K. five plus extended
learning school so extending the
school year as well as the
school day through after school
enrichment programs responsive
in New Mexico and appropriate
curriculum the the base
recommendation and LFC and
includes thirty five million and
the SCG flexible funding for
districts to purchase culturally
linguistically responsive will
curriculum materials
there's additional funding
outside of the formula for that
as well as well as supporting
PED reforms for oversight
accountability school districts
will need to start implementing
performance based budgets that's
the next big reform this can be
rolled out over the next year to
next slide.
Turn this over to the center to
talk about
the education budget and how we
fund schools.
Senator is welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee just the.
Give you a very high level
overview of some of the
technicalities thank Rachel and
Charles did a good job of
talking about the big picture
I'm just gonna go over briefly
how the technical details.
Turn out during the session you
can think of the education
budget as three large buckets
you know you've got your formula
funding which Rachel talked
about your biggest piece which
is about three billion and then
you've got to other parts you
got categorical funding which
are more restricted funds unlike
your SCG which is.
for flexible for local decisions
categorical funding includes
things like transportation or
The Indian education fund which
are restricted to specific uses
once districts receive them and
then you've got what calmly
referred to as below the line or
PED special appropriations and
these are directly appropriated
to the department to provide is
grants to districts for specific
innovative projects or
initiatives.
So a lot of you're going to see
this chart during the session
this is the high level review of
the public schools budget and
this particular section is that
first big bucket which is the
program cost and the funding
formula.
What you're gonna notice is in
these columns you'll have.
The base but funding which is
the previous years operating
budget.
Followed by a few other columns
that have both the executive
recommendation the LFC
recommendation you may see the
LFC recommendation as well and
then as this involves or the
session you'll see substitutes
from House Appropriations and
amendments from Senate finance.
What.
Important to note here under
program cost is there's a lot of
lines below it that indicates
the specific items that are
being added to the base so on
the top line here you'll see the
program costs from the previous
year about three point one
billion and that's derived from
the previous program costs then
you have all these items like
increasing the at risk index
were the legislature's and
increasing probation on each
line to get to a subtotal for
next year's funding.
And.
In the bill which is about two
hundred pages long you'll find
that the state equalization
guarantee is one line
essentially it's one.
Three billion dollar
appropriation in the entire bill
the reason why I showed you a
chart beforehand was to show you
serve all the detail going into
what comprises the SCG and
that's what the chart shows
essentially and just remember
the SCG is that.
Large appropriation three
billion dollar preparation
that's made to schools for their
general operations.
We've been down on that chart.
In that read section these are
what we would call categorical
appropriations so we've got your
transportation distribution
there you've got
your standards based assessment
Indian education fund and these
are.
Individual line items within the
budget bill as well.
But these appropriations once
again are restricted for certain
purposes and administered to
school districts for those
purposes.
Last but not least you'll see
what we refer to as global line
in green here each of these is
also their individual line item
within the budget.
And these are.
Iterations made to the parchment
and schools typically have to
apply to receive funding for
these programs and you'll see
them as well as single line
items and sometimes there's
language attached giving
additional instructions on how
the department should be
spending these funds.
Now go ahead and turn over Jerry
to talk a little bit more about
the funding formula itself.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee This slide gives you
an overview of school district
and charter school revenue by
source so this is all revenues
Including those that are
restricted for specific purposes
and as you can see
the bulk of also of all school
district and charter school
funding is coming from the state
and as director Google mentioned
earlier that top box the CD
position guarantee is actually
if you look at just restricted
funding for school to sorry
unrestricted funding for school
districts and charter schools
that stabilisation represents
essential almost all of that
unrestricted dollars all of
these things down below the you
can see the property taxes
federal funds the other state
grants which includes things
like transportation which
setting mentioned before was
restricted the almost all of
those funds are restricted to
the specific purposes either
outlined in state or federal law
depending on the program.
So the next slide slide please
send.
Actually director gradual
covered a lot of the the the big
picture items about the public
school funding formula so you
can switch to the other the I'll
go over some of the the more
detailed
Aspects of the sorry that the
other the other attachment that
we have provided this morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is a overview of
the public school funding
formula as inactive by the
public school finance act and so
I'm just going to to give you a
high level overview of how this
works and how hi this is used to
determine the distribution of
the funds that are so he talked
about in the in the budget
process.
So this top
budget in blue is it is your big
what we call your basic
programming it just a basic
amount of funding provided to
school to school districts and
charter schools based on their
enrollment and this represents
the vast majority of our the
largest share of funding
overall.
So in FY twenty one this
accounted for about one point
seven billion dollars of the
three billion dollars that the
Legislature provided for public
schools you can see each
different grade level has a has
a different cost differential
that set in statute and tells
PED exactly how to calculate the
number of program units for each
school district and charter
school.
So one of the things that's
important to remember is often
times school school district and
charter school expenditures very
based on the level of experience
that their teachers have so
generally speaking.
School districts and charter
schools with teachers that have
been are very experienced have.
Higher licensure levels are more
expensive so the after PED
calculates the number of basic
program units for each school
district and charter school this
number is multiplied by what's
called the staffing cost
multiplier so for many years the
public school finance act
included a factor in the funding
formula based on the number of
years of experience and the
academic degree that was held
by.
Instructional staff so in twenty
eighteen the legislature came
back and amended that this
portion of the funding formula
to take account of the three
tiered licensure system that was
put in place by the legislature
back in two thousand three I
believe so for a number of years
our school districts and charter
schools had noted that they were
required under under state law
the in the school personnel act
to pay teachers more with higher
licensure levels more there
there was a higher minimum
salary for those teachers but
the public school funding
formula didn't recognize this
advancement in licensure level
and direct additional funding to
school districts and charter
schools to pay for that so what
the legislature didn't twenty
eighteen was aligned to staffing
cost multiplier with you three
tiered licensure system so that
school districts and charter
schools that saw teachers moving
up in licensure level and that
were required to make additional
expenditures would see receive
additional funds.
So this is actually being are
phased in over time you'll see
in FY twenty to work at a
seventy five percent twenty five
percent split in the staffing
cost multiplier in FY twenty
three will be fully implemented
within with the new program that
takes into account the licensure
level.
M. as director going to mention
before are the public school
funding formula has a bunch of
it additional factors that
recognize either participation
in special programs or the
special needs of students or in
some cases the aspects of a
school district or charter
schools.
That that makes them have lower
economies of scale so I'll start
off with special education here.
You can see at the top here
there's several different
factors for special education I
and keep in mind this is these
are all additive to the basic
program units that we saw so at
the top so the the the funding
formula provides additional
funds for the number of
ancillary service providers that
are employed pursuant to us
student
individualized educational
programs which are part of the
federal ID along.
In addition are there are
student counts that go into
calculating additional funding
for special education based on
the level of service that is
needed by the by the students
individual needs so you can see
a and B. level students are
funded at a lower rate and
require fewer services than a D.
level student which is funded at
a higher rate and require a high
level of service in addition
director Joe mentioned that
there is the put in the.
Public school finance act
there's actually a provision
that provides a prekindergarten
services for three and four year
old developmentally disabled pro
students and that's funded not
just the basic program level but
at the US special education
units.
I special programs the director
got job mentioned earlier in the
presentation are all listed here
in in the green section.
And each different
It's different program has a
different.
Multiplying factor to determine
the amount of funds for that
program so bilingual education
fine arts education in
elementary physical education
have been around for a number of
of years of them the most recent
of these was elementary P. E.
which was added I just before
the Great Recession in two
thousand seven.
K. five plus extended learning
we're both enacted as part of
the educational reforms to
extend learning time as Mr so we
Stated before one thing I will
tell you about special programs
is there is a debate that you
all have when considering
special programs so the fund
going back to what director
gradual said about funding
formula programs being non
categorical to school districts
and charter schools there's a
lot of.
Discretion at the local level us
to whether the district wants to
participate in a particular
program whether
they're pretty participating at
every school every school and
And and how much money that that
generates there's also an
administrative burden factor to
consider everything that you add
to the public school funding
formula places it in
administrative to burden on
local school districts and
charter schools as well as the
public education department to
accurately calculate these
dollars and so that's a debate
you all have when considering
new special programs do you want
to fund it and
In the to increase essentially
increase the unit value or do
you want to provide additional
program units for a specific
program like with the special
programs.
moving on to the yellow section
you see here size adjustment
program units there's a number
of different programs that make
up these specify the definite
units you can see different cost
differentials for elementary and
junior high schools and then for
senior high schools in addition
if the district the school
district is less than I think
four thousand students are they
generate additional funds and
then on top of that there is a
A additional cost differential
for school districts of less
than two hundred students so the
small the school district them
the more that district doesn't
benefit from economies of scale.
finally the legislature recently
added the rural population
program unit you see here and
that was to recognize the fact
that there are some large school
districts.
That are that have significant
rural populations so when the
legislature amended the public
school finance act to limit the
ability of the school districts
and urban areas to generate the
small screen size units there
was up to the top here you also
enacted a rural population
factor so if you were a school
district over two thousand that
had opened a large percentage of
your students and in rural areas
you would generate additional
funds so that's something to
keep in mind.
As those elementary and and
junior high and senior high unit
stays out for rural districts
that are large you're also
facing in a rural population
unit that that was designed to
counteract that in in districts
that have large rural
populations.
Next in the purple you see are
the at risk factor.
This is calculated as shown
there on the left hand side so
you see the the it's it's fairly
basic the percentage of students
that are used to calculate a
school district or charter
schools title sorry school
districts in this case title one
allocation the percentage of
students are English learners
and then a percentage of student
mobility is multiplied by are
the cost differential factor of
point three.
And that's multiplied by the
total number of students in
the school district or charter
school.
I'll bring this up because
there's different methods to
direct funding to at risk
students what the legislature as
has chosen to do over the past
few years with Mr Saly noted
significant increase and our
funding for at risk students
through the at risk index is the
increase that multiplier there
from I believe it was point one
zero six
a few years ago is now point
three and so that's been how the
legislature has chosen to
increase funds for school
districts and charter school to
provide at risk services.
Finally there's a couple of
relatively what I'm cert without
do Raul McGraw first as
mentioned by director got job
most funding is
Legislative based on prior year
enrollment so all of the
calculations from above here
will note is based on prior year
enrollment data from school
districts and charter schools
this enrollment growth factor is
the is the part of the funding
formula that gives school
districts and charter schools
that are growing additional
funds to
To provide services for students
who are not on last year's role
but have shown up on the current
your role and this is only for
school districts and charter
schools that have grown by at
least one percent.
Well there's a couple of smaller
programs here down at the bottom
that don't generate very much
funding.
Use the it's about in FY twenty
one this is about five point
three million dollars out of the
three million dollar budget so
you can see the relatively small
amount of funding for these
special programs that are in the
public school finance act.
So thank you go back to the the
slide show please.
And I can next slide.
So as I as we mentioned before
the.
School district attorney school
unique enrollment will determine
the number of program units and
how much funding they generate
from each each of those things
you can see there's differences
by a type of schools so here you
can see.
The bulk of funding for school
districts with more than two
thousand students are comes from
basic program units and special
education program unit so
there's a small amount of
funding that is generated.
For for these other categories
School districts will less than
two thousand students and
charter school you see generate
much more from some of these
other.
Factors particularly small
screen size to make up for their
economies of scale you can see
the the statewide percentage
totals there on the right.
Our next slide please send me.
So the result of the public
school funding formula is what
we call program cost so.
As we said with the equalizes
funding formula the under
current law the
The funding formula takes into
account for different revenue
sources to ensure that each
school district and charter
school is guaranteed to receive
the program cost so you've got
the state equalization guarantee
which is general fund revenue
and then you have seventy five
percent of revenue from four
sources federal impact aid
federal forces are payments and
local half melody.
So for FY FY twenty one there
was a total program cost Sir FY
twenty there's a total program
cost just over three billion
dollars that
is from about two point nine
three six billion in state
general fund revenue through the
SCG and then eighty two point
three million dollars of this of
this other revenue now it's it's
worth noting that a recent
decision from the US department
of education just last week in
fact are will require the state
to a pay about sixty million
dollars of this eighty two point
three million to school
districts and charter schools
that receive federal impact aid.
Our next slide.
I basically talked about and and
director general mention this
the bulk of the dollars that go
into
The HSD ji are non categorical
to school districts and charter
school in their significant
control over the is these funds
and that's led to a number of
stakeholders concerned about the
transparency of the local
budgeting process next slide
please Sonny.
So school districts and charter
schools are budget their dollars
by frontier and function and we
can see we are a great a great
deal of detail about how school
districts and charter schools
are spending these dollars but
that information is not always
readily available to the public
so I.
You all last year passed a
Senate bill ninety six which
requires PED to develop a
financial transparency website
at the school level to provide
additional
Additional transparency into
local budgeting to sit budgeting
decisions are so that members of
the public to the public
education department the
Legislature and other users of
education data get a better idea
of how schools are spending
their dollars to benefit not
just at risk students but all
students overall.
And this is really important in
light of the court's findings in
the Martinez Yazzie decision
that PED needs to do a better
job of overseeing how school
districts are spending those
dollars to implement programs
for at risk students and
implement the three laws that.
Director gradual spoke about
before
In in serving those particular
students so with that madam
chair sorry Mr chairman and
members of the committee I will
turn it over to you for
questions and I think we'll
stand ready for questions.
Great well thank you Joanne
thank you to director gradual
and.
Charles and sunny for for the
thorough presentation so first
on my list I have Representative
Dow please thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to the team at
some of the S. C. for this great
presentation I I have.
A couple of questions about the
The current risk formula which
is based on lowincome English
language learners and student
mobility.
So the proposed PED agency
formula change the family income
index.
How is that different than our
current risk for Milan.
What is that near proposed
choosing what to getting at.
So Mr Mr chair representative.
We haven't seen an index yet
from the department but what
they are looking at in that new
family income index is simply
income levels of the individual
families so they've been working
with tax and revenue to pull
individual family income data
and tie it to students and then
they're also using census tract
data for students who they
cannot identify income level so
if you think about we're using
title one in the at risk index
as a proxy for income
PED is is and it's a different
formula right so it's not
replacing the at risk index as
far as we know right now in the
PED proposal is looking to make
an additional allocation to
individual schools based solely
on the income of.
The students in that family.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Rachel for that
question for that answer I'm so.
So perhaps the index will be
literally based on income like
if the families that this income
the districts going to get a
more okay and then the pilot
gets I'm just trying to
understand the pilot is coming
from reverted dollars to the
school reform Fund so those are
school districts for whatever
reason you you mentioned the
heavy lift we're not able to do
K. five plus or extended
learning one or the other or
both that dollars were reverted
to the to the
to the school reform Fund and
and the pilot is to now.
That act on the risk daily index
formula so theoretically a
district that implemented.
Pre K. five hundred percent K.
five plus a hundred percent
extended learning they will also
get in this pilot program that
many low income or smaller
districts that could do the list
Liz that meet all the other
categories that could fly the
dogs on those funds we'll get
back a tiny portion of what
their district was not able to
utilize it.
All.
I think so so
Mr chair representative we
haven't seen the index yet but
keep in mind they're not
calculating at at a district
level so it's individual schools
so dependent on up to get a
particular district you could be
right you could have a district
that didn't participate at all
and say K. five plus or extended
learning time programs which is
what primarily makes up which
which is what only makes up the
money in the public and reform
Fund it won't get a very large
allocation because their income
is income level of the students
in their schools as well.
We haven't done that analysis
yet we're still we've been
working with PED on
bill language to see what you
know what is the index look like
in order to be able to analyze
who's going to get those funds
how well does it align
with our current at risk index
in other.
Other programs that target at
risk students.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Rachel for that question I
think this question is for
Charles you mentioned that there
is a study that Rachel you
mentioned that there is a study
that showed that if there is
extra days of school students at
extending the school year was
was what would improve student
outcomes did we look at any
other types of studies that
looked at quality classroom
ratio teacher professionalism
quality versus quantity I'm.
Or did that do we only look at
extending the dates.
And.
We look at all of that I am the
A. R. study consider that as
well and and it kind of gets
back to what I talked about with
there are no silver bullets so
you want to have a longer amount
of instructional time with high
quality teaching with the right
kinds of
culturally relevant.
curriculum along with the type
of accountability and support
structures to get those better
outcomes so there's no silver
bullets like one over the other
it's really a combination of all
of this and that's been the
focus of the investments that
you've been making over the past
couple of years.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that I'm Charles because
I think that's what I hear from
superintendents from from
principals from from people in
the district is that you know we
need flexibility in responding
especially now with the changes
it with COVID and everything
that's happened there is no one
silver bullet but based on the
resources we have in our
community based on the capacity
of our staff based on the right
shows that we know in the
classroom sizes please give us
local decision making power in
please don't legislate policy
practice curriculum expectorant
you micromanaging those things
at the local level please give
us flexibility is especially
right now so I I I I guess I'm
wondering if we're not going to
do assessments this year and how
we get a measure what's going on
from previous years and if we're
not doing assessments worrying
aspirator for next year why is
that included in our state
budget why are we appropriating
for those assessments.
All.
For FY twenty two we have an
expectation to return to
assessments hopefully that are
aligned with a beginning of the
year assessment that's aligned
with the end of the year
assessments
certainly that money should
revert for this current fiscal
year that was appropriated if
it's not going to be used
and I haven't heard an
indication from the department
that they're planning to suspend
it later this year but that's
certainly a possibility.
If we can keep the discussion
going through the chair please I
would appreciate it all.
Chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I'm
trying.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
believe this is maybe also be
for Charles and I saw that one
of the measurements were selling
showing that I'm assuming were
saying make as showing progress
with our is high school students
as the graduation rates and is
that it would be helpful to me
if I could see and maybe the
other members of the committee
if those drugs which are using
their showing proficiency on
their testing and are graduating
with the proper number of
credits in proficiency that's
needed for it to diploma versus
doing the alternative high
school pathways the rubric said
school districts come up with is
there a chart where we can see
I'm because.
It's graduation rates is.
Helpful for workforce and for
students to have a deployment
but what diploma did they
receive.
Mr chair representative I don't
have a chart on that and will
look to see what data sets we
have to be able to break that
out and bring it back to the
committee I think that's a great
question given the alternative
routes that have been provided
to students to see if that's
driving the increase or the the
base traditional certificate is
striving to increase.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Mister chairman I have your
questions I'm trying to be
really brief I'm if we funded
enough for every student to get
K. five plus and pre K. then why
are we proposing budget
increases and expansion in those
categories.
And how do we know that the
children who need it most of the
ones that are enrolling.
Mr chair representative that was
the original appropriation be
rescinded about forty million of
K. five plus during the recent
legislative session last summer.
And we're we're tracking which
districts and schools are taking
that up and you're right it's
not always the most
disadvantaged schools you
haven't limited that program to
to only those schools but they
are the priority if there's a
more applicants than there are
dollars
So that's concerning that
schools have very disadvantaged
students are not taking
advantage of that additional
money in additional pay for the
work to those teachers would do
it has been left up to the
school districts option not all
the high risk schools are are
opting into level would like to
see in other cases they are you
know wagon mound is a good
example work they've done it for
the entire school district for
all of their their students we
always talk about jamming but
there's other school districts
out there that Clayton did their
entire district for extended
learning there are the other
success stories out there that
we need to do a better job of
highlighting.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Charles for that and not only is
it not just the disadvantaged
districts those schools because
they have other barriers these
their rule they don't have the
capacity of teachers they have
you know there's there's other
barriers besides just
leadership's desire to
participate but even in those
districts how do we know the
students who need it most of the
ones that are enrolled I guess
that's a question for in another
day
And then just a comment if you
can answer the question I know
we're we're phasing out small
screen size is my last question
Mr chairman we're phasing out
small screen size of formula and
replacing it with the rural and
I'm just I'm hearing from my
districts that it didn't make up
for the small the what we gave
them back in the role of formula
is not equal to what we took
away in small school.
Silvercity someone district I
know of were there might not be
That kind of offset and they've
just been an out liar because of
the a cliff schools that are
actually one school but they
were generating size adjustments
on paper for two schools and so
they have been just generating a
disproportionate amount of size
adjustments that they're having
to account for right now.
Thank you Mr chairman and just
on that point on cliff schools
that is a school that it would
children are bused hours to go
to that school and then from
there in the additional hours to
get into an additional hour to
get into Silvercity on a bus if
we are not able to keep that
school funded and that is an
active community they put food
on our table and I think if
you're talking about rural
school adjustment there exactly
who were trying to keep open so
that those families are not
driving their kids to the school
bus stop an hour from home there
on the bus for an hour to get
the clip and now we add another
hour for silver it's pretty big
burden to put on the people who
are keeping us fed and keeping
us our students healthy thank
you Mr chairman.
Great thank you representative
so just as a reminder I am
lowering hand so I'm taking you
down on my paper lists the old
habits Die Hard so I still have
my paper list going so all lower
your hand so don't be afraid
I'll get you on the list if I do
miss you I'm sorry it's not
purposeful but I am lowering
hands okay that have everybody
on the list
also as a reminder we have floor
I believe eleven Sir trying to
get out of here by ten thirty
I'm so please keep your your
your questions directing the
answers direct as well but I
have everybody on the list that
so far has raised their hand so
next on the list I have
Representative Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair at
all more questions brief one is
just a very specific question
about that at risk index formula
can I get the statutory
provision where that is to
provide.
Yes we can send that to you
Senator you have the citation
front of you.
Yes Mr chair of.
The citation is section twenty
two dash eight dash twenty three
point three and I can put that
in the chat as well.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Liu and Mr chair I also
question.
and this would be for Mr solely.
We have data on income verses
non low income versus low income
student performance and those
achievement gaps I'm wondering
do we also have data on
performance in terms of two
parent households versus a
single payer or no parent
households and what those
achievement gaps may be so that
we can look at maybe provided
some additional funding to those
at risk households as well.
The best we can tell Mr chairman
Representative Lane is we do not
have that data
but we're.
Digging through the stars manual
to see if that is something that
is collected at the PED but the
data sets that we get from PED
do not include that that data to
be able to break it out as you
described.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
so we and then my final question
Mr chair is.
As was presented enrollment
numbers seem to be declining
since since two thousand sixteen
and yet the budget for education
continues to increase is that
other than inflation is that
just a recognition that of
previously the state wasn't
properly funding education as
was seen in the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit or is it is there some
other factor that has seem to be
driving would be you know just
proportion terms of enrollment
going down yet spending going up
thank you Mr.
Mr chairman yes there were big
increases in funding for the at
risk index there are big funding
increases since that time for
teacher salaries and they're big
funding increases for expect
extending the school year in
those big pockets so that's
what's been driving the
education budget to spend a lot
more per student as you've
identified since twenty sixteen
and those enrollment declines we
project will continue there's
not a large in migration of
families with school age
children there's not a large
there's a lot of migration into
New Mexico for the last decade
And the number of births per
year has been declining since
about two thousand ten minutes
down more than twenty percent
and so those smaller cohorts of
potential students are entering
into the elementary grades and
and getting deeper into the
elementary school system
reaching about third or fourth
grade so we chairs kindergarten
classes getting smaller we used
to as a rule of estimate that
can each cohort of students was
about twenty five thousand
that's down
said about twenty two thousand
right now.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
so we Mr chair I have no further
questions thank you.
Thank you representative Nixon
was represented care.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you for these presentations I
specially want to thank Charles
for emphasizing the point that
our students are progressing
I think there is a lot of
mythology that we are horrible
educational system but you've
pointed out that there's a two
and a half year behind start but
that our students are
progressing
at a rate that least you're so
thank you for pointing that out
my question and my concern is
that extended learning planted
this picks up on what
Representative Representative
Dow said
that we have to have the
flexibility a charter school
leader reached out to me once to
do extended learning time in the
middle of the day which would be
kind of like a lunch time
because so many of our at risk
students have enormous home
responsibilities caring for
younger brothers and sisters
jobs that actually paid bills so
how do you see from the LFC view
point that we can address
waivers or flexibility in
extended learning plan at as
Representative Dow pointed out
so many people did not do K.
five plus because of the lack of
flexibility can you address that
briefly.
Mr chair on the extended
learning time there's nothing
that would prohibit that charter
schools from providing
enrichment or other types of
academic tutoring
at lunch there's nothing in the
statute that prohibits that I
was I saw that up it used in the
Albuquerque journal and I was
frankly perplexed because the
structure that program provides
a maximum amount of flexibility
the only
kind of requirements are one
that they do can additional
instructional days from what
they were doing before.
Provide eighty hours of
professional development for
teachers which most already do
you can embed that into the
instructional day they can do
that as an in service day that's
totally up to them.
And that they provide after
school enrichment or other types
of academic interventions that
are totally flexible we modeled
the cost of that offered twenty
first century schools which is a
very well funded after school
program but there's nothing that
says you can't add enrichment
elect specials teachers allsorts
of things that are totally
flexible when it comes to K.
five plus the recommendation
from the LFC is that districts
be allowed to use those twenty
five days as long as they're
doing their entire school for
all the students you can put
those twenty five days anywhere
in the school calendar.
And so that's maximum
flexibility on on how to
structure the school year to get
that extended learning learning
time.
So Mr chair and Charles so I
just want to be clear you don't
have to add can actual days for
extended learning or you do you
can't do by hours it has to be
by days or it can be by hours.
One has to be ten instructional
days calendar days.
And then you can structure your
actual instructional day to be
longer for after school
programming or other in
interventions or you know
there's nothing that would
prohibit that charter school
from providing that time during
lunch.
Okay thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative next
unless Representative Chatfield
please.
Our test we were talking a
little while ago about the.
The.
The.
The.
Mr chair representative were you
referring to the local mill levy
and forced to reserve an
impacted credits yes I'm sorry I
lost my train of thought we we
learned the industry court case
that we now cannot keep seventy
five percent of the.
The.
Whatever you're creating a
seventy five percent and the I
wondered what portion of the
local mill levy in the fourth
user funds we have kept in the
past you we only get the.
All of that we keep seventy five
percent of it so I was going to.
On the other schools.
So Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield.
Keep in mind so the the funding
formula as Mr Liu and and others
testified on before calculates
what's called program costs so
that's the amount of money that
should be available for a school
district regardless of the
revenue source and because we
used to fund schools based on
local property taxes at a much
greater level the state would
take a credit so they would
reduce the the state's portion
of that program cost by ninety
five percent of whatever local
revenue existed that was lowered
to seventy five percent about a
decade and a half ago and the
reason for that is because there
is vastly different local
property tax wealth and and
other revenue coming to school
districts and so it was it was
amended to basically equalizes
funding.
The recent
US department of education
ruling is that the state did not
meet what's called a disparity
test where the federal
government allows school
districts to use a credit
if they have an equalized school
system and they they do a
calculation of.
The per student funding at
different levels within the
system and data they changed the
the calculation of of how they
determine that
indeterminate a new calculation
that New Mexico do not meet that
disparity test the state had
appealed that decision and has
lost it so for impact aid for FY
twenty.
Of the fiscal year ago the state
is is not able to take that
credit and will need to pay the
impact aid school districts
that amount in state eight so
most of that impact aid money
will go out to three school
districts.
It is not a fact forced reserve
or how the state takes credit
for military at the local level
the LFC recommendation for the
budget
For this fiscal year and twenty
one you already put in an
additional thirty one million
anticipating that.
There could be an adverse ruling
and frankly a a political
decision to try to to move away
from taking credit for for
impact aid the LFC
recommendation contingent on
legislation would eliminate all
credits from the funding formula
and so any local revenue or or
impact Aid revenues that it had
a district received a would not
have that credited against their
Stewart stated in all
circumstances.
For all years.
The state has never taken that
revenue away from districts it's
just reduce the amount of state
aid going to the district by
that amount to make sure that
that funding was equal so the
LFC recommendation would
eliminate that practice
contingent on a deal to change
the funding formula.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
apologize you guys caught me by
surprise so.
Else and I'm I guess my
basically my question is if we
take the LFC recommendation will
the impact aid the local mail
led to mill levy enforce user
fund should be treated exactly
the same where they are the in
the past I think they've been
treated somewhat differently we
think the LFC recommendation
well those are from the we
created the state.
Would be treated the same the
executive recommendation would
only eliminate the impact aid.
Credit but it would leave the
credit for forest reserve and
the mill levy but the LFC
eliminates all credits in its
proposal and it basically adds
money to the funding formula to
hold all those districts
harmless
went to take those credits away.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative next on
my list representative Lente.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr gradual Mr Salih Mr Simon Mr
loop your presentation this
morning this is really a part of
the reason why I'm so excited to
be on education because these
inside of the educational
frameworks in the budgetary
aspects is is always a learning
process and that is an extension
of my time as well on Ellie S.
C. this past summer my questions
are in regards to
Increase budgets a three plus
billion dollar budget but yet we
are experiencing the same type
of outcomes yes we might have
some wins here and there but as
a businessman you know return on
investment is it is important to
me and so if we are doubling the
types of investors were putting
into our budget for education to
to a tune of about three plus
billion dollars and we're still
yielding the same kind of
results.
It would would you or would you
not agree in our I I will all
schools question anybody in on
on the stat that this perhaps
may not be the best approach
regards just throwing money at a
problem
at with it being unfocused.
Mr chair representative we asked
the same questions all the time
at the LFC staff level
And where we have targeted
investments like in
prekindergarten we have seen a
good return on that investment
so we've been following students
who participated in pre
kindergarten all the way through
high school where they're
graduating and we're getting
good results from that
investment the challenges some
of these investments have been
not brought to scale where you
see basically the the needle
move for the entire state so
we've not we've made a big
investment in terms of
allocating dollars for extended
learning time programs we've not
seen a large number of students
take the enrolled in those
programs and they've not been
enrolled in those programs for
research sufficient duration of
time to see the needles in terms
of student outcomes to date.
where we do have specific
targeted initiatives we have
been measuring those and
reporting back whether we're
getting good results or not the
challenges we've not scale these
anticipations level to see a
statewide impact another good
example is that I've been
recommending to multiple PED
administrations to do a more
targeted approach
helping high schools booster
high school graduation rates
there's a handful of high
schools that if we targeted
really good supports to turn
around you would see a statewide
increase and the graduation
rates and they're just a handful
I schools that have a lot of
students and it that are failing
year in and year out and we're
not targeting resources to help
those high schools in a way to
see measurable results so you
can go back to your constituents
and say we're making a
difference there's a lot of one
offs there's a lot of things
that are buried in the data
unfortunately.
Thank you for that Mr Salih
thank you Mr chairman of the
follow up question Mr chairman.
Regards to the presentation.
The title under student outcomes
and and you and you saw the
graph going up which is a good
sign
what was that based on on
categories like English language
learners and perhaps
socioeconomic through that based
on like geography and rural
versus urban perspectives.
So we can write that down a
number of ways the the graph
showing was broken down by
economic status of those
students that were at the top
were not from low income
families and they are not
learning English the the middle
graph even though there was some
improvement we're for students
that were from low income
families as measured by for
introduce school lunch and the
students for this behind the
three and a half percent
proficient work students who are
both from low income families
and learning English
That said the same thing with
the
another craft the included that
was based on attendance so those
students that are attending more
regardless of economic language
background do better than the
students who don't attend school
on a regular basis we can break
that down through a number of
different factors except the way
that Representative Lane asked
for in terms of parental status
we've also seen schools that
have a very high percentage of
students from low income
families that are learning
English that may even be native
American predominately enroll
students performing at very high
levels because they're
implementing a series of best
practices starting with high
expectations for all students we
call those schools the beating
the odds schools and there's a
number of them out there and
when they implement these
practices in a consistent way
across grade levels they
achieved very high results when
they don't implement those into
a consistent way for is that for
example there some schools
cultures that do not think that
all students can learn in a high
level they may not
articulate that in a in a racist
or other way but of the culture
of the school does not value
that all students can learn a
very high level we find that
across the state and the schools
typically performed a very low
level.
Thank you Mr Staley Mr chairman
of one last follow up question
in regards to slide on high
school graduation your chart
went up to twenty nineteen and
as specifically for native
American students you show that
you have now is seventy percent
graduation rate for native
American students and I'd be
very surprised to see how the
number turned out a post COVID
world because I know for a fact
that many of the people in my
district have fallen off of of
the charges not falling off of
their tendencies because many of
them just they don't have the
access nor do they have the
ability to to to participate in
classroom functions as they once
did perhaps create COVID and so
when those numbers numbers come
up please do should because
that's going to show a large
discrepancy in regards to those
in native American communities
in rural communities that just
did not do not have the access
to sufficient education our own
constitution so my my point in
bringing this up is.
When you bring up these high
graduation rates does this take
into account schools like the
Santa Fe Indian school.
Mr chair representative no the
that those tribal schools R. B.
I. E. schools are not included
in that data set
there are governed under
separate governance structures
and we don't have that data okay
thank thank you Mr Staley
reserves your chair I bring this
up simply because when you look
at the statistics in the data
from those schools like to CENIC
the Indian school you see
culturally relevant
interventions that have been put
into place which now yield that
many of the students that go to
those Texas schools with that
type of local control that
they've been able to develop and
create those type of changes
that are inherent to their own
success is that they now have a
ninety percent graduation rate
eighty percent of students go
into higher education.
A field as well as it increases
teacher quality higher
expectations valued students
language and cultural readiness
and applications and so it's
it's a change of a of a
perspective and that and the
dynamic in terms of how we are
teaching our children which is
why this is a much larger issue
than what I'm going to talk
about now which is the tribal
remedy framework or that to the
extent of the Yazzie Martinez
Martinez Yazzie
expectations because now we are
looking at for other reaching
aspects within our own state as
to how do we improve our
education of because at and many
of the folks prior to the
representatives of the
Representative Dow and others
mentioned the in the increased
need for local control and that
is where I think we are at this
point that we understand that
the yields that one size fits
all are not benefiting us nor
are are more children so we have
to somehow some way changes and
that throwing money at the
problem does not solve anything
but just spend money and so with
that Mr chairman and folks on
this call thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative next on
my list Representative is L.
please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I hope everybody can hear me
okay thank you for the
presentations this morning I I
do have several concerns
I think maybe Mr soleil might be
able to answer this I'm not sure
if he's the right one or not can
you tell me how many school
districts have over to two
thousand students.
I need to Mr chair
representative I need to look
that up I'd say the majority of
schools are less than two
thousand students school
districts resenting on school
districts.
Right.
I think Joe is got an answer Mr
chairman.
Mr chair representative is out
there twenty nine school
districts with more than.
Two thousand students so that's
twenty nine of eighty nine
school districts.
Okay so Sarah majority of those
do have less than that okay I
appreciate that information
which brings me to my next
question we do have some schools
that are so remote.
That.
This these people did not have
the opportunity to have internet
service one in particular is the
Duncan as many as Mexico
elementary school.
They are part of the Artesia
public school system but they
are more than fifty miles from
more to ship some of the
students
I have a grand total of eighteen
students what is the process
they have to go through to be
considered a micro school within
that district.
Mr chair representative L.
there's a factor in the formula
for a micro school district so
those are the school districts
like like Carter and Hagerman
that have less than two hundred
students there is additional
funding for the district.
And then there's a small screen
size adjustment factor for small
schools like in elementary
school with less than four two
hundred students and high school
with less than four hundred
students located in a district
with less than two thousand
students
And those are the the additional
funding factors that exist in
the formal.
Well I guess my concern there is
Mr sleep thank you for that the
clarification that you gave me
regarding the funding part of it
that this is a total of eighteen
students to take just two
buildings some of these kids
can't go to school they were
allowing be kindergarten through
I believe that was fifth grade
to attend the school but those
from sixth grade through eighth
grade could not even though
they're from the same family the
two teachers that are there also
the bus drivers so there is I'm
just very very concerned about
that whenever I first became
part of this legislative body
there was a book that came out
and I read it cover to cover is
very informative it was called
rich states poor states because
I was very interested in how New
Mexico fared compared to all of
our other states.
And I think it was two thousand
and seven and I think it
continued on a couple years that
per capita New Mexico invested
more money than any other state
in educating their you.
Per capita more money was
invested in our students.
But the outcome we were either
forty ninth or fiftieth year in
and year out and to me this
deplorable.
I I'm very anxious to learn more
about this committee I look
forward to businesses.
Everyone of you.
But you know what we have to.
Get back to where our local
school districts have more of a
say then somebody sit behind the
desk in Santa Fe or maybe even
an out of state office making
the decisions for local school
districts thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative is
there anybody else on our panel
that wishes to speak.
Please remember to keep the
discussion going through the
chair at all times.
I know we're on a new platform
but the the rules and decorum
still pertain.
Okay so if we don't have further
questions I I had a couple
statements so I appreciate the
committee and and I think our
our diverse background in
education really shows through
this committee and I think
that's that's really the
strength of of our group that we
have here so
One thing I wanted to stress and
I think it was Mr Saly had
mentioned once on attendance and
making sure that our students
are are being accounted for that
we're tracking attendance a few
years two years ago for the new
members we passed the attendance
for success act which had been
an effort by Representative re
Ruiloba for a number of years
and and I was one of the the
chief opponents of that bill for
for a few reasons early in its
stages but through continue to
work among say no a lot of
people on this call
We were able to pass a piece of
legislation and and its full
implementation is is really
coming up here soon and and it's
a pretty timely that its
implementation is is coming.
Here during a time that I think
we really need to be accounting
for our students the most and
making sure that our students
are are whether they're
Yes even if they're in distance
learning if they're attending
those classes on or not and
really having the school
districts be be thinking of ways
that they can reach out to those
students there was a news
article recently about school
districts doing kind of home
visits to check up on the
students I know that something
here APS that's that's been
going on to to account for those
students but but when when Mr
Saly talks about you know the
next phase building
accountability I think it's
important that the public
education department and we as a
legislative body really take a
close look at that attendance
and what that looks like whether
it's during our COVID times now
especially now but moving into
when we actually get back into
in class learning for all of our
students because for for
educators it's it's so much more
than just having them there to
learn right it's checking on
their well being checking on
their status checking on their
mental health which are all
things that
when we return to the classroom
in person whenever that may be
That we're gonna spend a lot of
time working on is is equally
with the educational outcomes of
our students but working on re
integrating them into these
various social settings that I
think are are super super
important in making sure that
that their their mental health
and their bodily needs are well
taken care of as they start
coming back to school as we
start re introducing these norms
back into our students so that's
one thing that certainly
Moving forward I really
appreciate Mr so we pointing out
I think it's really important
attendance and then that
accountability pieces that we're
continuing to look at that data
what it means and kind of decide
for reasons why students may or
may not be attending school
again whether it's during the
this pandemic time or it's
In class learning moving forward
and I think that's something
important that the school
districts also you know there's
there's flexibility in that in
how they can account for
students I think it and when we
talk about flexibility I think I
think it's where we place the
emphasis because I think in
education we have a lot of
different places where where on
we want to engage in that sort
of flexibility so me as a
sponsor of house bill five in
Senate bill one you know that's
one thing that I know me Mr
sleeve Mister Liu director
gradual all kind of had
you know bouts with and to
really talking about to great
extent is is how much should be
prescriptive and then how much
should be all west to to school
districts to decide and and I
think within that piece of
legislation we really opted to
go with the guidelines so we
came up with a list of
guidelines that a lot of that
money could be spent on all now
I hear issues amongst colleagues
especially on this call about
about flexibility and I
certainly share
some of that sentiment but it
but I think it would be
important that we really truly
drill down to what flexibility
means given in a particular
circumstance or a particular
initiative that we're talking
about
in in not try to use it as a as
a sort of catchall for four
different things but I think
moving forward and see is really
looking and and delving into
into the really particulars of
what could help and help the
educational outcomes help the
social emotional well being of
of all of our students and then
that's what I think is really
the strength of the of this
committee is that we have that
wealth of experience we have
tremendous staff to really do a
deep dive into some of these
issues for our students and on
behalf of New Mexico education
But not really any questions but
I appreciate director gradual Mr
Saly Mr Liu
Mr Simon on on your presentation
this morning and and certainly
look forward to to further
presentations in the future from
you all about the various issues
that will be facing in education
this legislative session so with
that if there are no other
questions I'm gonna put it out
there one more time.
Okay I'm so we will so thank you
all panelists they really
appreciated I know the other
member speaking for all members
really appreciate you're working
attention on these matters
is is we're to the members we
will be starting to hear bills
on Wednesday on what we have a
shared file system on that I
know is is getting online but in
advance excuse me of one state
will be putting out the agenda
certainly by the end of today
you will have it analysts will
be able to start looking into
those bills for Wednesday and
then I would encourage the
analysts on both sides of the
aisle to.
Double check and make sure that
the system for getting the
analysis to to your respective
parties is is is good we have
current email addresses were
still compiling the list so if
you could get with merrier
Rachel the committee analysts in
order to give your preferred
email or even when the.
To give your preferred email in
your preferred phone number so
we can have that contact listed
something accurate moving
forward for committee members
all of the analysis from Ellie
S. C.
At the end and LESC will be
posted on the website as well in
case but I'm hoping that the
file share system is something
that that will get up and going
in and can really utilize
that'll kind of as I understand
it is going to take the place of
our notebooks that we typically
get in the committee room with
all the bills all our analysis
ready for us okay
So.
With that being said we will
convene and eight o'clock on
Wednesday morning so with that
will recessed late eight o'clock
on Wednesday morning thank you
all is good thing you all have a
good rest your day.
