Your.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Representative Lente.
I'm here.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative or Baca by at
all.
Representative Stapleton in.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Vice chair Care Act.
Chairman.
Here we have a quorum awesome we
quorum this morning good morning
everybody I hope you all are
doing well especially after
having our first later floor
session last night so we're
going to begin with house bill
one thirty eight and
Representative Montoya please
when you're ready.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of this wonderful
Education Committee what a
pleasure to be with each of you
this morning.
I represent a very rural
district.
Rio Arriba County more a County
San Miguel and Colfax.
I'm also previous to being
elected I had a thirty year
career as a professional dancer
and painter allow me to share a
brief story before I fully
introduce house bill one thirty
eight.
I'm intimately familiar with the
fine arts Education Act funding.
Because around nineteen ninety
eight in my farming village of a
lot of the I created an arts
program that lasted about five
years by two thousand two I open
The New Mexican and I saw that a
state representative Max call
was introducing legislation to
bring funding to public schools
they leaped out of my seat I got
on the phone and that evening
his lovely wife invited me to
their home in Santa Fe it
started a ten year.
project where I became a founder
and the coordinator of an arts
program for the entire district
of Espanola.
We had seventy five teaching
artists two hundred and seventy
classrooms and three thousand
children.
Whose lives were transformed
literally.
That decade was the most
transformative for me because I
got to see the power in vibrancy
of the arts in a public school
setting.
That helped so many of our kids
to understand the power of
learning as a lifelong pool.
We use the arts as a form of
medicine to move kids from
trauma live through literally to
trust to trust in who they are
to trust in our cultures or
languages are histories and to
trust their special way of
learning it was a remarkable
time.
And again it made a deep impact.
The arts I believe as a tool to
help our young people to gain
the confidence to literally
claim their lives.
House bill one thirty eight is
identical to house bill two
thirty nine from last year's
twenty twenty session which pass
this committee and the house
floor unanimously.
A bit of history.
Due to an unintended consequence
of house bill one eighty eight
in the twenty eighteen
legislative session school
districts across our state so
significant decreases in arts
funding.
House bill one eighty eight
change the funding formula for
the fine arts Education Act.
That serve schools from gassed
into Farmington from tiles to
Las Vegas and across the state
as a result of the change school
districts across our state lost
funding earmarked for supplies
programs teaching positions were
also eliminated for.
House bill one thirty eight
corrects this loss of arts
funding by increasing the cost
differential multiplier in the
FAP formula slightly.
From point zero five two point
zero five four this small
increase would nearly perfectly
offset the losses suffered by
school districts.
If adopted house bill one thirty
eight would cost the state
approximately two point nine
five million dollars.
My staff and I have created a
brief video to help tell the
story.
They give a special thanks to
Isaac because of those for
helping to create the video.
Is that we have that ready.
And then I can share my screen.
So Celinda you may have to add
tailored to as a co host so she
can try to share screen please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So while we wait to do that
would one of your experts which
to make brief comments well we
get that set up let's invite
Christina Gonzalez and then we
can go to to the video.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee my name
is Christina Gonzalez and I am
chair elect of the New Mexico
and by re council on arts
education.
The council has been advising
the secretary of education and
the PED on arts education in New
Mexico for over twenty years.
We are consortium of
professional artists arts
educators and arts
administrators who advocate for
arts education in our public
schools and in our communities I
myself have been working in this
field for thirty years teaching
studio art at the college and K.
twelve levels as well as working
as an administrator and leader
in northern New Mexico at the
intersection of arts practice
arts education and arts equity.
This year I have watched arts
education become more important
than ever for children in
schools as they have been truly
discouraged by the social
isolation of the last ten.
I'm seeing kids sing and.
And last in their fine arts
classes and I can't help but
notice the joy and sense of
community being created and
those spaces even.
With intention arts classes can
provide the very best social
emotional learning.
We have a student in Santa Fe
whose family immigrated from
Guatemala of mine heritage and
this student shared that she was
being bullied in school she she
was ashamed to speak her in her
home language and in her art
class you have the opportunity
to painted self portrait to
depict herself which she did it
with beautiful patterns in
images from what the my loan
from her village and it was the
first time that she felt pride
she shared this that it was the
first time she said.
Ride in her ancestry it was in
and through art that she
understood and expressed a sense
of self worth and this was
reflected back to her by her
teacher.
This is culturally responsive
education at its best it goes
beyond the token inclusion of
diverse voices it is about
fundamental identity affirmation
giving students the opportunity
and agency to share their unique
voice and then to know that it
matters to their teachers to the
school community.
Beyond this year pandemic
closures the research is
unequivocal students who study
the arts have improved academic
outcomes achievement gaps are
known to decrease at schools
where the arts are central to
instruction the arts
definitively reach disengaged
students and arts education in
New Mexico will have long term
economic impact this cannot be
under estimated New Mexico is
among thirteen states with the
fastest growing arts and culture
economies in the country we
can't afford to not fund arts
education.
We asked the committee today to
support and pass this piece of
legislation this is just great
policy Mr chairman and committee
members H. B. one thirty eight
will restore not increased but
restore the funding that was
lost in fine arts programs
across the state.
The New Mexico Advisory Council
on arts education urges you to
support house bill one thirty
eight it passed unanimously in
the house last year and we need
your support to move it forward
this year.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you so madam secretary re
reading the video.
We're missing the audio test
everybody yeah I was warning
about that.
Is it possible to try again.
We may Representative.
One moment Mr chairman and
Thank you so much.
Much of this footage that you're
about to see and hear hopefully
describes the programs up in the
north and students who grew up
through that program.
Holidays I restarted my new it
was off our was on sorry of
course Taylor sorry about.
no worries we appreciate it.
I started western dancing
training I was about five years
old I have been dancing
traditionally since I've been
able to walk are is important to
me because it lets me express
myself.
It makes me more happy it's a
way for me to express my
creativity and my emotions and
my imagination my first aha
moment was at Rio Rancho high
school where I realize you know
this is what I want to do it's a
ducation is important because
it's a different aspect of kids'
amenity no other subjects my
teach come the the the Holland
doing something the arts teach
kids why.
Art is just are there so many so
many more components are going
to working with it it's not just
one.
In dealer item it's it's a music
box that has many many working
years in.
That turned things that happen
inside the pretty.
This bill seeks to restore
funding that was lost a few
years ago the finance Education
Act and it's important to
maintain programs give kids all
the access they need our system
microdistrict out rural New
Mexico or all the way to our
large deserves state education
it is very important for
students because it gives them
the opportunity to create and to
feel safe in school and simply
by their teachers in a social
way and in a culturally relative
way our students get to explore
who they are when I didn't have.
The capacity to use my words
they just tell me the dissident
express fully how I was feeling
I turn to dance arts education
in my mind from personal
experience it it activates a
part of your brain that core
classes or other disciplines can
we were not funded appropriately
we don't have to use to send
home with kids that was one of
the things that we were able to
accomplish this years to
participate together the funding
to to secretary is home for
students to use to someone who'd
set says the arts are for all
arts or Strickler I would remind
them that
the arts have been internal to
the committee for ever the first
indications we have a society of
human beings besides the bones
is our work the art.
Is the helping hand that's there
when you feel like there's
nothing else.
Thank you page with any of your
other experts like to make brief
comments before we go to the
committee I would like to invite
Kurt Schmidt.
Please Mr Schmidt.
Our good morning chairman Romero
members of the committee my name
is Kurt Schmidt I'm the
executive director of fine arts
for Rio Rancho public schools I
also service past chair of the
New Mexico Advisory Council on
arts education I just wanted a
couple points to his guns also
statement first of all I want to
give you a real life example of
what happened in districts with
the formula change from a few
years ago in my own district we
had to cut to full time teaching
positions last year and luckily
the district was able to cover
one of those positions and I was
able to reassign the other
teacher however not every
district was able to make just
to make such accommodations and
many were therefore forced to
make difficult cuts
also it's been suggested that
some of the reduction we saw in
funding
the roof there experienced
after the formula change was due
to reduced still student
enrollment and districts
my own districts also to
reduction but even after
adjusting for fewer students the
formal change still would have
forced us to eliminate it you
can position and these two
positions do not exist in the in
the abstract that the people who
live in our communities that
they get back to the economy and
most importantly the teacher
teach our kids I'm fine I just
want to say a few a few numbers
demonstrating what age the B.
one thirty eight would mean for
arts programs in the state have
the new multiplayer we are
proposing in this bill been in
place for the school year and
based on projected role as for
the school year for instance
Silvercity would have received
an additional twenty six
thousand dollars for their arts
programs Roswell an extra
hundred three thousand dollars
Los Lunas eighty two thousand
dollars guests in honor and
twenty four thousand dollars
aspect twenty one thousand
dollars in the PS seven hundred
eighty five thousand dollars all
these months representing a
restoration of funding that
supports fine arts education for
New Mexico students so thank you
for your time this morning and
we we are support thank you.
Thank you thank you for being
here
And Mister fear briefly please.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman my name is Daniel fear
and I in the fine arts
coordinator for Farmington
municipal schools most of the
chair of the New Mexico Advisory
Council in arts education is my
pleasure to speak for this
committee as the chair of the
Advisory Council I work
alongside brilliantly creative
and like minded arts educators
from across the state all with
one goal high quality arts
education for the children New
Mexico a few points I'd like to
make in support of funding
changes proposed by house bill
one thirty eight.
First I'd like to reaffirm and
reiterate to the points that
miss Gonzalez and Mr Schmidt
provided the committee second
even though Farmington is
considered a metropolitan area
our connections are rural and
schools are culturally diverse
with native Hispanic Education
students the restoration of
funding will go far providing
more equity for diverse
classrooms.
Multiple studies have found that
race and ethnicity and
socioeconomic status can predict
a person's access to the arts
and culture community with
minority and disadvantaged
students having the least amount
of access other studies have
shown that the same students
have a great deal to gain from a
vibrant arts education and are
dependent upon their schools to
give it to them.
Finally Farmington and many of
the committees throughout state
have received designations as in
New Mexico arts and culture
district our school should
reflect contribute and nurture
that community thank you for
your time and your willingness
to listen.
Right thank you so much for
being here Representative
Montoya do all stand for
questions.
Nope you're muted
Representative.
Representative you're muted.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry and
members of this wonderful
committee that is it for our
expert witnesses is there a poll
that you use is there are.
Open questions to the public or
no.
Representative no but we do go
to public comment.
Excellent.
Awesome well thank you all we
will go to the attendees list so
we have some eager beavers will
wait.
All lower all the hands before I
give my announcement so if you
are here more your viewers I'm
so if you're here in opposition
to house bill one thirty eight
opposition please indicate by
raising your hand if you wish to
speak.
I didn't think so so we'll go to
support we'll go to support for
house bill one thirty eight if
you would indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
All right for those of you I see
a lot of new names welcome I'm
you'll have up to two minutes
but like we always sends
Committee less is more so we'll
start off with Chris.
Morning Chris you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of this committee on
Chris boson I am the registered
lobbyist for Rancho Public
schools public schools.
But also I have another client
the next college and on the
register this as well those
three organizations Mr chairman
are in support of this piece of
legislation for the same reasons
that we're stated by the expert
witness I don't think I could
stay in a better way I think the
the the Christina Gonzalez and
stated that are perfectly and we
watched a beautiful movie right
there so I think the message is
and each one of you already
passed and for the reasons that
were stated previously by the
expert witness Mr Chairman those
three organizations at this
moment are in strong support of
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you Chris.
So we'll go to Mary.
Good morning merry of up to two
minutes.
Thank you chairman Romero and
members of the committee my name
is merry Cherokee and I'm an
elementary art teacher I'm also
a parent whose children have
benefited from arts education in
their schools in our state in
the spring when we suddenly
ended up home I was able to
quickly create a live space for
my students online to connect
and create and this was at a
time when classes were
considered optional and the
specials were even more optional
many of my students still showed
up and didn't want to leave the
place they can express
themselves and connect but also
highlighted inequities that many
of them faced a lot of them
didn't even have basic supplies
if we had more funding we could
have helped them at that point
with more supplies this
restoration of funding can help
us now to address those
inequities not only was supplies
but professional development
training for best practices to
be better culturally responsive
embedding FCL into the arts
which is a beautiful be helpful
for it and I would like to
propose that the arts is what
got us through this really
difficult time and it's what
brings our children and us a
richness and joy to life.
Hi I have some parents and
students also on hold to testify
thank you for considering
restoring the funds to help the
high quality art across our
state thank you.
Great thank you merry.
All right so we'll go to trees.
Morning tree state you'll have
up to two minutes.
Entry so you may be muted.
Good morning I your.
As well the Mexico can you hear
me OK we can okay I'm I am a
school social worker for there
are are just.
Of of.
Are the board of directors for
the Roswell artist in residency
for the Anderson museum.
Are it is just this this is the
essence of expressing create if
our students I'm able to work
with many students who struggle
to communicate and art and arts
program has just been so
incredible
in accepted just exposing our
students to to different ways of
communicating.
Creating our reduces anxiety in
both children and adults and.
The brain it's deeply
intellectual emotional Avenue
for expression this is something
that I hope this committee does
not under estimate and continues
to support across all subject
matters for both children and
and adults and the exposure that
this program gives to our
community.
Thank you I hope you support the
bill thank thank you so much.
All right so we will go to
Carol.
Morning care all you have up to
two minutes.
Good morning chairman Romero
members of the committee my name
is Carol straighter and I'm an
arts educator in the Santa Fe
public schools
Yesterday in teaching my art
classes I spent some time with
my students.
Encouraging them to go into
their kitchens and find an empty
cereal or cracker box that they
could cut apart and use the
inside of the cardboard as
material to paint on
because many of my students
don't even have paper at home
and the supplies we've been able
to send totaled out
The parties are adaptable and
resourceful that's part of what
we do with our creativity and I
don't think there's any problem
and encouraging them to use
recycled materials in their art
I'm just grateful that I had
received grant funding in order
to send home thanks so that they
had something to use when they
have that cardboard so we're not
asking for.
rolls Royce we just need basic
supplies so that our students
can learn to be creative and
adaptive in all situations thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right.
Go to steam.
Good morning Steve you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee my name
is Steve Pyle this is the
president of the New Mexico art
education association wished
express our support for H. B.
one thirty eight nearly half of
our members teach students in
grades K. through six who will
benefit from the full thank you
funding that would come through
thank you.
Thank you Steve.
So we'll go to Steve with any
eight.
Morning Steve of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee that's
the ceiling is government
relations with India in New
Mexico on behalf of our members
we support this bill research is
very clear that fine arts is a
key component in improving
learning throughout all academic
areas and also key in closing
the achievement gap evidence of
it being effective in reducing
student drop out raising student
attendance of fostering a love
for learning improving greater
student dignity and enhancing
student creativity can be easily
found by tool in a simple Google
search so if you don't believe
me you could easily decreased
search it on Google and and of
course I invite anyone to do so
the bill also corrects and I
think this is very important and
an unintentional wrongly
limiting funding for arts
program.
We support this bill and
encourage the committee to vote
in favor of H. B. one thirty
thank you right thank you Steve.
One right.
Board member Peter St.
Member Peterson good morning you
have a two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you very
much for giving me a moment to
speak thank you very much for
entertaining this bill
We know that music especially is
one of the areas that improve
students academic progress more
than almost anything else across
cultures across languages.
Right now I am terrified the
concern about.
So called academic loss during
school shutdowns is going to
cause some of us to panic in go
to programs that have short term
gain but not shown long term
gain for our students I believe
that if we can fully implement
new second art for our students
we will see the kinds of.
Progress for our students that
we all want making them created
rich healthy and happy human
beings thank you very much.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to
Sebastian.
My system Sebastian is telling
me that you have an older
version of zoom.
And it wouldn't allow you to
use.
We see.
We have to bring you in.
Sebastian you're with us you
have up to two minutes.
Hello my name is Sebastian and I
am a student in Rio Rancho
public schools I strongly
believe that the increase in the
fine arts program is urgent I've
been involved in fine arts to
the state one from elementary
school choir and band all the
way to marching band and jazz I
school in the bottom of my heart
I see the music is the reason I
get up to go to school in the
morning.
Music is me something to look
forward to after that math test
music has taken me farther than
anything else I've ever been
part of through music I have had
the opportunity to play
alongside the best musicians in
the world.
Travel to music for example I
had the opportunity to travel to
Australia to play the Sydney
Opera House but the Albuquerque
youth symphony the only reason I
have had these opportunities is
because of the fine arts
programs in my schools this bill
will greatly affect us all not
just a school but in my we need
the finance programs to teach us
valuable lessons that no other
class can teach that is why the
increased the fire program is
vital.
Great thank you suggestion.
Right Sir anybody else need to
be solicit wish to speak in
favor.
None.
Will come to committee the
questions from committee
Representative Chatfield please.
Mr chair.
Our.
You know I don't think there's
anybody that doesn't support
fine arts music in the in the
arts and some of my best friends
are professional artists.
What what I wonder about is I
don't see any funding attached
to this bill and so if it is
just a.
If it adds weight to the program
unit it seems to me that it will
take money away from some of the
smaller schools that already
already cannot afford an art
program or a music program and
give it to other.
Larger schools that already can
afford it hard program so I I
think that if something is.
It's worth doing it's worth
putting some money into worth
funding so I I would just like
an answer to.
Help me understand if if that's
what I'm what I'm seeing is true
does this add weight to the to
the SCG so that the schools that
have in our program get more in
those that are unable to afford
our program get less.
Mr chairman and Representative
Chatfield is so good to meet you
we share a district up
overlapping a little bit in
Colfax County it's great to to
to see for the first time.
To answer your question this is
obviously the elephant in the
room we're talking about a three
million dollar.
Re appearance so as a of funding
that just doesn't seem to be
there I've spent a great deal of
time the last five weeks
researching with the team of sun
sunny lu and analysts.
Peeking through an understanding
first the complexities of the
education funding and
understanding how this happened
in twenty eighteen it is my
belief that if we can restore
this funding and that is the
elephant in the room.
It will be an equalizer for
classrooms and it will not it
will not shift money from a
larger to a smaller.
In the bigger picture when we
look at our budget.
What we budget shows us what we
prioritize in the early
nineteen.
To in in two thousand two when I
started this work we were under
the bush administration and the
no child left left behind really
began to diminish the arts time
and then of course in the Obama
administration right to the top
it even got worse with the arts
became disproportionately
consider you know we were barely
a side dish let alone where I I
believe the arts particularly in
New Mexico could become the main
dish.
We have the Yazzie Martinez case
mandating that we provide equity
in culturally responsive
inappropriate linguistic
programming here we have the
arts and culture in a state like
New Mexico and it's under uses
under considered there are four
areas that I've thought about in
my research of where we could
potentially provide this
funding.
Sunny Liu and his team suggested
that perhaps the at risk funding
line item we reached out to the
secretary of education.
The Dr Stewart to that end we're
working on an answer.
The second choice is to go to
the Appropriations Committee and
beg for unlikely temporary fix
three million dollars.
And again I circle back to the
Yazzie Martinez mandate.
Finally I understand that our
governor is looking seriously at
big dollars to address
behavioral health issues across
the entire spectrum of life in
New Mexico perhaps that's a
place that this committee could
help us identify and again
prioritize.
This kind of arts learning is
absolutely proven to be
effective and if we can't
prioritize this small piece back
in well I'll just say it shame
on us we know it's useful.
Stop there for now and I hope I
answered some of your question.
So Mr Chairman representative us
I think you did that the arts
are very important to me I would
invite any of you to come to my
office at the capitol which is
filled with art by some of my
very close friends
I just you know I was sent here
to stand up for the folks that I
represent which is some of the
smaller school districts in the
state and I I don't think it's
right to take away from those
children the ability to have any
art or music and give it to a
large of a larger screen that
already has some and I would
prefer that we found some
funding in if it is truly dear
to our heart if it's something
that means something to us then
maybe we need to start a little
earlier in the process and get
some funding put into this and
fund the arts in not only the
way I mean I'm a person that
believes in it I just I just
think this takes away from our
middle schools what little they
might have thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Representative Trujillo please.
Representative we can't hear you
you may be needed.
Okay nothing there.
You are officially muted on our
side so you probably have your
microphone probably has the mute
button and then your computer
does as well.
One more time okay there you go
you know if you didn't tell me
about this new but none this
court I would never remember.
Try again.
It is so good to have been here
to hear this presentation I
taught for twenty one years as
you know Mr chairman and die
One of the NMAA reasons that I
think I stuck with elementary
education as a thousand yeah my
dad.
My family played music my dad
played the guitar he was with
low CENIC it is that the house
they they play the and at the
bicentennial in Washington DC my
brothers and sisters played all
kinds of musical instruments I
play the radio and the the only
other opportunity that I had I
think to express myself because
I'm not a.
A great speaker was our work and
I got into trouble for.
Can you hear me.
Okay I got into trouble a lot of
times because I would draw the
inside of text books because I
didn't have paper and eventually
we were able to use paper and
throughout my life I have been.
a staunch supporter of our to a
try I'm a fledgling artist I
would like to see Roger Montoya
Representative Montoya is home
looks like the gallery from here
but I've tried very hard to
express myself in our.
That more than anything in the
classroom when my students
couldn't find a way to convey
what they wanted they were able
to use our work to to state what
they wanted and they created
beautiful R. and they used a
variety of different methods to
do it and throughout throughout
my tenure as the state board
member and as a as a legislator
and as an advocate for public
education I have always tried to
support public of the the arts
for kids because sometimes you
can't reach them in any other
capacity and they can't tell you
in any of the capacity except to
their artwork and so.
I'm not I guess I'm unclear Mr
chairman of about Representative
Chatfield comments that this
would take away from
of his small schools and maybe
Representative Montoya can
respond.
Our clarify.
Eight first of all
Representative Trujillo it's
it's also good to see you.
Mr chairman I I would like to do
for two Mr Schmidt to help
answer this question.
Well you know how a larger
districts would sort of over
take a smaller one.
Mister Smith please.
Mr Chairman I'm too
Representative Chatfield up
quick
ever every district in the state
every charter school is are able
to apply for for finance
Education Act funding
it's it's a relatively simple
process to to to.
So that applications submitted
and get money for
for districts so what we're
proposing would not would not
take away from any districts
funders Education Act money I
would rather it would contribute
to it and and I understand I
believe of Representative
Chatfield representative was
Carroll public schools
which is a micro districts they
would receive they would receive
several hundred dollars of
funding for that
which is the beauty of the FAA
because at it funds every size
different district in the state
every child has the opportunity
to to benefit from the funding
so would not rob Peter to pay
Paul there it would it would do
it.
As you as you with the tide when
the tide rises all boats left so
that's that's what this this
would do.
Your muted Representative.
He.
Representative.
Okay so there and I'm what's
happening is that
you know every single year that
I lobbied here and every single
year that I've been here there
has never been enough money for
public education we always seem
to have struggles trying to fund
public education adequately and
and the programs that end up
getting cut are what people
perceive as the frilly stuff I
don't believe that it that our
team is really
and I think it's a critically
important that we fund it Mr
chairman the second thing is we
are both Representative
Chatfield and I serve on
probation and I believe that
if today when we needed
appropriations are going to be
dealing with the public school
Budgets and the and the state
budget so I'm hoping that
there's a way that we both can
advocate for some kind of a
increase in this in this the
funding of this program because
this is critical I I don't want
this to continue taking away
from kids that really need it
because.
The perception is that it's an
equal I think we can give it all
to all the kids and it may not
be a whole heck of a lot but
it's it's sufficient at this
point in time to find them well
it's important to find the money
and I think we can buy
sufficiency in in finding the
money Mr chairman I hope I made
sense.
Great thank you Representative.
Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee thank
you Representative Montoya for
bringing this bill forward I
think it's very important many I
don't think anyone knows my dad
retired as an art teacher from
for middle school or he was in
middle school art teacher and
and the arts is always been very
important to me and and our
family and and I know the
positive impact that has on
on students and I want to
applaud Mr chair of the
Representative and and the P. in
the folks is working with with
their efforts and what they're
doing with for our kids to
especially during this time so
with that said it Mr chairman
and to to Representative use
point you know we are
appropriations will be we will
be sharing the the public school
presentation today on on the on
the funding so what led to that
said how would this or would
there be any impact on this
increased funding for the arts
in relation to the efforts of
holding the school districts
harmless with their enrollment
for for the for this this past
school year Mr chair.
Representative for experts the
question was back to the
chairman.
About the whole question.
Yes so so the question is is we
have an idea that's floating
around because of the pandemic
that we have decreased number of
students enrolled in our public
schools since we're prior year
funding that is potentially
means last students and our
public schools for next year so
in order to address this we are
there are a couple ideas
floating around on this idea of
a hold harmless so this
committee isn't Garcia idea that
we would
not allow for any students or
school districts to be decreased
in there funding
so so I think that is
Representative not as question
is that a good I money the
waters or did I clear it.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
my apologies for we're putting
on the spot there.
No no worries used to it
teacher.
Representative.
Representative and Mr chairman
of you know not being a member
of this important committee but
watching on the sidelines I
believe that that harm hold
harmless rule is vitally
important as we try to rebuild
and restart in reemerge and and
get kids back into classrooms
you know our my a nine school
districts up here in the north
are devastated you know by not
only the whole hold harmless in
implications of it strewn Roman
but bossing and so many sort of
domino pieces you know that that
that have come out of that so I
I think I.
Command and agreed that that
that your committee should push
for with that I think it is
vital in this in this critical
here as you come out of COVID.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that and I think that's
something interesting that I'm
gonna look into a little bit
more but I applaud you for your
efforts and and do you can count
on my support of this bill thank
you Mr.
I thank you representative
Representative out please.
Tier after thank thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill and of course I'm from this
world early childhood where we
always focus on the whole child
art is essential throughout the
day children self select.
We provide them with a variety
of materials with we like to do
open it are so obviously I
support our
and even during this pandemic my
daughter who is a social worker
has been providing art therapy
and doing small groups that are
allowed in the behavioral health
world are not allowed in the PED
world with youth and much of.
When children express.
What what is happening with them
and their body of money in there
spare they do if you are so I
definitely support this I'm I
think I have what logistical
questions to help you decide how
to vote and a little bit of the
backstory on it Representative
Montoya comes from the fact
that.
People have been making changes
to the school funding formula
and it's.
It for example K. five K. five
plus and extended learning was
put into the funding formula as
a factor.
And in rural New Mexico some
schools could not participate in
K. five plus.
And extended learning there for
that particular factor did not
reach their district and I
believe that's what Chatfield is
suggesting so my questions are
probably more for Rachel
logistical questions so that I
can understand what's happening
here the bill is very simple
it's only one page Mr Chairman
representative Montoya and it
doesn't have an appropriation so
Rachel can you explain so my
first question is whether
dollars to the district aren't
they and restricted no matter
how other factors.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct there is a statement
the public school finance act
that
is that and so long as districts
are meeting
statutory requirements they're
not required to spend the
dollars that are generated
through the funding formula on
the specific programs that
generate those those dollars
okay so thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative Torren
Rachel for that so.
Does that but I don't read this
bill to increase the money going
to the district it just changes
the factors is that correct Mr
chairman Representative Andrea.
So Mr Chairman representative it
will increase program units at
districts that already have fine
arts programs or districts that
out fine arts programs the
resort decrease in funding it
will depend on the total overall
appropriation and the total
program unit so if you held
everything even no program unit
changes for anything other than
this bill and no appropriation
change you would have more units
a lower unit value the districts
that generated fine arts
programs would be allocated a
slight bump in funding while
other districts would see a
slight decrease in funding and
to be clear the three million
dollar impact is point one
percent of total public school
funding so you're appropriating
over three billion dollars a
year through the SCG.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative so I
guess it but it could be and if
we were to at a protection
appropriations of this Mr
Chairman Representative Andrea
if there is an appropriation
attached to this with the
districts with with that
prevents the district from
seeing a decrease.
What I just said all else being
equal no partner changing room
units yes do you have a
situation moving into FY twenty
two we're the generation of
program units is pretty up in
the air because of enrollment
declines in the chairman just
mentioned that looking for some
hold harmless language and not
quite sure what enrollment
growth will generate but but in
general yes.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative so I I guess.
And and so if we pass this the
districts with fine arts
programs would see a bump but it
would still be up to the
superintendents and the school
board to decide whether dollars
are spent there's no guaranteed
in the language of this bill
that would be spent on fine art.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I'm
sorry yes Representative
Representative doubt you know as
someone who who worked in the
fine arts education programming
has been over ten years that was
one of the.
Unintended consequences I I
would say of that by the time
the funding reaches a local
school district.
They can decide to use it or not
I mean at one point when we were
first funded in two thousand
three I fought like heck to get
back three hundred sixty
thousand dollars to get they
wouldn't believe that this
funding was actually.
There I had to go in depth to
understand that it was part of
the SCG that was a new program
and it took half a year so there
is a real challenge at the local
level we're school boards may or
may not value the arts but it's
still a fight we must have
particularly looking at the
level of trauma poverty that our
students are living through and
the therapeutic behavioral
health social emotional element
on its own is worth fighting for
this funding I am urging this
committee to help us identify
pathway is it possible that the
unused K. five plus an extended
learning dollars in rural
schools as you stated so.
Accurately is there a way to to
shift that into this line item.
Mr.
Good.
Mr chairman and representative I
I don't think you're hearing any
disagreement for this body
I think in the next bill that
that there's another bill today
that the chairman brought forth
that's asking for flexibility
and I and I've got a bill that's
asking for us to take a deep
dive look at the intention at
our funding formula and does it
reach the children who generate
the dollars and how do we get to
the student beyond you know the
district level so this committee
is definitely tackling this and
I think what what one of my
frustrations is seen those
dollars reverted from the rural
communities and going into the
school reform Fund and then
getting re directed at to
schools that are not at high
risk of where they were intended
to we passed the bill signing it
to go to where your act like
places like you're asking then
it becomes unrestricted or
reverted goes into the school
reform Fund and can get
distribute it re distributed
anywhere but still no assurance
that it's raising the children
who need it most so I don't I
don't think anybody's.
Opposing what you're saying we
just have to be really careful
especially in rural areas of the
unintended consequences so
someone didn't have it arts
program at so it it may be a
better fit in an independent
bill that is just Ahlers going
directly to arts programs you
know at with our program we
things X. number of dollars
based on the number of students
it wouldn't be part of the
funding formula it would be a
separate type of initiative that
we have seen before I I don't
disagree with what you're doing
I just know that that my
districts are really struggling
with these funding formula
changes that everyone intended
to do good but end up taking
dollars out of the district
instead of bringing him to the
district and
I want to help you figure this
out I actually have all kinds of
ideas going through my head
where I do know that a lot of
attention to the Appropriations
Committee I've been paying lots
of attention to where the
dollars are and there are
multiple programs go in my mind
right now where we can get at
funds for therapeutic arts and
art programs to the districts
that need them in fact in in my
district we ask for flexibility
in the pre K. program dollars
because there were no direct
dollars you know it was virtual
and so
If there is dollars that would
not get expended that we were
able to do a budget adjustment
request and direct them to
therapeutic programs and that
included are the same happened
with community schools the same
happened with twenty first
century funding like right now
in the COVID world there is a
lot more flexibility but I think
it's something that that we can
work on and and have happened
really quickly I'm nervous about
changing the funding formula
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
just a point of clarification in
order to generate
funding dollars for arts
programs does the school then
have to have an endorsed arts
teacher and one of the fine art
fields and maybe director
gradual could answer that I I
just want to be clear on what
actually you need to generate a
fine arts dollars.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative I'm not sure of
the Representative my twenty
might be better able to tell you
what the program requirements
are one of his experts but there
are there's a statute outside
the public school finance act
that says here's the
requirements you must meet in
order to receive funding.
Yes I I would like to defer to
my experts witnesses go back
when I was running the program
it may have changed since then.
It was dependent on the
application and how a particular
school district decided to use
their funding in our case we
employed seventy five teaching
artists that worked in tandem
with public school classroom
teachers and I know that in
other districts it's more of an
arts a band teacher on a visual
arts teacher that sort of thing
I would like to ask either
Christina Gonzalez for Mister
Schmidt to help me out here and
what the current date processes
for individual school districts
to six cents by the question.
Please remember may be able to
help us out here Mr chairman of
our respectfully defer to Mister
fear.
On this question.
Thank you Mr chairman
just to see if I can reframe the
question it's the qualifications
of the teachers providing the
content would that be an
accurate representation.
Representative Kerr.
I'm that that's my question Mr
chairman if it's if the school
do you have to have an endorsed
teacher for a program to qualify
for arts funding for an R. two
unit what does it take if if
you're Representative Chatfield
in a very small school district
is it possible to generate fine
arts units if you don't have a
teacher in Torrez in one of the
fine arts categories.
So the thank you Mr chair the
answer that question is yes and
it would be exactly the same way
that Mr Representative monthly
audited in the or early days of
the program you could bring in
at an artist teacher to work
with the classroom teacher the
only requirement is that
somebody that's working with the
students is a license to
educator but that the license
educator can work in partnership
with an artist teacher to
provide content for the
students.
Okay thank you thank you very
much thank you Mr.
Representative Garrett I might
add that in in our
Representative if you go to
through the chair please Mr.
Yes Miss Mister chair sorry
I would like to address that in
the case of rural districts
we're in the early days for the
first five years we could not
afford certify teachers in our
to work.
It was such a gift to rely on an
invite community artisans across
cultural groups you know we had
native American artists an
African drummers and it was such
an infusion of vitality that it
was a great way to satisfy the
fact that we didn't have enough
money generated from the units
in a particularly small school
but we were still able to answer
the question of bringing vibrant
relevant learning to our kids.
Are you back.
Mr chair.
Representative Garrett reader.
I yes I yes Mr chairman
but I would just add as a final
remarks I totally support are
just incredible things happen
you see a drumming teacher get a
silent child all of a sudden
talking my only concern is if a
school doesn't have a program
what would they need to do thank
you very much Mr chairman.
Great thank you Representative
so what's the committee.
Mister chair Mister chair I move
it to pass.
So we have a due pass motion
Representative Trujillo also
action second right madam
secretary if you call the roll
on to do passed motion please.
Representative Baldonado.
I passed.
Representative Chatfield.
Know what I would like to share.
Representative Dow all.
Now and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative laying.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente death.
Yes that.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative robot company at
all.
Representative about coming at
all.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Vice chair Garant yes.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Chairman.
Yes.
Nine two four.
All right so but for.
We declare the state do pass
Representative okay are
Representative Chatfield I was
looking for you in the squares
please to explain about.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I you know often
referred referred to that are
Representative Sheryl I would
just like to say and I represent
the.
Right.
And all of them are small rural
districts and they expect me to
come up here and stand up for if
by continually continually allow
the funding formula to pass by
so that also decreases the
amount of funding to go to the
small districts what would be
their voice so I support the
arts so extremely important
think when we put some money
into our priorities and not just
strictly we're still thank you
Mr thank you representative
Representative Dow place thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
Representative bye twenty at
just it did to what Jack said
but I would just add a little
bit to that and offer if this
bill does not pass I would be
very happy to work with you on
accomplishing your intention
which is getting our funding to
art programs and I think we can
draft a bill and I'd be happy to
work on it with you that would
assure that those dollars go
exactly where you intend without
a fight of six months and in
some cases never a victory thank
you Mr chairman great thank you
Representative and and so I
reserve my comments for after
the vote
thank you Representative when we
had talked on the phone I can
just shared my story my wife
being a fine arts teacher in an
elementary school that's going
on in the room just next to me
at our local public school and
she just recently made the
transition from the library to
fine arts because for degree is
in fine arts so I really
appreciate you bringing this
forward and I I think the
sentiment of the of the
committees pretty well taken
when it comes to our state
equalization guarantee and I
think these debates that we have
over state and local control I
think in various ways
we wrestle with that how much
state control there should be
and then how much should we
leave to local school districts
I mean I think in this debate I
share the concern about local
school districts perhaps not
allocating their share of money
toward the.
I toward fine arts I mean my
wife was really straining of a
few weeks ago to put their in
order list for her students that
included things like oil pastels
journals for the students to
keep wax paper for them to use
and and it was really hard for
her to budget for all of her
students and get them all the
supplies so it so I I yeah I
definitely feel that I think
just moving forward is is really
keeping that balance in mind of
what the state should be
mandating verses local district
control and what our role is at
the state level and then where
we fit in with that the complex
matrix of of our local school
districts things like that so so
I certainly share that sentiment
with the committee and it's
something I know you all
struggle with and something I
certainly struggle with it's
really that balance but with
that being said Representative
Montoya experts thank you very
much and there are members here
that are that are on the
Appropriations Committee as you
heard all to be are advocates on
that committee since the since
like I said before we don't we
in the Education Committee
unfortunately do not have those
fiscal responsibilities yet at
this point I wish we could have
a more substantive discussion
about the funding mechanism and
can really direct you there I
think that's super important in
that I'll never pass up a chance
to to to say that because we
have a disjointed system
Between our financial system and
and the policy so but with that
Representative Montoya thank you
so much for for much needed bill
and thank you experts for for
taking the time this morning.
Mr chairman and members if if I
may I'd like to thank you all
for having me this morning it's
been an extreme pleasure to meet
some of you a little more
intimately and I want to call
out Representative Dow and
others who are willing to work
with me.
Anybody that knows me and you
will learn soon I'm an absolute
fighter a champion for children
early childhood programming and
particularly the arts as a form
of medicine so look for me to be
there and and I will take you up
on problem solving we must solve
this and she said my dad says
that those.
Right thank you Representative
thank you all for being here
okay so we will go to house bill
one eighty four so.
Madam vice chair you would.
Take over.
Thank you Mr chairman and with
that I invite our chairman
Romero to present house bill one
eighty four which is K. five
plus funding and uses take it
away Mr chairman.
Great thank you madam chair and
committee members good morning
again
I I am sponsoring house bill one
eighty four which is looking at
changing aspects of K. five plus
an extended learning I do have
an amendment madam chair but if
I may just to kind of explain
the bill first and then we can
get into the amendment does that
work.
That works thank you
Representative Sweetser I'm not
seeing an FIR in our shared
file.
On Representative it may have
not been placer if you go to the
legislative website I do know
that the FIR is up on the
legislative website so if you
look at your house bill one
eighty four except there thank
you madam chair thank you Mr
chair.
All right so house bill one
eighty four
House bill one eighty four is
the equivalent hours bill so I
think one of the things that we
have heard from school districts
and superintendents have there
has been on the need for
flexibility K. five plus
extended learning so if you
remember these programs work
We're started Representative Dow
kind of gave a of a bit of an
overview of the beginnings of
this
In two thousand nineteen this
was a part of house bill five
Senate bill one for these
programs and and and the
requirements had been pretty
strict and and and have been
a stumbling block for for school
districts so this is the
flexibility and basically house
bill one eighty four would allow
for a club hours to be fulfilled
so instead of extending the
school year by twenty five days
which I've heard it
characterized as much of the
same by educators this would
allow for acquittal in hours
meaning that the equivalent of
the five days could be added
within the existing calendar
year for school so basically
this breaks down to about forty
five fifty minutes per day and
there have been some schools
that have been able to implement
things slide
in Richmond opportunities there
students so being able to make
the learning that they have in
that they've been doing
in school more practical type
renewable to to bring in outside
partners
So so as the bill currently
states this pertains to K. five
plus so being able for school
districts being able to add the
equivalent of twenty five days.
Convert that into two hours into
their existing calendar in the
day it all provides opportunity
for professional development
In school collaboration all
within the calendar day but
that's an overview of the bill
as it currently states
madam chair if I would be able
to go into the amendment.
Yes our please enter dues are
going to the amendment and the
and then that is posted in the
Here file.
Mr chairman if you can read the
went to number.
Sure madam chair point two one
nine seven six seven point
three.
Madam chair I move the amendment
for discussion I just.
Second four to discuss the
amendment please go ahead.
To adopt the amendment.
Yes we would but not at this
point okay thank you members.
I'm so so in the amendment the
the amendment to add in and
include extended learning time
as a quibble and ours as well so
where is the original bill is
deals with K. five plus the
amendment deals with extended
learning time so the ten days to
be added as
a cliff when ours as well so
that was something that was left
out of the original bill that we
are putting in so that it's both
program being able to do a COVID
one hours.
Is there any discussion
Representative Dow.
I thank you madam chair thank
you chairman I was going to move
the amendment but out should I
move them into production.
Already we have already okay all
right move to adopt the
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Okay the amendment has been
adopted continue Mr chairman.
Great thank you all so much
thank you madam chair so
basically again we have
equivalent hours for K. five
plus in the extended learning
program so with that madam chair
all stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman we're
going to go now to our attendees
I want to remind everybody that
you have two minutes to speak in
favor of or in opposition of.
and then you will be are needed
I'm going to start today with
those who would like to speak in
favor of the bill and we'll
start with
Superintendent Dennis.
Can you please pronounce your
last name for me again yes ma'am
madam chair it's Dennis Roch.
Thank you I am the president of
the New Mexico school
superintendents association
please to support this bill
strongly impacted during the
initial discussions about E. L.
T. P. N. K. five plus in Senate
bill one and house bill five two
years ago the superintendents
association with our advocating
for just this type of
flexibility that would have
removed the the barriers to
participation by number of small
districts and other districts
who.
And the barriers BFI are even
notes that participation in
these programs was far below
expectation because of some of
the barriers of no flexibility
so our our hats off to the
chairman or bringing this bill
to add the flexibility that we
think will likely lead to or
districts participating and more
students giving additional time
in instructional programs to
meet the mandate of Yazzie
Martinez and our state
constitution thank you so much
for the chance to weigh in.
Thank you superintendent our
next speaker is Andrew luck got.
You need to and mute yourself.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Angela gaps I am the proud
principal at McKinley middle
school in the northeast heights
in Albuquerque special thank you
Representative Christine
Trujillo for being a strong
advocate and representative for
my screen I'm here to speak in
support of house bill one eighty
four ninety nine point five
percent of students at McKinley
middle school qualify for free
and reduced lunches recently we
have moved to become community
school from hiring a family and
student counselor to support the
success of families to help
their child succeed to food
distributions to support
struggling families McKinley is
reaching out in our community to
support the whole child allowing
us to extend the school day for
my students is the next step it
means we could provide an
additional hour of instruction
daily to help close the
achievement gap that has only
widened during the pandemic it
means we could offer enrichment
opportunities for every student
alongside additional social
emotional learning supports I'm
not just talking about
individual optional tutoring
interventions are after school
clubs those we already have but
increased time in the classroom
for all students each day to
focus on academics while
ensuring students have success
the quality electives and school
to work opportunities too often
intervention academically comes
at the cost of engaging
electives over the last seven
months the question most asked
by parents has been what are you
going to do to get my kids back
on track nearly unanimously when
I suggest extending the school
day keeping kids at school
longer parents overwhelmingly
been in support of this
initiative keeping our doors
open in the evening is a major
component of the community
schools model and it McKinley
we'll continue to forge the path
that best meets the needs of our
students and families I thank
the sponsor for bring this bill
to the legislature and urged the
support of the committee.
Thank you Mr got our next
speaker is heather.
Doll.
Hold on for a second.
Okay whether you're on.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
heather Bassett I am here from
Albuquerque public schools and
we stand in strong support of H.
B. one eighty four this request
for put on ours is I'm not
actually represented by just my
voice or the school district of
the superintendent but it's
something that has captured the
attention of students teachers
and principals throughout our
district and the one hours issue
is something that we believe
would help Adam Richmond in
acceleration into our schools
and so we think chairman Romero
for at this bill and for this
conversation and we urge support
of age twenty four.
Thank you doctor Bassett our
next speaker is how are you a
drive on Tonio Gonzales.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is like
twenty eight dollars and ninety
associate superintendent for
leadership and learning in order
to which is the south valley and
west may serve Albuquerque I'm
here to speak in support of
house bill one eighty four I
have been before the L. E. S. C.
in the interim committee process
to testify to the homegrown
evidence based model we have
created an APS to reform our
schools through both extended
days and extended calendars we
are at the LTPS over ten schools
in our district but none of
those schools have seen the
community and academically for
like that of the three schools
in our district that it also
extended the length of the day
our districts supplements the
operational budgets of the
schools to provide equitable
hours to extend the date because
the losses we qualify only for
B. L. TB funding not funding for
the hours of K. five plus.
Equivalent powers would allow us
to expand this program and
extended day at other high
poverty schools.
For high poverty schools
extending the date provides time
for targeted instruction and
supports as well as in Richmond
and acceleration students with
licensed professional educators
and provides longer hours of
child care for working families
we do believe some of our
schools will benefit from the
LTP in K. five plus is
prescribed in law but to truly
target those schools with at
risk students in high poverty
communities we need equivalent
hours to provide supports and
enrichment that honors students
and families and brings about
true reform we thank
Representative Romero for your
leadership on this issue thank
you madam chair.
Thank you doctor Gonzales our
next speaker is lily may or K..
Good morning madam chair and Mr
chairman I am really more T.
signed the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico school board
association of the New Mexico
school board association as you
know supports greater local
school board decision making
authority and flexibility
specifically in this important
these important purpose of
students centered educate
standard learning programs and
the K. five plus program these
programs are part of our top
priorities and we are very happy
to see that this legislation is
coming through we appreciate the
flexibility of adding our
instead of days to the school
calendar we believe that adding
hours gives districts option to
execute rather than only being
able to extend their calendar
and we for the believe that this
option is increases the
participation because of the
flexibility given to schools
additionally this will changes
how schools qualify for K. five
plus extended learning programs
and again this we believe will
also help increase participation
to we don't so thank the sponsor
for the amendment and we asked
the committee to favourably
consider passing forward this
bill we thank you for allowing
us to voice our position.
Thank you Mr case our next
speaker is Dr Ellen burn sting.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Ellen
burns Steen I'm the president of
the Albuquerque teachers
federation K. five plus extended
learning time was first created
in order to address the
inequities
that have been pointed out time
and time again based on the
Yazzie Martinez rolling.
Allowing equivalent hours.
I'm we can create school
enrichment models that will
focus the additional time on
daily learning activities that
are student centered there
engaging and that infuse
cognitive and creative thinking
into the curriculum this
approach to extended learning
time really embraces students as
assets not students as deficits
that need to be filled and it
really does allow us to have
more culturally responsive
engaging activities that truly
expand the learning of the
student and the opportunities to
engage with the entire community
as of the principal ending the
gap pointed out this goes hand
in hand with community schooling
and I think that by allowing
hours it allows local economy
that we can cater to the needs
of our students and our
communities I thank the sponsor.
Thank you doctor burn sting our
next speaker is state Sen
Espinoza.
Yourself.
Madam chair madam chair members
of the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico kids can we stand in
support of house bill one eighty
four because it provides
flexibility to schools and
districts who want to prioritize
extended learning and may not
have the ability to add all the
days required by allowing an
hour's equivalency option the
bill still prioritizes adding
the significant amount of
instructional hours and allows
more Eleazar to participate
thank you madam chair thank you.
our next speaker is a sunshade
as.
Good morning madam chair members
of.
Oops sorry.
Your back on that was my fault.
Go ahead my name is I live my
sentence and I am principal at
Helen Cordero on the southwest
mesa of Albuquerque I also want
to thank representative put
three staff Roybal Caballero for
her leadership on behalf of our
community.
So I dropped in yesterday to
talk with you all about critical
information related to this bill
but as you can imagine no one
was here.
Well that didn't happen but it
pertains to what I want to talk
about this morning I believe
having the option for equivalent
hours and flexibility to add
time to each instructional day
verses only K. five plus for the
ELT program will have greater
benefits for students we will
have more time in the day with
students are already in school
versus adding days for parents
may or may not send the child
their children even if it's
required.
So just like my example of
dropping in yesterday with no
one here we can't teach students
who are not in school so for us
in particular we have many
families that travel back and
forth to Mexico and their
children spent summers there so
this is just one example of the
students that may not be able to
have the advantage of additional
days but with the additional
hours we can maximize the time
we have with our students that
are already four so my screen
has already selected yelp TP but
given an option for flexibility
with select lengthening our
instructional day so we can
better find it interventions and
enrichment thank you
Representative Romero for
bringing this important issue to
the legislature.
Thank you missile tests our next
speaker is Barbara Peterson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you
Representative for America for
introducing legislation I stand
in support for all of the
reasons that have already been
stated I'll just add a little
first hand
vision of this both with the
year and Hawthorne elementaries
in my district.
And given the extra funding
given the flexibility to really
meet the needs of their students
they have made amazing growth
and the thing that's so
wonderful about the extended
time is that they've developed
what they call it genius our so
that students.
Need for academic growth is team
with their interests their
vision their curiosity their
engagement and so instead of
more of the same they've been
able to really enrich the
curriculum in rich the
experience of the students at
the schools the benefits are
great not just academically but
on many social emotional levels
as well and so I I strongly urge
support for this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
Our next speaker is of Chris
Baldonado.
Thank you madam chair members of
this committee Chris boson of
the register lobbyist will ask
this is public schools and Roger
public schools madam chair
members the committee we would
like to let you know that the
superintendents for those to
school districts they have been
strong support of this piece of
legislation for the all the
reasons that we're stated
previously we have been asking
the legislature not only and
this chamber of the house and
the Senate for this kind of
flexibility so please members of
this committee support house
bill one eighty four thank you.
Thank you Mr resigned out our
next speaker is but Steve a C.
C. Harper and Steve can you also
tell me the proper way to say
your last name.
Yes.
Madam chair thank you what's the
ceiling is.
I'm so since the ceiling is
government relations director
with any New Mexico in on behalf
of our members we support this
bill any New Mexico supports
extended learning opportunities
such as before and after school
programs K. five plus academic
commitment mentoring tutoring
and the list goes on we know
these are very extremely
important programs for students
especially those identified you
C. Martinez.
We also know that the success of
extended learning programs as
research clearly indicates
require that educators and the
community.
Participate in the design
authorization implementation and
evaluation of all such programs.
I want to I want to note that a
top down mandated approach does
not work as evidenced by years
of failed public school policies
that have been for the value of
educator community voice in
addition Utah state university
the same university published a
study around the extended
learning program that our state
has adopted as a model has also
published several studies
highlighting the positive impact
the beach cater voice in the
success of academic programs we
support this bill and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
legislation forward we ask for
that both the need catering
community boys to be included as
this bill moves forward thank
you.
Thank you our next speaker is of
Matthew Paul.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Matt
Paul in the executive director
of public charter schools of New
Mexico we want to thank the
sponsor for this bill the state
took a big swing on K. five plus
an ELT P. two years ago that was
in the name of benefiting
students our a couple years into
this we're recognizing we needed
to make some adjustments and
this is an appropriate one
because it allows our schools to
meet their communities needs and
the way that they best see fit
so we think the sponsor we
support the bill thank you thank
you.
What we our next speaker is a
live via try.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak I my name's
Libya tribe and I missed your
Eldorado high school I'm here to
speak in support of H. B. one
eighty four I'm also earning a
career internship credit working
with APS government affairs team
and along with this internship I
currently have a blog called the
students stand wait reading
posts about the legislature and
school affairs but all from the
students perspective this is all
for my interest in education
policy with the New Mexico in
the problems I'd like to address
within our system my first post
was analyzing the three budget
recommendations and reviewing
other student leaders responses
high school students would
greatly benefit from more time
in the day to address issues
that make academic achievements
really difficult especially
during this time I'm coming from
El Dorado high school I know the
downfalls that come with the
lack of community building and
social emotional learning these
principles need to be fostered
in every school this is not just
happen when we add more days
instruction happens when we
extend the day to make space and
time for conversation supports
and activities that create not
only stronger students but
teachers and the community I'm
actually a year ago today I was
at the legislature in twenty
twenty to advocate with
Representative Melanie Stansbury
to pass H. B. three twenty nine
in regards to the growing mental
health crisis and while H. B.
one eighty four is on a
different topic I believe it's
passage will serve students
mental health you more student
advisory time home rooms
assemblies and community
meetings which are only possible
through special schedules and
extended hours a quote from my
blog as a community let's invest
in the mental and emotional
support of our students to
guarantee a safe return to
normalcy thank you
Representative Romero for
sponsoring H. B. one eighty four
and APS student leaders stand in
support.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is John dirt's.
Thank you madam chair my name is
John dirge I am with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico and we are supporting
house bill one eighty four and
it's amendment for many of the
reasons previously stated and I
think one of the greatest parts
of this bill is the local
flexibility and sometimes it's
hard to kind of bring a piece of
legislation from the abstract
and see how it would really
affect us schools dated a
functioning and I think this
morning's testimony has been
really illustrate out of the
imagination and the creativity
of what a bill like this could
do in our local communities
providing flexibility that meets
those communities need so for
all those reasons and the reason
stated by others this morning we
do support house bill one eighty
four thank you for your time
thank you Mr jurists our next
speaker is Cesar Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name just as
Senate on this on the principle
of most this elementary located
in the southwestern most tip of
opportunity New Mexico and I
support house bill one eighty
four and thank the sponsor as
well who is the representative
for my community less but the
yes thanks a budget of the ten
days of the LDP and could not
sustainable funding we also
extend already our day to the
extent that they were able to
implement a step in the same
programs that allow all students
to explore and treatment
opportunities within destruction
all day which allow among other
things for our technology good
critical thinking in the course
the streaming of off of our
bilingual program I'm based in
the date I'm in our school we
would make a right what is
defined by the community he was
needed my screen when we ask the
community what they want to do
the school to look like in the
perfect setting they all COVID
that they want a community
school a strong bilingual
program and a better use of
their center this a piece of the
boss confessionals yes
after we implemented these
things the parents begin to show
up at school every Wednesday to
receive losses when cooking
parenting in a second language
and bilingual TV classes after
they would have graduated about
four percent income about
fourteen of them at different
stages of their testing every
six weeks we have hundreds of
parents coming to watch well
right now this is virtually but
they come to watch our genius
our bilingual presentations done
by the students and their
parents and grandparents come
and they become the unofficial
judges for their own the
students efforts in learning
English this becomes really
meaningful to the students this
is the ultimate way to raise the
report and any class the
transformational ideas can give
us a glimpse into what we can do
with more creative educational
time for students and
communities thank you for from
the support for this committee
thanks to the sponsor and thank
you for your.
Our support to our students in
my school through this
legislation.
Thank you so much our next
speaker is Dr Kimberly thank.
Oops.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the chance to speak for
you again on this issue my name
is Dr Kim thank and I'm here to
speak in support of house bill
one eighty four I am the prince
what would your elementary in
the southeast type of
Albuquerque and our schools our
students in the international
district and we are proud to be
represented by Representative
Sheryl Williams Stapleton he was
a warrior for our community
thank you I have been twice
before the LFC in the interim
process to testify to evidence
based practices that we've
created in our school for the
MRI process my extending school
they've last three years
well expertise have allowed for
more time on core curriculum and
a substantial growth in task
force for school and include one
hours to an extended day has
allowed for two huge innovations
in our school that we would like
to continue the first is
encouragement that our students
might not otherwise receive
because of their economic status
and it would here reading is a
major step toward remedies for
equity issues addressed by the
Yazzie Martinez suit which
covers ninety seven percent of
our students in our school and
one protected class and fifty
percent of them into a more of a
protected classes additionally
we used time for the the reason
is the extended time for job
embedded professional
development for teachers which
strongly impacted the culture or
school resulting in increased
test scores a higher student
stability right and enrollment
and nearly no teacher attrition
since its implementation we are
strongly in support of the
flexibility that you want to be
for offers and thank you
Representative Romero for this
legislation and thank you all
for your time today.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is Michelle.
And you can identify your last
name Michelle Martinez.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michelle Martinez and I am
the principal at new features
high school is gone the uptown
area of Albuquerque that focuses
on students we need an
alternative environment to
support the role as parenting
and pregnancy students as they
pursue their education I'm here
to support house bill one eighty
four our community is thankful
to be represented by
Representative Christine
Trujillo our school has
previously implemented the ten
days of an extended learning
time program adding more time to
our days would allow us to focus
on teacher professional
development great teachers help
create great students in fact
research shows that in this
wiring and inform teacher is the
most important school related
factor influencing student
achievement so it is critical to
play close attention to how we
train and support both new and
experienced educators teachers
constantly need more effective
strategies to help students
learn more creative and engaging
ways to assessor learning in
school can't require students to
use the tools of the future
unless teachers are prepared and
knowledgeable about new and
innovative technology curriculum
program software skills and
strategies no one understands
the challenges teachers face in
the classroom better than other
teachers which is why
collaboration is also a crucial
part of professional development
thank you for your time and
thank you for Representative to
Representative Romero for
sponsoring the sledges wishin it
has my full support.
Thank you.
I'm our next speaker is Melissa
Candelaria.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Melissa Candelaria I'm interning
with the New Mexico Center
online poverty and also a member
of the legal team for the Aussie
Kleenex in the Yazzie Martinez
case The New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty supports this
bill because extended learning
time and K. five plus programs
can provide students with the
proper support to help them do
well in school and to close the
achievement gap this bill would
allow flexibility and encourage
greater per to greater
participation in these programs
that will benefit our most
vulnerable students including
the for student groups
identified in the US the
Martinez case we really think
the sponsor for introducing this
bill and we ask the committee to
support this measures thank you
so much.
Thank you very much.
Is there anybody else who would
like to speak in support.
Of house bill one eighty four.
Is there anybody who would like
to speak in opposition to house
bill one eighty four.
Thank say no hands we'll go to
our panelists.
Analysts is there anybody that
would like to ask sponsor.
Questions and yes Representative
doubt.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Romero for
bringing this bill and I
remember very well the floor
debate that was held is actually
holding the chambers in twenty
nineteen and we listen to school
district after school district
after school district tell us
that although they supported
what we're doing they needed
flexibility.
And I remember at folks from my
neck of the woods down in
southwest New Mexico where New
Mexicans get their fruits and
vegetables and where we get our
fabrics in our in our beef
saying we need flexibility we
need flexibility and they were
driving five hours six hours to
the roundhouse just say please
include flexibility and I
remember very well the
conversations out on the floor
when folks from LFC and LESC
were saying that they would find
a way to provide the flexibility
within the framework and that we
didn't need to change language.
And one of the things that has
been a reoccurring building this
session was let's go past this
let's take a look at it and see
how it works and if we need to
come back and make adjustments
we will.
And so I think this bill to date
the same thing happened all
these people lined up and said
please give us flexibility and
no one propose flexibility and
it's two years later we've seen
how it works and they need
possibility so I I'm I'm really
grateful to the chairman for
bringing this bill and grateful
that so many of us are return
numbers to education and that we
will keep that commitment to see
how it works and provide the
flexibility you need and I just
I want the committee to know
that I'm so so glad that many of
you are joining the
Appropriations Committee this is
an example where in nineteen
there is also a funded called
the school reform Fund and a lot
of times in the language of the
bills or the language of the
appropriation is as an spent
funds will be reverted to the
school reform Fund and that has
been happening at a tune of
about a hundred million dollars
a year.
This interim I had the privilege
of being able to attend any of
the legislative education study
committee interim committee
meetings and the LESC the LFC
and LESC interim committee
meetings and in that process I
kept asking the questions where
do those funds revert from and
where did they go and one of
those conversations that we've
had in a small group and
subgroup I asked so my district
you know that the multiple
public schools in my district
we're not able to fully engage
in K. five plus extended
learning because there was no
flexibility and it is literally
farmers and ranchers who need
their summers off many people go
into education in the rural
areas because it's a hundred
eighty days of work in this case
will be changing it to a hundred
ninety but they going to action
because it allows them to
continue farming and ranching
and continue providing us with
affordable high quality food and
so they they could keep the
homeroom teacher and they
couldn't get to K. five plus so
they couldn't get the their
elements they could not do and
dollars reverted to the school
reform Fund I ask for an example
of districts that were rural
districts that were fully
engaging.
With the reverted funds an
example I was given was Los
Alamos and although I'm not
begrudging Los Alamos any
dollars from the district I want
to point out that the dollars
left my district and and all the
southern if yes the order
southwest areas of the state
where we have our farmers
ranchers those dollars that
reverted from lowincome title
one migrant schools reverted to
the SCORM Fund and went to a
school district that is not
title one is not low income and
has very few of the Yazzie
Martinez targeted students the
highest per capita income and
not title one and they are now
receiving fully funded K. five
plus extended learning because
they could manage it.
And it left the target is
students of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit.
I we cannot allow this to
continue to happen it's why we
look at these things that's why
we need to be intentional as why
I'm grateful for the chairman of
bringing this bill and I hope
that we will all support it
thank you Mr chairman.
Anybody else have a question for
the chairman.
Say no further questions from
our committee members with
somebody like to make a motion
in order to pass.
The motion and a second.
Representative Lente yes and up
Representative Lente that.
Chair thank you up.
Everybody yelling at up to make
a motion be to it doesn't make a
motion that's okay.
Representative Lente we will
give you the second because your
hand went up first Hey we have a
motion to for I do passed in a
second
and madam madam Mr Chairman do
we need to take a vote if
there's no objection or do we
take a vote well there's why I
you I would I would I would take
out madam justice just to be
sure and everybody can get
certainly certainly don't want
to okay anybody madam secretary
can you please a call about a do
pass system and it
Representative Baldonado yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative dal yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara.
Absolutely yes.
Representative Lente that.
Yes Representative Madrid yes
Representative or Volcom bye at
all.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
I'm sorry yes.
Chairman role metal.
Yes if I would be able to
explain my both mention.
By chairman sure will then care
at yes thirteen two zero.
Mr chairman you have to commend
it yes you have a do pass on
house bill one eighty four as
amended a chairman Romero.
But thank you madam chair and
and thanks committee
For for for for recognizing this
I think I think the important
thing moving forward in in the
process is is really recognizing
this flexibility I think
Representative Dow spoke to it
really well because this was
certainly part of the debate
during Senate bill one and house
bill five a couple of years ago
and and it was always my
commitment as one of the primary
sponsors of that bill that you
know we were going to see how
things are going as far as these
programs and we would evaluate
that and I think our school
districts in our we heard loud
and clear today school districts
superintendents unions
teachers really support this
measure in moving forward
and I and and I think I just I
just got a message from
Representative Dow that I think
it would be a good way that I
would welcome members of the
Education Committee to to sign
on to house bill one eighty four
I think you would be a good sign
of of all of our support behind
giving this flexibility to our
our school districts and and
particularly with a quick when
ours there are some other kids
see around that are that are
touting flexibility but I think
it quit line hours needs to be a
part of that package as well but
with that thank you madam chair
and thank you committee and I
certainly invite you all to sign
on to it thank you everybody.
I'm and and with that I guess we
will switch roles
so all come back thank you madam
vice chair and now it's your
turn in the hot seat.
Thank you and I understand Mr
chairman that my seat is going
to be hot which is why I'm.
House Bill to twenty one yes.
Did you have an expert I'm sorry
yes ma'am I have expert witness
Dr Ellen Byrne sting if you can
move her and.
Sure.
Right.
Should be on her way.
So fast all of our connections
Okay Dr birds sing and then is
that it minimized her yes that
is that.
All right so House Bill to
twenty one when you're ready.
So Mr chairman and committee
members House Bill twenty two
twenty one is a bill that has
only a few additional words but
has a lot of impact which I
believe is very positive to our
students their families and
their educators it.
The assessment requirements for
students in kindergarten through
second grade really bring about
a recognition of what early
childhood development yes I
remind you that technically
speaking early childhood
includes everything up to grade
three with that when a child
turns but eight years old.
and I would ask you to also
think in your own life
how students are assessed how
you want how you were assessed
growing up some of you may many
of us remember our early
assessments your children your
grandchildren if you've been an
educator kids in your school
your neighbors I want you to
really hold that in your mind.
Two of the bill I'm this bill
aligns assessment with the
structured literacy that we
passed in the last couple of
years it says all kindergarten
through third grade classes
shall provide daily instruction
in reading or language arts
skills including phonemic
awareness phonics comprehension.
As parts of structured literacy
which is vocabulary fluency and
riding and it takes in the next
sentence said students in
kindergarten and first grade
changes to students in
kindergarten through second
grade shall be screened and
monitored for progress in
reading and language arts skills
addresses are as if we be what's
there and adds that the mantra
this is a new US sanctions and
the act the monitoring for
progress for kindergarten
through second grade shall use
an observational assessment that
is developed purchased by the
department that combines
developmental milestones
essential skills including
social emotional skills and
academic standards our young
students are acquiring those
kind of social emotional skills
that are the foundation of
academic learning.
What is already our own PED and
and now our early childhood
education and care department
thanks to the early childhood
observational to all the he
caught this is given in pre K.
and it's an example.
Well among all those in the
nation of early childhood
observational tool.
It was also developed by RPG
with consultants to the
kindergarten observation tool
which is given the first twenty
days of when a child is in
kindergarten that was developed
by our own people in
consultation.
The problem is that it drops up.
Alright
PED actually has developed the
framework to include all of
kindergarten up into first grade
but it hasn't been used beyond
that first beginning of the year
assessments.
Why is this so important
when you.
Additional.
Tulis you pick up things about
children that you don't just
pick up from the computer I was
reading yes for example one
teacher observed a child walking
in an unusual way she finally
told her parents I think you
need to talk to your
pediatrician actually turned out
that the child had a tumor so
that's why observational tools
are so important.
I I just want to say I I myself
taught for twenty eight years
the last six years were from I
was an instructional coach at
the largest what was then the
largest elementary school in the
state payments guy elementary
school on the west side of
Albuquerque New as we moved to
these computerized tests that
companies then try to align with
higher level third fourth fifth
grade and middle school yes I'm
we look at academic thing and we
don't think about the child's
development level I had.
One second grader who took what
what we now use in APS the I
station yes although she was a
gift an advanced reader reading
at a fourth grade level she
scored read the lowest level of
the I station and and when asked
why she scored so low she said
well.
Back to my blog I just pushed
all the buttons and the test was
over and I could right so.
All these computer ice yes we're
not actually even accurate
reading assessments another
problem we had with
kindergartens Gartner says when
you take somebody's computer
eyes yes you're actually testing
if they know how to press the
right place on an iPad screen
so I a teacher an effective
teacher is giving computerized
tests but often gives other
assessments to really find out
the situation of the student so
we've kind of this was brought
up in the first bill there there
is a balance I realize and
advocating for a change in
assessment we have mandates we
have local control but I really
believe we have to start
assessing children's
in a developmentally
appropriate way where the
teacher is interacting with the
students observing the student
and not just use academically
only a centered tests that don't
look at the whole child this
developing child who's in the
New World of the classroom
our rapidly growing expanding
all the skills we have to look
at the whole child and that's
why we need an observational
assessment and with that I will
ask my expert witness Dr Ellen
burn sting to give additional
perspective.
Please.
Representative Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Ellen burns dean and I
currently work as the president
of the Albuquerque teachers
federation before I was elected
into this role I taught early
childhood for seventeen years
both regular ed and special ed
and I became a nationally board
certified teacher in early
childhood education.
It is from that perspective that
I'll make my comments today.
We have been over testing and
inappropriately testing young
children for a very long time it
is a legacy of no child left
behind but currently our focus
both in New Mexico and
nationwide is to re humanize the
way in which we are teaching
young children and all children
we know that we need to change
our policies and our practices
to pay equal attention to the
social emotional health of our
students and as we do that it
actually leads to greater task
force and deeper learning some
people I represent flight I
station which is the current
computerized test that is
mandated in the state of New
Mexico.
Nothing about this bill would
preclude using AI station to
augment their information but it
will change the mandate to get
I. station multiple times
throughout the year.
Data.
As many people say I station
provides is important but what I
have heard from tier after tier
is that data is not the same as
accurate data.
Much of the way in which we
currently test using I station a
computerized test for very young
children actually disadvantages
the students that we are
focusing on because of the
ruling in Jassy and Martinus it
disadvantages English language
learners special ed students in
fact prematurely testing and
sorting kids is is an equity
issue
as I was doing research and
looking at some of the things
that would go into a more
appropriate assessment for young
children I ran across an article
in which researchers said at
this point in our cycle.
Metrics history we need to do a
better job of assessing to
support equity as opposed to
equality in the spirit he wrote
I interrelated themes for
assessment must come to the
surface.
Assessment should be used to
gauge student learning
development and improvement over
time assessment should be used
by teachers to adjust their
practices how they teach what
they teach when they teach and
so forth to respond to the needs
of the individual children
students should not feel
intimidated by assessments but
see them as opportunities to
exit but what they know and what
they're able to do.
The assessment send a long
message and can raise anxiety in
learning and perhaps most
important assessment tools
should be just as diverse as the
students to take them why re
centring and refocusing
measurement systems we will be
able to better address our
students and their needs
assessment should help us learn
about students and not sort
students.
When I asked the learning policy
institute if they had any
comparative research about
assessments for young children
they gave me quite a bit of
information and they said in
fact that in a review from chief
state school officers of K.
twelve assessment policies our
New Mexico code is and usually
perspective and I think that's
worth noting I also want to note
that now that we are giving I
station to students as they are
learning in remote that the
parents have reported that they
are astonished and dismayed at
this assessment and how it makes
students feel teachers report
over and over again that I
station especially as one of the
first things a five year old
experiences when they go into
kindergarten before they even
had a chance to do any learning
any
norming of being in school what
teachers say is that the I.
station is very stressful for
young children they report over
and over again that students cry
and we believe schools should
not make students cry that
produces very and accurate
results and I know I've talked
to people who work for the
legislature in different ways
that have said to me the data is
very important but if the
teachers who are demanding the
assessment say that the data is
inaccurate that we need to look
at the tool we're using.
Teachers say developmentally
it's extremely inappropriate
that what they have experienced
when I was teaching and when
some right Representative
Trujillo I know was teaching in
elementary school what we were
able to use is a developmental
checklist so that we could
report accurately how children
were learning their skills over
time and we were able to cater
our assessments and are teaching
to that.
Teachers over and over again say
that it's an inappropriate
assessments for second language
learners and for anybody in a
dual language bilingual setting.
Carefully designed systemic ways
of collecting observational data
actually informs teaching and
supports equitable practices
that enable us to address the
whole child.
Oprah.
Additional assessment will
ensure that we are able to
preserve Development Willie and
culturally appropriate
experiences for young children
I delete any assessments that we
use should be in.
Should be done while the
learning process is happening
not separate from learning
process so this bill very
appropriately says if we take
what the PED developed with the
car and we moved all the way to
third grade skill level which is
what what it was intended when
they first developed it we could
potentially informants traction
inform parents and make sure
that our assessment is
developmentally appropriate as
we look at developmental
milestones essential skills and
all of the academic standards
kindergarten through second
thank you very much for your
time.
Mr chairman I will just add for
those unfamiliar with ice
station it is a time cast add
any child with then I eat P.
that calls for an time yes
the timer is removed so the data
obtained from my station is no
longer accurate and with that I
stand for questions.
Right thank you all for the
presentations so we'll go to the
attendees list I'm going to
start off with all okay.
Your beavers with their hands up
I'm gonna start off with
opposition first those who are
opposed to house bill two twenty
one if you would indicate by
raising your hand.
Get my and the timer ready on
Monday.
In the difference so those in
opposition please raise your
hand all right we will go to
Dennis.
Morning then again Dennis you
have up to morning Mr chairman
and Representative Garrett thank
you so much for the chance to
weigh in with all due respect
you know what we often hear in
in the legislative process.
The comment about a bill that
this is a great idea whose time
has come well this one's a
little different this is a great
idea.
But we're not quite ready for
you this is an unusual here we
are recovering lost learning we
are spending an enormous amount
of time trying to work with
student deficiency areas that
happen because of remote
learning the inability to be in
class hybrid learning not on a
normal schedule all sorts of
other technological barriers and
the this is about that this kind
of environment is the last time
superintendents are feeling.
is appropriate to add an
observational component that
will likely take time away from
direct instruction and not not
that this is not a good idea in
the long run but for the short
term we respectfully must stand
opposed until we sort of get
back to normal I I know you
understand are hard we
appreciate your passion for
early childhood growth in
literacy and will stand behind
this after after the current
environment has passed thank you
so much Mr chairman right thank
you.
All right so we'll go to
Matthew.
Good morning Matthew welcome
back you have a two minutes good
morning thank you Mr chair
I'd similarly just want to thank
the sponsor we were able to
speak this morning about the
bill there's a lot we like about
the bill developing an
observational assessment I think
it's it is something for the
near term here but there are
there are two pieces of the bill
that we just to oppose it today
one is that that observational
assessment would be mandatory
and we it we want to keep a lot
of local autonomy in place
particularly around choices
around instruction and
assessment you know that the
expert with witness Dr Bernd
statement that our our our
allies currently on usually
prescriptive we we we'd like to
would like to we take that to
heart we believe that being able
to provide for local troll but
an observational assessment I
think is the right right past
forward for us in the future so
we think the sponsor we hope
we're able to work with her on
this but but we do oppose the
bill in its current form.
Great thank you so much.
Wait for their opposition.
Jason good morning you have up
to two minutes morning Mr
chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with New Mexico and.
but while we agree what with
some objectives the policy we do
stand in opposition.
The bill requires the use of the
observational assessment for
reading which may not be the
best fit for every school we do
believe that school should be
able to choose their assessments
and that the bill we also think
that there should be funding
associated with this new
requirement as well thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you Jason.
Right so anybody else.
In opposition.
All right so we will go to
support support for house bill
two twenty one indicate by
raising your hand.
Given moment.
Barbara please you have up to
two minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this forward I stand in
support if this legislation I
want to make it clear that
today.
On this matter I'm speaking as a
practitioner not as an APS
Representative board member
I would just my background is in
early childhood education I
started out my career as a
kindergarten teacher I ended my
career as after thirty five
years as a reading recovery
teacher and reading intervention
teacher
This I think the legislature is
frequently put in a funny
position because as is clear by
the testimony today there's
disagreement within the
educational community and so
sometimes the legislature ends
up having to sort through where
this is valid and rich
discussion within the
educational community takes
place but I want to go back to
what happens to children and
what happens in the teaching
relationship in a classroom I
think right now more than ever.
Although we are using a lot of
screen time because we have
another major overwhelming
crisis that we have to address I
think more and more people are
realizing how difficult and
Miss Representative screen time
is for young children
Frequently children's first
experience in a school is being
put in front of a computer to be
ranked and rated and labeled
before they ever even happened
experience as a student within
that learning environment and
what happens lots of times the
student.
Thank you Barbara that was two
minutes.
So no good morning welcome you
have up to two minutes.
Can you hear me OK we can okay
great hi good morning everybody
my name is Sonya Romero and I'm
kindergarten teacher at Lew
Wallace elementary school I have
been a teacher for twenty three
years specifically in
kindergarten the last seventeen
years and I have seen the at
transition of testing throughout
the years and I have to say that
my experience with I station has
been.
Nothing but a headache
particularly from my students I
teach in downtown Albuquerque
and the biggest frustration that
I experience is one the amount
of time that it takes for these
children to be on a computer and
off more often than not they are
just pushing a button the
frustration level and the level
of time that they are I'm
spending on a computer to try
and pass a test where they
cannot get any help is
frustrating especially since I
feel as a practitioner for as
long as I've been doing this
that that developmental
appropriateness of the I station
is completely wrong I do agree
with the idea of the economy
where I can see growth and
something that is visible to me
as I create my own
My own assessments that I used
to drive my instruction as
opposed to the I station simply
because it is not development
appropriate for five year olds
and the amount of time that they
spent thank you.
Right.
Thank you.
So we'll go to John.
Morning John you have a two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John direction with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico we do stand in
support of house bill two to one
many of the comments from the
Representative Garrett and
doctor burns Steen are echoed by
our statewide membership that
serves our early education
community in New Mexico public
schools
I won't repeat their reasons for
supporting this bill but we do
want to say as a statewide
entity that we are supportive of
health due to what thank you for
your consideration.
Great thank you.
Steve.
Morning Steve.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Steve ceiling
is government relations director
with any New Mexico on behalf of
our members we support this bill
I do want to point out that we
have concerns around the
assessment change.
In other words what does the
decision process look like in
determining what assessment is
and how will get new testament
be implemented.
We don't want our public schools
to replace the I station yes
with another similar yes it does
very little to evaluate student
achievement and very little to
close the achievement.
We can do better for students
and in order to do this we need
a shared decision making
processes in creating a new
assessment or purchasing a new
assessed.
Let's listen to our educators
and include them include them in
the process.
We thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward
and asked that are concerns of
including need to cater voice be
considered as this bill moves
forward thank you.
Thank you Steve.
All right.
Kelly W. if you would identify
yourself please and you'll have
up to two minutes.
Thank you can you can you hear
me.
We can do is you have two
minutes okay my name's Kelly
Weber I'm a bilingual dual
language speaker Albuquerque I
teach kindergarten I am in
support of house bill two twenty
one I I want to echo everything
that was said by by Sonia and
Barbara and Ellen enjoy
I I'm not going to repeat some
of the things they said but it
it's just I feel it's
fundamentally
Inappropriate to be doing this
kind of testing.
On kindergartners with regards
to their developmental
awareness I also like to
advocate for parents as as
someone had said since
remote learning is happened some
on my parents and many other
parents have have the
opportunity now to see what this
testing the light first hand and
I've I have had a lot of
responses from my parents just
feeling like it is completely
inappropriate to be using this
assessment tool for kids who are
so young hi I really believe and
Growing student through jointly
and the love of learning.
As a the most essential thing
you can give to a kindergartner
and loving reading is not
what happens when you take of a
nice station yes and I I my
biggest when.
The biggest concern is the
damage that testing like this
could do to the self steam of
the child and their confidence
because that that thank you
Kelly that was two minutes.
All right is anybody else wish
to speak in support.
Okay so will come to our
committee is anybody wish to
speak.
Representative Trujillo please.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me we can.
Okay I I'm really thankful that
Representative carat has brought
this bill forward
I taught kindergarten through
fifth grade for the years that I
taught.
And as Dr Byrne Steen stated we
used a variety of different
tools to assess learning and one
of the things that I learned in
my experience was that the
testing obviously is to satisfy
adults it does not.
Do anything to help kids and the
and the more we tested the more
stressed kids were I think that
this bill.
Kind of well not kind of it does
finally focus on how to interact
with kids not make them
Struggle or suffer during the
testing process that conflict I
think this is an opportunity for
us to change the dynamic in the
way we assess kids because
right now all we're doing and
with all due respect to the
opponents all we're doing is is
trying to
Insure that we have done our job
as educators by showing a higher
number on the test that really
frankly I think is meaningless
the test right now are are for
grown ups and the there is no
lost learning kids are still
learning it may not be academic
but it's learning and they have
no control over their
environments and during this
pandemic they've had no control
over their environments and I
think we are providing undue
stress when we continue the way
we've.
Done by assessing kids in the
manner that we have so I really
strongly support this bill I
hope that might be a committee
of colleagues will do the same
thank you.
Great thank you Representative.
Further comments.
Right with the will of the
committee.
Mr chair I move it to pass.
We have a new path motion
Representative Trujillo do I
have the second.
ms Representative Madrid peace
to you to now okay
Representative Madrid with the
second
madam secretary if you call the
roll to pass.
I'm sorry.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield so.
Representative Dowell no.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Hello.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative who were Baca I
at all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes ma'am okay.
Vice chair Care Act yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Eleven to four all right by a
vote of eleven to four Madam by
cherry Avenue passed house bill
issued I'm sorry to tend to for.
And to for.
On house bill two twenty one
thank you Representative may I
add one thank you Mr chairman.
only if we could redo our votes.
Okay no go ahead I I took notes
on all the issues that were
brought up and I will do Lee
Be looking at that so thank you
for all the feedback from the
public I really appreciate it
thank you.
Great thank you Representative
good work today everybody I
appreciate everybody's patience
so we will be putting out the
agenda hopefully sometime later
today or early tomorrow for
Saturday it looks like it's
going to be a bit of a zombie
day where we'll be seeing some
are bills that we have seen
before but are coming back in
some various forms so will look
for that on Saturday I'm I'm
hoping to have it right after
the finance and appropriation
hearing I understand it's at
nine o'clock eight thirty so
morning that correct okay so
after sing some members truck
that is also very student like
for me that are like I don't I
go with the flow when they some
and I go I get it but that's
what I'm waiting to figure out
so that we can have hopefully
eleven o'clock again to hear
those bills and hopefully have
an afternoon but it looks like
we may have a little bit of time
today it's sunny I don't know
how it is a Santa Fe but try to
get some fresh air everybody
other than that have a nice rest
your day will see you all.
Mary E. Rachel Linda are we
gonna meet yeah okay I will send
the link.
