The school program that you
identifies necessary for your
population enrichment programs
that focus on problem solving
and cognitive skills content
that provides technical
knowledge skills competency
based applied learning research
or evidence based social
emotional or academic
interventions to relieve the.
Gap that many of our students
face and then it also counts
instruction that occurs during
the rex this time period finally
section one states up to sixty
our instructional up to sixty
hours of that instructional
time.
Here can be used for
professional work professional
development in bed during the
course of a normal school day
professional work may include
home visiting student parent
teacher conferences educator
training or professional
development mentorship coaching
and collaboration which
educators know is vital to the
success of each and every
student and part of this success
of each and every educator
section three which is starts on
page five defines an additional
opportunity for schools that
wish to do it it finds the K.
twelve plus program units by the
public schools who wish to add
additional days beyond a hundred
and eighty if there are five day
a week school schedule for
beyond a hundred and fifty five
days if there four days a week
and again this is not mandated
what is adding weeks or days
it's a local decision with full
flexibility so with that I'm
gonna turn over for remarks from
our executive director of the
legislative education study
committee Dr Gwen Perea
Warniment.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and like to thank
the sponsors Representative
Garrett yourselves Mr Mr chair
as well as armed men approached
him for bringing this forward
the have legislative education
study committee staff we're
grateful for the support for
this cause there's been quite a
bit of research that has gone
into this bill
I would say is your staff
legislative bodies staff the
dives into education research
there are fundamentally three
things that we hope for with
this bill.
The first is that we recognizes
the state the need to advance
achievement and success and
wellness for our students.
That's fundamental for all of us
and all of those things.
Are wrapped up in one it's not
just achievement.
It's wellness for students.
The second is any policy that
you enacted the legislative body
should be and present
flexibility.
That insurers local districts
have the app ability to an act.
Policy to their best X. possible
extent as well as a provide for
the space in which they do so.
And it's clear there's clarity
in the policy that affords both
the executive and the public
education department the ability
to enact what they need to as
well as the school districts so
that's the second thing that we
would hope for.
With this.
The third and perhaps the most
important to my heart.
Is the daughter of an educator
the friend of in educators and
educator myself.
Is that this policy supports
teachers.
And teacher development.
they are the most important part
of schools.
They are vital if there is ever
a silver bullet in education it
is the educator themselves in
the classroom it is both the
school environment and the
teacher in the classroom.
For teachers if we have our you
know fast possible scenario
multiple teachers in the
classroom I can't say enough
about how that supports it
students.
I'm not gonna reiterate what
Representative Garrett said
other than to say that I think
it's really vital to understand
that there are four things that
this bill does beyond just
raising the eleven forty it does
so in a way that defines
instructional hours in a broader
format.
Really involves pieces like work
based learning experience a
learning.
Pieces that of education that we
know are really vital to the
success of the wellness of the
student and the school including
social emotional interventions.
Third thing it does is it up to
sixty hours inside of that
eleven forty not on top of
eleven forty not requiring
exactly see time but of those
eleven forty sixty hours of
that.
Can and should be used for
teacher work time.
And then finally it also vitally
supports those districts that
are beyond a hundred and eighty
days because there are districts
out there that are doing so and
so recognizing those districts
that want to support and are
extending their calendar beyond
a hundred and eighty days or in
the case of a four day weeks
beyond a hundred and fifty five
days and incentivizes that and
supports that.
By establishing those schools or
districts is K. twelve plus
schools and providing a factor
for them but that is an option
for districts and schools should
they so choose not required.
With that Mr chair the list of
questions and Mr chairman and
committee hi our senior policy
analyst for millions he is can
but Joe who probably wakes up at
three o'clock in the morning
thinking about this does it so
well so he'll be here to assist
in answering questions and with
that we stand for questions
thank thank you all for joining
us and for the presentation so
again those of you joining us
for the first time house
education welcome we appreciate
having you as I mentioned in the
beginning we have a ten thirty
four times so we'll need to get
through the three bills that we
have we have participants online
we have those of you that have
joined us in person welcome
again so we're going to go to
the audience so you'll have up
to two minutes to speak but no
more so please keep your
comments to two minutes but also
please be as brief as possible
to go through and make sure
everybody's voice gets heard and
we have plenty of discussion up
here in the panel to get through
our list of bills and
particularly this bill that we
have before us right now so
welcome I'm going to ask that
our participants online that
wish to speak in favor of house
bill one thirty please indicate
by raising your hand use arrays
hand option I'm gonna let you
all stay there while you all
organize yourselves and support
online and then I'll go to our
audience those those members in
support of house bill one thirty
on my left hand side please
indicate by raising your hand
okay we'll start in the front
row so Sir welcome if you would
identify yourself you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Response I'm I'm the registered
lobbyists must use public
schools also with regard to
public schools I'm gonna get
this far short we ask with Dr
Warner has stated because the
lab stated perfectly what
actually the this bill does I
want to emphasize and in two
points the first one the sixty
hours and eleven forty that's
extremely important and the
second item is the local control
that is school districts will
have local control of this
extremely important because the
board of education of the school
districts and as active cabinet
with the support that they can
make the decisions for the
community and that's I want you
please but that and we support
this bill this is gonna help the
school districts.
Thank you I appreciate the
privative anybody else in this
room okay we'll go to the next
for please welcome.
And members of the committee on
more information I'm speaking on
behalf of of the legal in voters
New Mexico and American
Association of university women
and we strongly support this
bill we really appreciate all
the work that
the sponsor and the LESC has put
into it I appreciate the
comments we don't need to
reiterate them I think this is a
way to improve our our problems
here in New Mexico and as we
know nobody likes the last
we need this investment in our
schools it's going to pay off
thank you great thank you so
much anybody else in that same
row please welcome members of
the committee good morning my
name is Mandy Torres I am
education reform director for
thinking Mexico and the twenty
twenty New Mexico teacher of the
year we stand in support of this
bill because we know that in
order to move the education
system forward we have to put
our students first this
educators in the room we know
how heartbreaking and gut
wrenching it is to have to sit
down with parents to tell them
just how far behind their
students are following and we're
having too many of those
conversations around the state
we have to implement reforms
that we can work at the same
time we think we can do a little
bit better by ensuring that
those eleven hundred forty hours
are reserved for instruction
time with that time we know that
we can find in school tutoring
targeted interventions for all
of our students and maybe more
importantly enrichment time a
lot of our students are getting
that enrichment time outside of
the school day they're not being
exposed to the arts into stem we
can we should find that and we
can do that with extra time at
the same time we appreciate the
conversation on providing our
teachers with paid planning time
and collaboration time too often
we're asking them to do that on
their own time however we know
that high quality teachers
report and we know the
professional development isn't
but we shouldn't compete have
that compete with dedicated time
for extra.
So thank you to the Sanchez with
and all the work that you've
done we appreciate your efforts
and we hope that you see student
centered as you move forward in
your discussions.
Thank you others in that same
row please.
Good morning.
If you are going to try would
have.
And here on behalf of the board
of zoning and we support the
bill for sure thank you.
Thank you so much for joining us
others in that second full row
row.
Okay we'll go to the next room.
We will please welcome.
Your hard work I'm if you can
Santa Fe teach first grade and
while in some very much support
the intent of the house bill
thirty I heard you all to
continue to discuss how it's
going to be worked out it's hard
first the readability really
understand the nuances are we
really are not supportive of
just adding more hours days and
doing the same old same old we
need creativity we have lots of
teachers to work out with you
on creating an advisory
committee I have a list of names
we really want to be part of
this discussion so that we're
not just having to implement
something that we don't feel we
have part of.
Thank you for much thank you
please keep in mind we're in
support so if you support the
bill will take that and then
please make sure you director
comments through the chair as
well please so third full row
are there others that wish to
speak in support okay please
welcome.
My name is Gerry one morning so
I and I am to get to that
teacher at noon terrible
community schools in Santa Fe
and twenty twenty given to that
teacher of the year I mean
Terrill is a title one hundred
percent free lunch school and I
wanted to stand here in support
of house bill.
Legislation point intentional
and reverse programs that will
help.
losses the experience due to the
pandemic I would also like to
have
In the future reducing class
sizes because our children come
to us with a great deal of.
So many issues that are beyond
the scope of our job that we
need to address those before
learning.
Thank you all so much for your
work.
Great thank you others in that
third full row please.
Okay we'll go to the next row
those in support all right Sir
welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
public charter schools of New
Mexico were largely in support
of house of this bill
There are a number of items in
the bill that really show that
you're listening to the
educational.
Moving away from program hours
as possible keeping the
professional development within
those hours is also part.
We also appreciate some of the
adjustments that definition of
instructional hours this
challenging things at the bottom
of your L. E. S. C. analysis
however and this is we see share
that many schools with good
actors those that have a hundred
days or more and hours that
exceed the number of hours in
this bill.
Negative budgetary impact a few
examples for you House
international school charter
school in the afternoon hours
thousand hundred seventy eleven
seventy hours hundred eighty one
days of school each year and
somehow they lose fourteen
percent of their budget in this
some member of charter schools
that serve large we need to look
at Gallup one thousand three
hundred thirty dollars and a
hundred.
Get the health issues the
muezzin twelve percent budget
just.
That's challenging for me the
good actors might might not fare
well in this however a large
number of school.
And so I think that's just a
question as we move forward here
ensuring that those two actors
get to get the funding that they
deserve less they'll just say
for.
For just a few ways to
incentivize the number of hours
as well we have a number of
students that have thirteen
hundred hours of more that they
have a shorter school year
dropout we gauge when schools
are serving kids from seven AM
to seven PM that's a lot of time
to be open a school but there
are long school day and so
finding a mechanism to by.
Of those two minutes thank you
so much others in that same row
in support of house bill one
thirty okay we'll go to the next
row support for one thirty
please welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee that the Karen Sanchez
Griego superintendent give ISC
we are in support of bill we
have done extended hours and
some of the programs that we
have been looking at how the
state has been looking at we
actually been able to correlate
academic improvement in students
who have extended time doing
differentiated things so again
thank you so much we appreciate
all the support.
Thank you doctor any others in
that same row wish to speak in
support all right so we'll go to
the next row those wishing to
speak in support please Sir
welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee Robert Beatty with
Robert act from the school
Robert contractual operate from
in the morning eight in the
evening we already received the
our if this bill I'm and we all
for eighty hours of professional
development and so we will
appreciate the additional I or
C. for doing what we do in fact
respond thank thank you so much
any others in that row.
Anybody I missed on my left hand
side that would wish to speak in
support of house bill one thirty
okay I so we'll go to my right
hand side those in support of
house bill one thirty please
indicate there is your hand part
will start in the back and then
work our way forward please
welcome Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is funny
like that and superintendents
schools and house New Mexico
also representing
superintendents association and
their currently serving as the
president of the association we
are as an association and as
also the superintendent have I
definitely in favor of this this
ammendment sorry this bill and
also grateful for your listening
to the educators their expertise
about what and what better ways
to serve our kids many part of
the state for many months now
that more is not better better
is better and teachers by nature
are competitive and so if we
have skills and.
Is just so it is or whatever you
use for resources to help our
kids get better we're naturally
going to seek those because
we're just competitive by nature
so I appreciate that I I am also
grateful for the hours versus
days COVID there are some
nuances as my colleague use
their cell problematic
situations I am perplexed use a
little bit about why the first
four pages of the bill are in
ours and then all of a sudden
section three go two days.
So thank you for your support.
Thank thank you so much any
others in this the first back
row I guess please two minutes
chairman members of the
committee Jane Strickland
superintendents schools pops.
We do stand in support of house
bill one thirty and the
specifically hi to better is
that many of you may know this
year we have are going to
schedule to where we have eight
days a professional development
professional learning built into
our calendar and so our students
have a hundred eighty three days
instructional time.
We have a hundred ninety one
contract days for instructional
staff reviews that to be very
intentional very focused with
the intent and the purpose
being.
Instructional games in the
classroom so we we appreciate
the recognition in that in this
bill recognizing that better is
better and as a state we will
only get better by providing
better opportunities for
students not just more thank you
thank you superintendent others
in that back row that wishes we
can support.
All right so we'll move to the
next row forward please welcome
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee college
president able to Mexico we
quickly learned a lot through
COVID I was master myself in
twenty twenty one I first handle
return to some semblance of
normal it was clear we have
ground.
We've been taking steps towards
a longer school year for several
sessions now and through that
process before the every
communities embrace of a longer
school year is contingent on a
variety of factors that
underscore the importance of a
model with flexibility we know
the New Mexico needs to adjust
its courses family to me these
are students and community well
changes often hard counters are
incredibly complex I
wholeheartedly believe that we
can do this because at the end
of the day it is what is best
for New Mexico get thank you
great thank you others in that
same or other which speak in
support.
All right so we'll move up
tomorrow those that wish to
speak in support House going
very.
All right we'll move up to the
next earth as to which speak in
support.
All right please.
Mr chair Representative get the
latest for that second.
Law firm interested citizens
education and came out of my
**** this repayment for this
expense really appreciate it
replied said around what was.
That is a new job with helpful I
to bring.
Actual time funding to the
classroom.
And this bill get those related
my life was about the LFC and
putting that money back into the
classroom and not reverting to
perform transfer programs that
local districts in.
I think this is a step in the
right direction and it's really
important to keep the
construction time definition to
that that job embedded
professional development is
really going to need a person
comes thank you all right.
Thank you others in the room
please Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman stand
around on the executive director
superintendents association and
a college education leaders we
appreciate the bill we support
this bill thank you for
listening to us as we talked
about particulars there's still
one new ones but I would point
out to the we believe used to be
amended in the bill of the
tunnel page two wives twelve
thirty.
In this matter.
That this increases not only
secondary five sixty hours but
elementary I I double.
We believe the bills better and
more functionally correct if we
do have sixty hours at the
elementary which would change
that eleven forty two ten
fifteen let me give you just one
reason why that makes sense in
twenty two of our eighty nine
districts.
Transportation process looks
like this part of the nested
transportation elementary and
secondary.
Which is different from ours of
the line and an eighty the whole
crap initiative if you were to
add as were recommending eleven
forty and ten fifty you would
simply do this we do the eleven
forty for both you do this.
That creates a transportation
problem for twenty two districts
we think that's all necessary in
the bill we would recommend the
amend the elementary K. five
level two one thousand and fifty
hours in lieu of the existing
eleven for Mr chairman again
thank you for the great work by
your staff we appreciate both
sponsors and thank you for
listening to corruption and it's
and there was remarks thank.
Thank thank you at this place.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee ability or two
service any The New Mexico
scored Association the New
Mexico association for many
years and supported continued
the payments in the process we
really appreciate the fact that
it's been increases in
participation for students do
better in school more time with
classroom more time for the team
to help someone learn a lot
better really like it's fun
support which piece of the bill
it talks about the six years and
that it for time for teachers to
work that is clearly needed a
great best practice and we're
very happy that it is better to
this legislation of course.
Legislation as we continue to
say will continue to say that
because of this in funding
equipment that is flexible the
house office to allow the school
districts throughout the state
who are working at many
different levels of different
sizes of school to do what's
best for them and for their
communities we also ask you to
consider the suggestions made by
the superintendents regarding
transportation issues.
The the the scheduling we
support this bill would thank
the sponsor for bringing it
forward and for all the hard
work this of us to support thank
you.
Right thank you others in the
same row wish to speak.
All right we'll go to the last
many Representative and you wish
to speak okay.
Thank you all so we'll go to our
members online thank you for
holding tight this is still if
you wish to speak in support of
house bill one thirty so you
have up to two minutes.
All right hope welcome give us
two minutes.
Good morning can you hear me we
can please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is help
our Alice and I'm the executive
director of teach plus New
Mexico we are at a crucial time
within our educational system
and must take bold steps to
support student learning and
close the opportunity gap that
has been the only exasperated by
the pandemic our decisions must
center around two things the
current skill set of our
students and the potential of
our students our current student
learning data requires that we
work with a sense of urgency and
strategy this bill will ensure
more students have access to
increase instructional time and
also allow for differentiation
through intervention and
acceleration this is vital for
our elementary students who need
those foundational skills in
addition to time to learn we
must focus on quality
instruction over the past
several years teach plus
educators have advocated for a
need to focus on quality teacher
training and mentorship programs
in an effort to support a more
effective educator workforce we
appreciate the Sanchez for
ensuring that teacher
effectiveness is a priority of
this bill and also allows for
flexibility within its design
thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you for joining us.
All right and if I mispronounce
your name I'm terribly sorry
just correct me
Ellen.
Good morning.
Your with us while working.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Alan
burns Steen president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
the idea that extending student
time must include adult time is
crucial and I thank you for in
betting adult time and house
bill one thirty according to the
research of Dr Linda Darling
Hammond American teachers spend
more hours directly instructing
children each week work more
hours in total and have much
less time in their schedules for
planning collaboration and
professional development this
left over from the factory model
makes it harder for all of us to
work with our colleagues and
creating great curricula and
learning new methods grading
papers working individually and
collectively with students and
reaching out to parents this
collaboration an adult learning
time is essential it helps us to
re think typical schooling to
achieve a more equitable student
focused education system and to
pursue bold initiatives that
will help all of our children
that drive thank you for
embedding sixty hours of adult
time within the new eleven forty
I support this bill.
Thank.
Thank you so much.
We'll go to Serra.
Good morning Sir you're with us
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Sarah fitzgerald
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce chambers in strong
support this legislation and we
thank all the sponsors for
bringing it additional
instruction hours are what our
students need as they work to
recover from the learning lost
the experienced over two years
of school closures and
suboptimal remote instruction it
may feel like the distant past
to us now but the data shows our
kids are still feeling the
effects and they likely will for
years if we don't take big steps
to help them catch up
academically our education
system isn't urgent need
improvement you said it for
years.
We're also in favor of the
flexibility this bill both
allows and encourages will not
only enable all of our districts
and schools to get on board with
extended learning but of support
the innovative ways our
districts and charters are
already implementing longer days
and school calendars for the
benefits of their students both
for greater gains during the
school year and for last of the
summer slide we are the
committee support for this bill.
Great thank you so much.
so we'll go to.
He's a riser.
Good morning welcome.
Part eight at TCU a good morning
term narrow and members of the
committee TD right there from
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in full support house bill
one thirty we appreciate the
flexibility I want to ensure
it's all expected thank you.
Thank you so much.
Anybody else who wish to speak
of in support online they get
okay so okay.
K. Elise do you wish to speak in
support.
Good morning Cayley's they
desire and go up do you wish to
speak in support.
Good morning members of the
committee and chairman
Romero.
This is at least Packard and I
am with the coalition for public
education we stand in support of
this bill with the concern that
it contained funding for full
transportation for those
children
who are most in need also
tutored funding for tutors
education assistance and food
for summer programs these are
the children most affected in
the Yazzie Martinez case and I
encourage that that be part of
the budget allotment for this
bill thank you for your co
sponsorship of this bill.
Great thank you.
All right so we will move to.
Opposition so if you're online
and you wish to speak in
opposition to house bill one
thirty please indicate by using
the raise hand feature will come
to you in a moment those of you
in the room on my right hand
side those that wish to speak in
opposition to house bill one
thirty please indicate by
raising your hand.
Okay so we'll start in the front
aside we're going backwards so
please you have up to two
minutes welcome thank you Mr
chair.
The state department Santa Fe
public schools teacher and I am
a parent of four children in
Santa Fe public schools some
have graduated from there
reason I'm in opposition to this
bill is because I really think
that.
Need all kinds of other things
before a single dollars spent on
the monitor screen they are
longer school year here just a
few.
Full time school counselors my
screen of three hundred plus
kids have a counselor on site
only two and a half weeks per
week sorry kids if you have a
crisis in the on the day the
counselor isn't there this
happened just the other day
students said that they wanted
to self harm counselor wasn't
available
We also need things like
dedicated reading and math
tutors and multiple in each
building who are not also
serving as testing coordinators
or sector meters these are the
people who orchestrate a very
lengthy and complicated process
for final fours and IT peas and
they often get pulled into sub
regular classes because we have
a stab so there desires to
complete the reading
intervention tasks with students
in need all
an accomplished.
and these teachers should be
able to work with any child
during the school day whether or
not they qualify for P. because
lots of children who need
support don't actually qualify I
currently in my class of twenty
two children have one student
who is reading about
astrophysics and one student who
is struggling to write that a
first grade level.
And everybody in between and so
if we had a reading tutor who
can work with and this child who
is struggling didn't qualify for
ninety.
So we just need people in the
building who can support these
kids we also need more
diagnostician that the district
levels of kids who've been
identified by teachers are as
possibly needing more support to
special ed services don't have
to wait almost an entire year to
be tested before receiving
services and families going.
From left to claim thank you
ma'am proving this doesn't
matter we need smaller class
sizes thank you ma'am thank you
please anybody else in that same
role in opposition.
Anyway in the same row
opposition okay we'll move to
the next Representative.
Please you have up to two
minutes welcome Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jenny Sinclair I just retired
after teaching public school for
thirty years both elements of
both special and regular red in
the elementary school I'm here
speaking for many teachers I'm
not speaking for administrators
I'm not speaking for educational
bureaucrats I'm not speaking for
community organizations of
speaking for teachers and I'd
like to make a data informed
argument in opposition of this
bill and any other bill that
focuses on increasing school
hours.
The only S. C. analysis states
that increasing ours has a
modest but statistically
significant impact on student
achievement.
In elementary school this impact
is negligible.
If we spent two hundred million
dollars on something that even
the L. E. S. C. reports has a
tiny impact on student
achievement in elementary
school.
The LFC analysis states that
many spaces nearer our current.
Statutory minimums for
instructional minutes in other
states performed so much better.
Clearly the difference between
New Mexico and other states is
not instructional time.
Increase in hours alone will not
cause a significant increase in
student.
Performance especially in
elementary school what it causes
is exhausted kids exhausted
educators and a colossal waste
of taxpayers their money it's
quick and easy but it won't work
it's kind of like the DA
arresting the first suspect so
they can say that they've got
the case.
The real solution is complex
multi faceted also expensive and
long term it starts with making
New Mexico a magnet for young
energetic and idealistic
teachers both H. B. one thirty
and eighty one ninety seven will
prepare.
Thank you so much right thank
you so much for joining us other
opposition to house bill one
thirty that wish to speak.
Please give up to two minutes
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is grace
may of the NEA Santa Fe local
president and future out of a
middle school I'm standing in
opposition to each bill one
thirty extended learning time
Because the Santa Fe
philosophically has road
reservations around engaging
across the board increases the
school hours and days a one size
fits all approach is not
relevant or effective local
school districts students
parents and educators should use
community and school based
employees and needs assessments
to design and.
Any extended learning
programming and opportunities
for for their their children and
their students to fit their
specific needs mandating longer
hours does not acknowledge the
considerable and dire
circumstances that many of our.
Students and educators are
facing if we want them to
advance academically we need to
address class size concerns
social emotional well being.
And other factors insured we
need more counselors we need
more social workers we need more
attendance coaches we need more
community schools.
To transform learning
opportunities for students in
Santa Fe this will affect or
elementary students
day it'll extend by of probably
twenty to thirty minutes which I
understand that there is some
flexibility in the bill but our
students are already
trying to keep up with the pace
that we have now and they're
they're not they're falling
behind because we don't have the
people in the resources to give
those other services that are
critical for them to be
successful so the resources that
we need are you and beans.
That can serve in those roles as
a as I indicated.
Great thank you so much for
being here we appreciate it all
right other opposition and on my
right hand side.
Okay we'll go to my left hand
side those in opposition to
house bill one thirty.
Okay so we'll start up in the
front and then work our way back
please you have up to two
minutes and yes.
Hi my name is Andrea Romero you
of a teacher for some of the
public school it's also limiting
we have broadly the most
impacted a little community here
is happening and I oppose this
bill because it doesn't reflect
all of the factors that we need
to have in mind when addressing
those needs of college students
we haven't heard of bilingual
bilingual Spanish singers
consular up until this year we
haven't had a principal those
are what happened to this year
we have a tremendous of scene
lacks all bilingual so for sure
by the kids with me so if
failing argues with Jesse
Martinez okay and I realize that
you can think of all these you
know in terms of putting more
time is going to need and better
I I may going them putting more
means to analyze factors help
communities can definitely
address that to the best of
their abilities.
Thank you great thank you for
joining us all right any others
in that row.
Okay ma'am you've been waiting
patiently please have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr speaker and
committee members
The notes here the school in
Santa Fe
Here's.
Have thirty which proposes
increases sectional time to one
thousand one hundred forty eight
hours.
I believe in the well and
intend.
I believe in certain parts of
the bill and Lee and making K.
five plus optional
is a huge deal with their
teachers and their students want
to go but mandatory for a.
Will is not the right way to do
that
I believe.
Providing teachers with more
purpose of prep time anytime and
sessional development because
for now it is real.
and but.
It can't support spending more
money for more days because
that's how to dress in the true
issue issue issue is that we
need smaller class sizes I have
I am over cap for my classes
here and expected to teach
twenty three six year olds how
to read this year and I can we
meet with them maybe once a week
maybe twice a week if I'm lucky
and a small group and the front
center venture and that is the
real problem is not the number
of days is that not a time that
I have to plan and prep to meet
with twenty three students.
If I had fifteen.
Completely different.
At I.
I think that in order to change
the quality of education we are
providing must have five classes
the more instructional planning
simply put and advocating for
increasing the quality of
education not.
Please.
No one half of one thirty five.
Thank you so much all right
other opposition on my left hand
side okay please Sir you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Morning insurance the members of
the committee my name is sherry
Phillips educator for over
twenty years for principal
twenty eighteen New Mexico
teacher of the year for parent
Mexico public school committee
thank you for your commitment to
improving education system for
students families and educators
I would like to state that I am
talking opposition for us for
the one third proposal to
increase instructional hours for
elementary school students I see
several reasons against the
school year cost expenditures
we're would require additional
resources not just teachers but
also in terms of custodial food
transportation.
Thank you for not four years
could lead to increased stress
and burnout for many are feeling
overwhelmed with the amount of
support from answers.
Family disruption in extended
school year with the for a
family plan for summer vacations
travel exercise relaxation and
Richmond ineffectiveness there
is no clear evidence that since
we are approve student learning
on the other hand it would
increase student FCS.
Hello programs programs and
other opportunities for students
to explore their interests and
develop new skills cut short for
limited altogether.
Students school year Furthermore
many teachers use this time
professional development.
Public funds for children but I
have to find ways to bolster
high quality educational support
during the school year artist
establish some potential options
include providing resources for
early childhood education
additional educational systems
and other insurers that provide
continuous inclusion support in
the classroom assist with co
teaching improving access to
mental health services for
school counselors special
education.
Our system does best.
What for the.
Program property.
Representative Lundstrom a
better solution for twenty.
Graham.
What
interests.
For
great thank.
Thank you for being here Sir all
right others I wish to speak in
opposition in the left hand side
okay I don't see any opposition
online.
Okay.
We are one of them.
If you would please make sure
you indicate a raise your hand
so I can do.
All right so we have that
welcome you have up to two
minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity to speak
I think just a couple of points
here a number one we need to
make sure that we're getting
kids ready to learn and so I I
support the comments that Stacy
made as well as others in the
room about increasing the number
of social workers counselors
tutors instructional supports
that we have in the classroom
the making our class sizes
smaller is certainly a great
idea it's a it's a good way to
ensure that our our kids are
receiving of one on one
instruction when we can then the
second thank you teacher teacher
retention and improvement is
absolutely got to be one of our
goals and
embedding the sixty hours inside
the eleven forty just disrupts
the instructional instructional
school day in my opinion we're
gonna have five day weeks or
four day weeks for those schools
have forty weeks as many as we
can in four destructing are
Wednesdays for whatever days are
choosing to use that is
inconsistent and kids operate
and teachers operate on
consistency and stability and so
the more instructional time that
we have consistently is is
better and we've seen that over
and over and over and so
professional development before
the school year starts or hold a
professional developments in in
the middle of the school year or
at the end of the school year is
is really important so we don't
end and disrupt the
instructional time and so I'm in
favor of leaving the hours where
they are and then making sure
that we pay for good meaningful
professional development for
teachers and support them with
everything we have with full
days not half days not partial
days but hold a very meaningful
before the school year starts at
the beginning of the first
master at any of this that
second semester for example
meaningful time whole days and
not disrupt the instruction if
teachers are of participating
professional development during
the school year and during what.
Should be a full school day
they're not teaching the kids we
caught a teacher.
All data no you're too thank you
so much that the two minutes
thank you so much.
All right I need a.
I need to welcome.
You have up to two minutes.
I need are you with us.
Hello here with us good morning
you have up to two minutes
morning Mr chairman the members
of my school teacher from Deming
well I like the flexibility of
this bill we should recognize
that quality individualized
resources and support for ELL
population population would be
to student success rather than
more hours we are my minority
majority state and I think that
is the considered many of the
students at my school are
working to support their
families and need that extra
time and summer to help their
families
many of us know that New Mexico
ranks fiftieth in education
according to US news dot com
what I found interesting was
that before the lowest ranking
states at the same number of
instructional hours as New
Mexico which is currently at ten
eight ET however the top I
reckon states had an average of
nine hundred twelve
instructional hours
but why does this matter I do
not see the correlation between
additional school days and
student performance before we
add more hours we should address
the foundational issues New
Mexico education face thank you
right thank you for joining us.
All right so we don't have any
more public members so will come
to committee I want to say first
off though is that even though
we have differences of opinion I
think is a great model for
students on the civil discussion
that we're able to have in this
environment so thank you all all
right so we'll come to committee
so if we can carry that on that
be awesome
questions comments concerns.
I don't assume but we work with
a great group of peers
Representative Chatfield please
Europe.
As we strongly oppose VLT you
guys that have have been to this
committee over the years of I
have known that it it will it
does my heart good to be able to
come here this morning and
support this bill but my support
is contingent on a few things
that that were for our.
We were heard the as to the
things that we oppose it in the
reasons that we oppose it for
more support is contingent on
the fact that it has hours
instead of days I think that's a
big deal it's an enormous deal
to our small school many of whom
are the more successful in the
state it's a big deal to me that
it has flexibility and that we
can count in and set up a
program that fits our school the
flexibility of local control so
that's a big deal to me it's
important to me and it allows me
to put my support for this bill
it the is important to me that
it has sixty hours of
professional development for
teachers that doesn't mean that
they teach less it just means
that the there there preparation
time in their training time
during the school day is counted
towards the hours of our school
and and I think that's a good
thing so it is truly important
to me that we have a broader
definition of instructional
hours I think a lot of our the
reason that we have such a low
attendance rate is because we
don't have anything there for
the kids that they're interested
in you know there are kids that
one learn how to build a house
bill hot rod car
learn to be an electricians do
many many things and and they're
up for learning.
This over here so they can do
this that they like but when you
cut out that the
technical education that is
something the child likes I
think they tend not to show up
so of those things have changed
the way I feel about the LFC ELT
so I support this bill this
morning.
Thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and care for
introducing house bill one
thirty
I'd like to.
Just talk briefly about what we
know we know that of more money
alone is not going to create
transformative of student
success models we know that we
also.
Need to institute new
transformative systemic policy
approach approaches which I
think HB one thirty begins to
deal begins to do.
We have a whole lot more work to
do we also know by getting more
local control.
Requires also giving the
flexibility for local
communities to take control but
this also comes with more of a
need.
For oversight as it relates to
meeting the legal mandates under
the Yazzie Martinez order and
that's of principal concern to
me because that order in great
detail outlines the historical
missteps we've taken an
education.
And it also provides a guide for
how and what we need to do to
create the system it changes and
that is of principal concern to
me.
And it should be to all of us
because of the make up of our
student populations around the
state which are primarily native
and Spanish and other
communities of color comprise
the vast majority of our student
population.
So my question is this.
How do we ensure our students
receive cultural and language
relevant education.
Under it in what we're proposing
as extended learning time as
well as our teachers receiving
professional development with
focus on teaching cultural and
language relevant education.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero
price making sure we cover that
I think the fact that we have
the embedded professional
development and communication
time insurers that there's time
not just passing in the hallway
or in the faculty lounge but
intentional time used for those
purposes and I want to also
emphasized many of our speakers
today who gave testimony talked
about quite correctly all the
issues we have to face this bill
can't address thing community
schools building the the
pipeline for teachers food
insecurity all these issues are
addressed in policy work in
other legislation and in the
actual budget so you're very
important question.
Has a component here but has to
be integrated with all the other
work we're doing and I'd like to
just drive Perea Warniment to
add some remarks.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Roybal Caballero
I think one of the most critical
pieces about the bill that
addresses what you're speaking
around is the actual definition
of learning time for instruction
and that is new our our current
state law does not define that
in fact the it simply says
school based program and that's
a really nebulous sort of
approach to what exactly is
instruction.
So the bill defines an
instructional hours thus.
Richmond programs that focus on
problem solving and cognitive
skills development not just that
direct instructions so it was it
still retains the direct
instruction directly aligned to
academic content performance
standards but then it goes above
and beyond includes enrichment
programs it also says
instructional our could be any
other content that provides
technical knowledge skills or
competency based applied
learning.
And instructional our could also
be.
Reserves are evidence based
social emotional or academic
intervention time that you
provide for students or
individual students or groups of
students small group instruction
tutoring anything that is
typically not what we consider
the.
Structured classroom approach
instructional our could also be
breakfast right so we want to
retain the breakfast after the
bell program and acknowledge
that Representative reserves and
consumed in accordance with
breakfast after the bell program
or federal requirements such.
I think what's in a critical and
maybe implied there is that.
How educators approach their
classroom.
What is
Datable education should be
brought and community driven and
by defining instructional our in
this way it allows communities
to do so as appropriate for
themselves.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and drive for
your responses.
However I would add
That I think that we can no
longer.
Go without.
Being intentional about.
The language we use in our
approach it cannot be implied it
has to be.
Intentional and there has to be
guidance given and yes I truly
believe as you know and local
community driven however we have
an obligation as a state we have
an obligation as a public
education department to provide
the framework.
The curriculum suggestions for
professional development the
curriculum suggestions for the
correct and the a culturally and
language and relevant
educational materials that are
being used we have an obligation
to be intentional about what we
need are how we're responding.
In the tail two thousand
Martinez it cannot be yes in
general or implied terms thank
you Mr chair and thank you thank
you Representative Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you and thank you presenters.
You I am I rarely ever agree
with Representative Chatfield.
But he adequately stated what I
was going to state but he's much
nicer than I am
sunny loop that is sitting he's
one of my very favorite people
in the whole wide world but
practically to to his head off
when we were talking about
extended they do remember
setting.
And.
And I've been a strong opponent
to the extended day concept
because I didn't feel that there
was of a correct framework.
In imposing it on on public
educators.
throughout the course of a few
years this committee the alley
and the alley S. C. has worked
intently on making sure that the
work that is created so that it
affects classroom teachers and
students is done with benefit to
them and not as a punishment and
one of the things that I've I
love about this bill is exactly
what the Representative Garrett
stated there are there are many
many concepts in this bill that
really do address the needs for
giving teachers an opportunity
to actually sit down and focus
on planning and giving kids an
opportunity to interact with
each other just you can go
through the list yourself the
issue for for me was that really
brought me forward was the fact
that
This bill hasn't been created in
isolation there are many people
throughout the summer in the
interim committees that I've
worked on issues to insure that
school districts get supports
for counseling for support
services there are many bills
are going to up the the
legislature right now that are
trying to ensure that that piece
teachers don't feel abandoned
that educators don't feel
abandoned and that they actually
have the support systems in
place to do the things that they
need to do and I'm carrying a
lot of bills that focus in on
that you know behavioral health
for everybody that's ever been
an education without beating
your head against the wall and
watching the kids swing through
the the rafters you know will
remember that the quote don't
let school interfere with your
education and you to the for the
big poster with the teacher
trying to control the classroom
the kids are doing whatever they
want that's what we want we want
teachers to be comfortable and
teaching kids and kids
comfortable in building those
classrooms and this committee
believe it or not since I got
here ten years ago
It's more educators and you've
ever seen in your life these are
people who are actual
practitioners and one level or
another and they know what
they're talking about because
I'd been up in the in the field
for many years and I recognize
the concerns that many of you
who oppose this bill have
because I was an opponent as
well but the reality is things
have changed and this is going
to change I believe that the
direction that we need because
there's a lot of support in
other efforts throughout this
legislature that will help you
do the work that you need to do
without feeling frustrated and
flustered and I really hope that
you'll work with us to get this
of bills moving forward thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Baca please thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
your presentation for those who
don't know I am a thirty year
educator taught everything
regulate special ed and gifted
so I will say that all students
need enrichment all students
need remediation alternative
access to other things that have
been included with this bill
I think this is a good start two
of.
To try to address some of the
needs that we have my only ask
is that you know along with this
extended time because this about
quality more than quantity.
That we have access to CTE we
have access to stem we have
access to our first day of the
crews work study and other in in
activities so forth so Mister
chairman my question is is it is
tough to questions and they're
very succinct and very direct
for the actual funding about
this how this rules out in the
is it the of ten ninety nine
forms of what it is yes you
need.
Is this a increase in the unit
value.
Or is it the at risk multiplier
per student.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
Baca great question.
There are two mechanisms to fund
this bill and this hopefully
will clarify the question from
the audience as well in terms of
the two sections the section
three that ships just to speak
about ours.
Funding of the increase in
instructional hours to eleven
forty is required in not in the
unit value in the SCG not as a
factor but simply funding all
schools that's really a
fundamental piece of doing of of
supporting this type of
legislation you heard many from
both those in support and and
opposing that the need to really
do this well means you fund it
well that is critical to this I
mean schools operate not just
with educators but with a whole
host of adults that support
student learning as well as the
operations of the environment
and the building so funding this
while.
In the base is critical the only
issue recommendation was two
hundred and two million dollars
I believe that
executive recommendation was
slightly higher and the
legislative finance committee
recommendation is slightly lower
than that but our estimates are
a little over two hundred
million dollars to do this the
very back of your packet
attachment three is a really
nice cheat sheet for you all in
the L. yes C. analysis the talks
a little bit about this.
The third or the third section
of the bill which is sort of the
second arm of this if you will
is the increase in a daze to the
calendar if US district so
chooses.
So let's say I have a school
district and and director if I
may interject I notice that
members are kind of flipping
through their packets it doesn't
seem that we have it is that
correct members I don't think we
have that all right.
Yeah Miss Mister chair sorry
about that this was this
analysis was uploaded yesterday
okay so if the packets were
created before that you're not
gonna have it so it is on the
online version now currently if
if anyone has okay thank you by
maybe one of the stopped making
copies rules.
I copies afterwards if I have a
school district that says we're
just going to add a certain
amount of time at the end of
each day.
Then they're not adding days
necessarily to their calendar
academic year that two hundred
over two hundred million dollars
is really fundamental to provide
solid amount of dollars to go
out to all school districts the
funding formula works in a way
that you need to recognize that
it's going to move out to all
districts and do so in a way
that is equitable and sustains
particularly those that have the
for this to go.
The second mechanism though or
the second arm that I was
talking about in that section
three of the bill is for
districts or schools that we
choose to go over a hundred and
eighty days and if they so
choose this is only if they if
it's a choice for this old
school districts again the more
flexibility in both places if
they choose then there is an
additional factor in in that
case you do want to factor a
unit factor of point zero one
two per day.
Times a member of the school
district so I have a school
district that so chooses to go
beyond a hundred and eighty days
if there of a five day week and
they're going to go two hundred
and sixty eight a hundred and
eighty six days they get the
factor times five days times the
population if I'm a four day
week of school school district
and I go beyond a hundred and
fifty five days yeah however
many days I go beyond that times
the ma'am in my school school
district times at population of
multiplied by point zero one two
I will also receive that so both
funding mechanisms are critical
to enacting this the base
funding of the two hundred and
two million dollars as well as
sufficient funding are at the
for the factor to support those
districts who so also want to
have increased days.
Thank you Mr chairman just open
again one cent one sentence as
well I do have my photo educator
of your my colleague the talked
about the counseling and the
need for social emotional help
so is that a function at that
respect of factors does not
address that need because as a
father as a parent of three
school age kids I understand
that so can you just briefly
tell how the at risk factor
addresses the concerns of social
emotional needs of students and
staff certainly Mr speaker
Representative Bach I'll try to
be quick.
the as you know and as
representatives you mentioned
there are other legislation that
is running right now one of
which is the bill that you are
caring among with other members
and that is to increase the
factor which we call the at risk
factor in the formula the
recommendations in the bill is
to increase it by to a certain
amount that would get an
increase of fifty three million
dollars into the base of the SCG
that would go out to school
districts to support exactly
what you're talking about
counselors social workers
attendance clerks a significant
amount to go to that thank you
Mr chairman over the question
thank you I would just like to
add a couple things on that
point for for Representative
Bach as well on page two line
twenty five so it's still on the
definition side the new
definition of instructional our
part of what could be considered
an would be considered
instructional hours with in this
bill is item for research for
evidence based social emotional
or academic intervention so
certainly incorporated but not
just in this bill several other
pieces of legislation the
funding one that we are caring
together in order to provide the
resources for the districts to
provide the services for
students and yes time is always
a factor we have a couple other
bills so I appreciate
Representative Baca you
recognize that we'll go to
Representative Ezzell.
Mr Chairman excuse me thank you
very much I appreciate the
presentation today.
All I can here at home is more
local control more local control
and and that is key in my
opinion.
I do have a couple questions
which in regard to the gifted
programs am I missing them in
the list of.
Scope of what this bill is
trying to do am I missing that
entirely.
Mr chairman members since
chairman and representatives all
no not at all gifted programs
would definitely be included in
this okay can you point that out
in the bill because I'm not
seeing Mr Mr chair
Representative Ezzell the school
program the first very very
first sort of sub bullet
underneath the definition of
instructional hour just glancing
a page so the people online Mr
chairman can funded in the
buildings here section Mr chair
representative was on its page
two.
Subsection B.
paragraph one underneath that a
school program as set forth in
sections twenty two thirteen one
that lays out sort of the
traditional idea of what a
school should be including if
the program okay thank you very
much for pointing that out and
Mr chairman amid members of the
committee here I'm pretty lucky
Representative for school
districts and one charter school
in my area three of those are
minority majorities and we have
been factors down there my
particular area that are
incorporating into the schools
out of their own pocket the
stamp programs.
The steam programs and I feel
that my students that are in
this particular districts.
Are the students in the state of
New Mexico right now it is
outstanding how these local
benefactors are doing to help
improve the education of our
kids.
I am in agreement with what
Representative Jack at Chatfield
talked about.
We need to change two hours
instead of days and I'm the
reason I'm bringing that up Mr
chairman and Representative
Garrett.
Whether we're talking about the
transportation cost when they
were talking about the utility
costs the food services the
custodial services the smaller
rules to schools cannot survive
adding those extra day.
And so I am opposed to adding
extra days I am in favor of the
extra hours and I know that my
superintendents of the schools
feel the same way that I do
about it.
Excuse me I've got it from my
throat the state.
That is one of the main things
and I will be adamant about the
number of hours versus the
number of days and Mr chairman
and see what else I've got here.
My last question is because my
other questions have been
answered.
But is this model that we're.
Probably going to go forward
with that at this committee is
this is the money factor going
to be sustainable Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative is
all I believe so one thing that
I'd like to reiterate that was
spoken earlier was the
fundamental collaboration that
went into the development of
this bill not just among the LFC
staff and stakeholders visiting
across the state
across the summer members of
this committee in particular
work with the superintendents I
believe in the school board
association others
but actually the legislative
finance committee I I do want to
recognize sunny in the in the
room the legislative finance
committee staff have been
wonderful to work with over the
past summer and following
closely with them to explore
this we wouldn't get this bill
if what would have been for
their collaboration.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and Representative Garrett I
understand that that you do have
the cooperation of the Elliott
as of the legislative finance
but my question goes back to the
actual dollars that are going to
be coming in and right now we
can attribute that to the.
Oil and gas industry.
And the extra dollars that are
now available to help with our
age educating our young people.
But we've also seen push to go.
To another extreme.
And not rely so much on oil and
gas and
In my opinion Mr chairman are
oil and gas industry along with
our agricultural community does
provide.
Will will over forty five
percent of the budget for the
state of New Mexico is so the
concern there is if there is
hopefully not the big hiccup in
the in the market.
With the downplay in farming and
ranching it will make an impact
on the money that the dollars
that did go with this the actual
dollars themselves and I'd like
to her response on that Mr
chairman if that's.
Appropriate.
Mr Chairman representative so I
think your point is very well
taken and I think that the
approach that the members decide
to take in terms of the budget
should fundamentally recognize
the need to both wisely invest
in the things that you so choose
to invest in for the long term
that would be recurring as well
as recognize that you need to
protect the state for the long
run so both of those things I I
I agree it and wholeheartedly
support for you on the decisions
that you make I would say that
if you're choosing to invest in
one thing that is recurring that
does four all of these
components of good policy this
would be one thing.
And Mr chairman thank you for
that response and I'm not in
disagreement we're putting the
dollars to it where it is going
to make a definite positive
impact in the education system
of our youth I am all for
because I'm tired of being at
the bottom of the list whenever
we're putting this much money
into it and I think this does
give the flexibility especially
along with our local control in
a dressing room miss
Representative Roybal copiers
concerns I think it can be
accomplished with the local
control needs to include hours
instead of days Mr chairman
thank you very much thank you
representative Representative
you know as more a more after.
That's right it happens all the
time Mr chairman
especially that most people
can't simulate so members good
to.
But a Representative in and
presenters I have a couple of
quick questions first of all I
am a current of chemistry
teacher Evelyn high school and
so I love the fact first that I
I work in a title one district
and so of all of this is
actually not going to change our
world a whole heck of a lot
because of some of these we
actually go are to go over
because we take advantage of the
I you know the K. five plus and
and extended learning time and
stuff like that
but I want to kind of just
clarify a couple of things
because I know when I was going
back and talking to people back
home
and they kind of misconstrued a
couple of of the points in here
I love personally I love the
fact that sixty hours of teacher
times invented in this that is
wonderful about speaking from a
teacher that takes piles of work
home two great so
but a so districts I should have
what your expectation is is
districts should have eleven
forty hours in the one hundred
eighty days that's the
expectation at this point and
then so if they'd current if a
district ends up taking doing
eleven forty and then taking a
hundred eighty six days to do
the eleven forty hours they
would not see the funding or
they would receive the act
xtrafinder.
Mr chair representative anymore
where the one hundred eighty six
days because they're going over
one hundred eighty days
regardless of how many hours
they have they would get funding
for those extra days if you do
of there's a in the LFC analysis
I believe it's a the.
Three the LFC analysis is this
nice co it I'm sorry but the
page for.
Nice little chart for you
they're that that has a few like
sample calendar so you can look
at on none of these calendars
are significantly over eleven
forty hours you see that first
calendar up top they're doing
ten days over that one eighty it
will get extra funding for those
ten days and they they're doing
six hours per day.
For a hundred ninety days
they're still doing eleven forty
hours but they're getting those
ten extra days of funding for K.
twelve plus excellent excellent
thank you Mr chairman thank you
the last question that I kind of
have is if you go over because
there was another conversation
that some of my colleagues and
had
like the Katie
what is it the K. five plus and
and and and and I think extended
learning was everyone K. five
plus sometimes was not didn't
have to be everyone it wasn't
mandatory for all students that
extended learning time is that
mandatory for all students or
can those that opt in like let's
say in high school those that
need to recover credits or if we
want to do a vigorous program in
order to do that would that be
included in this.
Mr Chairman representative
Domingo Molina yes so everyone
raises to the lower forty and
then those schools within the
district that so choose to
operate with the extended days
can do so so let's say the land
a school races all those schools
raised to eleven forty in some
form or fashion whether its
equipment or days or combination
and then let's say that we have
one school particularly the high
schools that says would like to
go two hundred and eight eighty
six days because we really want
to have our students start with
the
a little bit earlier than that
school in particular can so
choose the other schools don't
necessarily need to participate
in extended date right so
superintendents and community
school boards parents have
flexibility are in terms of
determining what that's going to
look like but what's best for
them excellent thank you Mr
chairman and and Representative
so that I like because then it's
it also not only breaks it down
to flexibility for the district
but also for each individual
school those schools that need
to do something a little bit
more or maybe other schools
don't feel too so thank you
thank you so much Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative a
representative and head off.
Mr chair recommended to pass so
we had we have a due pass
motions Representative a second
by Representative itself before
I go to that motion we have
Representative lane on the list.
Pressure
pressure the kids keep
everything going I can add a
little bit of pressure that we
thought two thousand it's half
hour tour on the floor of the
low pressure.
As much as I would enjoyed a
cross examining vice chair
Garrett I I I will be brief.
Mr chair so this make COVID.
Mr chair.
The reason why I think we need
take this bill seriously.
Is what happened during COVID
with the governor's decision to
shut down schools for an
extended time and I'm not
interested in debating whether
that was wise or unwise the
reality is is that had a
tremendous negative impact on
our students.
So I I submit that we have a
moral obligation to our students
to do everything we can to help
them catch up this is not the
only solution but this is one of
a handful solutions I would
submit so providing more
instructional time I think is
vital.
And I believe also providing
professional development for
teachers within that eleven
forty I think it's I was well so
how's that for a lawyer
politician being briefed Mr
chair.
Senator Representative lane and
I would like to add as well to
take a little bit of pressure
off of you that thank you to our
earliest the staff to our
members of the legislative
education study committee for
really doing a deep dive into
this issue it's been the house
Education Committee us with all
the experience that
Representative Trujillo mention
of all of us being in education
that have stood firm on a few
things and that has been
flexibility within our schools
to provide the programming that
they feel that they need for
their communities and also being
able to provide not just days
but hours into their calendar if
you remember two years ago we
had a bill that was sponsored by
this entire entire committee
passed off the house floor in
order to support hours instead
of days in the K. five plus
extended learning time programs
and that's because we heard from
communities from you all the
educators are school staff that
this and these initiatives were
important we've spent the past
interim on this issue at least
every meeting and where we went
we went to places like Kerwin
New Mexico we went to places
like Los crucis to hatch Santa
Rosa and we heard from the local
districts including Santa Fe
about what they wanted and
brought them to the table in
order to explore that in what we
see here there are a couple
other initiatives that will be
floating around our session that
are focusing on time in class
we've heard that from several of
the comments today I think what
we're providing here is the
flexibility but also not just
seat time for students by the
integration of professional
development into the hours
because as we know and this.
Several of you stated it's about
the quality that we have of that
instruction in the time we have
with our students.
As well as the time we have in
class to deliver that
instruction as well as the
supports and everything that go
around to making our schools and
our communities whole so with
that I'm very proud of the work
that we were able to do and
hopefully be able to move
forward so with that we did have
a due pass motion for
Representative at a a second by
Representative Ezzell madam
secretary if you call the roll
on a do pass motion please.
Representative okay yes
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative girl yes.
Representative first yes.
Representative Lane yes I like
to play my vote just kidding
sorry.
Representative Lara yes.
Senator Madrid.
Representative near Valmeyer
yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
And madam vice chair yes and Mr.
Yes.
We have to do that all right so
we have a unanimous do pass on
house bill one thirty thank you
for the robust discussion.
All right so we'll re orient
will need representative Lente
there.
Representative Lente would
please come up in any sort of
expert will move on.
To house bill one forty.
Representative Lente yes.
Everybody if you're exiting
please be quiet as you exit
because we have another
presentation to start.
Later.
Thank you.
The all right so representative
Lente that we're pressed for
time usual but.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Welcome we're getting ready for
in New.
Yes.
Okay thank you Representative I
give it to we're pressed for
time or other discussion was
going but please when you're
ready welcome thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee
members good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to
present to build on this
committee my favorite committee
I want to begin by first
acknowledging all of those that
helped us to get to this point I
want to recognize all the tribal
leaders in the audience and
online all the tribal
representatives I want to thank
especially the legislative
education study committee and
your staff as well as the the so
many other staff to help make
today possible in regards to how
we're advancing the tribal in
the framework and its components
so without further ado let me
begin with house bill forty Mr
Chairman house bill forty simply
is one that was endorsed by the
legislative education study
committee during this past
interim session it is in a
collaboration with the state
investment council that helped
put together numbers one again
once I want to once again thank
the director for L. E. S. C. and
and her staff for taking charge
in regards to helping devise and
helping of.
Helping that the the the the
concept of of this tribal
education Trust Fund that being
said the tribal education trust
fund creates a fifty million
dollar trust fund for tribal
education programs within tribal
nations it supports and invests
in tribal community based
education to compliment school
based programs and services as
the fund grows they will secure
a stable and consistent funding
element and we're looking at
starting in FY twenty five we we
if we aren't that successful
this year to begin small
distributions made to New
Mexico's tribes pulls the
nations to develop education
capacity compliment school based
education and learning and
provide culturally and
linguistically relevant programs
and services for those native
American students that being
said for any questions that I
cannot answer I have to expert
witnesses with me I have got
under Regis Pecos from the
Cochiti pueblo as well as drive
on your rooted here with me here
today so with that Mr Chairman
and with the consideration of
time I stand for any questions.
Great thank you so much
Representative and.
Panelists thank you for joining
us all right so we'll do this
like we did the last one so we
will go to those on our zoom
that would wish to speak please
indicate by using your raise
hand function on soon and again
if I mispronounce your name
excuse me please help me we're
all still learning
so I will leave you all there in
order to do that and I will come
to our committee room thank you
all for those of you have joined
us I will go to my left hand
side this time those of you in
support of house bill one forty
please indicate there is in your
hands.
Okay awesome again you'll have
up to two minutes and if you
have comments that overlap with
other ones please just indicate
and please we'll start in the
front so.
Please.
Welcome.
More control and.
For those
of these calls and one in Texas
today we're here to support for
we support one forty.
that the the reserve language
culture and traditions of New
Mexico.
View the landmark.
About the lawsuit your focus of
governors.
We should for the establishment.
Distrustful of trouble.
And
Would you pass.
Great thank you so much for
joining us others in that same
rather wish to speak in favor.
The same rough please welcome
good morning members of the
committee thank you reporter
junior level the good governor I
think it will return very very
brief
just you can safely back a
little bit you know the
Yazzie Martinez cage.
The court decision.
The
Action or inaction since the
twenty eighteen decision you
have called us also to again be
the legislative session for
those many sessions up to this
one it's been the on the agenda
as we know it separates through
again
Yes what also that this tribal
remedy framework that
Representative Lente is
mentioned in the APC of
connection that we have that
developed in the census very
comprehensive.
And we're doing a scene with the
legislature over the years since
the decision we're doing it
piecemeal we're doing
Our efforts are legislative
efforts have been piecemeal and
then also the appropriations act
so what I'm saying is is that
I'd like in this trust
The digital development status
distrust one I liken it to an
investment.
Many of us know as families
parents guardians that we live
in our to our own resources to
invest in our children.
I DO like industry where we put
away resources for our children
for the future you know when
they're young we start the
college one we start things like
that to see this is the and can
I see that we can appropriate as
we go along really we need to
invest for the future with this
fifty million dollars is a
proposal to do so as you know
that we do things right and
managing administer it let it
grow we stand to achieve things
for the future in in our.
By two we talk about the need to
thank you governor that was two
minutes right thank you thank
you so much governor all right
others in that row please give
up to two minutes welcome.
The.
That would have been helpful
and then there I have to.
my own sense of that is.
Sen.
The session.
I don't have are have all of
that.
And so the basis for.
And also.
That.
Okay thank you for joining us
anybody else in that row okay
Sir please two minutes on the
oil chairman honorable members
of the committee good morning
everyone
I am the first lieutenant
governor
and a lot of money.
We're here in support of SB one
forty eight Representative Lente
for bringing this forward and we
asked for previously for the
past thank you thank you
lieutenant governor any others
in that first for a.
Okay we'll go to the next of.
Okay well we'll start the middle
and we'll go out Sen initiatives
welcome.
Members of the committee yes
more information and for legal
and other Mexico mereka
Association.
And we support
Read the report and
a remedy I think this bill is
really important and remedy
store
that we see that resulted in a
very poor educational outcomes
native American students in our
state and
Opportunity right now this the.
I revenues that are available to
actually do something
substantive so that you know we
leader years there is some
resources to actually dress
Committee some of the equity.
Very important and I encouraged.
Thank you for so please.
Up to two minutes welcome.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is it would be
if you are.
I would also member with tribes.
I stand for the for the one
forty percent Asian Indian
Education plus for
you.
The bill will establish a
separate numbers for us and for
our regular support for tribal
education entities.
Students attend public schools
which works closely with for
the.
Our.
Transform to provide valuable
support for education
department.
Schools provide full coverage
for all our students and allow
us to grow provided for
education for all our
families.
Legislation to establish this
from this system stable and
predictable funding for years to
come enabling tribes to provide
much needed support for the
students thank you great thank
you for joining us others in
that same row that wish to speak
Sir.
Welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm seeing Sanya
is government relations director
up for any New Mexico on behalf
of our members we support this
legislation.
Is investing in education for
native American students will
result in real and substantial
academic outcomes we know this
because research is
demonstrating that education
the education budget that
culturally based education has.
How this legislation is also
founded its approach of
distributing the funds
allocated.
It sets forth the importance of
respect sovereign immunity and
decision making public private
determine how best to use the
funds.
A practice that we have
supported for school districts
across New Mexico.
Better known as local.
We thank the sponsor for
bringing forth this legislation
and we ask that you consider
student support thank you great
thank you others in the same
row.
Okay we'll move to the next row
those in support for the please
Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you Tom good
morning.
My name is James R. on the
tenant governor sent the double
standard support of this bill.
Santa Clara there really.
Not only for community schools
that we took over from the VA
but the surrounding communities
surrounding school districts.
In in Santa Clara within the
community school.
Go to Jeez.
At the ninety nine high schools
junior high that off food
because of inclement because of
transportation
they go for me so we still with
Albuquerque public schools have
school children in Santa Fe
public schools charter schools.
So really help us.
The store language in our
school.
We have to be competitive with
all of the public schools and
charter schools to retain our
teachers that we training to
teach and this and it it just a
challenge we appreciate what
you're doing for children the
patient with.
For education and that is.
Thank you hello right thank you
for joining us others in that
same or other wish speaking
support.
Okay we'll go to the next room.
As we speak in support please
give up two minutes welcome.
Warning.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is very ill
and former governor of the city
problem by virtue of that I want
to invite I welcome you to a
couple of these are essential
for members of the public people
okay
and also the executive director
of the northern Nichols Council
and I'm the chair of the awful
comes and goes of governors to
chasing Committee of all the
reasons that was given a status
report of this bill thank you
all right welcome counterpart
all right as in the same room
please welcome.
Learning Romero Representative
chair of innings quickly
telephone trees Pueblo the
governor on this year and the
committees that will support
this bill and I thank you for
your continued efforts to close
this gap between the tribal kids
in the of the other kids in
helping us to.
It got closer to support support
of tribal.
For all this the the the.
G. so thank you again.
Thank thank you for joining us
others in that same rather wish
speak in favor of all right
we'll go to the next room.
Okay we'll start the and Dr
please welcome.
Senator.
By the we also
Respect and honor for fifteen
done with this bill thank you
related fourth.
Percent stating our students in
our district are native American
novel I commend Senator for
bringing this forward and for
working on it for the students
in the state of New Mexico we we
support.
Thank you others in the same
room please.
I'm reading this right I am a
director of Indian education and
federal programs that Cuba
Independent School District.
I'm also a member of the number.
And I just wanted to support
this bill as Senator before me.
It will really improve our
collaboration between the tribes
and the state.
Representative.
Working with
in every area but particularly.
Forty class so.
Members of native Americans come
back to work in our community.
Us specially smallest school
districts and predominantly
American school districts
I think this will improve our
ability to focus on language
revitalization which is key for
our future children a lot of us
are seeing that.
And we're grasping at straws to
come in.
After our children.
Have their identity and just
such an important part of they
are so we need to work on that
and build this definitely
support that and then you can
also discuss more targeted to be
able to address the learning
process everything that's been
brought up this morning but also
again and cultures as
intervention just being able to
provide support for our own
communities within the school
district and then also.
Thank.
Thank you others in that row
Sir in the outside please okay
good morning Mister Turner
and committee members
Leo the human resource director
and chief of staff but in
schools former director of the
district from my colleague from
the state we are in support of
the bill because not only
invested in our future for
native students but to provide
the resources programs I some of
us actuator formally.
The thank thank you please
welcome morning Mr chair all
members of the committee on my
screen Senator chairman of the
native American democratic
caucus representative all of our
tribal communities in the state
of New Mexico on behalf of the
Democratic Party Mexico you
stand in support of this bill we
have worked extensively to
appreciate the appreciate our
platform for this entire
upcoming two term here and
tribal remedy framework is
important part of this process
coming on the twentieth
anniversary of the New Mexico
indicated Indian Education Act
this is a framework that will
help this process prepare those
gaps in the challenges that we
have for for many many years and
also coming on the hundredth
anniversary is not correct this
helps to repair some of those
inequities that we've seen long
term not just in our our state
but also nationwide so we stand
support of prosperous thank you
so much anybody else in the same
room.
At the same or the next row my
depth perception is going Sir
please.
What's the hope of the ability.
The morning Mr chairman.
Members of the committee my name
is without channel.
Percent of the government.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
The local decisions order for
the legislation.
Offered for years by
Representative directly.
Legislation designed to meet the
educational needs of our notated
chilled.
This morning welcome.
That also for.
One forty.
Representative.
What is encouraging.
The creation of.
Of the troubles education trust
fund with the national
investment what the state will
provide tribal education
departments.
The consistent and stable
revenue source for the build
capacity establish community
based programs.
More than anything.
For sure tribes that The New
Mexico legislation is willing to
invest in the hopes and dreams
of our native children.
Our children can and will excel
academically.
She great because.
What we this we can continue to
see this the mileage in your.
The New Mexico state
legislation.
To make this happen by accident
house bill one forty.
This.
As members of the legislature.
This this to budget appropriated
for the month state Rep.
Yes committee reports as well in
favor of the twenty one forty.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee well
at.
Thank thank you lieutenant
governor.
Anybody else on my left hand
side that wish to speak.
Coming back to the for a Sir
welcome.
The future.
for the record from both of you
guys want to indicate that it is
very important that we push this
one point Paul because of
curriculum to the histories to
incorporate in our education
system that.
Not duly noted as as it should
be so I would persist the
committee to to push this for
thank you right thank you
anybody else in the left hand
side okay we'll go to my right
hand side those and support that
we speak.
Question up again Sir ten thirty
deadline so we would start being
brief but please Sir welcome
good morning.
For
course
of our.
Your.
my name is Andreas thanks.
Governor what was that.
And really on the fence about
the C..
Yeah.
Legislature.
Working together.
And
People was the we can support
this bill.
As long as.
And if you go back in history.
Fifty years ago.
And we have to worry about the
future.
The state.
City your.
What's happened in years.
Very important to us.
Levels so.
Happen throughout the state.
All rural rural.
See us here distribution of.
At the heart language is is very
very important
Educational disparities among
racial groups we've had this
position for many years all the
we believe this fund will be a
funding mechanism to help
address some of those issues and
we support this bill thank the
sponsor forward and for all the
hard work that was involved in
creating in addition to this
concept thank you sister thank
you others in this room please.
Morning chair members of the
committee
Senator of the Montana governor
for pictures public.
Part of a house bill one forty
we have a lot of kids from house
all the time so.
Well you need.
We're all.
Have the same but different
practices for Cuba's we would
dress we talked to the state.
Warning to the north you are
traditional stuff.
That.
A lot of people that you guys.
So.
We need to continue to teach our
kids that has been going on
since time immemorial.
And the support of of this thank
you thank you so there's never
a.
Not on the next row yet but the
next row now.
Mr Chairman well I guess since
you stood up please.
Dr ran Representative something
to mingle Pueblo on some of the
funds so problem Mr chairman I
want to begin by thanking
Representative for his diligence
on this legislation not only
this year but since he's been in
the legislature and I appreciate
also the recognition is come to
Regis Pecos he's never rested on
this issue and I also to you Mr
chairman for your signature on
this piece of legislation that I
think is important this year
thank you for that for the
reasons already mentioned Mr
chairman the governors of the
two problems that I represent
strongly support this
legislation thank you great
thank you Representative.
Share American mentored members
my name is Jenny parks on the
president and CEO of the legal
foundation we strongly urge a do
pass on this bill of the tribal
education trust fund would get
paid students and equitable and
culturally sustaining education
one that will enable them to
thrive in both our tribal
communities and society at large
and with secure much needed
resources to build capacity
within the tribal education
departments to better serve our
students which would help them
prepare for fight for pursuing
college and career opportunities
but also promoted right them to
continue to speak their
languages engaging tribal
cultures and traditions we
believe that New Mexico with the
third largest percentage of
native students in the country
could be and should be a model
for native education and this
trust fund goes a long way and
getting us there thank you so
much great thank you others in
that room.
She speak.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name's
Austin we often with the city of
New Mexico hi we send a strong
support of this legislation for
all the reasons mentioned
because this is a we are a great
opportunity point to build some
real stability and some actual
respect for tribal sovereignty
and our cultural preservation
it into the the state law and
and to prove that we are going
to put our money where our
mouths are and actually invest
in tribal education long term
and make sure that they have
stability to continue to
preserve their culture and teach
students that they know how.
Thank you all right think those
last night the next row as we
speak please.
Good morning audible sugar and
representatives name is Derek
Candelaria trouble initiated for
the public sector we pay and we
whole.
Support this we think
uh representative Lente for
bringing this bill to the floor
of.
This is an investment in not
only in education but it's an
investment in New Mexico's
future.
Hope that you all consider this
bill thank.
Thank you others not rather
speak please.
good morning my name is
could chair committee members
good morning
I'm for Mr Apache tribe on the
tribal library so I'm
representing our tribe we are
greatly in support of this bill
House Bill you know one Senate
bill one forty for the reasons
stated
I've been in the tribal library
for twenty years and I see this
it's a everyday so
this page.
Bring so much
Vitality life back to our
community to our people
some of these dollars already
given to the library
and with those dollars we were
the the agency where people are
able to
develop the elders a group.
Who needed a voice in the
community solar these dollars
really assisted and will assist
further.
Helping our people to carry the
language the tradition the
cultures and
find find the sustainability and
identity for the Mescalero
Apache people and we greatly
appreciate Senator Lamptey and
we just pickles for all their
support and I know we just
because and I've been working on
this for pretty much ten years
of my career as tribal library
thank you.
Thank you post number please Sir
thank you chairman the committee
of dropped off of the head with
college for the public to know
along with of my governor first
attended to support the due
process of the.
The funding needed for for local
school control in regards to
tribal of the question that
popped into my head listening to
to everybody here you hear the
the needs and and the want for
local control over tribal
schools but when these kids get
to the middle school in the
venture into the public school
system you just you just took
the action on to pass for a
health bill one thirty which
includes multi bilingual
cultural so how for me how does
that work if if we're working
and we get our students to a
certain level of language but
then moves into the public
school system where the end of
that system pick up and carry on
what we're trying to have in our
communities for for our local
schools for local students so it
is just a question I often get
rid of thank you thank thank you
others in the rather speak.
All right we'll go to the next
room does that we speak in
favor.
Our office warning please visit
the committee my name is a lot
of requests for ticketing
Education libraries provide
higher career at the very
successfully in the Santa Fe
Indian school and I know that
some of my former students in
the leadership of spoken on this
bill and it's it's a direct
the simple fact.
The Yazzie Martinez can really
be addressed by putting control
of the funds into the hands of
the tribal people the Santa Fe
Indian school is a perfect
example of the success of that
formula we're the community got
to control the school and got to
control the education we've had
success in this goes a long way
to extending that throughout the
state thank you thank you
others.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee reviewed at of the
half of the transform education
in Mexico we strongly support
this piece of legislation thank
you Sir right thank you others
in that rather wish speak.
All right so that concludes in
person now I have nine attendees
that wish to speak.
So we'll go to Valerie morning
Valerie of up to two minutes
please.
good morning caught on that one
my name is Valerie Boston and I
Representative Hernandez any
public library I'm also a
community member and parent of
students within zoning and
I.
So I.
Supporting this and I hope it
passes with two passed and the
key words within this and
document is preparing culture
equity justice and civic
engagement and I hope this
passes because this is in a
sense showing support to our
future leaders as you guys are
needing at the roundhouse just
representative Lente and reach
us eight this tribal remedy
framework I want this to pass
because it's telling our
children that we are in support
of creating leaders who well
engage in civic engagement has
some our library that's part of
my goal is to
Bring those learning
opportunities preen equitable
learning services for our
community and we are deserving
to have this funding and to have
this past bill passed thank you.
Thank you.
All right first lieutenant
governor okay we get.
Good morning.
The morning Sierra will.
Thank you honorable chair and
committee the first lieutenant
governor how we only know from
okay we get on the apple care we
get I stand strong in support of
each the one forty to establish
the engine Indian education for
I also want to thank sponsor Rep
their internet although hearing
your cannot be there in person
we are with you in spirit and
all said this bill passes thank
you we're not.
Thank you first lieutenant
governor.
Bettina sandbox good morning
welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Fatima Santa education and
training division director for
constable we're in support of
house bill one forty to support
stable and consistent funding
for our departments we provide
various community services and
support with very limited
resources we're the experts in
our community and of our
families and we ask that funding
is provided directly to us so
that we can support our students
no matter what school they
attend we're all responsible for
our children's education and
this will enable us to act on
the shared responsibility and
provide appropriate support I'm
a strong supporter of
collaborating with school
districts and I do that well
here inTaos with the additional
funding we received this year
we've been able to support many
initiatives in the schools and
it has changed the dynamics of
the more of a partnership now
that our department has funding
to support our asks so please
don't favor this bill thank you
for your time today Mr chairman
members the committee thank you.
Making our net.
Good morning in two minutes
talk.
Thank you Mr chairman Mickey
Barnett to along with damage are
lobbyist for the pueblo of Santa
Ana we believe that uh this bill
house bill one forty as well as
the next bill one forty seven
will help provide structure
stability and more certainty in
the funding for American native
American education matters I
know you're short for time we
are to do passage of this bill
thank you thank you.
Lydia good morning with the.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
putting up parking I am
StateTribal policy fellow and
research and policy analyst with
New Mexico voices for children
forces for Children stands in
strong support of the tribal
remedy framework and house bill
one forty for all of the reasons
previously stated we ask for
your support of house bill one
forty and thank you for your
time thank you Melissa good
morning welcome.
A good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty we think
terminology and the sponsors of
this bill for being wonderful
champions for the children of
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of house bill one
forty because tribal education
the tribal education trust fund
will help support tribally based
programs and services to meet
the needs of native students we
urge the committee to pass this
bill thank you great thank you.
Loretta good morning welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I am ready to heal
and I'm the executive director
of transform education New
Mexico our coalition stands in
strong support of the H. B. one
forty I am very grateful to you
representative Lente and Regis
Pecos I and others for their
leadership on this matter I
really wanted to contribute one
other point we know that we need
to create culturally running
relevant instructional resources
and this sort of tribal
education trying to cross on a
macro which is exactly the
solution to getting communities
control over those types of
resource development process
these I also want to connect
this to the fiftieth anniversary
of the bilingual multicultural
Education Act and sending in
that moments of leadership that
lawmakers fifty years had.
Around this kind of commitment
to the educational needs of our
children I invite you to sort of
stand in that same line of
support and I I.
She the moment to speak thank
you great thank you.
makayla
Good morning Micaela welcome.
Hello good morning my name is
makayla surely program manager
at the university of New
Mexico's indigenous design and
planning institute also on
behalf of my director Dr Ted
whole look from the slot of
Pablo and professor community
regional planning at the school
of architecture and planning at
UNM we stand in full support of
this house bill thank you so
much great thank you for joining
us.
CENIC a good morning welcome.
Good morning chairman Romero the
committee and tribal officials
in the room my name is Johnson
and I'm an organizer from yucca
Mr crime increased action so yes
that is do you think campaign
with thousands of members
customer New Mexico and while I
focus is on protecting your
future and basically I'm
destruction are also fighting to
ensure that we have an equitable
just and sustainable future so
as in people you know the
important role education has in
shaping our lives and our
culture some from the Muskogee
insemination and I graduated
from the Santa Fe Indian school
after attending it for all of my
middle and high school years
that was incredibly meaningful
and beneficial to receive
culturally relevant formal
education and to get to about
tribal histories are teacher to
show language learning courses
learn more about indigenous
ecology and world view and more
directly from indigenous
indicators so I'm very very
grateful to pretend as if I just
and I want more native students
have operated to use that I did
complaining so I'm very happy to
see this bill on the table is
too much stress and to see so
much support for and yes the the
investment in the education
across New Mexico so yeah please
go yes thank you thank you.
S. curry's Reese good morning
welcome.
Good morning chair and committee
members any question increasing
with the Santo Domingo pueblo
education department I ask for
your support of house bill one
forty as an investment in our
youth and providing holistic and
meaningful community based
learning experiences which
foster and support growth of our
kids beyond the walls of the
traditional question
appreciate the time to speak
thank you thank you for joining
us all right Tracy.
Good morning.
My name is Stacy Charley.
The tribal librarian and for all
the reasons stated I Senate bill
would.
All right thank you.
All right so that concludes the
support side will go to
opposition either online.
In person is there any
opposition to house bill one
forty.
Going once twice all right so
we're back to committee than
committee we're already on the
floor so members have been
excused from the floor but again
questions concise we want to
make it to the floor because we
still have one bill to go no
first on my list of
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman of yeah.
Kind of that's the one free to
fund the other one
The distribution of an existing
product what.
Mr Chairman representative agree
question thank you for that you
know the the the new fund is
something that's going to be
completely separate it once
again provides a a nonpolitical
consistent funding source for
tribal based programs capacity
building programs within the
communities themselves rather
than PED let initiatives.
Thank you Representative a
please.
Thank you Mr chair
Mr Representative Lente chairman
like the could you tell me what
the high school graduation rate
is for native American students
in the state of New Mexico Mr
Chairman representative I would
ask if one of my experts knows
that of the top of their head.
All analysis the the lowest
among all on a student
population groups so
unfortunately native American
students rank lower than other
groups and most of the
performance and achievement
indicators Mr chair.
Mr
sixty nine percent.
Well these rates have been
creating improved over the years
Mr chair and representative
certainly they rank far below
what we want and I applaud you
for bringing this bill forward
fifty million sounds like a lot
of money that's an annual
distribution of two point five
million when you take it down to
the individual tribal level it's
only a hundred and five thousand
I I said to pueblo leaders years
ago I said gosh I looked at the
the rankings and it was much
lower than it is today I will
say that I said my gosh you
should just start your own
charter schools you couldn't do
any worse than what we're doing
and that's probably a pretty
negative way to look at it but
it's fine with the data showed
me and so I really think this
will be a step I want people to
understand this won't happen
overnight this money isn't even
distributed to the year two
thousand twenty five when you
create an down that you have to
wait and in closing I would just
like to recognize our governor
from Santa Clara pueblo governor
not on how who is a leader in
all things that matter in
district forty one thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Baca please thank
you Mr chairman welcome my
governor governor SUNY and my
neighbors to the west of the the
public good enough.
Well my questions again of Mr
chairman and the.
Representative Lente this is the
one time reeker one time
allocation or reoccurring fund
and what is the funding source
of this.
Mr Chairman representative agree
question so it is a one time
investment based on the on the
influx of of capacity we have in
the state right now so the
mention is made that the the
during times like these
injections of investments to
help considerations for whatever
whatever subject matter it is
this is the time to do it and so
in education is in fact one of
those one time investments
that's it absolutely one of
those good things to do and so
it'll be a one time investment
based on the capacity we have
today there after once that
principal grows which we're
looking at probably twenty
twenty five if in fact we get
this through the entire process
we would begin as a
representative of Susan Herrera
mentioned to begin making those
disbursements from this as the
investment also is made within
that corpus.
Thank you Mr chairman the the
question is like the funding is
a through the school from and
what is that going I'm sorry.
Teachers are maybe maybe Mr
chairman and and representative
will be at this point the
general fund monies that were
looking and regards to our
capacity in the state thank you
Mr chairman just so that will
the people these funds flow
through the PED is forced to be
allocated or who's responsible
for the distribution of these
funds yep Mr Chairman
representative they would up as
a function flow through PED.
And and yes I am more
Representative Mr chairman and
and Representative Baca said The
appropriation is from the public
education reform son so it's all
the money that's reverting from
the K. five plus extended
learning program.
That is where the source of the
money and that's thank you Mr
chairman of that was my point
just trying to clarify is that
there's already the funds that
have been reverted back there so
these are those funds so
And the I did see Mr chairman
and representative Lente that
these funds are to flow from PED
to the different of sovereign
nations April fifteenth and
there is reporting that October
fifteenth as far as the funding
or the reporting of how these
funds have been utilized is that
correct Mr chairman and
representative Mr Chairman
representative you're absolutely
correct.
I do sentence for this bill
thank you Mr chairman great
thank you Representative Ezzell.
This chairman thank you very
much I appreciate the.
Presentation today I'd like to
say hi to the governor I think
it's good to see you again and
I'd also like to.
A dollar to the library for the
Mescalero tried being here she
is my neighbor to the west.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I do have a question
regarding the.
P. E. D. is stating in what is
this the FIR believe it is just
for the is on page five.
Under administrative
implications it states PED may
need to hire additional staff to
promulgate rules to negotiate or
traffic program member of
memorandum and goes on.
With that.
So on.
One of the nails's.
This is the beginning fiscal
year twenty twenty five the
lesser of one percent or one
hundred thousand dollars is
appropriate from the tribal
education trust fund to PED to
administer that trust fund is is
going to be an offset is that
what I'm reading here.
I mean.
Mr Chairman representative you
are correct that that it's it's
the cost to do business so to
speak that they're going to the
pro administer the funds and we
got to consider them as a
partner in this.
Okay thank you for that response
because I had I had there was
concern ahead Mr chairman and
representative Lente.
This is tribal education trust
fund in in addition to or a
separate interest from the
Indian Education Act funds.
Mr Chairman representative it
would be a separate of fund
created for again going into the
respective communities to help
build capacity within those
communities to complement the
school based programs within our
own public school system okay
all right.
And the Mr chairman I guess
another concern I have.
I'm reading one of the notices
that the in the an expanded or
unencumbered funds at the end of
the fiscal year will not report
to the P. to the public
education reform Fund can you
tell me one.
Mr Chairman representative that
is the problem today which I
think my next bill addresses in
regards to how the other funding
formula works today is that it's
often times time crunched and
set ourselves up to fail within
their own tribal communities so
at at current and I want to get
into the details now but
basically that being said with
this trust fund is that it gives
tribes an opportunity to fully
plan design facilitate and
expand the funds and then there
after any unexpended funds
because you want to spend money
just for the sake of spending
dollars you'll be able to say
okay we've we've got field so
that's we we don't maybe there's
there's ten thousand dollars
left the year it goes back into
the fund to then be regenerate
for the year after so it creates
again again that that
sustainable predictable Fund for
that'll hopefully take us into
perpetuity.
Mr Chairman okay I guess that go
along with that for right now Mr
chairman I understand that we
have to be in compliance with
the Yazzie Martinez court ruling
and the Indian Education Act.
It also in reading the
legislative education study
committee bill analysis it is
talking about the anti donation
clause can you expand on that
because this one I don't want us
to say yes we are in support of
this bill and then all of a
sudden we get a ruling down this
we can't do this anymore can you
expand on that why this would
not create a problem for
absolutely Mr Chairman
representative you know that
that's that's the that's an
issue an argument that should at
at this point be put to rest
based on a nineteen ninety six
Attorney General opinion from
the state of New Mexico we have
several examples as to why this
is not an anti donation issue
one is that we have a tribal
infrastructure fund that
provides state monies to tribal
infrastructure projects we have
capital outlay projects that go
straight to the tribal projects
currently in so it's a practice
that has been vetted and Ben has
of underpin you know favorable
opinion on behalf of the of the
tribes that this is not in fact
in any form
and anti donation clause issue.
And Mr chairman Representative
lived a I don't like this
questions less I know the answer
that's why I asked that question
and I just wanted to point it
out to the members to the public
that might not be here at this
meeting today and that's why I
asked that question Mr chairman
that's all the questions I have
thank you very much.
When is yes good morning.
most of my questions were
answered already but I when I
rated R. right that are here
that I'm very happy with this
feels thank you Mr chair and
thank you to sponsor for doing
the same thing like somebody
just said at the tribal
communities have the experts and
I think we own that to the
policy and
to decide how they want to
implement their programs
I think about hopefully this
will be something that will send
the president for communities
and it's amazing the support of
the bill has from all the people
there said so thank you thank
you thank you representative
Representative Trujillo
Mr chair I move it to pass
second Mr chairman.
Representative we have multiple
second but I have a due pass
motion for Representative
Trujillo a second from to use
the microphone Representative
Roybal Caballero
is there any opposition to the
do pass motion.
Seeing none of a unanimous to
pass on house bill one forty so.
Well done I will say we have
been on the floor were in
over time now we have house bill
one forty seven like
Representative Chatfield
indicated it is the distribution
you representative
Representative meant they had
mentioned so if we can go
through what the distribution is
and then we'll move on from
there very quickly Mr chairman
thank you for the continuation
of this hearing twenty years
later after the inception of the
Indian Education Act we want to
amend this bill to make a
compliment native American
education for now this century
or at least in a in in in the
environment that we are in today
so what house bill one forty
seven does is that it
distributes at least fifty
percent of the Indian Education
Act funding the tribes to build
tribal capacity for
collaborating with schools prior
to two thousand and twenty two
the Indian Education Act budget
was at a stagnant five million
dollars and twenty twenty two
that budget grew to eighty eight
it could do three full to about
fifteen million dollars thanks
to the tribal advocacy to help
insure that that was going to
take place
it in addition to that in twenty
twenty one about only thirty
percent of total Indian
Education Act funding was spent
on tribal grants which it which
is a problem and and those are
short term tribal requests so at
this point we we have in
addition to that use an
equitable strategy or or or
formula to distribute funding
the tribe's rather than the
current one off grant
application process in the the
process itself and finally and
lastly it allows tribes a
carryover funds just like this
will distributions of funds with
their state funding formula that
typically takes place
outside of of of tribal entities
so that being said Mr chairman
and with time considerations
that is our bill is that for any
questions right I certainly
appreciate that Representative
your house education pro
so we will go to.
Audience comment and I ask that
those and support those in
opposition please keep your
comments brief anything else you
wish to contribute since related
to the last piece of legislation
is certainly welcome
but with that I will start on my
right hand side as I've been
switching those in support that
would really wish to speak
please raise your hand in
support of.
We have in the frontal certain
front.
Welcome back thank you and if
you did.
The session.
This activity.
With the.
What.
in we support this bill
as you will notice that it has a
public library is our program
here we have a.
The school.
And and Public Library.
Also if.
And so on.
So.
The concern.
Looking at the film.
The supported and.
You.
And our.
Your budget.
And
And how happy they are and this
is a new year we're starting off
with a four year.
And we should be glad.
Your meeting here today.
Your thank you so much right
thank you anybody else in this
row okay we'll go to the next
row switch speakers for okay
we'll go to the next row those
which speaking Sir please.
Yes.
Right Representative the trouble
in the library for your first
startup library and right now
we're in the process of
purchasing a bunch of items for
library however I've been told
that I need to hurry up and use
the money to purchase these
items because they are going to
lose the funding in the new
fiscal year so no it's
definitely supported for us to
be able to roll over the funds
not having to rush to you know I
bring and what we need for our
community.
Hello hi thank thank you so much
anybody else in the same row all
right the next which cause for
please.
Chair and representative the
post would be supports house
bill one forty so that you have
a public library also within our
community and again we're here
to support thank you thank you
so much anybody else in that
same replace.
And we intend as Mexico Apache
tribe tribal librarians are far
tribes in support of house bill
one forty seven
due to the fact that what she
previously is that I'm in that
situation right now where I've
got half a million dollars that
I have to spend by June
thirtieth and I was just
notified last week so I we are
in support of this bill for the
past thank you thank you so much
others in that row same row for
okay next so we speak in
support.
All right we will come to my
left hand side this time those
that wish to speak in support.
Okay.
So we'll certainly backing we're
going forward this time please.
Okay Sir Senator you have
somebody else
will get to you.
The.
Board chairman.
Members of.
Again my name is without you
know.
To the left.
Thank you for this opportunity
the.
Information for for H. B. one
forty seven.
I mean the.
For funds well tried higher
stuff.
Within our own tribal education.
I could also use the additional
state funding for teaching our
native languages.
Right another educational
programs within the federal.
They have been for.
I want to listen to this
the page loads the critical
stage.
I.
To.
I
tried to do it we didn't the cap
for that for language loss and
with the state's health with the
additional funding the school
budget all of the children.
Yes the committee support for
legislation before you.
The support page three point
forty seven.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members.
Thank you so much anybody else
in that row all right we'll move
up tomorrow if you would please
the New Mexico.
Thank you Independent School
District.
For the purpose of thank you Mr
chair.
just really quick I want to add
that we are in full support of
this bill in our area
he went to Mexico and a lot of
the eastern Navajo agency
communities that we and beyond
access to libraries and
community centers a lot of our
students don't have access to
it.
City water of those are a
disaster in our area and so we
are really community have to
work together together to
address these issues and so
bonding with this definitely
help us to be able to work with
our local trying to be able to
give our children will access
the most basic necessities.
Believe that we have access to
that they will succeed in not
only by education but.
So.
Thank you anybody else in the
row.
All right so move up for a.
All right your time to shine now
welcome.
Thank you chairman and the
members of the committee my name
is guilty you know of the former
governor of the city public and
executive director for a
northern New Mexico discount so
and chairman of the all public
health system patient committee.
And.
Comment that it is active
cultural traditional ways.
The impact of the way that we
realize how important our
language and cultures are.
Because stopped us from doing
those some reason for concern.
And yesterday.
We want to have another meeting
of the awful cold governors of
the table with the governor's
again yes it to their commitment
to their people and their
children and their all of all
the needs of their
responsibility to their people.
And today we are here requesting
funding from the state the
previous deal with this bill
because it.
Time that like remedy.
Framework is time we start.
Doing or get into remedy done
for all the things that have not
been done in the past.
We are asking for these funds
because it is truly needed in
our communities to develop our
education program to where we
can teach our children the
language and culture and have
disabilities for that is for
that reason that is for the
house bill forty seven thank
you.
Thank you others in that rather
wish to speak.
Okay so we'll move up tomorrow
as we speak please send mental.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee objection off of the
to the governor sent their phone
we stand strong support the
previous mention.
Within the legal community
school well
as we talk about success the
libraries
that and that the city that.
To about two million government
jobs are successfully in the
school forty years ago we were
students in the library
invested.
It's truly a blessing we get
protection.
Right
in this way
but he down the side of the we
need your support to move for
children and I want to thank.
Well for those phones but great
thank you so much others in that
row that wish to speak please.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name self more
and I work for the latter
foundation as the vice president
of career pathways in advocacy
I'm also former lieutenant
governor CENIC our problem for
cabinet secretaries if there's
foundation is proud to stand in
support of this bill and thanks
Representative Lente governor
pickles and all the trouble at
that a role in developing this
bill but we know that Yazzie
Martinez the court decision
found that for status failed to
comply with Indian Education Act
then it is a function both of
the amount of funding but also
the way that we provided fund
and frankly this sort of short
term application process were
funds referred if not used and
they have to be done on a
reimbursable basis sets tribal
communities up for failure and
and we need a new mechanism that
actually matches the capacity
this is bill how tribal leaders
and their education programs so
it is time to to update the
method the method that we use as
a state to provide funding to
tribal communities for education
programs so we stand strong
support in order to do.
Thank you others in that row.
All right we'll move up for a.
Does a page speech please.
We might be worth having
apartments here we support the
CEO and I just want to reiterate
that to propose any support the
one point six thank.
Thank you so much.
Please.
Chairman members of the
committee verification speaking
on behalf the others and
verification very few women
if for all the reasons stated we
need to.
For this bill and urged
committee to settle in hope it
sailed through thank you very
much thank you any others in
that row that we speak I will
move up for a visit wish to
speak please.
One.
For more and I am the co
founders I think.
Education there there are so
many different from my comments
and the previous bill is
are in the public schools with
this system
And that elementary middle
school and from there you know
they teach are you the
linguistics addition from what I
can think Navajo she speaks Care
and so that's just the
We're all working in the call
the Mexican okay all kinds of
traditions and languages and to
be given the option to do that
in our.
Also in in this would be a great
opportunity and also.
Hi.
R. The New Mexico
Yes
I.
In order to.
I find that.
And right thanks part to the
proposed program has to be
tested to have high school they
wouldn't allow his Navajo
language to come up for one of
those bring this process.
Fifteen percent.
After the proposal thank thank
you others in this room.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee again my name
is mark.
Former governor from the public
to Kate as I said to welcome you
to our ancestral homeland to
secure.
today we stand here in favor of
bills one forty seven for all
the points that we made the
doctor will also
The off of the council
governor's house resolution to
support this and for hi will
we'll do a couple of things for
the tribe to much needed.
Capacity to enable school
districts and tribal education
departments to collaborate and
the answer.
This will result in greater
coordination and investing
students need to develop a
systematic plans and implement
plans.
Level of play as Indian
Education Act in education are.
Again I urge this committee to
unanimous passage thank you
thank you others in this row
please
thank you chairman the members
and former governor from public
that but also I always want to
support this bill also because
of the library and that library
next aspects of of also with
that is the the by legal suit I
think that's initiative that we
need to start going to move into
the sense that was commented on
that set sail but also
restoration and artifacts and
stuff so much our need that that
needs to be covered under that
thank you thank you others in
this row placed.
We're doing a government public
gonna thank you chairman
committee members again the
staff at the port to the LFC
committed to pass this.
the mention earlier.
Ation overall as we know that
you were here to discussion here
to debate we hear the action or
inaction to notice it's been our
our legacy what what our legacy
be going for today I I figured
all of us our legacy should be
to make these positive changes
make these actions reality so
that we can move so that next
year we will stand here and ask
but we will stand here and say
thank you and we will report
with the person or your The New.
List.
Make better those statistics but
the good work hard so that we
can state now we're can we build
on that and we're can we now
demonstrate that actions we took
together have now begun to
benefit and recognize you are
our progress again of education
it's going to be the wait the
pathways that we're going to use
of a catalyst to shape the lives
of our children.
Those children we carry
Representative not only the
native Barcroft the state you
know the this this sort of
act transcends which was
mentioned by the pandemic our
students are and are try to make
a joke schools and public
schools and charter schools
This is where the impact really
is going to show up for work
thank you we support this bill
thank you thank you anybody else
all right so we'll go to online
so the
the re orient part firstly to
governor okay we get it.
Good morning welcome.
First lieutenant governor you
with us.
All right welcome we can hear
you now.
First lieutenant governor or PO
we again good morning madam
chair and committee I just
wanted to let you know that okay
we get strongly supports house
bill one forty seven in the
direct supporting tribal would
be partners in activities help
support tribal departments have
always liaison between
leadership and tribal students
allows tribes to build tribal
capacity for collaborating with
schools.
Allows for equitable statutory
formula to distribute funding to
tribes rather than grant
application process and this
allows us the ability to to
carry over funds just like
school districts to win the
state formula funding to a lot
the longterm effect asking you
to address tribal education
needs thank you.
Thank you.
All right Melissa good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and
counsel for the US the
plaintiffs in the us Martinez
lawsuit the judge in the case
found that small short term
grants to tribes through the
Indian education fund are
unstable for developing the
capacity and programs that need
to be sustained a year after
year this bill would replace the
current scattershot funding
approach of the Indian Education
fun with consistent stable
distributions that incentivize
long term cooperation between
school districts tribes for
these reasons and many others
given here today we support
house bill one forty seven thank
you thank you.
Lydia good morning.
Horgan Mr chair and members of
the committee my name is Lydia
parking at I am state travel
policy fellow and research and
policy analyst New Mexico voices
for children forces for Children
stands in strong support of the
tribal remedy framework tribal
education on house bill one
forty seven providing stable and
consistent funding.
For tribal education will give
needs of students and tribal
communities the supports they
need to be successful we ask for
your support house bill one
forty seven thank you for your
time thank you just a.
Good morning just a few of two
minutes welcome.
Yet.
Mr chair chairman members of the
committee J. Joseph Hernandez
you should look at not the buses
tree action to try not to
dissimilar I am Richard lobbyist
for NM nativo I am also the vice
chair of the the Navajo Nation
head start policy council will
receive eighty four head start
centers on the Navajo Nation in
Utah Arizona and New Mexico.
And I I am a here's
it is support of house bill one
forty seven.
Because of the of benefits that
will will be made to our
youngest population in our
tribal communities and it's not
population that needs the most
investment right now
there's a lot of unmet needs it
in that area and this will
definitely help
the our our tribal communities
of of build up what what you
know that the prosperity that
that that's needed and and give
equity across the state a with
other school districts that have
the the the ability to to not
worry about whether or not the
heaters gonna be working in in
the facility whether or not
you know the the the the
conditions of the buses will be
able to pick up the students of
that as well as giving
educators.
The the the ability to to not
worry about the that the issues
of the question but be able to
focus in on education and
teaching our our our youngest
population thank you very much
Mr chairman.
Thank you perfect all right.
Good morning Loretta.
Good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee I the executive
director my name is aware that
you're here and I'm here to
represent transform education
Mexico again our coalition
stands in strong support of this
bill and for all the reasons
stated thank you for your time
thank you.
Right Tracy good morning Tracy.
The state.
Is
there.
The
thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to
opposition do we have any
opposition to house bill one
forty seven.
All right so no opposition all
right we'll come to committee I
have Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative chairman Monday
and governor.
Pecos for bringing this
legislation forward I just
totally wanna stand in agreement
doing away with reimbursable
grants very much needed having
carry over policies set to
continue this spending year to
year is very necessary and I
just want to say I also spoke as
land foundation director I would
meet with thirteen different
superintendents in thirteen
different school districts in my
region and they struggled they
struggle to implement this
legislation and a very fair way
as it as it stood before they
really struggled they didn't
have the connections this money
this legislation makes the money
go right where it should go and
I applaud you for this
legislation I just want to say
that thank you Mr chair right
thank you Representative for
about Correa.
Thank you Mr chair type to go
ahead and move it to pass right
so we have a due pass motion
second by Representative because
of a do you have any more
discussion.
All right so do we have
opposition to the do pass motion
on house bill one forty seven.
The.
Doesn't look like it so you have
a unanimous two passed house
bill one forty seven thank you
all thank you all for the
participation today.
We're doing we'll see you all
Monday morning eight thirty well
one thing members of thank you
Representative so members you
should have on your death right
the invitation to
to the pocket.
