Our I understand that that's
fine if you would call the roll
please.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative check bill.
Representative chair.
Representative Dow.
Here.
Representative is now here.
Representative Egolf are.
Representative main.
Your.
Representative.
Representative
Representative day.
Here.
Representative Madrid at.
Representative give my address.
Representative were Baca I at
all.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
I should be here but I.
Yes sorry.
Yeah and and Representative
district there here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garrett.
Chair.
Here we do have a quorum.
All right good morning everybody
I hope you all are well rested
and ready for the work ahead of
us
It's good to see you all so just
a reminder to our panelists
committee members and to the
audience about proceedings so we
have a good list of bills our
first hearing today so to make
sure that we respect the
public's time and our time is
panelists and everything going
on some have afternoon
committees this comments and
questions can be very direct at
committee members we want to
make sure everybody gets our
questions and and has their
questions answered also for
those of you that are here to
speak in favor of or in
opposition to bills just
remember please be brief in your
comments as well please do not
be repetitive and repeat what
others have said just reference
what somebody may have said but
you'll be given at maximum two
minutes to speak before we will
and your public testimony and
allow for others to speak okay
but we want to respect
everybody's time make sure we
get our comments and questions
answered but everybody has equal
time equal access to getting
those questions answered okay
also this is obviously our first
run at at our committee meeting
the as soon so a lot of us have
been doing a lot of work in
different ways to make sure that
the bills are up on their up
loaded into our new system that
they're posted in a timely
manner so I would ask certainly
for this first week is to extend
some grace there's been a lot of
work going on to get these bills
out we've had Sanchez asked for
their bills to be rolled over
that had been on the schedule
and then built to be moved
around all in this new system
okay said sits for a little bit
of grace while we get settled
into
the system so and then Linda if
you would please Representative
Madrid will need to link so if
you could resend that to him he
just texted me about it or one
of the members if you could do
it I would certainly appreciate
it what we start or proceedings
so we can get everybody in.
Any any questions before we get
started so as where usually ask
my students I think everything's
pretty clear are clear as mud.
Okay.
Cool what's good to see you all
will go ahead and get started so
I'm gonna hand things off we'll
start off with house bill twenty
five I think it's fairly
straightforward and then we'll
get to the rest of the bill I
should mention one other thing
I'm sorry is that will be
rolling over
House Bill trying to switch back
house bill fifty two for Friday
okay there's an amendment that
we're expecting on it so
Representative Figueroa if you
could please get that to Linda
forte here on Friday by five
o'clock today so that she can
send it out to everybody that's
one announcement that I do want
to make is please be cognisant
members and and please
disseminate this amongst your
caucus members as well all be
reaching out to members is that
please be cognizant of the staff
as well because the staff works
from eight to five so amendment
should be and at five o'clock by
the end of the day I know things
happen but it's difficult in the
time we're living in
to get information disseminated
because I'm sure we're all
experiencing an influx of emails
and sifting through on has
become increasingly more
difficult so its so please be
cognizant of that as well and
get things in early so I can be
disseminated amongst everybody
in in a proper amount of time
okay.
Representative the weather.
Yes if you make I have a
question house bill fifty two of
the amendment that's already
been submitted do we disregard
that moment amendment or do we
keep it.
And my understanding is is that
we keep it and there's a further
amendment coming okay thank you
okay.
And then just a reminder as well
about hands when it's raised I'm
gonna be lowering hand so don't
freak out please
I'm just doing it I'm keeping
track on my trusty note pad here
of the people listed to speak
and again if I forget forget you
please just remind me okay
also be cognisant of this online
format it's easy to start
talking over one another so
please keep the on that points
to a bare minimum and make sure
that I recognize you before
proceeding okay because it's
easy for all of us to start
chattering that over one
another.
So with that being said good
morning I hope you all are doing
well I'm going to hand things
off to our vice chair to conduct
proceedings I'll be presenting
house bill twenty five so madam
vice chair.
Thank you Mr chair
with no further ado.
X. excuse me is that
Representative Chatfield with
Rebecca tells.
Do you have a question
Representative Chatfield
yes Madam thank you can you have
them changed my name from check
to from Rebecca Dow to projects
that you.
Or I can just tell you had of
the Mr chairman I consent and he
can vote twice for me of I I I I
think that that was some of the
debate we had on the floor if I
remember correctly the fear of
doing that so so please refrain
from doing so.
Thank you
are you able to change his name
I know I'm not but I will talk
to our tech people on that.
Because I can't do that.
Thank you.
Representative Chatfield I will
make sure that I call on you
okay with no further ado art it
sure will present the
legislative education study
committee study of public and
post secondary education house
bill twenty five.
I'm sorry madam chair I was
changing Representative
Chatfield name and I think are
in the process of re I'm sorry I
is doing for us I'm.
Good morning everybody this is
house bill twenty five so this
is for the legislative education
study committee and the bill is
basically asking
Us to approve of for the
legislative education study
committee in the interim to
incorporate higher education
into the purview of what we
study as far as the legislative
education study committee I
think that currently in our
legislative system we have the
legislative finance committee
that has oversight over higher
education but I feel that we in
the education community with the
importance of higher education
Across our state in in our
society that we as educators can
be a helpful voice in the
educational endeavors in post
secondary education for for
students for faculty for for the
administrations and I think
that's something that is long
overdue I would just like to to
remind the committee that this
is a bill that's been proposed a
number of times in two thousand
fifteen Representative Dennis
Roch had it passed out of the
house unanimously on in two
thousand seventeen Senator
sapien had it passed out of the
Senate
so I think it's something that
certainly long overdue that we
is the education community
start being able to look into
matters of higher education
along side with on public
education during the in our so
with that madam chair all stand
for questions.
Thank you Mr chair we're going
to start with the attendees
first of all
I'm going to ask for people who
want to speak in favor of it to
indicate that now and then after
those in favor of it I will ask
for those in opposition so if
you are in favor of this and
would like to speak can you
raise your hand.
Mr chair.
This is in favor of an.
I do not see okay I'm gonna call
on Mister mark surveyed.
Okay hello good morning members
of the committee can someone
give me a thumbs up if you can
hear me because of course all
right right all.
I'm right then madam Mr chair
members the committee thank you
for let me speak today just real
quickly this is kind of weird
because this would be my twenty
fifth session that I would be
attending in person so supports
the not to be there seeing this
thank you for all the hard work
you do and so far and sacrifice
you're making out in Mexico I
just wanna make four point I'm
standing support it's not really
supporter against I just wanna
make some comments gems of the
position of the council
university president and
executive director for the
council University presents
refer to as the cop
and so whether without the bill
we just want to let that the
sponsor no and the committee
know that we are very
appreciative very thankful that
the council that the L. L. S. C.
what is reaching out to work
with and and help and support
higher education in New Mexico
and and really we want to build
on reimagining higher in Mexico
and building a higher education
culture in New Mexico thank you
for that with that said there's
just some things I want to point
out in terms of some concerns
with there's the word duplicate
that gets taken out we all know
that there's really there's no
more of the there's no director
the board of education of
finance doesn't really exist we
do have a higher at board of
advisory board that's
understaffed you within the
higher department and I have to
give credit to our interim
secretary seven Rodriguez she's
done an excellent job of really
building that board and doing a
lot of work within that point
that board does oversee does
have a lot of discussions and
does a lot of work when it comes
higher education in New Mexico
statewide with that in terms of
the concern with duplication
coordination is that it also
mentions the bill removing the
work duplicate and what that
concern is is that we don't want
to see duplication of efforts so
we either have the revised
report and then there's talk of
a legend there's a higher
according council that might be
a bill might be present at the
session so that's another entity
and then you have the work of
the LFC and the evaluation team
that evaluates higher education
that so there's a lot of work
done there and in regards.
So we just hope that there's
coordination and occupation of
efforts when it comes to this
piece of legislation secondly we
just like to point out that we
are concerned with that there
needs more support financial
support for the fire department
would like this group support.
To increase the budget support
higher department it comes to
working higher at and then
finally also would like to also
just point out the fact that
there's a things we like the LFC
to consider when it comes to
higher education.
We do not get any funding for
dual credit we get a little bit
for maybe two dollars credit our
in our in our dual credit in our
funding formula.
We do not and so we're roughly
eating about over ten million
dollars a year up to a credit
would it comes to higher
education.
I'm sorry your two minutes is up
we just made one last comment we
do what we what is the example
Representative let this bill
house bill eighty seven is a
great example of the work the
also you can do with us when it
comes to supporting Yazzie
Martinez support are at risk
students so that's that please
take those things into
consideration will continue to
work with the sponsor of the
bill thank you Mr chair that
number of that members of the
committee thank you thank you
very much and I want to remind
everybody we know that everybody
has very important information
to share but I will be muting
you it two minutes so try to be
very brief.
Mr Ricardo rail your next.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you all for all
the work that you all do and I
really appreciate the work
controller doing in public
education as well as working and
higher in the interest that you
all have and I do stand behind
the comments of Mr some major
adjustments made but I'm not
going to duplicate a lot of
those comments one of the other
items were there is oversight as
well as for example with the
state board of finance for
example the four year
institutions also have to work
with the state board of finance
students more degrees approved
and this is another requirement
so there several years that
would there were there are where
there is oversight well we do
would appreciate if we will be
able to avoid duplication of
most all of the areas where
there is oversight and in areas
out there that we have in areas
that we have to refer to as well
thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else who would like to
speak in favor supporting this
bill.
I.
Do not see anybody else okay we
will switch if you would like to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay I don't see anybody who
wishes to speak in opposition so
we will go to committee members
starting with Representative
doubt.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam chair at I just want
to say thank you to and chairman
emeritus for bringing this bill
I think it is a timely and that
I hear a lot of opportunity to
prevent duplication and the
streamlined systems I I think
there's opportunities to have a
good conversation about dual
enrollment career clusters just
transforming.
The way that we think about
higher ed and that transition
between high school and and
higher at I do I was wondering
though I'm do the LFC and their
staff to the are you do this
work there's not appropriation
do they have the capacity.
Madam chair and and
Representative Dow are you
asking about LFC and if L. S. C.
has the staff to do this did you
find that are LFC.
LFC LASD who are you talking.
Hello yes yes Sir thank you
chairman.
No no may I just want to get a
clear madam chair and and
Representative Dow
currently I mean LFC is allow
Ellie S. C. E. is allowed
according to the statute to
study
instances of higher education
that relate to the college of
education right so teacher
training things like that
however not higher education
writ large as far as staffing
levels we do have director
gradual here that can address
that and I think she addressed
it pretty well during the L. S.
C. hearing so director dental if
I if I may tend to defer to you
on that.
Morning Mr chair good morning
Representative Dow we right now
have two vacant analyst
positions and one of those we're
definitely planning on keeping
is a K. twelve analyst part of
the the you can see is the
second vacancy is because of
they can see.
Not vacancy savings special
session cuts that happened we're
having to hold that eight
analyst position vacant but I
think M. the deputy director and
I had a good conversation this
morning that the amount of work
wouldn't necessarily change for
L. S. C. so we would still have
the same number of committee
meetings the same number of
hours it does committee meetings
it would just be an added
subject so
there would be an intent to
start looking at that eight
analyst position over time and
get that funded again it
wouldn't take that much money
and turn that back into a higher
at analyst.
Thank you Mr chairman and Rachel
and what how are you using that
money how long is that position
been vacant and have you been
using the funds now.
Well so Mr chair representative
we've had a significant
reversion from FY twenty because
of the number of vacancies but
because of budget cuts were not
we're not able to fill in a
panelists position and so we for
the last year and a half or so
I've had it is vacant
we're not using the dollars for
other things.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
How do you have any more
questions.
Okay our next our panelists in
this order it'll be
Representative Chatfield
Representative Baldonado and the
Representative Roybal Caballero
and I just sent a text Christine
Trujillo cannot get in there
and if you can contact her.
Okay Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Dow got my
questions.
Okay thank you very much
Representative Representative
Baldonado.
Well I think director god's will
answered my question so thank
you madam chair I don't have any
further questions thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chair for this
Bill I remember we've been
supporting at throughout the
years I think it's really
important to madam chair and
members of the committee and and
this is a perfect example I
think that we we increasing the
pathways to higher ed is really
incredibly important especially
for those students madam chair
that choose to pursue those
pathways and then looking at the
importance of alias C. doing
this continual evaluation and
research is to also look at.
Madam chair what I believe is
the critical point and that is
what is working what's not
working how do we increase that.
And we need that to a process to
be in place I have the example
for the the dual
programs that we have now in
place and relating to to kind of
to come studies for example of
the ethnic studies programs that
are.
In place right now.
In coordination with the
Albuquerque public schools and
then with you amendment and it's
an incredible example of what is
working well and it is
increasing graduation rates for
those students and it's also
introducing them to the higher
ed on program and increasing
that enrollment aspect but we
don't hear very much about how
effective those programs aren't
we don't hear very much about
how we can institute them across
the state in a better
coordinated and collaborative
manner so madam chair this bill
is extremely important because
it gives on Ellie S. C. where I
think it appropriately belongs.
The opportunity to look at how
well these programs are
functioning in order to be able
to model them throughout the
state so that we can continue
those successful pathways that
we envision when we place these
programs in place and so I just
wanted to stand in support of
this again all of this bill in
again and given what director
gradual mention about the
staffing I think it's an
important point to note that we
don't have to create any new
positions or infrastructure it's
within what is currently
available to Ellie as C. so
madam chair and Mr Mr chair
representative thank you for
introducing this bill that that
thank you madam chair.
Are there any other members who
have questions.
Rebecca Dow Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman I guess.
Where does the higher education
department down the bill.
Is there any.
The higher education department
here that wants to make a
comment among the attendees.
Representative Dow there's
nobody.
attending who is indicated that
they want to make a statement
about it Matt madam chair there
is a hand Anderson John.
Okay.
Can you I'm not seeing that
that's all.
Can you.
Mr chair.
I see okay.
Anderson John yes.
Please yourself.
Yes.
Your unmuted we can hear you
oops all right so I just wanna
say Mr bush for.
So we cut that when we know that
one in the budget.
Okay any other.
Go ahead go ahead Mr chair.
So madam chair and
representative I haven't talked
to the higher education
department but certainly is this
bill makes its way through the
system I certainly will be able
to do that I mean I think part
of it too is is that we are the
legislative body tasked with
certain responsibilities and I
think that this is definitely
within our purview to be looking
into our our our system here so
with that thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman I don't have any
other questions okay thank you
is there a motion.
Yes.
Okay we would get past the
second.
Of.
Representative Roybal Caballero
has second.
is there anybody in opposition
to about me yes.
Representative Stapleton was
that you yes okay if we can have
a roll call vote Linda.
Excuse me I have I wasn't added
on mute myself fall start right
now Representative
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
I'll.
Yes.
Representative is that.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Gleim.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative.
Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo Representative Garrett
excuse me
Representative.
And that is our madam chair yes.
Representative chairman.
Chair acting chairman Garrett.
Yes.
Of fourteen to zero.
Okay Mister chairman you have a
do pass.
Thank you everybody great thank
you committee.
All right so.
We will go on to our next agenda
item
we will go on to Representative
Stapleton House Bill twenty
September twenty.
Thank you Mr medit and I'm sorry
before we begin Representative
do you have an expert that we
need to bring on yes yes I do Mr
chairman I have judge Tommy
Joel.
Okay okay.
This has.
Representative
I mean chair Romero.
Yes
The state Representative
Trujillo is in the attendee
list.
And she voted yes on your bill
but she's the tentative is that
is that okay can't log in she
has issue we're going to try and
move her in.
To the panelists can we are sure
I do not see her on the list
listed under Debbie sari ana.
She's what.
And the attendee list that she's
not on her name she's on to
somebody else because she's
under debates are now can we
move her.
I have so we'll all need to
rename her as well okay okay but
she did vote on your she said
she voted on year because we
would look at I have my it might
my roommate here go look for her
because she was saying she had a
hard time finding in but she's
been in there Mr chair can you
hear me we can yes
Representative thank you my
original computer is just really
acting up so I've been.
SB I mean Representative been
listening but I was not able to
do anything about it so thank
you for letting me participate
through hers.
Yes your.
Thank you representative I
assume by the committee is that
okay.
Okay.
We have a fifteen zero vote then
I'm your yes your bill.
Yes thank you and I did change
your name Representative to
accurately reflect.
However that the picture is
still of Representative Sarnia.
Okay thank you so house bill
twenty seven Representative
Stapleton.
Mr Jewell welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I bring before you
House Bill twenty seven.
The bill creates the misdemeanor
of hazing and provides penalties
for a person who knowingly
commit stays in for the purpose
of the students induction
initiation admission into.
I'll make sense of membership in
a student organization student
body all private athletic club
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this bill is sponsored
by myself and Representative
nine.
And it's a bill that we passed
out of the house prior years.
A couple of years ago actually.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee a person commits an
act of hazing.
But private post secondary
educational institution by
requiring another person to
perform an act all create the
situation that recklessly or
intentionally endangers the
mental physical health of
another current full prospective
students to be in a group
associated with that
institution.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee a parcel Committee
hazing is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be
sentenced to the provisions of
section thirty one dash nineteen
dash one NMSA nineteen seventy
eight.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee does not include
coaching training condition and
physical education customary
athletic events all school
section section the band.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
Activities fall into three major
categories and.
City to inflict mental and
physical disabilities target and
the level one differential
hazing example Mr chairman
depriving privileges requiring
new members to perform the
duties not require existing
members who is in jail on
meeting less information
socially isolating new members.
Last Monday the Mr chairman
verbal abuse trucks so implied
tracks sleep deprivation stumps
would Carrillo humiliating acts
expected new members to do
chores personal favors for
existing members violent hazing
Mr chairman the use of alcohol
or drugs.
Public nudity expected illegal
activity duction kidnapping
bonded Brandon water
intoxication Mr chairman and
members of the committee there
has been at least one university
hazing deaths each year from
nineteen sixty nine to two
thousand seventeen and
specifically last year in our
own state.
Mexico state with
what I'm gonna.
What index between two thousand
seven and twenty seventeen alone
Mr chairman what is the biggest
cause of death more than half of
college students involved in
Klopp's teams at all.
Experience in and nearly half of
the students experience in.
Coming to college.
Mr chair forty four states.
Mr chair with that in mind I
have with me as my.
Any additional information I'm
questions.
Representative judged on the
jewel.
Judge Joe please welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton I I
think because she covered of the
bill very well and the
activities that need to be
prescribed by the criminal law
and so Mr chairman I'm not at
additional comments to
Representative Stapleton's but
stand for questions.
Great thank you judge cool so
we'll go to our audience so do
we have anybody in our audience
that stands in opposition to
house bill twenty seven if so
please indicate by raising your
hand if you wish to speak you'll
be given an.
At maximum two minutes but
please keep your.
Comments brief so opposition.
Is is is.
Thank you Mr Fernando Trujillo
please you have two minutes.
Fernando Trujillo.
Oh sorry I was on I was on New.
Mannings that number through
your hair and my only concern is
that for the control of the
penalize ation is never that I'm
seeing.
Local.
That that's why I will pose
that.
Well great thank you so much for
your testimony.
Do we have anybody else in the
attendees list that wishes to
speak in opposition.
All right so we'll go to support
is there anybody in support of
house bill twenty seven that
wishes to speak.
So again if I mispronounce any
of your names I'm sorry in
advance please just repeat it
for me and I'll do better.
All right.
No are you there you're with us
please.
Two minutes please.
I just want to say I'm Kernan
student and I essentials for
this bill heating is common
knowledge on campus that will
serve as a work of it of the
sexual assault and abuse that
goes on but within the
detergents authorities and
historically they've avoided
almost any of litigation for the
prosecution and so I hope this
goes in the way of finally
addressing those issues and I
would say that I hope that it
doesn't it take away from the
complex because sometimes they
go beyond that and and or just
plain sexual assault or
but I don't hate crime incidents
against on a black woman in
all the Telemeds are compliant
in about two thousand one I
believe is the variety of
incidents UNM happened yearly
like Representative consent and
this is absolutely necessary for
just keeping people accountable
in UNM and colleges across the
state thank you.
Great thank you so much.
Next we'll go to Sonya Smith.
Please you're allowed to speak
you have up to two minutes well
great thank you very much.
Mr chair so this might was one
of my expert witnesses.
But I haven't seen on the list
so that's why and
mention.
Okay so should be with you then
Representative Stapleton for any
questions yes you can you can
speak as well she needs to be
able to.
Okay okay
Mr.
Please okay.
All right hi good morning my
name is Sonya Smith and in
addition to then the secretary
designate for the department of
Veterans Services I am also a
member of delta sigma theta
sorority incorporated and I have
had the privilege of speaking to
this committee before regarding
the hazing bill and so hopefully
we're able to get some movement
on this as a Representative
Representative Stapleton shared.
New Mexico is one of six states
that does does not have a bill
in this regard and and as a
member of a sorority that has
zero tolerance for hazing I
stand in full support of this
bill also as a member of the
divine line which is the
organization of all the blacks
Ortiz and fraternities here
Representative in New Mexico I
would be adequate to add and I'm
sure judge Joel will support me
in this and saying that we all
stand in support of this because
we have zero hazing policies
within our individual
organizations.
It is important that we
understand the difference
between hazing and bullying
because I know that that has
been brought up before hazing is
something that is typically done
because you're trying to gain
admission into an organization
building is something totally
separate and more individualized
so I'm hoping that we're able to
convey that clearly here today
and I understand that this is
something that needs to take
place
more urgently because it's not
just on college campuses ladies
and gentlemen it is happening in
the middle school's marching
bands and children are dying as
a result of this so I do hope
that we're able to have a
conversation in that regard
thank you Matt thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you madam secretary
welcome.
All right so go back to the
attendees list is there anybody
else that wishes to speak in
favor of house bill twenty
seven.
All right see none will come to
committee so first on my list as
Representative Eli please
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr chair
on my question has to do with.
really who is defined as a
perpetrator in the statute I
noticed that
the text itself with limited to
of one student versus another
student.
And I assume that probably
includes most of the scenarios
but my question is why limit it
to that scenario why not allow
for the prosecution of maybe a
non student that commits an act
of hazing on existing students.
Mr chairman Representative Lane.
We.
In this legislation.
For the students against another
student and your question is one
that somebody else is that
somebody else would be out
because it said that is involved
in admission initiation into a
student organization opportunity
also right Yaghan ideation all
of private athletic club so it's
those individuals that are
actually involved in the
participation.
Well All.
Surely.
In this in the induction and
committing the hazing Act.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Stapleton so I
guess what I'm envisioning is
maybe scenario work a parent
of a booster club sponsor
somebody else may be involved.
and so there might be some
potential participants that
could potentially escape
prosecution under this bill
because they they are
technically a student that was
that was my only thought.
for for you to consider in terms
of actual language it says L.
you know and I do actually help
coach varsity baseball at the
high school level have for a
number of years.
And I can tell you that that
this issue is something that
were well aware of that we take
seriously
thanks our staff and I do know
it can be a problem my other
question has to do with the the
concept of.
Endangering mentally.
and so Mr chair my question
would be is this term in danger
I notice is not defined in this
particular bill are there other
criminal statutes for the
wording danger is to provide so
that it creates a criminal
standard of that that could be
shown or proven.
Mr chairman I would let my
expert witness judge to respond.
Please judge.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Stapleton
Representative Eli I'm sure that
there are I have certainly not
researched.
The definition and other
statutes
but I I did want to briefly
hearken back to to your comments
about involving parents I know
that the Representative
Stapleton has narrowly table of
this bill I think there had been
an expression of of a concern
about over reaching and I know
that there had been some
concern particularly about the
high school and in a minute
school students being placed in
in the school to prison pipeline
and so this bill is is narrowly
prescribed of.
To college students and and I
think that there are other
laws that that might reach
parents
indeed the there there may be a
delinquent offense under the
children's code that might reach
the behavior of other the high
school or middle school students
as well but this this bill is
aimed at the college students
well I I don't know with any
specificity about a definition
of endangerment but but I'm sure
that there are ample
definitions and in other
criminal loss.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that Representative in and your
honor.
so and I I just raised the
question because typically in
the criminal contests we're
billing with an intent to either
of cost physical harm
or
Nearing physical harm and so I
just wonder about this concept
of any danger in the mental
health.
it seems like a not on a well
defined standard
and I do I have done cost your
work in the in the past and I'm
not familiar with the standard
and other criminal statutes it
is a I think it is a poor
concept but in terms of being a
criminal standard I'm not aware
of it so thank you Mr I have no
further questions.
Right thank you Representative
Lane next some A. list
Representative is L. please.
Thank you.
Representative Eli do they have
ask one of my question
Representative Representative
I'm sorry to interrupt you
however your microphone in your
voice is very very well I think
this is probably the first time
you've heard that
but we can hear you it's very
faint or if you need me to I if
you would please of I've got my
microphone up all the way.
Going on if you maybe have your
microphone a little bit closer
to your mouth that might assist
thanks.
Okay let's try this that better.
Slightly but we can turn we can
turn up our volume as well
members are encouraged you also
you have the volume button you
can adjust thank you thank you
Representative give the let's
give this a try I will talk
right directly into this right
here of Representative Eli did
ask one of my questions but I my
question for Representative
Stapleton and her expert witness
I have seen it on several of the
analysis of.
Rep pertaining to this bill this
is a hazing bill.
What will the schools be
required to do if there is an
offsite re treat or I can't may
be a training camp for
basketball or volleyball or
whatever the case may be will
the schools be risk at.
Have to take steps as far as
those venues go.
Representative is that a low
I might expert witness Sonya
Smith is there of the judge is
anyone could answer that
question.
Representative Stapleton I don't
believe that this bill is
targeted to the behavior of the
institution but the behavior of
the student involved in the
hazing at and so up I suspect
that of educational institutions
and and staffs have
responsibility of of reporting
up with in the institution is it
this does not require that they
report as a crime but certainly
that might be part of the policy
of the institution in which the
hazing occurs.
Mr chairman as a representative
and Mr Jewell thank you very
much for that I guess the
concern there those whenever I
keep seeing it and each one of
these additional analysis there
it does raise.
Eyebrows in my opinion of
because there are lots of
offsite camps that these go on
there are lots of.
Aviance that do go on where
they're not on campus so there
therefore I do have concerns
about that but I.
As far as any of the rest of it
I I don't see a problem with it
since Representative Eli had my
other question answered Mr chair
representative thank you very
much.
Right thank you Representative
is out next on my list is our
vice chair representative Gary
please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Stapleton my
question pertains to the
definition of who this applies
to it says
and let me just read it directly
it says that.
on page one section one AA
hazing consists of a person who
is a student of a public or
private a post secondary
educational institution taking
these actions
against another current or
prospective student of the
educational institution so.
This
I interpreted is that it's
students or potential students
in these organizations at the
same institution however some of
the definition of the situations
might involve students from
another institution with this
bill apply
for instance there's a private
student club or even a sorority
or fraternity where someone from
that organization from another
campus is the one guilty of the
state would still apply.
Joel.
Thank you Representative.
What my answer would be yes.
Representative of I.
I think that there's probably
some interpretation of required
to reach that answer but I don't
think that this legislation
limits of those the students in
in that paragraph to being in
the same institution if the
activity is engaged for the same
parts purpose I do induction
into a club or other activity or
organization of the post
secondary institutions so yes.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative and judge to
all.
All right thank you
representative next on the list
Representative Chatfield and if
we can remind everybody please
go through the chair for our
conversation.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
I'm you know I think this is a
good bill at I am totally
opposed hazing in all of its
forms but I think so much of
what's what you're dealing with
is subjective it's a you know I
know that if you go to the
military institute of the first
year you're a rat and you have
to walk straight lines turn
square corners you have to stand
at the table feet in any student
that has seniority over you can
drop you for ten push ups
for any reason and and that is
stuff to teach discipline and
respect for authority and that's
a that's a policy of the school
and also you know I just I
joined a little globally once
upon a time and I had to stand
in saying in trouble whole
groups of people you know who
was that mentally dramatic to
media
it is so I think it's subjective
I think that it's a it's a great
idea but I'm not sure who gets
to decide what is.
Mentally troublesome to someone
the the extra someone would like
to speak to that war.
I would love that.
Mr chair and representative
Chatfield
I I understand what you said in
about the subjective nis well
also looking at depravation four
Krillin humiliating acts and
violent acts and right because
of them to do alcohol on drugs
all all of the action and
kidnapping those are mainly this
type of things that we're
looking at that would be
regarded as as as criminal acts
all all COVID misdemeanor
knowingly that in for example
dropping in doing that that that
is set up so whatever in
exercise that is normally
something that would have been
doing it right I'm so that is
not a criminal act all act of
humiliation.
Mr chair my my thought is maybe
those things of that that we're
talking about are already
illegal all there already a
crime.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative doubt please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Representative Stapleton for the
bill and the heart of the bill
and the intent of the bill I
understand and support and on
the first page where it talks
about any person who is creating
an action or situation that
recklessly or intentionally
endangers the mental or physical
health of another student or
prospective student does that
student have to feel that they
were subjected to something that
endangers the mentally or
physically or could have third
party feel that it it it can who
gets to define if so if I
willfully choose to stand up and
and do a silly thing and I have
time at a at a game and I choose
to do it because it did not
endanger my mental or physical
health but in observer felt that
it did and it was an appropriate
could that observer decide that
I had I have participated in the
active hazing that hazing had
occurred.
my expert witness judge Joel
please.
Thank you Representative
Stapleton Representative Dow I
think a lot of this as with
other.
Grinds plays out in the
ultimately in the point setting
we're we're someone is making an
argument I think the initially
of a prosecutor might look at
this or a police officer might
look at it and make a charge but
but let's remember with any
crime there is the necessity of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt
and so some of those things that
you're talking about may
mitigate the proof of guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt and
and certainly someone
objectively my my the state will
that the is a can to hazing and
and that might promote their
being proved beyond a reasonable
doubt so it is much as a lot of
the determination is subjective
a lot of this can ultimately
play out in the court said.
Thank you and Mr chair and thank
you Representative Stapleton and
Mr jewel and I think I think
that's what you're hearing from
the chap building what I think I
was hearing from Ryan is that
it's a crime it's already a
crime and it let's use the
example of kidnapping someone
kidnapped taken to an
undisclosed location and then
released and they take off their
mask and their quarter mile from
the school or whatever
kidnapping is a felony but in
this case as someone said it was
hazing this would be a
misdemeanor
or if I'm an outgoing person and
I like being the center of
attention it wouldn't cause me
any mental distress to do
something that someone who's shy
would consider would cause
anxiety and so I I am also
concerned about the subjective
nis of this but also I just
knowing as a parent and rolling
my children in schools including
college that all of these are in
rules and policy and procedure
and so if it's already a crime
and these things are already
being addressed through quick
can argue criminal charge a
sexual harassment or somebody's
hazing accident most egregious
I'm thinking what's on that
involve brooms those are
criminal charges and what would
additional log do that isn't
already done by current current
law crimes and misdemeanors and
that isn't already covered by
the school's policies and
procedures.
Representative Stapleton I don't
know if you want me to answer
that director yes please yes Sir
yes please so it certainly
Representative Dow beyond
prescribed the angel if I if I
may please please make sure you
go through the chair your
discuss our leads that's how we
do personalize the conversation.
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Representative Dow I I think
beyond prescribing the behavior
itself it's since the signal
that that so not society does
not condone the activity and and
this specifically regards Hazen
certain certainly society has
made that determination with
respect other crimes that you
mention of kidnapping as an
example but but this reaches of
a very.
Insidious conduct that that is
problematic of that.
New Mexico is one of six states
that has not made the statement
up up up condemning and and so
as Representative Stapleton has
mentioned there have
consistently.
Been yes the activities tend to
graduate if if they are not
prescribed and and so that would
be the answer that I would offer
you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Stapleton and I am sorry at
judge Joel I did not I to call
you by your wrong surname but I
guess you're asking for a
statement to condemn but in New
Mexico we have criminalized
these behaviors I think the fact
that we criminalize them is a
statement in itself I don't know
necessarily I'm.
Why that's not sufficient but
but also on page two in our
lines three through eight I'm
just gonna re direct the
question I think was asked
before but why is why is why
does not apply to coaching
training conditioning additional
education customary athletic
events or school sanctioned
events I'm I mean he we see
examples on the news of it where
what what what I think are
criminal acts that could be
defined as hazing are happening
under these authorized
Education Act you know what why
is excluded from the bill.
I'm Sonia.
Certainly Mr chair
representative Stapleton
Representative Dow again I think
this bill was narrowly
prescribed to the to the
behavior that occurs in the
context of sledging in a
fraternity or sorority or other
clubs were activity and it's
directed at the students rather
than the coach's as you
mentioned there are certainly
other laws that might apply to
coaches or mentors or parents
but but that is not the intent
of this bill one and so I I
don't think we can
say that those activities are
are not covered elsewhere but
this bill is of.
Narrowly tailored to reach the
activity of of what we used to
call pledging of which got out
of control and and created I
think case and and and so the
the conduct.
This reached in this bill is
that of the student.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Stapleton and judge Joel if we
do not pass this bill is the
conduct of the students still a
criminal act.
The conduct described in this
bill still a criminal act and
still able to be prosecuted
through the courts.
You.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Dow I think it
depends on on the the behavior
of the week excuse me we've
we've talked about things that
are other crimes there are
certainly activity in this bill
that otherwise might not be a
crime as I mentioned this is
narrowly tailored to that
context of of of what we would
call a pledging activity and so
I can't tell you in every
instance that activity that is
prescribed in this bill is
covered in other crimes.
Certainly when it reaches the
level of violence there they are
crimes like battery of their
there are other crimes that you
mentioned like kidnapping of but
I can't tell you in in every
instance that the conduct of
that is prescribed in the hazing
of Bill would be reached by
other crimes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton
Representative Stapleton could
you give one example of
something that would become
criminalized if we pass this
that currently isn't just so I
can get a context of what we're
accomplishing here.
Mr chair and Representative Dow.
I'm committed.
In.
In a fraternity or sorority.
That that
relates to consider this part of
this bill W. Hazen bail to be.
Normally across this country was
a happening in
in different states and
different universities and
different organizations that
the students themselves I'm not
familiar that it's considered a
crime what should take place
should.
For example if you thanks.
In.
Mr chairman
That.
Still another student so we can
not given them full.
those individuals within that
organization well within that
Senator idea fraternity I think
that's not a crime but we are
New Mexico currently has isn't
in place they did that it is
considered a crime.
Thank thank you Mr chairman I.
Thank you I'm I don't have more
questions.
Thank you representative
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Stapleton for
bringing this bill
You know I remember a few years
ago we had done a long
conversation about and and
eventually passed a bill that
would prohibit people from
texting while driving and when
that bill was running through
that through the system I called
one of my state police friend
state police officer friends and
ask them can you issue a
citation to an individual that's
texting while driving he said
sure of course we can it's
careless driving and I felt like
at that point that we were you
know we were making now.
This this long process of of of
another.
A punishable crime in the in the
statute to.
To just sort of make a statement
I think that's that's kind of
what I hear today about this
bill on you know we had an
incident a few years ago here in
Valencia County
of the high school in high
school for the was a hazing
incident and there was there was
consequences there was it was a
crime there and and it was
prosecuted people that trouble
for it and you know still like
we we might be better off in
this scenario passing a bill it
just mandates universities and
high schools I'm sure every
every school in our organization
RT has a policy on hazing but
just mandate them to have a
policy on hazing make sure that
their student bodies know that
this is not acceptable to to to
do to each other you know I I
feel like we're we were forty
minutes in fifty minutes into
this bill we we have a bunch of
other you know really great
things to talk about today in
you know I it is I just feel
like we're we're we're sort of
repeating with RT's existing so
I really don't have any question
Mr chairman Senate make sure
that you know everybody says
perspective and I'm feeling
because I intend to vote no and
and and don't disagree that
hazing the bad thing but I don't
feel like we need to be on you
know how to find more things in
statute that that punish people
for
things are quite.
Completely explicitly clear like
the the mental peace that the
Representative lane brought to
our attention so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Stapleton.
Thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward once again and I
fully supported and I I do so
because of this and I stated
previously as well I've been on
campus many of you know that I'm
a student I came into being a
student to complete my.
Graduate work all about.
How long ago because it's been
so long now when I started and
I'm still trying to complete my
doctorate and so I've been
involved Mr chair representative
and the number of levels of
student organizations I ran for
one of the graduate students
Association president I was very
active on the coordinating
student committee on the project
for students of color let us I'm
involved in a number of student
organizations all as a student
and I will tell you that even
though there are policies within
the institution Mr chair and
even though the students go
through the orientation and
receive all of this information
on during their orientation they
do not take it seriously and I
think it's really important I
can attest to that because I see
in when we could not not this
last year obviously but I do sit
in the libraries and I do sit in
the student union building and I
engage with students I listen to
what they're saying I hear the
conversations that are going on
around me and students do not
take what we have S. policies
seriously and I think that there
have been circumstances that
perhaps have gone unreported
perhaps go unreported because of
the fact that
there's not a sense of security
although the institutions Mr
chair are doing everything on
their part to ensure that these
types of actions are preventable
or prevented and that our
students have a safe place to
report unless they know it's it
is human
I guess it's human nature I'm
not quite sure what it is but
unless they know that there are
consequences to their actions
that are beyond violating
university policy I think that
that that has to be a strong
message because I will tell you
that they take these kinds of
actions amongst themselves very
blacks they're not serious I am
not one to encourage punitive
consequences of.
Any kind I'm not one to promote
criminalization on any front
however I don't see that this
bill does any of those things
but other than sends a strong
message that you will be facing
stronger consequences if you
continue to do these
unlawful practices engaging
these unlawful and harmful
practices above all so Mr chair
I really don't have a question I
just want to support it having
been on in in give testimony to
what my experiences have been at
that level and I appreciate
Representative for bringing this
forward thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative
Representative let up please.
Thank you Mr chair up thank you
for bringing this bill Madam
floor leader I I think this is a
really important bill one I
would like to ask you though Mr
chair is
You know what what was the
reason what was the impetus
behind creating this bill you
know we we've part we've talked
in in abstracts and what is and
I know Representative Baldonado
mentioned a certain case but I
wanted to ask you madam madam
for leader what was the reason
behind this bill.
This.
Representative Lotta
basically
like
Sonya Smith deputy secretary
secretary of Veterans said.
fraternities and organizations
across this country of which I
am a member of the by line item
which has of the pledging of
individuals within them to
become part of fraternal orders
all become part of some righties
and organizations and and I'm
not familiar with the fact that
not all that bit some things
might be considered wrong to do
but they don't know they're not
aware most students are not
aware that there is a
consequence all
and humiliating stunts then we
of deprivation of food that is a
consequence.
Reading in these organization
and I'm pledging in these
organization but they're not
aware that some of the things
they might be doing in
isolating a new member locking
them up in a closet full three
four days they're not aware that
there might be a consequence if
something happens to that person
they think it's just a matter of
being in the fraternity and
being pledging to be a member
but if we have a Hazen bill in
place and we have that there
will not be on that we already
know that laws exist but they
will become aware all there is a
consequence if certain things
happen to students while they're
committing As an axe.
Thank you for that the Madam
floor leader in thank you Mr
chair.
Great thank you so no further
questions
I'm open to a motion.
I move passage of house bill
twenty seven.
So we have in past motion from
Representative Roybal Caballero
was at a second Representative
Garrett yes.
Great so madam secretary if you
would call a call the roll on
the two passed motion for house
bill twenty seven.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow no.
Representative Dow.
Representative these L..
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Gleim.
No one I would like to explain
my will please.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative provoca yellow
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Garrett.
Yes.
Chair.
Yes.
With the vote of ten to four it
passed this.
So you have a do pass on house
bill twenty seven Representative
Lane briefly to explain is
locally.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know anyone that is in favor of
hazing it's a real issue and
I've impacted support this bill
I do think we need to tighten up
this concept of and mental
endangerment thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you representative
line so we'll move on to house
bill twenty nine so
Representative Stapleton do you
have
Yes that you wish to bring on
board FOR for House Bill twenty
yes I do Mr chairman I have
Alexandria Taylor.
Million the walkie and age of
Brooks okay if you would please
do it one by one as I do some
I'm I'm having to juggle.
So if you give me the first name
please I'm sorry I'm Alexandria
Taylor.
All right Alexandria Taylor
moved to panelists.
You need the other one Mr
chairman yes please eight.
Well.
All the second one is million
the walking.
Okay.
Having a hard time finding my
Leah if you can hear me can you
raise your hand please in the
participants listed that I can
add you.
He.
All right thank you million it's
awesome.
Anybody else.
This as a major.
Asia Burks's here I was on this
here welcome okay now two
million so welcome welcome you
all thank you million for easier
and that's awesome I I would
like to say before you get
started Representative if I may
on one thing because I am
juggling that tech for our
committee is that members of the
of the attendees list that will
wish to speak I will be calling
people so long as they provide
their first and last name please
so please provide your first and
last name I don't want to have
an incident like we almost had
with the the first presentation
so it's it's difficult for me to
judge they could the committee
and and we're also going to I'm
gonna be discussing organization
of the lay out of committee
because me running tech I need
to be able to see one panel on
this soon so that I can mute
people if there are any
disturbances so I'm fine with
doing that so long as I can see
twenty five people so we're
gonna be discussing that
for the next meeting because
it's difficult for me to have
multiple pages of people and
chocolate I'm used to Google
classroom as a teacher and I can
see up to almost a hundred
students but I can only see
twenty five on zoom so we're
gonna have to do something about
that but I think we have in
excess of people on the panel
itself I would like to keep it
to legislators and and experts
and and and Ellie S. C.
representative for the bills but
sorry about that it's a little
clean up Mr chairman recalled
after.
Mr chair recall that incident
occurred when you asked school
favor all against that was from
the attendees list that that is.
For sure for sure and and
Representative part of what I'm
saying is that if I have one
page of people on my way out
it's easy for me to see all in
manage our committee and the
attendees that are here to speak
so if any if we do have an
incident I am able to to rectify
it in a timely manner like I was
able to catch that person but if
we have multiple pages of people
I'm on my way out it makes my
job that much harder to do would
manage the committee and juggle
all these things so
Changes will be forthcoming but
again on the attendees list I
will only be calling on people
that have their first and last
name listed for identification
purposes okay so I appreciate it
but thank you Madam leader and
if you would please house bill
twenty nine welcome you thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
members of the committee and I
bring before you house bill
twenty nine that prohibits
schools to impose discipline all
allow discrimination or
desperate treatment against a
student based on the students
race all culture well because of
the students use of protective
here styles all cultural dresses
and Mr chairman the bill amends
school discipline policies by
requiring local school boards to
prevent any discipline that
reflects the students culture
well here's side house bill
twenty nine the fines yes size
and culturally addresses that
are traditionally associated
with race on a use as part of an
individual personal cultural
believe Mr chairman and members
of the committee often referred
to as the crown.
Create a respectful and open
world for natural here the bill
Mr chairman and members of the
committee intends to address the
treatment of students in terms
of discipline of discrimination
based on their hair many
students from a variety of
cultures and races hi this is a
new is protected here this is
as an expression of their
identity Mr chairman and members
of the committee in the house
bill twenty nine the term
culturally.
This includes.
Some of the dresses that are
expression of cultural believe
and protective hairstyles it
includes the braids the locks
the twist that Lloyds of curls.
Rules will not.
Because we wind so head wraps
the time race as you.
Twenty nine with flex traits
that are historically associated
with race that includes a
hairstyle they linked up here
protective yes all cultural
dresses.
Members of the committee
research has found that in many
schools policies exists that
black hair styles and students
can be disciplined we'll have
here styles that are not
accepted by these policies in
some schools Mr chairman.
Yes I was also subjected to
these policies.
Natural here Mr chair is defined
as a here that has not been
chemically.
To change its kinky curly I'll
call you state that includes
many traditional black yes time.
Natural here often results in
the use of chemicals and
procedures that are unhealthy Mr
chairman and members of the
committee house bill twenty nine
insurance that students in
public schools including charter
schools are treated.
No not subjected to policies and
procedures that discriminate
them based on the students race
ethnicity Mr chairman I some
questions on my and I have some
expert witness but I also have
an amendment.
So where your experts be here to
help out with with any
questions.
Yes Mister chairman I gave you
their names just a few minutes
ago.
Great you also might well they.
Will they be offering their
testimony as well yes.
All right so do you have anybody
in mind to go first I I leave it
up.
Alexander Alexander welcome
please thank you good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
it's our sponsor madam majority
floor leader my name is
Alexandria Taylor I'm the deck
deputy director at the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and a member of
the New Mexico Black central
organizing committee that has
been working with our champion
Sanchez the past the crown Act
in New Mexico I am the daughter
of New Mexico born and raised in
Alamogordo and I'm now raising
my son here that makes five
generations of my family that
have been living and thriving in
New Mexico and the crown Act at
which as as the majority floor
leader shared stands for
creating a respectful and open
world for natural hair is not
only sound policy for our state
legislature to pass it's also
very personal for me as a black
New Mexican I have personally
faced discrimination based on my
hair the crown Act was created
in twenty nineteen by dug in the
crown coalition to ensure
protection against
discrimination based on race
based hair styles in reference
to the beautiful diversity of
our state we have also included
expansions to that definition to
include cultural headdresses and
length of hair seven states and
a few local jurisdictions have
passed the crown accents twenty
nineteen and six since last
summer we have been organizing
to ensure New Mexico becomes the
eighth state to pass the crown
Act the efforts in New Mexico
were started by a senior at
Albuquerque high school
Augustine Lee on signs who
reached out to his state
sentenced Senator after having
witnessed the impact of respect
based here discrimination
towards his peers these efforts
also led to the unanimous
passage of the crown Act
ordinance in the city of out
Albuquerque which is sponsored
by city city councilor lance and
earlier this month house bill
twenty nine.
I will do several things it will
add much needed protections for
young people in school and
through our central organizing
committee we have collected
stories from young people about
their experiences right here in
our our New Mexico schools the
discrimination macro and micro
aggressions they face because of
their hair are not things for us
to brush off these forms of
racism creep into our well being
our self esteem and they keep
young people out of school and
hinder their opportunities
whether over or not the
consequences to young people are
real and impact is lasting when
my son was ten at the time was
ten he wanted to lock is here
and I required him to write a
three page research paper on
hair discrimination and to learn
about all of the cases of young
black people being forced to cut
their locks by people in
positions of authority and I ask
if you have ever had to have
make such considerations for how
you wear your own here or how
your children wear their hair he
should not have had to do that
but he did.
In a report titled here politics
how discrimination against black
here in schools impacts black
lives they wrote it goes beyond
hair when across the country
school policies use the same
language and reasoning to ban
black hairstyles are grounds for
discipline or removal from
school entirely I value the
young people in my life and I
honor our use leadership and
their lived experiences and I
believe we have an obligation to
do everything we can to ensure
they are protected this bill
will also provide much needed
protections in the workplace in
a research study by does in the
dry collective found what many
of us have already known through
our lived experience black women
are one point five times more
likely to this be sent home from
the workplace because of their
hair black women's hair is three
point four times more likely to
be perceived as unprofessional
and black women are thirty
percent more likely to be made
aware of a formal workplace
appearance policy compared to
their non black counterparts
this impacts are over will all
are over a rural well being and
diminishes our job opportunities
it is time for us to take a
stand against race based here
discrimination in New Mexico and
I look forward to working with
you to pass the crown Act the
session thank you very much.
Thank you Sir Representative
Stapleton who would you like to
speak with
million please Mr chairman
Malina please welcome.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Melina Luarkie I am the co
founder for indigenous women
rising and I support this bill
because I'm a black mobile woman
I'm not black or pueblo and
Group One to look in a
reservation I'm as a child I was
constantly teased and
disrespected because I look
different the teasing wasn't
limited to just fellow
classmates but to their parents
and school faculty as well.
As I straightened my hair when I
was ten years old up until I was
about twenty
I'm I would buy extensions
straight hair extensions just to
blend in with everybody else
that I grew up with everybody
have bone straight hair and I
was the complete opposite I had
huge beautiful curls but I was
always discouraged and wearing
them natural.
Whether we are in school or at
work we deserve to participate
without wondering if will be
discriminated against for our
hairstyles in twenty eighteen
according to the bureau of labor
statistics fifty three percent
of the black labor force or
black women we're keeping this
economy going in twenty eighteen
our own state we made national
news for a teacher who cut and
need to students here.
As a black in Pueblo woman I
understand the power and the
divinity our hair holds for so
long it's been disrespected and
taken from us it's time we
received the respect we deserve.
Most black people have here that
requires most more care in being
seen as irresponsible we're
incapable because of how are
here has roots in racism I urge
you all to support this bill.
Thank you.
Great thank you Asia please good
morning what.
Mr chair members of the
committee greetings and good
morning my name is Asia bricks
and I'm the president of the New
Mexico Black lawyers Association
thank you for allowing me to
speak to you about house bill
twenty nine today.
So why are we having this
conversation is hair
discrimination really that big
of an issue yes it is African
American women are twice as
likely to experience social
pressure at work to straighten
their hair compared to white
women and black women were fifty
percent more likely to report
being sent home no of a black
woman who was sent home from the
workplace because of their hair
these are statistics gathered by
does in their research study
much of this discrimination that
we see is rooted in history it's
not surprising that for more
than forty years there have been
court cases about this issue one
of the most recent cases in the
case that inspired the movie to
prevent hair discrimination was
that case called equal
employment opportunity
commission versus catastrophe
management solutions and in that
case an African American woman's
job offer was rescinded after
she refused to cut off her
dreadlocks at her employer's
request the employers grooming
policy prohibited what they
called excessive hair styles and
the employer.
Categorized her dreadlocks as an
excessive hair style schools are
a place where we see this
discrimination against black.
People's hair it's very apparent
and we see group grooming
policies that discriminate
against black here the N. double
ACP legal defense and
educational fund has seen a
troubling up tick of instances
of black children being targeted
for their natural hair textures
and styles prohibited in school
dress codes in recent years
you may have seen some of these
in the news in Massachusetts
there were twin sisters Deanna
and my a cook who were given
detention and kicked off of
their sports teams for having
braids the school said that
their hair was distracting in
Louisiana there was a young
woman who was sent home for
having braids with extensions
they set her hair was not
natural because it was in braids
and had extensions which of
braiding is actually a
protective style for African
American women and girls you
braid the hair so that your the
end of your here are not exposed
and they said that that was
unacceptable for her to have
that here
you know we see this also on
black men and other people of
color in New Jersey there was a
high school wrestler who was
forced to either cut his
dreadlocks off or forfeit a
championship wrestling match the
referee was heard calling his
hair and natural.
So I'm why do we need this in
New Mexico we are not immune to
this in New Mexico as you heard
from the previous two speakers
I have had instances of here
discrimination in my life and I
don't think it's unusual for
people to have that experience
in New Mexico unfortunately
we've had situations of black
children being disciplined or
sent home for their here here in
our state
specifically with regards to our
bill it does add protections
against here discrimination to
the public school code the
charter school Code and the
Human Rights Act so it is
protecting against hair
discrimination in both schools
and and employment our bill is
unique it focuses on black women
but extends protections to
cultural had dresses as well so
cultural had dresses the
definition includes Burke as
head wraps or other head dresses
used as part of an individual's
personal cultural beliefs and we
specifically use the language
includes because we wanted to
ensure that the definition was
inclusive of the mentioned hair
styles and other hairstyles not
specifically mention like he job
squash washer blossoms eagle
feathers and more it also
includes protection for length
of here.
I'm as the previous speaker said
it's definitely time for a
change seven other states have
passed the crown Act you know
the army and Air Force have
changed their grooming policies
to remove words such as I'm
can't and the City of
Albuquerque has also passed
amendments to its human rights
ordinance to incorporate the
chronic provisions so it is
definitely time to make a change
of our state and I just
appreciate you listening to me
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Thank you so Representative
Stapleton if you would please
can you discuss we have an
amendment for this can you read
the two oh two number for us
Representative Stapleton so
people can pull it up please.
Mr chairman point two one nine
three three eight point one.
Thank you representative so as
members pull up this amendment
can I have a motion to discuss
the amendment.
Are we discuss this amendment Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado all seconded
Representative Stapleton can you
please explain the amendment.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it was brought to my
attention
Meant Mr chairman House Bill I
move amendment number one to
house bill twenty nine Mr
chairman on page four line ten
strike the word woke us and
insert in the love he jabs.
I don't know right but
you Mr chairman on the online
tool.
Line thirteen strike will start
the love that he jobs online
page fourteen nine thirteen
strike will cause some insert in
little the he jabs Mr chairman
and members of the committee it
was brought to my attention that
of will cost in the Muslim world
includes a whole entire outfit
black with covering the whole
body coverage and that is not
what we have in schools children
normally would not we had that
in their classrooms or to the
schools so we wanted they have
asked that we remove the what
will cost because it doesn't
apply as just a head dress but
it's a complete although we act
and to put that he job which is
the head covering and Mr
chairman that is respectfully
what I've asked to change that
one wording and I now stand for
questions.
Thank you thank you
representative is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Mr chairman I move to a
document.
Thank you Representative thank
you Representative Dow is their
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none you have an amended
bill thank you representative we
will go to the audience so
everybody in the attendees list
I see some hands already raised
however I have not given
instruction yet so I'm going to
lower all hands as I need to
give instruction first as to
what we're raising our hands for
I'm going to lower all of the
hands.
All right.
So so we're on a level playing
field so I will go to those in
support those supporting.
House bill twenty nine amended
okay so we have a number of
hands going up I do ask people
to be brief please we'd like to
go to a Levin and we still have
another bill to each year and
again if I mispronounce your
name please forgive me just
correct me and all all I'll be
better
The also you'll have up to two
minutes but please do not be
repetitive also okay
So with that being said I will
go to our first.
The person I feel like I'm on
the radio go to our first caller
all right.
Nicole Rogers please.
Hello.
Hello Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name's Nicole
Rogers and I am in favor of this
bill for many reasons most
importantly my two children my
son Alisa who's three and my
daughter who's twelve who have
absolutely been discriminated
against because of their hair
already and even at my three
year old age I'm having kids at
preschool when he wears as after
a state things like your heroes
we hear what's wrong with the
license hair and really seeing
the teachers didn't know how to
handle that or even didn't even
intervene at all and so I always
say to the kids my son's hair is
magical and it grows to the sun
there's nothing different or
weird about it everybody has
different here that's okay I'm
so excited to see that we
hopefully can help create a
world where my son doesn't have
to feel like it's Harrison years
it also translated so the work
force when I worked at CNN in
our human resource department I
had to go and speak to a
department head who decided to
build his own
dress code and said that
dreadlocks were not allowed and
so we had to coach that leader
that that's not something that
you could do that that is
absolutely discriminatory but
this time we had no law to point
to right to say that that was
discriminatory so now this will
give us the ability to do that
and so I just thank you for your
time today and really hope that
this passes today.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you so much.
Next we'll go to Monet.
Monet you're with us please you
have up to two minutes.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Monique
archer back and I stand in
support of twenty nine this bill
resonates with me because I've
heard the stories of black youth
with in New Mexico that had been
sent home from school on the
condition that they change their
hair due to the discomfort that
their braids locs head wraps and
natural hair of cost.
Well administrations although
the discomfort of school
administrators towards black
hairstyles stems from their own
implicit racial bias there's
been no remedy for the type of
harm that it imposes upon black
students I advise all members of
this committee to not simply
dismiss this bill due to the
lack of proximity our awareness
of hair discrimination or the
new Mexican schools I fear that
their failure to pass this bill
do this committee will
contribute to future acts of
harm to our most vulnerable
students in closing I would like
to remind everyone within this
digital space that legislation
that centers the most
marginalized members of the
community will benefit society
as a whole thank you.
Thank you moment.
So next okay.
We have.
Ahmad who has one name but since
this is a new role please
include your your your last name
as well
but.
For this meeting a lot of money
please.
Mr chair.
Good morning I apologize that
you only have one of my name's I
think I'm when I moved from my
cell phone to the laptop it
changed the the two names into
one for some reason my name is
Ahmad Assad I'm an attorney here
in Albuquerque and I am also the
president of the Islamic center
New Mexico one of the largest
slimming centers in the state
Representative overall twenty
five hundred people and members
I want to tell you first and
foremost that it was a pleasure
seeing all of you in action I
will have the benefit of
watching some of the discussions
on the prior bill I want to
thank each and everyone of you
for what you do
Mr chair
Representative Stapleton it's an
honor to be here to speak in
support of HB twenty nine at
very very much appreciate the
work that the office of
Representative Stapleton along
with strokes Missler Kate and
We miss Taylor
put into this it's very well
thought out a lot of hard work
and certainly will needed bill
to address very fundamental
issues facing our children in
schools today I appreciate the
amendment to the Representative
Stapleton addressed already to
members of the committee and I'm
support of that I was going to
ask Representative Stapleton to
consider the change of the term
we're going to have job she's
already had me on that there's
one other matter that I would
like to have considered by
Representative Stapleton and
committee here and that is Mr
chair of the idea that some of
the slamming the job that is
addressed in the bill really is
one although some members of the
community that's specific
community do we're addresses as
part of their cultural beliefs
it is a religious requirement to
fundamental religious
requirement so the difference is
maybe important with regards the
intention of the bill may not
but I think from our perspective
when you're talking about the
job it's better dressed clearly
and correctly as a component of
the fundamental religious
requirement and I would ask
Representative Stapleton who
have been in a long time long
life and I appreciate everything
that she does on behalf
instituting a Mr site that's
here two minutes I thought I
recognize the there it's good to
hear you my friend thank you.
All right CENIC's will go to
Nicole Martin.
Please up to two minutes please.
Yes good morning.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Nicole more
in.
I'm in favor of H. B. twenty
nine because.
As the reason prisons.
what's happening today in our
communities people and their
natural hair.
It's just it's not just sorry is
not just a recent issue you know
this has been going on for a
really long time.
And as.
Worksheet.
Stated earlier
the case here in New Mexico an
indigenous grow.
It
does.
My close friends younger sister
and that happened.
Cibola high school.
And I attended the APS meetings
on that and.
Just to see.
How many people.
Supported this teacher and act
was very disgusting.
So I do.
To help us.
Policies that protect our
children and.
Community members thank you.
Thank you so much.
Senate sent the NMAA welcome
good morning.
You have years up to two minutes
please.
And you are muted.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for your the work you do and
for your commitment to the state
I am a take us on the honest
registered lobbyist for the
Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president we
stand in full support of house
bill twenty nine as amended and
want to thank leader Stapleton
for sponsoring this important
bill.
The Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president
supports a policy in schools
that prohibits race and cultural
discrimination and to protect
our students from egregious acts
of discrimination.
We support amending the Human
Rights Act to include cultural
headdresses and protective
hairstyles in the general ban on
discrimination.
Based on race or culture we
support creating a respectful
and open world for natural
cultural relevant hair I ask for
your support on the bill which
bans racial or cultural based
hair discrimination and I want
to thank miss Nicole Martin
very passionate support for this
legislation.
And others thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Great thank.
Secretary mccamley amosu Ming
that's you welcome you have a to
two minutes please be part.
Thank you Mr chair will my name
is bill mccamley in the
secretary the workforce
solutions department we oversee
the Human Rights bureau who
would be the main state agency
in charge of enforcing this act
we are monitoring a number of
bills this session that Askar
Human Rights bureau and our
labor relations department as a
whole to do more work without
appropriations in them to give
us additional people to do the
work and so this is a big
concern of us for a number of
other bills however with this
one after checking with our
staff we don't believe that the
workload involved would be very
very high so we think we
probably could accomplish
whatever investigations that
needed to come up regarding this
bill with our current workload
for the more our people are very
very familiar with the concept
of these types of discriminatory
policies that can be done based
on race so Mr chair once again
we need your support nor or
against this but we feel we
could actually make this one
work with our current workload
it's just important for us to
let people know that some of the
other things that are coming in
maybe give us some issues but
this one we feel pretty good
about and I'll be around anybody
has any technical questions
regarding enforcement or how it
works with the Human Rights
Spiro if that's alright Mr chair
that's the case thank you very
much appreciate your taking the
time to hear me.
Thank you Mr secretary next on
the list is Marshall Martinez.
Please Marshall.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Marshall Martinez I am the
interim executive director of
the quality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization as LGBTQ people
we've always known the impact of
discrimination on individuals on
whole communities in fact LGBTQ
people in New Mexico have been
working since nineteen ninety
three to be granted access to
basic human rights most
importantly to be protected from
discrimination against us in our
jobs in our schools in housing
and in public we applaud and
strongly support the crown Act
an effort to clarify in statute
what so many of us have always
known without clarification
those that would discriminate
against us based on our sexual
orientation race gender identity
or religion we'll do so based on
their perception of us not their
knowledge of us the color of our
skin the way we style our hair
the physicality of how we carry
ourselves are all
characteristics that often
identify us as queer or trans
people when we amended the Human
Rights Act in New Mexico in two
thousand three we wrote language
that ensure that LGBTQ people
could not be discriminated
against because of the
impression or perception of
their gender identity that is
because we knew even then that
is the perception of people
physical visible characteristics
or assumptions made based on
those characteristics that
result in discriminatory
practice equality New Mexico
sees this clarification as a
strengthening of the Human
Rights Act the thought put into
this is one step closer to
achieving full liberation for
all New Mexicans especially
queer and trans New Mexicans who
deserve to be given every
opportunity to thrive in
education in workplaces and in
our communities we strongly
support the crown Act Senate
bill eighty and house bill
twenty nine thank you for your
time this morning.
Great the next next will go to
Meredith.
Please can you hear me.
You can have up to two minutes.
Chair members of the committee
on Meredith nation and I'm
speaking for both the league of
women voters of New Mexico and
the American Association of
university women and I we
strongly support this we
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing it forth very important
statement and
and we hope that the help
committee will support it make
it all the way through into law
thank you very very much I want
to repeat what other people have
said thank you.
Great I appreciate the privative
thank you madam.
Commissioner Barboa.
Hello can you hear me we can
welcome you have up to two
minutes thank you I'm thank you
chair members of the committee I
want to honor all the folks that
have worked on this important L.
are black women leadership that
are putting their heart and soul
out there thank you so much for
together action stands in stark
support of this very important
Bill B. of witnessed across our
state discrimination happening
in this form and in jobs in
applications in the work place
and it school I'm we can
instruct the part thank you.
Right.
Go to Deborah Condit thank.
Please direct your with us.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Deborah Condit
with the public charter schools
of New Mexico and we stand in
support of house bill twenty
nine as a statewide membership
association for charter schools
we represent dozens of schools
who were formed I have a
communities to fight against
racial and socioeconomic
injustice this bill contributes
to that mission by contributing
to a society where students have
the right to feel safe in school
regardless of their race or
culture we support this bill and
would like to thank
Representative Stapleton for
bringing it to the legislature
this year.
Right thank you.
The next we'll go to Joseph this
could be a.
Please.
Yes if we cannot hear you but
the time is going.
I'm sorry Mr chair members of
the committee just this computer
Albuquerque public schools we
think the majority floor leader
for bringing this forward and we
stand in full support thank you.
All right we have any record
thank you Joseph.
So we'll go to a Casteel human
that.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee I am
here is a representation of
yucca youth United for climate
crisis action we are use lad and
primarily by pock of eight
nonprofit organization we're
here to ask you to stand for the
crown Act today as a by product
lead organization we represent a
wide variety of communities here
in New Mexico and it would be
great to keep our communities
safe
thank you for your time and have
a great rest of your day.
Thank you so much have a nice
rest your day during Kelly.
No rain here allowed with us
good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning.
Thank you.
members of the it is especially
the Stapleton for bring this
most important.
Legislation to the forefront.
As I remember recalling the
views.
On the basketball court when our
young native people were on the
court and somewhere where we are
traditional head head where.
Fund and were asked to unravel
and tucked it into the chair.
How demeaning how confusing that
must be.
And also further as being a
grandmother to.
Three beautiful black children
with all different types of hair
I feel that this needs to be on
the forefront and it's long
overdue.
Thank you so much for bringing
this I asks the members of the
committee to vote yes on this
important bill thank you so
much.
Thank you so much for being with
us Sir Tory Jacobus.
Yes good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Tory Jacobus I'm an
attorney and the head of the
office of civil rights in
Albuquerque my office work with
counts are selected passed
similar protections in
Albuquerque earlier this month
I'm also a black woman and the
mother of black children all of
my family has experienced the
type of discrimination that
house bill twenty nine seeks to
eliminate I am in strong favor
of passage of this bill adding
these protections to our public
school code into the Human
Rights Act or large step towards
acknowledging and dismantling
centuries of lawful
discrimination on the basis of
race related to the way our hair
grows serve our heads protecting
our children and our community
members to speak volumes
regarding New Mexico's
commitment to protecting all
members of our great state from
discrimination I look forward to
New Mexico joining the ten
cities including Albuquerque and
the seven states the legislative
these clear and over protections
to their community members
already thank you very much.
Great thank you so much Kelly
Francisco.
Tell you have up to two minutes.
Kelly I'm sorry we're having
trouble hearing.
And now you're muted Kelly.
We're still having trouble with
your audio I'm in it disallowed
I'm gonna move on to my list and
we'll try to come back to you
okay.
So with that we'll move on to
the new so that Campos.
We still don't work you're with
us you have up to two.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is Lucy
let them plus I'm a police
policy associate a New Mexico
nonprofit organization gold
futures.
We strongly support H. B. twenty
nine we understand that the way
in which we carry our hair is
not just a hairstyle it is part
of our cultural identity and we
should be celebrating it not
discriminating against it we
stand with the incredible
leaders who brought this bill
forward we ask that you stand
and support and in favor of this
bill thank you.
Right thank you so much so we'll
go to Kimberly York.
Kimberly Act.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Kimberly York and I am
independently licensed clinical
social worker I have witnessed
and counseled countless youth as
well as adults around this the
negative impacts of hair
discrimination
and I would ask that on behalf
of all of the students in New
Mexico that you would
unanimously support this bill
because it is a matter not just
of hairstyle but it is a matter
of well being and a matter of
the stability and strong support
of are used all over the state
thank you.
Thank you so much so we'll go to
Isabella Baker.
Welcome thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is is that are Baker and I am an
organiser with Boris the other
action and co founder of youth
places in action as a person
that works with young people.
Image every day
it saddens me the amount of
times that of but I've heard
stories from the young people I
work with about her
discrimination and their
personal experiences with that
even one story about her
discrimination in this day and
age is too much I believe that
young people deserve the respect
the rate is there from us to be
able to express themselves and
express their cultures in any
form.
I truly believe that this bill
is imperative to our society as
it is today and I've been here
in support of it it's time that
we start to give our young
people the respect that they
deserve period and I hope that
you do that today and support
this bill thank you so much.
Thank you.
So we'll go to Valerie Bellson.
Good morning my name is Valerie
Boston and I'm with will work
together action and also that
your program coordinator with
the pueblo of Zuni library.
I support the bill because first
and foremost role as parents and
as adults is to create safety
and stability for our children
and I believe this is a safety
issue and it's also creating
within our children my son had
long hair until he started start
right now he's twelve years old
and in the seventh grade and
when he start his hair started
getting pool he would be upset
and he asked to get his hair cut
and his grandfather program you
should leave your hair long you
must leave your hairline hero
warrior how are your ancestors
recognize you so this is a call
from significant not only for
native Americans but for the
people and anybody who has a
connection mind body and spirit
so I support this bill and I
think you Representative
Stapleton for activist within
our state.
Thank.
Okay thank you so much and I'm
sorry to the
this on Cisco she appears not to
be on the list but your support
is noted thank you so much I'm
so go next okay Kelly Francisco.
C..
Kelly are you there yes can you
hear me now all right we can
wonderful thank you chair and
representative I appreciate this
time
I and in support of HB twenty
nine as a no woman the from
personal experiences and
witnessed experiences of others
For I do not culture we do have
a practice of keeping long hair
and if this has.
Because to trauma in personal
spaces for me and as simple had
mentioned is also a personal
security concerns
that there have been multiple
times in my life at a young age
through adulthood where
I've had to.
Kind of come between myself and
other people and my hair
so you know hair is not just a
vanity
and.
And because of that it's you
know a personal assault on need
when consent consent is not
considered
in in touching hair in our
cultural practice cultural
practice there are very few
people who are allowed to touch
your hair because it is so
personal to you
so much so you know folks using
their DNA to test back so maybe
you know test back many years
many months of stories that is
collected in your DNA from your
hair and because of that it's so
culturally tied to us and our
well being
so again there have been many
instances where there was a
personal CP violation where I
intentionally have to keep my
hair up
in public spaces because I don't
want to put myself in a position
where people are gonna grab me
or my hair and the same with
flying I can not
keep my hair down it when flying
I am always taken aside to
security and patted down unless
they have my hair up in a bun so
there are many many instances
like this that I do not wish
upon anyone else and the lady
that was so that was two minutes
thank you so much.
And the LCS please please be
brief.
At the area with us.
Please.
Hello can you hear me now.
We can welcome please you have
up to two.
Okay hello my name is out there
Yazzie and I'm with for together
Action Comics LA county and I
support this bill H. B. twenty
nine because I have I have heard
let my cousins
my nieces and nephews that play
basketball and that that they
had to take their hair down like
Noreen Kelly was saying and then
they we're also demanded that
they couldn't where
native designs and on their
clothing and you know I really
think that this is wrong for you
know our culture to go through
all this and you really support
HB twenty nine thank you.
Right thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is there anybody in
the attendees listens posed in
opposition the.
So we'll go to about.
Good morning.
And good morning madam floor
leader thank you so much and
also the three witnesses thank
you so much for bringing this
been up to the attention of the
committee and proposing this
bill hi I'm kind of in a
quandary because I supported
amendment for including the job
as a Muslim dress but I'm a
little bit of an opposition
because it does not include a
couple of major religious groups
and dead headdresses and David
trying to join today but they're
having difficulty with audio and
video so I'm speaking on behalf
of the Jewish community as well
as the C. community the six
would like to include their
religious help address which is
determined which will serve you
may be familiar with and the
Jewish community would like to
propose that day yeah mocha and
keep up the also included in the
bill and mentioned specifically.
That's the only comment I have
to makes it is really not in
opposition but the suggestion
that these two communities
religious communities but also
recognized instead of
exclusively recognizing only the
Muslim community so with that Mr
chair thank you so much for
giving me the time to suggest
this and thank you very much for
all the work that the committee
and Representative Stapleton has
done on this.
Great thank you so much.
All right so we'll come back to
committee.
And first on my list is
representative Lente.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning everyone I want to first
thank Representative Stapleton
for reading house bill twenty
nine especially I want to thank
her expert witnesses miss Taylor
missed the working and miss
Brooks for your compassion that
that testimony on this matter as
a native American we are we are
taught that are here is our
power that no one has the right
to touch on here without that
consent and when we bring these
types of issues these types of
of powerful.
notions of changing that the the
dynamics of how the world sees
our people are the types of
harmful instruments that we have
to continue to bring forth if we
intend generally want to break
those cycles of of institutional
racism and with this type of
approach of of the bill that's
brought up to date I want to say
that those of you that are
sponsors of this bill those of
you that have worked on this
bill is to date have taken a
sledgehammer to breaking those
institutional systems of racism
so thank you so much I
appreciate in honor you and
respect all of your power the
within that you have with you
today so thank you so much.
Right thank you representative
Representative parte Senator
Baca please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative I want to say
thank you publicly to a
representative floor leader for
letting me join her on in
sponsoring this bill and I want
to say thank you to all of those
who gave
As Representative Lente top this
mention very passionate support
today and heartfelt
you know we while no Mr chair
that that these protections are
becoming more and more necessary
because of how we are
experiencing institutional
racism which has historically
allowed on stereotypes and
biased attitudes to promote
these discriminatory
assimilation and culture ation
on practices and I just want to
say Mr chair that my older son
is bi racial and his saga with
hair began when he was born he
came out with a huge hair hair
beautiful hair dark curly hair
and the first thing the nurses
did in the in the at the
hospital was apply bestselling.
We baffling for his first photo.
And that.
Was.
Very deeply by his father in
line.
We did not know how to refrain
more disappointment in our anger
Mr chair what had occurred we
had to have his head watched
very carefully he was only a few
hours old.
And allow it to dry and go back
to its natural form that's the
following his path as he
proceeded in line.
When he entered elementary
school.
All he did was cry and cry and
cry coming home because he
wanted to changes here so his
hair could be like the other
kids.
And it wasn't because the
teachers were reprimanding but
it was because of a system that
we allow to occur and happen due
to racism in our school system
in our society as a whole I now
I am the proud grandmother of my
son's son requests sent any has
a beautiful head that he walks
around here saying he's proud
This Is Afro and we'll ask him
what are you gonna do with your
hearing he says grow grow grow
is four years old so Mr chair
and representative this issue
It's beyond me that we have to
address it in the manner that
we're addressing that it's
beyond me that we're having to
it address on the server actions
on discrimination that
continuing twenty twenty one and
I wanted to say thank you again
Mr chair representative for
letting me join you this is
going to give my family and
myself and all of our
communities of color and all of
our communities who face these
discriminatory practices big
relief that we are addressing on
this particular issue and also
it relates to my indigenous on
tribal side of my family I have
family members that are in
school now young family members
with very long here male and I
hope to protect them as well
with these provisions in this
bill so thank you Mr chair I
have no questions I just stand
in very strong support and being
thankful to the representative
for letting me join her on this
thank you.
Great thank you representative
is out please.
Thank you Mr chairman I hope
everybody can hear me okay now.
Mr chairman Representative
Stapleton.
I was reading of the FIR
Representative is L. it it's
your your voice is still very
low so I think you're in the
room all by yourself if you
could speak up even more we
appreciate and then everybody
else if you could turn your
volume up as well.
Is this any better Mr chairman.
Now.
I don't know what's going on in
the because I have my computer
all the way up and it's.
I don't know Mr Waterman ever
money.
If if need be maybe we can have
somebody if you want to
transmitter questions to
somebody we can have them
answered for you.
We'll figure something out
representatives up thank you.
Representative Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair I would like to direct
my question
At we find that the page number
for reference for everyone.
And it's page fourteen in the
bill.
And so I think that this bill
add definitions to our section
twenty eight dash one dash two
and and this subsection just
calmer for drugs The New Mexico
Human Rights Act so to the
definition editions Mr chair
what I was wondering
if I could get confirmation this
bill does not amend a section
twenty eight dash one dash
seven.
Mr chairman I am much so what is
section twenty eight dash one
that seven what is that
Representative Eli.
What do you use it that it does
not affect a different part of
the Human Rights Act.
Mr chair yes that is what I'm
wondering is I don't see any
changes the Human Rights Act
other than adding be specific
definitions and I just wanted
confirmation about.
Representative I'm not
Representative no longer
Representative the secretary
mccamley who is in charge of the
Human Rights Act he could
probably answer that question
for you can still learn.
Is he said he told me he would
technical support.
Representative I can or I'm
sorry.
Easter represents secretary
mccamley if you could raise our
and please if you'd be able to
address that for us.
In the attendees list.
So we're waiting on that in to
not hold things up
Representative lane I don't know
if that was pertinent to your
your next questions but we can
wait to get confirmation on that
but could you please proceed.
Thank you Mr chair
I would appreciate an answer but
I I have some other dialogue but
I can proceed with that we can
come back to that when
appropriate.
If we miss more.
Yes Mr chair might my next
question would be related I
guess exploration is the intent
of this bill to extend beyond
the school setting.
Mr chair representative lane the
bill specifically said prohibit
schools.
So it doesn't go beyond the
school setting yes it does is
for the workplace it does
involve workplace and and and
discipline allow discrimination
a desperate treatment students
and it is placed in the school
and it is also placed in the
Human Rights Act.
Mr chair I'm sorry I'm I'm
really not trying very minute I
just wanted confirmation for the
I'm I wasn't Corman answer so it
is intend to be extended beyond
the school setting.
And the workplace settings also
Mr chair representative lane you
could not discriminate against a
person.
Thank you for that and and Mr
chair so with that I'm wondering
what happens to industries like.
Of the restaurant industry for
example are where their health
and safety issues regarding care
of or maybe medical facilities
those kind of places.
Mr chair representative lane
that is why I had asked
Representative Senator
Representative secretary
McAnally to come on board as a
secretary in charge of the Human
Rights Act located within his
agency to respond to those
answers for you but I could also
have aged blokes from the law
firm the law association to
respond.
It's.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't think that
we're saying that an employer
cannot have someone wear a hair
net or something like that if
they are have do you have a
valid safety concerns this is
just speaking about here
discrimination
when it comes to the hair that's
actually coming out of your head
so it does not say that you
cannot have someone we're here
net for instance that's a that's
a situation that I think would
be
ation where that might be a
health and safety concerns
and also just figuring out ways
to do things besides having
people chemically straighten
their hair or cut their hair
right there are different ways
that you can promote health and
safety without going to those
lengths so that's all they were
saying.
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you Mr chair
I do want to say that I you know
I support this concept so don't
take my my question to be
competitive I just wanna make
sure there are unintended
consequences and so
Along that line is there a
specific text me a bill that you
could show me where.
That exception that was just
described president goal for
helping safety wouldn't apply.
Representative lane see the
piece of legislation refers to
actually as age a Brooks just
mention having to.
Thank you here.
And it doesn't talk about the
fact that because.
What if I work in a restaurant
and most restaurants require
that you cover your hair.
It.
Has certain requirements.
That does not make you here it's
a low if
you want to tell you
you have to wear all you have to
call but you want doing certain
activities within the job then
that's up to that but that that
that what what we're saying in
this piece of legislation is
that employee of the
organization of the industry
take us to hear like the teacher
did to the students at Cibola
high school that's not allowed.
That's all I was saying you
cannot personally distracts
somebody's
cultural.
Heritage of religious background
and heritage of something that
they must do as part of their
religious activity up part of
their cultural various styles.
Thank you for that answer and
and Mr chair on that point.
So I guess really the the rubber
come down to do what it the the
job maybe that I am currently
employed in or that I applied to
what if there is a conflict
between you know
my protective hairstyle and what
my employer deems as as health
or safety issue what happens in
that example Mr chair.
Jenny Brooks is there and so I'm
we actually need secretary who
is in charge of that kind of
decision making and with that
employment opportunities
available to New Mexicans but I
don't know if you'll come back
on and I'll try to get it.
So I do believe probably Mr
mccamley would have a better
idea of kind of the procedure of
what would happen but I do
believe that if there is a
dispute and someone believes
that they are subjects to
a grooming policy that does
discriminate against their hair
based on you know some of the
language that we have here I
think they would have to file a
complaint
with the Human Rights division
and you know they would have to
go through the administrative
procedures first right so they
would have to exhaust their
administrative remedies and then
they can file a complaint then
they have to comply with all the
statute of limitations and
things like that I think if it
you know if if the department
then made a just decision that
the person was still disagreeing
with I think that they could
then go to District Court and
file a case in District Court
that's my understanding of the
procedure but
Mr mccamley like I said would
probably know that procedure
better than I would.
Okay please go ahead.
Lane you can get you can
continue of questions since
secretary McKinley would be
wrapped up.
Representative when Mr chair
I'll try to remember how to
articulate my questions.
Up for the secretary but it did
sound like from this dialogue
that the remedy for the employer
Mr chair would be that they
would have to either take a
hardline stance of the employee
that could result in the process
of looking Rights Commission
or allow the employee to keep
the protected her staff our
cultural addresses.
But I think I would appreciate
an answer from the secretary on
that but Mr chair I can go along
with a couple other questions
while we wait in the meantime
for privative sake.
and then the next question I and
I again want to look at some
text because I I I actually
don't think this does your tent
but I just.
I just want to bring it to your
attention.
if we take a look at page two of
the bill.
Mr chair it read starting line
three it's it's a new language
no local school board chair
allow for the imposition of
discipline discrimination or
district treatment it's a
students based on race and then
it and then here's where my
question comes and use the word
for culture.
And then again uses the word for
because the students use of
protective hairstyles our
culture has dresses so you the
concern that I want to express
Mr chair hopefully my concern
the levy and it is I'm afraid
that this is going to create a
new
protected class of school boards
have to
be aware of based simply on
culture because the sick culture
or because we subject ourselves
there's no connection in that
language between the protective
hairstyle and the culture and so
this concept of my cold sure
because of the work order is is
separated from this whole
dialogue we've been having about
hairstyles and addresses
and so I I would appreciate a
response from that Mr chairman.
Asia.
President of the blame.
your cultural.
Your cultural here style.
Is it was often.
I'm protective hairstyle you
cultural here style are you
saying you shouldn't have the
all India it's either one it
could be a culture yes I it
could be the locks it could be
that the head wraps its could be
and the protected.
It is considered the natural
here which is defined as your
kinky curly here.
So thank you.
Its chairman.
Thank you
Representative and so I I I
agree with you that that the
into the bill because again the
whole dialogue Mr chair is been
around the hair styling her
dresses and and I and I do
understand that that is tied to
a person's culture and so what
I'm suggesting is that.
By the language usage when you
say culture or.
Because the students use a
protective hairstyle that you've
now separated out the hair style
from culture and culture becomes
its own subset and it may be
related to her style but it may
not be and that's my fear is
that we start getting beyond
culture hairstyles which it
which I have no problem with I
think is is appropriate to
protect but if we just tell you
cannot give disbursement
treatment based on culture.
And don't now tie that to her so
I don't know what that means and
so it's very broad and does does
that make sense Mr chair this.
Representative laying for
example.
Native American students.
They come to school with a long
pony tail in the back.
And it's that's a cultural
history with them.
But it's also.
I'm.
His style
and then you have.
Let Representative about us just
mention.
I'm.
You have the you have the the
Jewish community and the C.
community that have cultural
headdresses.
And you have the job that I just
put in there that is a cultural
covering of the head.
That's specific to their culture
but then when you have a
protected.
Protective style
Which is a natural here.
Which is the right which is the
twists.
Not.
It's you you have both.
You're saying that we should
have one of the other.
Is that what you're saying Mr
chair representative maybe.
Thank you.
Both is very significant in this
piece of legislation and very
significant.
I mean yes styles as well as
cultural headdresses.
Thank you Mr thank
Representative Stapleton no
that's not what I'm saying I
think maybe I'm doing a poor job
of articulating my question so
all of the examples that you
gave I I agree with that makes
sense to me and they're all tied
hair on which is what the
purpose of this bill is is is
protecting her thousand cultural
addresses so what I'm suggesting
is the use of the language here
specifically when you talk about
no spiritually meant for culture
and then you talk about no
disbursement because of the
students choose protective
hairstyles or cultural
headdresses is that you're
capturing beyond just here so
could be for example I I the
students they will the certain
I don't know branded clothing of
the search shoes are the certain
whatever is part of my culture
now I'm setting up of these
other protected classes that
school districts be on guard for
I don't want to belabor led to
the point that that that's what
I'm getting at I understand what
you're saying Mr chair but
Representative Lang
it is if it falls into the same
category the students to race
all culture because of the
students use of protective yes I
because of a student's use of
protective yet stylish it goes
back to that culture is goals
back to the race.
Thank you for that Mr so the I
think you made it evident that
the intent of the bill is to tie
in protective hairstyles and
cultural had presses as a
cultural aspect of the person
then you're not trying to get
beyond just protect ourselves
our cultural addresses and then.
Are we still waiting on
secretary Mr chair no we are not
are you finished with that line
of questions so we can move on
to your initial line.
Yes thank you Mr great so we do
have secretary mccamley so if
you would quickly rephrase your
question for the secretary and
then be happy to address.
Thank you Mr this is where it's
nice to have a quorum for to the
can read back what I what I
thought about earlier so I'll
try to rephrase the question
So I think really the what the.
What the dollar comes down to is
it's my understanding Mr
Secretary Mr chair that this
bill.
The only part of the New Mexico
Human Rights Act that is being
Amanda is the definitional
section which is twenty eight
dash one dash two and no other
parts of the New Mexico Human
Rights Act then Amanda is that
correct Mr chair Mister
Representative that is my
understanding.
Thank you for that answer and
here is the other question I
posed.
And and see if I can remember
articulated essentially what so
you have an employer who because
of health and safety standards
you know say like a restaurant a
line cook for example for my
understand the typically have to
wear like internet or something
like that.
What if there's a conflict
between.
What the employer would require
for health and safety reasons
verses are what would be defined
by this bill as it said cultural
address our protective
hairstyles that's my question Mr
chair Mister Representative
after speaking with our staff
about this bill a couple of days
ago we would basically be
treating this type of
investigation that we would do
just like any other area of
racial discrimination so if
there was an investigation file
there would have to be evidence
on any kind of mistreatment for
termination based on evidence
that there was a a brief the
reason for this firing based on
eight cultural reasons and so
that that is the type of
investigation that our staff
generally put out I'm not sure
how to answer your question I'm
not an attorney I imagine that
what we would do is investigate
based on the significance of the
action based on the Human Rights
Act and come up with a
determination generally what
happens is most attorneys take
those determinations to private
right of action and then the
file that in court so that would
be up to a judge to kind of look
at those decisions and and.
Ascertain whether or not there
were health and safety standards
that mitigated anything or they
can go to our Human Rights
Commission which would do the
same thing but I I imagine that
would be taken on a case by case
basis.
Thank you for that chair Mister
secretary
and then my my last line of
inquiry in and I would love to
Representative Stapleton whether
this is for Mr secretary which
wants to handle it is there was
a reference
In expert testimony Mr chair
about wrestling specifically in
and that and you know I did
Russel Walder through high
school and I remember wrestling
other students both male and
female that had that had hair
that drops below that years I
think there were ones you have
to you have to since we wrapped
that underneath your head gear
and so I wonder how do these.
These rules being additive in
these bills how do they affect
participation and say athletics
where you know there is a
safety.
hazard with with long hair and
and grappling so how does this
bill address those things Mr
chair.
I'm.
Mr chair and representative
laying.
Let me see if I understand your
question.
How does this affect.
Students who are in school and
possibly wrestle in and they
have to have been here at a
certain length is that what
you're referring to.
Mr chair representative so.
Essential yes I I I just worry
about it if there could be a
conflict between say a safety
risk regulation within a
particular sport and
how that may come but with
either cultural Head dress for
protective hairstyle.
Thank you Mr.
I'm.
Thanks helps you can and you're
asking the legal question of me
all sure I can I can try to
respond
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm I I do think that
there could be situations where
in a school or an employer
saying we think that this is a
safety issue and the the person
is saying well I think I'm
protected under you know the
protections that are afforded to
me through this act and I think
that that would definitely be a
situation that would have to go
through the process if there was
no way to
To come to some sort of
agreement and I I do think that
there are other ways that you
can deal with safety issues
besides having someone cut their
hair off or besides having
someone have to chemically
straighten their hair or and
this is what we're talking about
in the bill is things of this
nature we're not talking about
safety concerns and so I do you
know I know you know that that
there are sports like with the
gentleman from New Jersey where
he had to decide you know do I
cut my dreadlocks off or
participate in this national
championship in that situation I
would say that there were things
that the school probably could
have done the size have him cut
his hair but but that that you
know but that that's not my
decision but I would think that
there you know cutting the hair
is definitely in our bill so if
the only if the only their
employer or the schools only
decision was that you must cut
your hair in that situation I do
think that then that's a
situation where you would have
to
talk to the school talk to the
employer see if there's some
that could be worked out and if
if they are if their decision is
no then you're gonna have to go
through the the process I would
think it Mr Representative let
me let me just add on to that if
that's all right I had I don't
feel comfortable addressing
education situation since the
Human Rights bureau just deals
with employment but ms Brooks
put out a fairly good statement
if for instance there was a
situation like the gentleman who
was the wrestler in New Jersey
he was given an ultimatum either
cut your hair because it's a
quote unquote unnatural links
or forfeit your competition and
there wasn't from what I
understand the situation any
kind of discussion about any
kind of mitigating thing that
the cat could you rapid can you
figure out a way to to control
the length of it for the
specific reasons of wrestling if
we were in employment so.
UA ation I I think what our
investigators would do was try
it would try to get to the
details of the situation and say
was there an attempt for an
employer to work with the
employee to figure out if there
is a reasonable safety condition
involved whether or not they can
get around that in or if it was
as ms Brooks spread out Hey cut
your hair or get fired I think
those would be the types of
things that our investigators
would really look at once again
we would handle it on a case by
case basis and our folks feel
pretty comfortable with this
type of investigation in a lot
of cases.
There are pieces of evidence
that put in saying Hey so and so
wanted me to cut my hair for
discriminatory reasons and those
would be the things that we
really look at.
Thank you Mr chair in the and
and Representative lane so we
are trying to get at here at
eleven we still have another
bill so if you could please wrap
your questions I have a number
of people still on the list and
we have another bill to go
please.
Stop in a long winded Attorney
understands chair I will you'll
before thank you.
Thank you Representative so
we'll go back to Representative
uses L. if your microphone is
not working representative or if
people can't hear you I'd be
happy to I have poor eyesight
and hearing so I'll try to
amplify your question for you if
that's okay and you trust me to
do that.
Mr chair let's say if this is in
a better.
Can you hear me now okay let's
it is not a thing.
Is this better.
Is it okay if I I trip I
translate to question I guess.
Sure.
Okay.
Hold on one moment.
Mr chair representative as well
as asking you to come back to
her after the next presenter.
Okay.
Thank you Representative Garrett
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing
forth this.
Crown Act.
One question for you as we talk
about cultural headdresses I
feel personally that it should
say cultural or religious
addresses
you know that he job is not
cultural sexually religious as
one of our attendees pointed out
seeks where a turban for
religious reasons
orthodox Jewish man where you
are because I I would feel more
comfortable so that we don't
list a bunch of things and then
leave something out I personally
would feel more comfortable if
we said cultural or religious
some people do say cultural
includes religion I I don't feel
that way would you consider
amending it in any way to add or
religious Mr Mr chair and
representative Gary I'm not a
sad is very close to me and very
extremely close to me more like
a brother however
I was given the term by
Representative Representative
about us and he mention
the term which the amendment was
written however
I
spoke in that I would have to
amended to include one word
related just before cultural all
cultural and religious beliefs
hi I'm the requirement in a
committee is that we have to
give it amendment twenty four
hours in advance so my hope is
should this bill go on to the
next committee I intend to amend
the work that the request that
the matter said was seeking
you'll when Representative about
us on that word would cover all
of the others because if I
continue.
To add names Mr chair and
representative there is so many
different terminologies in
different cultures of what's
considered the headrest but I am
not familiar with so if it
covers religious and cultural
beliefs that it covers
everything.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Madam floor leader
that's great to know because I
would vote for the bill as it is
knowing that in the next
committee that kind of amendment
would be made thank you very
much.
Thank you representative so
Representative Weisel I see your
back do you think you have it
sorted out.
Thanks it but I think you just
called on me can you hear me OK.
So it's the same representative
I'm sorry.
Sure okay.
Thank you representative
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes ma'am Mr chair and I'm.
Chair woman Stapleton I stand in
strong support of this bill and
the reason for that is because
of the many discussions that you
and a half and I have had over
the course of time many pieces
of information that have come
from the community and I think
that the this is such a terrific
bill and I have no no issues
with that and I I hope that the
committee the committee will
vote for it.
Mr chair representative Trujillo
I ask you to sign on this bill
and I hope you did any good did
not you better go do it.
I did I didn't get a chance
madam chair but I fully
supported thank you.
Thank you so.
That is through with the
questioning
all entertain a motion at this
moment.
Would pass.
We have a due test measure for
representative Patricia Roybal
Caballero do I have a second
also in that Representative
chair thank you representative
so madam secretary if you would
please call the roll on to do
pass motion.
Two passed as amended.
I'm sorry yes is to pass as
amended hi twenty nine note now
you're dead thank you can't.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative del yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative is now.
At.
She.
Why are you voting
representatives of.
Yes.
Okay.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes yes okay.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes ma'am Representative Madrid
yes Representative robot guy at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Sir okay it is
she she saying yes okay.
Our Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes.
Fourteen.
Without Representative Chatfield
I don't didn't see him respond
so.
We have a of photo fourteen
zero.
Thank thank you so you have a do
passing house bill twenty nine
as amended thank you
representative so next last not
least is house bill forty three
Representative Stapleton so if
we could keep this brief so we
get a little bit of downtime for
those of you on afternoon
committees Representative
Stapleton do you have any
experts that need to be brought
into the meeting yes Mister
chairman I have Dr Jamal Martin.
Okay.
Vickie Bannerman.
As as as some the floor leader
announces your name could you
please raise your hand in the
attendee list so that I can
promote you to our panel please.
All right next.
Jackson with Albuquerque public
schools.
Black student union.
Miss Jackson could you please
raise your hand please.
I do not see her on the list
Representative thank you Mr
chairman we can continue.
So Representative Stapleton
you're on the list go ahead
house bill forty three in your
panelists but remember please
keep things brief so we can.
Get on with committees thank.
Mr chairman members of the
committee house bill forty three
creates within the public
Education Department critical
mechanisms to address
educational disparities that
exist for black students current
national research has recently
released a congressional
mandated annual report the
condition of education in twenty
twenty that very unsettling
national picture of the state of
education of black students this
is how for the black students
lack of internet access black
students attend high poverty
schools achievement gap has not
closed school drop out rate is
high and graduation and college
enrollment rates so low and with
that Mr chairman I
some questions.
Great so welcome panelists and
be here to answer questions we
appreciate your attendance all
right so we'll go to the
attendees list Sir member
attendees you have up to two
minutes but please do not be
repetitive
and we're happy to hear your
testimony so if you would raise
your hand those of you.
All in support all as soon Mr
Escondida the early Andreas
doesn't support if you would
please be brief in your comments
all right so we'll go to
Kimberly York.
Hello again and good after good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee us
Representative Stapleton and
your committee thank you so much
for your hard diligent work on
this again as an independently
licensed clinical social worker
I strongly support
of this HB forty three and as a
former councillor in the loss
costs Los crucis public schools
are black people represent less
than two percent of the
population and that number is
even smaller within the Los
crucis public school district I
ask that you would consider
supporting this bill so that we
can begin the critical work that
needs to be done so that we can
minimize these gaps as well as
making sure that we our students
have the support that they
deserve thank you.
Thank you.
Dr peel eighty.
Dr.
Good morning welcome.
Dr I'm sorry about that you're
in.
Sector peer eighty you are muted
but you have equipment and you
hear me now thank you welcome a
perfect thank you Mr chairman
and Representative Stapleton
will presentation and members of
the committee for the floor I am
doctor just any appeal ET
associate professor and chair of
the department of language
literacy and sociocultural
studies in the college of
education and human sciences at
the university of New Mexico I
support house bill forty three
research including my own
supports the need for this bill
on multiple levels we know for
example that African American
youth do better in school and
you themselves and others more
positively as learners we may
engage educational environments
to support their humanity as
well as a cognitive development
deficit views of African
American learners are pervasive
and unless and until we are
intentional about addressing
these views this will not change
house bill forty three not
unlike the existing Hispanic
Education Act is centered in the
research based argument that
attention to students cultural
experiences in school do matter
and serve to empower students
intellectually nurture there's
there's a value in the long as
well as our social and was the
competence in educational
settings after American students
in New Mexico deserve this four
ints I support house bill forty
three and encourage you to do
thank thank you.
Right thank you doctor.
All right so next we'll go to
Joseph Escobedo.
Are returning privative
champion.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee just west of
you know Albuquerque public
schools I thank the Majority
Leader for bringing this forward
and we do support thank you.
Right thank you Sir.
We'll go to Nicole Bedford now
Nicole.
Welcome.
You're still muted Nico.
Everybody here will we can get
two minutes thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee and
Representative Stapleton for
bringing this bill forward I am
in full support of house bill
forty three I'm just being a
native of New Mexico going to
Albuquerque public schools and
my children going through
Albuquerque public schools as as
a black man as a black person
and just facing the racism and
discrimination and not having
the schools be able to really
properly address the issues and
just hearing been working for
the state for eight years and
hearing stories from parents and
our children and what our black
children are going through in
the schools this is a time to
not only bring safety to our
children and I've and up to our
black children and our black
families but it's also time for
for culture to be incorporated
into our schools thank you
members of the Mr chair and
members of the committee.
Great thank you so much for your
testimony.
All right we'll go to family you
will they'll.
Family you have up to two
minutes I think you I'm Emily
will die I'm here representing
New Mexico voices for children
to stand in support of HB forty
three I want to thank
Representative Stapleton for her
work adding additional
and just say we believe it's
crucial for New Mexico to
include an act that insurers are
black students are supported by
anti racist practices and
curriculum throughout their
education and we believe that
learning about understanding
black culture anti racism will
benefit all students thank you
very much.
Right thank you so much.
And then we'll go to the doctor
he minutes late them.
Place Dr Lakeland welcome.
Chair.
The members of the committee my
name is Patricia Jimenez late
them I'm the project manager for
transform education New Mexico
and the co chair and member of
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council usually I would like to
thank majority floor leader
Stapleton for bringing house
bill forty three forward New
Mexico currently holds the
Indian Education Act of nineteen
seventy two the Hispanic
Education Act of twenty ten.
These advisory councils are in
statute the advisory councils
allow for essential advisement
to the in enemy in MPD secretary
as well as the New Mexico had
secretaries of education related
to ensuring a high quality
insufficient pre K. twenty
education for native American
and Hispanic students in order
to ensure student equity New
Mexico transformation you Mexico
stands in support the black
Education Act and ask this
committee consideration and
support thank you Mr chairman
for the time.
Right thank you so much.
So we have miss Willie please
you have up to two minutes.
No I'm calling from as we know
the New Mexico.
As the mother of three African
American students who graduated
from.
Schools here in Espanola I just
asked my grandson the question
he went to schools from.
Eight seven great and he
graduated I asked him what did
you learn about black history in
schools.
He told me Graham.
I'm I have to think about that.
So what does that tell me.
I support this bill because for
students who graduated from the
schools.
They can't tell me that system.
Is amazing.
And that's all I have to say I
support it.
Thank thank you so much for your
testimony.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is there any
opposition to house bill forty
three so please raise your hand
if you wish to speak.
All right going once twice.
Sold to our panelists.
Mr chairman can we have my
expert witness Dr Jamal Martin
speak please oh please Dr Martin
if you would please.
You have more than two minutes.
You do Sir you are a panelists
in an expert thank you Sir good
morning Mr chair and Houston
Committee members thank you for
your ongoing commitment to
democracy building I think this
is a good start I support bills
that close the racial inequity
achievement gap in New Mexico we
must remember that New Mexico is
not immune from the racialized
hierarchy that shape
contemporary and every part of
the public and personal life
cycles throughout school
policies and practices
especially when it deals with
curriculum children learn what
they are taught.
this deliberate indifference and
benign neglect of African
descent people because accounts
narratives and legislation that
transform this illogical
cultural norm especially within
existing historical educational
debts we need more robust
movement away from the negative
statistics in in New Mexico
school districts particularly in
early living learning indicators
that the talk about risk and
resiliency factors and outcome
of the face of services
assistance I say this because I
am a public health
epidemiologist in the in the
specials and health promotion
disease prevention and also
teach africana studies so when
we talk about community
education health we must
remember that health is
academics and academics is
health.
State.
Our focus on education not just
is it is about the creation of
wealth.
Things that allows a civility
human dignity planetary health
and determination of structural
violence with this in racism
oppression eczema phobia and
tolerance and so in saying that
I see this as an as someone who
wasn't born in New Mexico but I
have family in New Mexico since
nineteen ten for my my three of
my four children graduated APS
to have graduated from UNM and
the Lobos and I'm a member of
the divine line I would dread
locks and I'm a Muslim seven
listen very intently to all of
the previous legislative bills
of going before and I think that
we need to put closer links and
support for the whole school
whole committee whole child
model that speaks to not only
speaks to culturally relevant
pedagogy we creates a
partnership a collaboration that
built a culture of equity with
educators administrators
understand africana studies ever
college research methods
methodologies that improve the
life course trajectory for
people who've been marginalized
and then our ties so again as
say that also to associate vice
chancellor for academic and all
the health sciences center in my
main job also to is the
reduction of of men are judged
health disparities and the
burden of diseases and issues
and burden of issues in
education research service
social accountability and so I
stand here before you as a as a
humble servant us into your
questions in this regard thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Representative at three Senator
COMITTA.
Thank you Mr chair I'd like to
go ahead and make a deal.
Do passed motion on house bill
forty three.
So we have a due pass motion
Representative Gary get your
hand up.
Yes Mr chairman and
Representative Stapleton I just
have a quick question from
section eight about the hotline
to report racially charged
incidents or racialized
aggression this is hot line
applied reporting for all racial
groups.
Of course Mr chair
representative Gary.
Mr chairman Representative I
figured that was the answer but
just to make sure and that's it
thank you.
Right thank you so much is there
any further discussion.
On the bill.
Representative.
Well Representative Frank.
I need the pause see it's the
teacher all that weight
Representative Gleim please.
Thank you Mr I'm sure miss.
for leaders started very much my
voice my face on the be quick
and I just have really just one
period I want to ask about
section nine at the the bottom
page eleven and Mr chair what
that creates is that it's a
yearly requirement for teachers
to take and I'll just quote it's
an online anti racism racial
awareness and sensitivity
training or professional
development so my question is is
who is funding in that class and
in taking that class Mr chair.
Representative lane
provide anti racism professional
development folks school
personnel a lot of the school
district currently do that
however the school districts are
are the ones that would provide
that and that is very necessary
and I could have Dr Jamal Martin
explained how critical that
professional development is
needed in school districts
across the state and it's being
given across the nation
so that
Professionals would be familiar
with what is considered
not correct.
In terms of teacher is not
knowing what is correct
correctness for them working
with students of different
cultures.
Thank you Mr chair
Mike my question not for the.
The utility of the class but
just I'm just curious our school
district's gonna have to rate
the school districts normally
would give that.
Provide that training.
Okay good that'll school example
I know severly is APS has given
have brought in individuals that
provide training to the teachers
in regard to to diverse city
training and and within that
diverse city training is
sections regard to what is
considered racism on not racism
in week to students.
Thank you Mr that was my only
question.
Great thank you Representative
Eli.
any further discussion.
So we had to do passed motion
from Representative Roybal
Caballero do I have the second.
Well that second by
Representative Stapleton.
All right so madam secretary
please call the roll on the do
passed motion for house bill
forty three please
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative doll.
Yes okay Representative is that
all yes.
Yes.
Representative figura.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lente excuse me
it should be Lotta.
Yes.
Representative let.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative R. ball Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes.
I see how Representative about
another just came in and he's
waving at me.
I'll call you representative
although not all.
Yes okay.
C. representative okay so we
have
fourteen.
Fourteen zero.
All right I have to fourteen in
the affirmative zero in the
negative house bill forty three
has passes Committee thank you
Dr Martin did you want to say
something in closing place.
You have to Mr you'll need to on
mute.
Yes please I lost control of my
system for enrollment so and I
was thinking of something that
you folks have already voted in
affirmative so it probably is
probably mute but there's
something else that is because
senator about this Education Act
briefly of years ago I served on
the tax the committee for the
state of New Mexico under the
riches and camping and one of
things that I learned that in
terms of not so much about anti
racism education or prejudice
reduction of democracy building
or healing and reconciliation
but instead of diverse multi
culturalism there's an
administrative law that existed
books in New Mexico this is the
text books can only have ten
percent multi cultural content.
And I think that needs to be
looked at and Amanda so if
you're going to have this this
notion anti racism and and
equity for all that that has
that law has to be changed
amended so the text books gonna
have more than just wanted a
picture of my to the king of
princes cut your lawn FY you
somebody else in that sense so
that's something that needs to
be looked at also two as you as
you go down this road just
just a point of point of
discussion.
Great certainly appreciate that
Dr Martin thank you for being
here today committee I certainly
appreciate the good work that we
have done today we're gonna have
to straighten out who is on the
panel and who may not be so that
I can juggle the tech
responsibilities of this
committee and we can get that
straightened out if we are
having microphone issues things
like that like I said I can't
hear most members I have good
hearing so I'm happy to ask
those questions on your behalf
if we're having those sorts of
issues to get them out there for
everybody and to have you heard
but other than that I'm sorry
Representative say Mr chairman
I'm very sorry that
Representative these al was not
able to ask questions because of
technical difficulties
Representative is that a low
represents quite a few African
American students in Roswell
area and and so I I would.
Look to talk to representative
is L. offline in reference to
her questions.
Certainly I think that's great
thank you so much for doing that
and Representative is L. and and
Representative Stapleton thank
you for for that extension so
with any of that if there aren't
any more questions were recess
till Friday morning work will
have quite a number of bills but
good work everybody and we're
off to a good start thank you
everybody have a nice rest of
your day we'll see you soon
thanks a lot.
Representative Stapleton thank
you very much everyone I
appreciate you.
Nice to see our.
Likewise.
Yes.
I think we should do in New exam
because I'm gonna tell you out
why don't we created new still
what you want me to create it I
just created and sent it to me
merry will do it okay bye okay.
