Representative her
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Marable here.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo here.
Madam vice chair here you Mr
chairman here you have a quorum
all right so we have a quorum
good morning everybody and sorry
for the confusion that we're
starting at nine thirty this
morning
I may have misspoke on the floor
sorry about that
I did.
Yes Representative I take
responsibility for that I'm not
of of doing that so I'm sorry
about that but.
One announcement Senate bill one
await we're going to roll over
so the sponsor was actually
really good about saying that
that's something that we should
be visiting in the interim as
it's going to have a pretty
hefty SCG impact so that's
something we've agreed to work
on as we get more funding for
CTE so Senate bill one await
will roll over sees Senator
Brandt the audience and then
we'll start off with Senate bill
four ninety two so if chairman
Nunes vice chair Garrett when
you already thank you Mr
chairman that's interesting
conversation about Senate bill
one away because of I was told
to give them a committee is a
need to get out of my wasn't
hearing the Sanchez bills and
could you just hear that bill
and Carol kill it.
That would be a lot easier for
me a lot more painful for him
chairman I believe that's what
we just did by rolling it.
No I would like it kids.
As well start Wednesday off
right we we we do morning is we
do have your bill up so well
that's fine
Senator be anybody in the school
system so Mr chairman members of
the committee said the four
ninety two just extends the the
time for teachers returning to
work from thirty six to sixty
months with that will stand for
questions right thank you so
much so we will go to the
audience if you're online and
you support Senate bill four
ninety two please indicate by
raising your hand.
Those in our audience if you're
in support of Senate bill four
ninety two please and part so
then you have up to two minutes
welcome morning Mr chairman
members of the committee that
relative to Phillips and lands
on the New Mexico's boards
physicians and is the
verification physicians
supported bills that will allow
our teachers to return to work
so that we can provide that
excellent structure for students
we think the sponsoring this
forward yes it is and move
forward to a large to be in the
hospital for a long period and
using their thank you great
thank you others and support
please Sir you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman or the
committee stand around for the
school superintendents the cost
of education leaders want to
thank thank the chairman for
bringing this forward.
Last year you're labeled a
through a thirty six months.
Of the best deal for for us to
work we had a number folks take
advantage of that it helped us.
In our staffing for a lot of the
openings were having these days
this five year period or sixty
of the months is even better
because we can build a retaining
number of those and also entice
others that will lay out for the
thirty six months to come I'm
sorry for the for the ninety
days and then come back in the
service was chairman of the
committee to vote and I thank
you thank thank you anybody else
in support.
Opposition is there any
opposition to Senate bill four
ninety two.
All right see none will come to
Canadian Canadian questions
comments concerns Representative
order please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I have just one
question to clarify is in the
bill but Google does affect that
retirement fund.
Mr Chairman representative it
won't affect the retirement fund
the teachers return and we're
still paying into the fund but
they're not eligible for any
other benefits in in
representative Garrett's bill so
will not affect the funded
actually additionally helps the
fund.
Allows them to drive the
retirement the same time they're
teaching though and so but
they're paying into the fund so
it actually is a benefit.
Thank you that was my only
question thank you so other
Representative Lara.
And so we have a due pass motion
by Representative well as a
comparison made a more
Representative added you have a
question if I.
Yeah of course.
I'm sorry I'm late as it says
spaniel today down and the
people are so thousand people to
talk to but I just want to thank
you for bringing this bill
forward we need to all the
teachers we can get at this
point so anyway we can get more
qualified teachers into the
classroom I'm all about thank
you thank you.
Thank you all right so we had a
motion by Representative Lara
side comparison we do Maya any
opposition to the do passed
motion seeing none.
Yes Representative affordable
it's not mark seventeen right.
Gave it to me at all.
All right so we have yes
Representative Garrett staying
up is that correct thank you
very much
Mr Senate bill let me just make
the answer is Senate bill three
fifty seven to buy your experts
a little bit of time okay when
you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair this is
Senate bill three fifty seven
it is the.
What is that it's the C. pack
Committee substitute for Senate
bill three fifty seven if
parents of children and
performing art what it does it
pertains to the employment of
children to clarify the
protections established for
performers who are under the age
of eighteen it applies to both
residents and non residents it
establishes requirements of for
studio teachers including that
they should be certified at
level two so that they don't
need supervision as a level one
beginning teacher and it talks
about the fact that they should
be certified to cover that child
welfare of a child performer
which is already been the
practice and is part of the
responsibilities in a certified
level two tier I've been expert
witness Lee Lewin who is a
current studio teacher who just
add a couple remarks and will
stand for questions please
welcome thank you good morning
I am a retired educator I've
been working in the film
industry as a studio teacher for
about five years and what has
become clear is that well the
law is clear but a little silent
on some of the issues that we
deal with and the regulations
are in conflict in some areas we
are trying to verify the duties
in the scope of responsibilities
of a studio teacher in one whole
document the conflict is some
rig say the studio teacher is
only to be there during school
hours other rigs say the studio
teacher is responsible for the
health safety and welfare of the
child on sat so we have combined
the rest responsibilities of
health safety and welfare with
the level two teacher
requirement level two is within
its scope of responsibility and
duties includes monitoring
health safety and welfare and
the requirements to report.
And and I will that across the
could the country I ought see
and the string actors guild of
support this is the standard
practice with that we stand for
questions thank you feel could
remember to go through the chair
for discussion thank you all
right so go to the audience will
start off with opposition
opposition to Senate bill three
fifty seven.
Online in the room.
There's nothing all right so we
will go to support if you're
online support of Senate bill
three fifty seven please
indicate there is your hand in
our audience if you're in
support please indicate by
raising your hand all right
we'll start off with prestin
good morning pressed any of two
minutes welcome I'm interested
I'm a child actor I'm currently
here for next week's down for
six months and it's really
beneficial to have a studio
teacher as my point of contact
instead of having a medic and
her to look at because then that
just gets confusing.
All right welcome all right
others and sport American side
please Sir you have up to two
minutes.
Pardon me for hearing aids part
of what we have is a teacher
this Daniel Williams a retired
military officer for training
officers I've also been an
educator for three decades
including working with
characters including Mr
president here and off with the.
On sat for about twelve years
now the it is actually critical
that this passes we have a huge
tragedy over a year ago one
hundred percent preventable if
existing safety guidelines are
followed they were not but and
I'm not talking about anything
with kids there but in this case
you've got the opportunity to
pass legislation
to keep kids safe.
Why have it yes their parents
there but often there's a
conflict of interest many
parents unfortunately of look at
it as a chance for their.
Child to move forward in
Hollywood and will agree to
things that they want if they
really understood and so happy
they're just overwhelmed FY are
is huge three point four stories
like squeeze and the number one
director on the film wanted to
shoot wanted for a nine year old
girl topless studio teacher said
no.
Huge production everyone of you
here's.
I was one of four teachers
different production worked on
on that one.
Do during the week we have New
Mexico studio teachers that same
production brought in three
hundred New Mexico kids to work
as background actors on a
Saturday zero New Mexico studio
teachers there they did have the
New York teacher as required by
sector.
Their third one.
For all right those two minutes
thank you Sir thank you
appreciate it thank you all
right please family of up to two
minutes hi my name's the only in
a mode I and I am testament is
mom and as a parent on set it is
very critical and important that
we have somebody else that can
be a voice for us as parents and
it is very hard as you mentioned
to be able to walk up to the
director of the state I'm not
comfortable with my child in
this of course we want to be
their advocate but we also want
them to be successful so to have
somebody else do that kind of
fear of bad news sometimes is
very beneficial and for it to be
that single point of contact is
very important to be the studio
teacher okay thank you others
and support that we speak.
All right so we will come to
committee committee members
comments questions concerns.
Representative is out please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank you for your presentation
today I do have a couple of
questions here and I'm looking
at the FIR.
I understand that this is kind
of going under the students the
child of being under.
Home schooling but then it also
states that
Over here under significant
issues that the by two thousand
and twenty six.
The studio teacher must possess
the level to licensure can you
explain that for me please Mr
chair and representative that's
because currently since nineteen
seventeen it's been required to
have a certified teacher
the reason why we've given that
two three year period is if
somebody is a current studio
teacher with the level one it
gives them time to get their
level two certification.
Okay but Mr chairman and
representative whenever we're
talking about the a parent or
guardian should be present yes
be within sight and sound of the
child at all times the list goes
on there.
But she can't the parent or
guardian also be.
An instructor under the home
screen.
Los rules there was a little
bit.
Chairman chairman Romero then
respond of course thank you.
Kirman thank you
that's a little bit of
misunderstanding on the report
the law is that the child must
have three hours of school today
whether they are in front of the
camera or not while employed at
some children are home schooled
some children are online some
children attend public schools
so it is a very different
picture depending on who the
child is the studio teacher is
there to either be the primary
teacher if the child is not
attending school at that time or
the studio teachers there as a
tutor to support the child who
might be online.
Or might be in the home screen
kind.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
that was my main concern there I
do have to laugh though because
in the bill itself and it's
under current language.
Whenever it's talking about
children working in the
performing arts on page two I
thought it was.
And funny the performer is a
member of the armed forces we're
talking about a child that's
under the age of sixteen and
then it goes on down to the line
I was is the performer is
legally emancipated.
So the.
That's current language folks
and I'm kind of stunned by the.
But Mr chairman thank you for
answering my questions
appreciate that very much.
Thank you other questions what's
the will of the committee.
Right so we have to pass a
motion by Representative
Trujillo second by
Representative Chatfield is
there any opposition to the past
motion all right see none do
pass on the committee substitute
Senate bill three fifty seven
thank you all all right so
Senator Brandt.
I was trying to be in three
places at once but is joining us
we feel so honored.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
thank you for getting this on
right away of course.
As everyone knows I have been
hearing a lot of CTE bills this
year I want to thank the chair
for working with me on one oh
eight we just decided to make
things right instead of being
rushed that we would hold off
for the interim so we can really
figure out it was hitting too
many people and we really wanted
to be more narrow so we're gonna
spend LESC time making sure we
get that one right and so
together we decide we just hope
that here this bill.
started out trying to fix the
language for CD licensure.
In talking to their attorneys
told him they could no longer
issue the eight hundred license.
Because they actually never had
the authority to issue in the
first place because we didn't
give it to them and so without
this bill there will not be a
CTE license for new teachers and
so
Sat down with Pat we worked on
the floor seven we literally sub
this yesterday on the floor with
the exact language between me
and Pat that we agreed on to
make sure that could make it
through get signed and take care
of the licenses tuition in the
state and so that's what you
have in front of you is an
alternate path for for those who
are in the trades to you know
auto mechanics welders all those
different trades that don't have
a four year degree
this gives them a path to
becoming a teacher it is within
the three tier licensure system
and there's some some small
tweaks we don't have the this
particular Lysons doesn't have
to comply with the minimum
salaries that's because they're
such a unique type teacher that
that really just needs to be
left to what the local community
needs because of auto mechanic
gets paid very differently in
Gandhi's else part of the world
as they do in my part of the
world and so the local districts
need to be able to deal with
that and our local communities
and that's what the builders
right thank you senator all
right so we'll go to those
online and those in our audience
if you're in opposition to
Senate bill for seventeen
indicator is here and.
All right so we'll go to support
if you're online in support of
Senate bill four seventeen
please indicate areas your hand
doesn't support in the room if
you could please indicate there
is your hand I see.
Hi you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the chamber
supports efforts to ensure that
the current focus on her
technical education as
maintained as an important.
For many students five members
of the education committees for
this.
Please for just the fourth
seventeen to codify elements of
regulatory co chair Dr pathways
license three professionals
traditional pathways into.
Thank you right thank you others
and support please sorry of up
to two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman Stan
rounds for the superintendents
Mr chairman I think it's been
well stated number one I was
shocked that the eight hundred
license should never been
allowed I.
Think that that's something we
certainly need to crack with
like this possibly has of making
that happen the real issue of Mr
chair members the committee is
we have a lot of folks to come
out of trades and that of non
teaching level training they
have high value and instruction
of our kids witnesses an example
the the current tax center in
Hobbs and those employees are
very brief top of so this is a
will to continue working on but
we want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this up to give us the
gateway into capability of
filling his job we thank you for
your interest and hope will
continue to study this as we
move forward thank.
Great others in support please
Sir.
William Mr chair members of the
committee CCI as with any New
Mexico government relations
director and we also stand in
support of this bill makes
common sense and we just a few
of those in favor thank you
thank you others and support in
the room to speak.
All right I did see one hand
online I hope you don't get
discouraged but if you wish to
reserve.
Speak addresses.
We'll take that now in support.
All right so we'll come to
committee Representative Milan
please.
Thank you Mr chair Senator I
really when I was reading this
bill I was like auditing I would
have really liked to sign on to
this because I love this
legislation I really do because
in Berlin high school we have a
state of the art of auto
mechanics
shop and we cannot find a
teacher.
so this will make it easier to
find those either you know those
mechanics those master mechanics
and get them licensed and get
them hopefully wanting to come
in and teach our students so I'm
I'm really excited for this
adjusted and I don't have
questions but I I I really like
I really like this legislation
thank you for bringing it right
thank you others comments
questions concerns share our
Representative Lara.
Alright so we have in the past
and Senate bill committees of
force of for Senate bill for
seventeen Representative Lara
second by Representative
Chatfield there any opposition
to the to pass motion.
All right harmony on our last
day you have in the past
Senator.
Awesome and that.
Will conclude house education
for reals this time for real
this time it's great working
