bars with our schools. We talk
about the expectations of a
student.
Having a profound impact on a
student's success.
High expectations.
Provided and tied with support
leads to better student
outcomes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Chair, I would also assert that
School leadership as far as the
principal is also a vital and
part of that.
Not only in creating a culture.
That promotes learning.
But also that makes it a
positive learning environment.
For both staff and for students.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, as a
School leader myself. I've been
a
administrator since 2005.
I've
Covered every I've had every
job.
In a school district from.
Sight coordinator
2
Assistant principal
The director
Assistant Superintendent, now
deputy.
And I can tell you, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Chair.
That the skill set.
And the knowledge that is needed
at the, at these levels, it
differs.
And so with this bill tends to
do is to make sure that
that we not only
Promotes, continued learning.
But that we recognize when
somebody's charged with the
responsibility of leading a
school.
Or leading a district.
That there be other
Knowledge that be necessary.
to be successful.
You know, we talk about one of
the, the big.
um, researching this, Mr.
Chairman, Ms. Marzano.
Talks about school leadership
matters.
And so when we're looking at
this bill.
And also recognizing that not
all answers are going to be.
Fulfilled with this bill.
It takes many different
stakeholders at the table.
It takes your teachers.
It takes your colleagues as far
as other school leaders.
It takes numbers from our
various organizations or NIMSL.
folks are our superintendent
association to have input and to
develop quality programs and
support.
That will not only provide great
leadership, but also
consistency.
For our schools and for our
district.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, we do have an
amendment.
OK.
Are you all finished with your
presentation and overview of the
bill.
Uh, and we're gonna have any
Armitage add a few comments as
our expert from the legislative
education Study Committee.
Mr. Char
He
Um
I just want to tell you a little
bit more about the bill itself.
I know that it looks fairly long
and I wanna mention that the
first half of the bill is
cleanup.
And one around adding the new um
the new licenses that the bill
would be adding to requiring
them to the list of.
Licenses that require background
checks, and then moving the
principal responsibility factors
that determine principal pay,
um, out of the definition
section into the section that
licenses principles often a
complaint that nobody can find
it, uh, so that's the first half
of the bill and part of why it
looks so long, um, the kind of
real substantive substantive
changes that this bill would
make are really bringing uh best
practices around school leader
preparation and licensure.
sorry, bringing
What we do here in New Mexico
for school leader preparation
and licensure in line with
national best practices. So
that's one requiring that
educational um preparation
programs for schools and school
administrators, I got to slow
down, um.
Our meetings with those national
best practices and some very
basic levels of those are
included in the bill, um, more
details in terms of
implementation, content
knowledge that would be given to
administrators would be left to
uh PED to determine through
rule.
The next thing it would do would
be to separate those
preparations um for principles
and superintendents. So right
now in statute.
All school administrators, that
includes assistant principals,
principals, superintendents, uh,
special education director, um.
And more than that, frankly,
anybody working at a central
administrator's office. They all
have to go through the same
license, and that's actually not
a best practice because all
those positions need very
different preparation. And what
happens now is that
administrator preparation
programs are trying to prepare
candidates for all of these
different things. It's not very
efficient.
Um, so this would allow
administrator preparation
programs to really focus their
programs on preparing
principles.
And charter school head
administrators. Superintendents
would be required to go through
um an inspiring superintendent
academy, um.
There's not a lot of specifics
in the bill about what that
would mean and is required to
be. But the task force has been
working on this for several
years, had recommended it should
be feasible within a one year
time span, and should be
differentiated to meet the needs
of both rural districts.
Those are kind of the two.
Main things that would happen in
this bill to help improve the
state right now, and I just
wanna.
know that we have really high
principal and superintendent
turnover within this state well
above national averages in both
cases.
Um, I guess I should say one
more thing this bill would do
would be to really aim to
support these um.
Professionals, not just by
making sure they're more
prepared when they enter their
roles.
But also allowing for mentoring
and induction programs during
their first year to make sure
that they're getting all that
knowledge that they need.
And I'll leave it at that. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair with that, I would
want to introduce the amendment.
right? Do I have a motion?
For the amendment.
This year
Uh, have emotion.
Or discussion of the amendment
Chatfield. I compared to Mita
Moya.
we got it all.
Everybody's on board. I
appreciate that. OK, so we're on
discussion of the so um Madam
Vice Chair, if you want to talk
about the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The amendment simply moves the
dates back one year.
So instead of 2028, for example,
on page 16.
Line 3
Um, it says all teachers
instructional support providers
and school administrators who
hold valid level 3B licenses on
July 1st, 2028. That's changed
to 2029 shall be granted a
professional site administrator
license and as you go through
it, it changes to 2028 dates to
2029.
On page 22.
One section.
Inserted
A minute
Um, at the bottom of section B.
Uh, we add section C.
And it's the department may
grant a superintendent licensed
to an out of state candidate who
does not meet the other
requirements and qualifications
of that license if the candidate
and it lists uh 4 points uh for
that candidate.
And then on pages 26 and 27, uh,
we changed 2026, uh, to 2027 and
on 27, it changes 2028 to 2029.
This at the request of the
colleges of education gives more
time to develop the program and
the requirements.
Uh, and it gives everybody more
time to implement effectively
and accurately the changes that
this bill calls for.
Alright. Discussion on the
amendment.
Just on the amendment.
Right.
All right, so there's a motion
to adopt the amendment by
Represent Moya.
Second, I representingrola. Is
there any opposition to adopting
the amendment, seeing none.
We have an amended bill and you
all are finished with your
presentation, right, so, um,
we'll go to comments from the
audience. So first we'll go to
opposition, so any participant
on Zoom that wishes to speak in
opposition of House Bill 157 as
amended, please indicate by
raising your hand. I'll go to
the room. Is there anybody here
that is in opposition to House
Bill 157 as amended.
Opposition
wait time.
So
OK, so we'll go to support.
Anybody on our Zoom that wishes
to speak in support of House
Bill 157 as amended, please
indicate by raising your hand.
Let that populate on my left
hand side of the room, those in
support of House Bill 157 as
amended that wish to speak. All
right, so we'll start in the
back, ma'am, you'll have up to 2
minutes. That's
Every
I stand in support of HB 157
because of my belief that
superintendents and principals
are key to setting the culture
and working environments of our
schools. All practitioners
benefit from meaningful
professional development and
best practices, having closer
alignment between the standards
and expectations for our
administrators to that of our
educators makes sense and is a
step forward to ensuring that
the right highly qualified
people hold these important
jobs. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Others that wish to speak in
sport.
On my left hand side, please,
sir.
Good morning. Welcome. You have
up to 2 minutes. All right.
Good morning. My name is Mike
Gabriel. I'm the vice president
of Program and learning at the
Lanno Foundation.
Uh, the bill you see before you
is the result of years of
collaborative work based on the
same fundamental truth, and that
is that strong school leadership
is essential for student
achievement.
Second to teachers as uh
Representative Garrett shared
school leadership has the
biggest effect on student
outcomes. Um.
In 2022, our colleagues at the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce published a report
highlighting the leadership
needs in New Mexico and this
eventually snowballed into a
collaborative effort with the
Lao Foundation, Kellogg
Foundation, JF Maddox
Foundation, and Thornburgh
Foundation to fund a task force
this past summer.
Um, and that task force
consisted of a prep
representatives, charter school
representative, uh, tribally
controlled school
representative, LESC, LLC PED,
um, all the acronyms you can
imagine, and their
recommendations for what to do
with this, live in the bill
that's before you.
I won't repeat any of the things
that um the presenters have
shared, um, but just want to
emphasize that in New Mexico and
that one of the recent reports,
72 of 89 superintendents has
rolled over in the past 3 years.
There's clearly something we
needed to do to support the
preparation of our leaders of
our superintendents and of our
principals.
Well-prepared school leaders
improve outcomes, the reduced
turnover and that creates strong
learning environments. This is a
research-based solution that
will strengthen New Mexico's
schools. So behalf of Atlanta
Foundation, the largest
nonprofit in New Mexico
dedicated exclusively to
education. I urge you to support
this bill, and invest the future
of our student, teachers and
communities. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Others on my
left-hand side.
Oh
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole. I am the
president CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I'm here today to support HB 157
because to improve education in
New Mexico, it's always helpful,
we think, to turn, think about
turning things around one school
at a time, which at its core is
a leadership challenge, as Mike
mentioned from the Lannell
Foundation, we have been engaged
in this project for many years
and commissioned research on it,
so this is an exciting day for
us.
to have a bill before you that
we can speak on.
There are no documented
instances naturally of a school
turning round its academic
performance in the absence of a
dynamic effective leader at the
helm.
Stronger, better prepared
principles are essential to
driving change. The final few
pages of the bill significantly
raised the standards for how we
train principals in New Mexico,
which we've been urging the
legislature to adopt for several
years. Things like rigorous on
the job training, aggressive
recruitment of top teaching
talent into school leadership
training and improved tracking
of graduates.
From principal prep programs. We
commend the sponsor for carrying
the bill. She's delightful and
helpful to work with, and we
urge your support this morning
of the bill. Thank you very
much.
Great. Thank you, ma'am.
to 2 minutes. Welcome. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Mandy Torres, uh,
we think New Mexico, um, I think
New Mexico stands in support of
this bill, and we think the
sponsors and all who contributed
to um to this effort to raise
the quality of school
administrators in our state. Um,
the sponsors have already talked
about how important the
principle is for school culture.
Um, as a former classroom
teacher, I was lucky enough to
have, excuse me, is I keep the
mic going in and out? I'm sorry.
I was lucky enough to have
school leadership in my career
that allowed me to innovate and
thrive.
Many of my classroom colleagues
have not been as lucky, and I
often hear the sentiment that
they're just writing out the
storm until the next one comes
along. I also have had teacher
friends who have entered the
administration ranks only to
feel unprepared, unsupported,
and too overwhelmed to be
effective.
Our students deserve better.
The school principal is
considered the 2nd most
important factor as as
Representative Garrett said, and
this bill gives PED and school
leaders the opportunity to
ensure that preparation programs
require quality time, ample
time, and sustained mentorship
and transparency around their
quality. Creating the new
license for leadership can
ensure that leaders at different
levels in their journey, if the
quality training and support
they need.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else on my
left hand side?
All right, I'll go to my
right-hand side, those in sport
that wish to speak, sir, in the
back.
I'll start off with you.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes.
Mr. Chairman, Chris Balzano with
Rancho Public Schools, we stand
in support of this piece of
legislation. Uh, we understand
that this bring in line with
national best practices.
Um, we have a few reservations
you want to bring before the
committee so that this can be
debated today. How much an input
with PED and the and the
districts.
Um, this, you know, throughout
the year.
We did we have any input with PD
in the districts that's a
concern we have.
Um
We believe that this should be a
collaborative matter where
superintendents, principals, and
PD, um, working together.
be able to achieve this goal. We
are concerned with recruitment
and retention, since this is a
problem here in the state of New
Mexico, not only on education.
Uh, but also and everything
else, healthcare, um, law
enforcement, you name it, um, so
those are two things that we are
concerned. We're going to keep
monitoring this bill as it
progresses to the legislative
process, we are working with HR
team as well to see how this
would impact our school
district. That's all. Thank you.
Thank you. Others on my right
hand side that wish to speak in
sport.
All right, sir? You have 2
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee stand rounds
for the school superintendents
and the coalition of Educational
Leaders, we stand in support of
this bill. We want to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward. We appreciate the work
over the summer that was done. I
direct your attention to page 16
lines 1 through 7. this is, uh,
something we want to thank the
sponsors for adding to the bill
after it was originally
constructed. It really has to do
with the transition from the
current system to the new
system.
You'll notice, uh, uh, they're
in the superintendent section
which I think starts on line 5
or so, uh, it talks about it's
now in.
2029.
Uh, anyone who has held a
superintendency and a 3B
administrative license will be
granted in a superintendent's
license we appreciate that the
same thing for uh for the
principals in lines 1 through 4
or 5, wherever that is in in the
bill. I don't have it in my
little phone here, jumped off.
However, we ask a question to be
something just to be cognizant
of as we roll regulation out
when we do that the way licenses
work.
as they roll over every year on
the year you have been licensed
and the administrator license is
a five-year license.
What we
Expect to have happen and in
talking with the sponsors, I
believe it may be their
expectation is that when they
roll over, that will be a 5-year
license commencing in 2029 for
five years because as we set up
CEU processes and those
trainings for long standing
superintendents, those are
different than new
administrators or new
superintendents. Final appoint
Mr. Chairman, I help him within
my two minutes is we have been
working on aspiring for the
years I've been executive
director. We have a very, very,
uh, uh, involved aspiring
superintendents, aspiring
principals through cooperative.
Thank you so much.
Right. Others that wish to speak
oh, we'd already gone there,
man, but you're fine.
Allow it for now, please. You
have up to 2 minutes, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Paul with Public
Charter Schools of New Mexico.
I'm sorry for breaking decorum
this morning, but wanted to
share our support um with some
reservations, uh, uh, with the
licenser piece. First, we want
to thank the sponsor because
this is desperately needed,
overhauling of our
administrative prep programs.
The bill also appropriately
allows charter school leaders to
have either a superintendent's
license or a school leadership
license. Um,
However, we're worried about the
new uh licenger structure and
adding bureaucracy to to a realm
where we don't have enough
qualified administrators
already. Um, we would rather
keep 3B with elevated training
for everyone. Um, the rise to
being a superintendent or a
charter school leader is not
always linear or planned and
giving everyone the tools with
an administrator's license, we
think is a is a better approach
with maybe some professional.
Development requirements for
continuing license holders. So
we feel like that's a better
approach to it.
Overall, we, we are.
to the sponsors for what they've
done and all the work they put
into it, and the general thrust
of the bill we do support, so
thank you.
Alright, thank you. There's a
wish to be in sport.
Right.
None, nobody in the Zoom.
come to committee. Ready.
Oh, we have hands up. I don't
have hands up.
Does she have hand up?
Brenda, good morning. Did you
wish to speak on House Bill 157
has been.
You're still muted, Brenda.
If that's the case.
if not.
Right.
Brenda, last call.
OK, we'll come to committee
then, committee members,
questions.
All right, Represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I appreciate the
presentation.
I've talked to quite a few
superintendents and I was just
wondering.
Have you worked with the
superintendents and is this a
popular thing for them, or is it
more of a burden?
Mr. Chair.
Representative, that's a great
question, Superintendents were
included in the working.
Two working groups actually over
2, in terms for the past. I
think the support, um, you know,
we have san rounds here has
generally been and
And I think a lot of that is
because we did get feedback from
so many stakeholders, all the
acronyms, um, you know,
principals, superintendents were
on that working group from urban
rural districts, tribal schools,
um.
And it did shape the
recommendations or the
recommendations they made did
shape this legislators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm friends with lots of
teachers, lots of principals,
lots of superintendents, and I
want to make sure that that
we're doing what's just by them.
So
Would you explain to me when you
get your administrative license.
What happens after you get the
administrative license. Do you,
do you do continual ed
you go to workshops, how do you
keep your, your license valid.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, I can speak for myself.
I got my administrative license
in 2005 when I graduated from
UNM.
I've never been required to take
another class since 2005.
Uh
I think this also stresses the
the importance of professional
development for school leaders,
right? I think that there's been
a huge commitment and
professional development for
teachers and other staffs, which
I agree and I support.
school leaders, there has not
been.
Support and for many, in many
cases, there's actually been
quite opposite.
There has been a lack of
professional development. So in
this structure here, it is
basically
A signify that we have to that a
district.
to support and continue.
Uh, allowing professional
development and growth of our
leaders, as I said before,
because for many of us,
Myself included, even though
like I.
Spoke earlier
In all the different positions
that I've had, including special
director, including HR director,
including
You know, in charge of early
childhood.
never had to
been required to take anything
different and so it's more on
the job training as opposed to
more specialized.
Or um
Kind of a situational uh
concerns or development.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And also uh I was reading on
the, the reciprocity process.
So on the reciprocity process,
is that gonna be burdensome so
can somebody from another state
come in with an administrative
license.
And who issues that license and
how does that work, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for your question.
Um, if we just compare the
current situation for a school
administrator, reciprocity to
what the bill proposes.
Um, both of them do allow for
reciprocity, in fact, um, well,
there are 4 things, so I'll just
go through them one by one.
The first ones that they have to
hold a school administrator
license from another state, uh,
that's required now and continue
to be required.
Um, in terms of numbers of
school administrator numbers of
years of school administrator
experience, the current
requirement in 6 years, um, the.
passport working group actually
felt like this was too
burdensome, so this bill would
actually reduce it to 3 years of
experience to get reciprocity.
Um
In the current and the proposed
bill, they need to be in good
standing and uh.
The one thing that would be
added now would be that they
need to be enrolled in a site
administrator induction program,
um, which we expect with the
task force recommended be about
a one year program that you
complete while you're, um, while
you're on the job and their
intention with that was to make
sure that when you have
administrators coming in from
other states that they have a
chance to become familiar with
the context of New Mexico, any
kind of um.
Initiatives that, for example,
PED is working on, they get some
training in that and they get
kind of a cohort experience, um.
That would be one of the the
changes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One final
question.
So I heard you say that
superintendents last somewhere
around.
3 years.
2 years
And I've known a few of those,
and I know that it's a hard job.
It is this gonna help promote
that? Why do they, is it the
pressure? Is that why they quit?
Or are they not equipped?
And I know those are hard
questions. I'm sorry for that,
but.
I need to know those.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, I think that the
reasons
For a superintendent and huge
turnover.
is dependent upon each district.
For some, it may be a case of
upward mobility that they may
Start out in as small district
and went in as successful may
move up.
For others, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representatives, I think that it
could be that.
There, um,
Support of the local community
and or school board.
Has made it very difficult then.
To do the job that they need to
do.
brothers, Mr. Chairman, I think
that
It really is.
Just like
Every school has a culture.
Every district has a culture and
so sometimes, Mr. Chairman, it
may not be.
A good fit and may be well.
a good person, but it may not
be.
The right fit.
And so I think that it's, there
are 89 school districts. There's
a 100 state charter schools. So
I think that the reasons are
different if you look at the
overall
Overarching issues.
I do think a part of one of his
is the upward mobility as we
have folks move up.
The other, I do think it's uh an
issue that we have with the
leadership starting from PED
secretary.
Down to our school boards.
I do think that there has to be
some
Some um
Study into those types of
reasons because
Just like uh we, we do want to
have a new head coach every
couple of years.
It's very difficult to win in
that situation. It's also very
difficult to lead.
When you're always in a state of
starting over and getting
somebody new.
So although the
Reasons are very different. I do
think that if this, you were to
study it, you would see that
they would fit into those 3
buckets, Mr. Trim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your honesty and thank you
for the time.
I.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for, for the bill. I
think uh uh it will support
school culture, I believe, um,
in, in the whole. I have a
question, uh, Mr. Chair.
I not here. What is the
difference in the requirements
now currently on, on, on
administrator license for um
Mr. Chair and Representative.
One thing that continues to be
the same as you have to have a
level 2 or a level 3 license to
be eligible.
To become a slight
administrator. That's the first
thing.
Thank you.
So I
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
so I, there is a part here that
I read and I'm trying to find
it, um, 3 years as a teacher or
something
similar support.
This, does this mean that they
don't have to have a
specifically classroom
experience, it can be, I don't
know, instructional coaches for
5 years.
representatives, that's a great
question. I'm glad you asked it.
Um, actually right now in
statute, there's a separate
section you could see if you
wanted to look at the very end
of the bill, that section is
repealed, so right now.
There's a separate section of
statute, in fact, a separate
license for school
administrators, that's
specifically for instructional
support providers, and that's
like occupational therapists,
helped me, um.
speech and language
pathologists, there's a long
list of them, um, and so they're
already able to do all of this,
this bill kind of cleans that up
by incorporating them into the
primary bill language instead of
having a separate license for
them.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
do believe it's very important
for the the the administrators
to have experience in all the
areas in the school, especially
in classroom.
Thank you so much. That was my
only question.
Thank you. I represent
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know
I come from the land of the very
small school.
A lot of our most successful
superintendents are
different tenets that have spent
a lifetime.
Uh
Teach, uh, being a
superintendent in Texas, they
retire, they come over to our
area, they make a good
superintendent, a little bitty
school is not a learning place.
It's, it's better to, to start
your career in a more populated
area where you have other people
and other.
Superintendents, other
principals, other folks, uh.
Working with you
whenever we hire.
A small school.
We don't always hire somebody
that's got experience.
Right now is great.
Time, but
Um, for the most part, they need
some mileage.
Uh, is there anything in this
bill that
You know, and I see the, so that
they're required to do some
training, that's OK, but in
those remote areas, are they
gonna, is it gonna be online or
is it gonna be some something
that prevents us from getting
some of these highly qualified
folks and we've been
Using in the past.
Mr. Chair Representative,
actually.
We had online courses back when
I started my leadership license
that was in 1998.
We already had a hybrid learning
situations, and some of the
programs like I think it's a
cooperative education service.
They have people come together
on certain weekends, so there's
multiple ways that programs can
operate for the educational
piece of the preparation.
So make sure, that's not going
to be a problem for her.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, I don't have anybody
else on my list. I'm calling,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
I just, um, I wanna say that I
really appreciate the.
to professional development.
Um
retention rates, um, especially,
I mean, we're fortunate that
we've had a superintendent.
Strict
Um, but as they had mentioned
earlier, there was a concern.
Mr. Chair, that, uh, if they
would be collaboration.
Uh, in
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Representative
Collin. I think that, I think
that's another reason for the
dates being pushed back is the
need to actually
that
um
We have, we, this bill basically
brings to light the need for
this.
Through the various stakeholders
and through the various um
I re, I think that is where this
process will not only be
in but also input.
um gathered
that if this is, you know, the,
the message or their slight
changes that need to be made.
I speak for myself and
Representative Garrett, that
this, that's the job, that's the
goal of this is we want to take
that.
would be
you know, if there's language
that need to come back in the
future prior to these dates. I
think that's an opportunity.
No one bill.
Fixes everything.
times a bill will will highlight
a need.
Or will bring to light a certain
requirement that has been
overlooked when we talk about
best practices. This bill does
the same.
So
I
answers your question, uh,
representative and Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
from committee members?
All right, see, I'll accept the
motion. House Bill 157 as
amended.
In a more do pass motion, uh, on
HP 157 as amended, right, so we
have a motion for a due pass on
House Bill 157 as amended by
Representative Chatfield, sorry,
you'd mentioned it even before
the motion went through. So even
if it was a motion to table, he
would have second it. Yeah,
right, is there any opposition,
dare I say, to the do pass
motion.
In 9.
You have a unanimous due pass on
House Bill 157 as amended. Thank
you, Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. All right, um.
I'm gonna ask the committee,
would it be OK? we have
representative Herrera here to
hear.
has built 201, if we take the
bills out of order here House
Bill 201, we all right.
Right, cause I'm gonna stick
around.
I'll be here.
To do 193, so I'm not going
anywhere.
All right, so give it a moment.
When we switch.
See
Well.
Because not switching seats or
any, oh, hey, hey, all that. Oh,
OK. No, you're good. You're
good. We're, oh, OK, you're not.
All right.
Right, yeah, it's OK.
Oh.
Yeah, you gotta, you gotta be
accountable for the bill too.
All right. So represent Verrera,
welcome back to House Education.
Please, when you all are ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you committee. It's good to be
with you this morning, um, it is
my pleasure to introduce uh
House Bill 201, which was
endorsed by this committee, and
I certainly appreciate that. Um,
I don't think it's, uh, this is
actually a pretty simple bill.
It's only a page and a half, uh,
compared to 24 pages, so I, I, I
think we all know the need for
this, uh, our lowest.
employees are are really
struggling and if there has been
one.
Theme really in the
appropriations committee this
year, it's been how our lower
paid staff in all our state
agencies are really struggling.
And many of them living in
poverty, and many of them having
2 or 3 jobs just to make a
living, so the purpose of this
bill is to just raise our, our
employees at the lowest levels
in the school every.
Every single employee in a
school, and, and you all know
this, most of you are in
education is an important part
of that culture.
You know, they, they, the
janitors, the bus drivers, the
uh, the cooks, so they they all
care about these children and
they take care of these children
equally along with the with the
teachers and the and the
assistants and the principals
that they're an important part
of the culture and, and if
they're struggling in their
lives.
Uh, because of poverty wages, we
need to change that and um.
And so it's a fairly simple bill
we're raising uh awful time uh
school employees to a level of
30,000 a year and uh I will let
my uh co-sponsor, uh, comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
Represented me that um
One of the first
Things that I was able to be a
part of was when we, we
introduced a bill back in 23.
Which raises the level from at
that point 12,500.
25,000.
You know, that was something
that we
As a as a 32 year educator.
Art
I
Many times our teachers and our
principals, they, they gets
highlighter, they get a
spotlight for their
For their work with kids.
The truly unsung heroes are
those working behind the scenes,
and I'm going to tell you that
in many districts, there's an
equal amount of people.
Working
and support staff in various
roles.
As there are teachers,
administrators, and otherwise.
And I think that what we need to
do is we need to elevate and we
need to recognize the work that
they've done. There, I promise
you there's no harder working
person.
Than those that are working with
our students that have special
needs that they care for their
Uh
They're feeding or other
personal needs.
those that are in the classrooms
that are supporting
differentiation in small group
learning, those that serve our
meals, drive our buses, and
clean our halls and a very uh
whatever they do.
I think what this does is
basically that it.
It says that with we've made
great strides into paying our
teachers and bringing them to
the level that helps us to
recruit teachers. This bill also
recognizes that we want our
other staff.
To
realize, and then be recognized
for their role that they play.
In the education and success of
our schools, so I do appreciate
the opportunity to sign on for
this bill.
As we take one more step towards
doing.
what's right and um
I thank you, Mister Chair and
Committee, for your
consideration.
Mr. Chair committee members, um.
I just want to add a little bit
about how this bill would work,
so I want to note that you all
have already required and funded
a minimum wage rate of $15 for
um per hour for several years
now.
So for full time employees who
are working a calendar year
contract, they should already be
receiving earnings higher than
$30,000 per year.
Um, and this bill would codify
that minimum wage right now
you'll see in statute the
minimum wage for school places
about $6 an hour. Um, no one
should be paid that, but this
would fix that. Um, however,
what would change is that
employees who work shorter
full-time contracts, such as
those who work in 9 month school
year, for example.
educational assistants, school
secretaries, food service
employees, their wages could
increase, um, notably with the
$30,000 minimum salary.
And just a reminder that school
districts have a lot of
authority to determine the
length of a full-time contract
for different positions as well
as salary schedules. Um, so
there is, and there probably
should be some variation uh
across districts and what that
looks like.
With that Mr chair, we stamp her
questions. All right. Thank you
all so much. So, folks will go
to our audience, so folks on
Zoom, if you wish to speak in
support of House Bill 201,
please indicate by raising your
hand on the zoom.
We'll see if that populates, but
we'll go to my right hand side
now, those that wish to speak in
support of House Bill 201,
please indicate by raising your
hand, right hand side, all
right.
Sure, yeah, start off with
stand. Why not? We'll get, we'll
get it through.
This chairman was gonna let Lily
May go first. I apologize, stand
rounds, superintendent
Association Coalition of
Educational Leaders, we stand in
support of this bill. It's good
legislation. I think
Representative Baca framed it
very nicely about those unsung
heroes we have working for us.
Do you know that that's almost
half of your entire employee
base.
It isn't just teachers, that's
about half of your entire
employee base.
However, when we now mark this
up to House Bill 2.
We disagree with the process
that's happening there because
as I understand that markup,
House Bill 2, 1st does this.
And then whatever percentage you
ascribe as a as a legislature, I
think it's 4% is what I'm
hearing a discussion on if that
meets the 4%, there will be no
more money on top of that.
Now what that will do is it'll
compact your salary schedules
for these personnel, which I
don't know that's your
intentionality, so I would
suggest as you go through your
process, you might query that
and resolve how you might want
to handle that. Thank you.
OK, thank you, Lily May, please.
Morning, you have 2 minutes.
Welcome. Good morning. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman Lily May Ortiz
with the New Mexico School Board
Association and NMSBA has
maintained over a number of
years the need for additional
funding to increase the salaries
of this three-tiered licensing
system, the bilingual teacher
and Telstipends, educational
assistants and also all staff in
public schools, we have
maintained this position for
many years, uh, adequate funding
is one of our top priorities.
We're very appreciative of the
sponsor for bringing.
The sponsors for bringing this
bill forward, we thank them very
much and we ask you for your
favor favorable consideration to
pass this on to support our
staff as they need to be
supported. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else on my
right hand side that wish to
speak in sport?
All right, we'll go to my left
hand side, those who wish to
speak in support of House Bill
201.
All right, we'll go to the
server in the back with the
black tie looks black from here.
All right. Good morning.
Uh, my name is Edward Webster,
and I'm the government relations
director with NEA New Mexico. We
stand in support of HB 201.
Um, educational assistants play
a vital role in helping our
teachers in the classroom. They
assist with differential
instruction, uh, support special
needs children and uh help
teachers manage classroom size
requirements, but according to
the New Mexico educator vacancy
Report, there are an estimated
356 vacancies in the state of
New Mexico for the 24, 25 year.
Um, our president Mary Parr
Sanchez testified on Monday.
Um, how cost of living is going
up in the state of New Mexico.
It's hurting our teachers, but
it's hurting our educational
assistance even more. So HB 201
will raise wages for current
educational assistants and make
the position a more attractive
job option for New Mexicans and
we'll diminish the vacancy to a
vital resource for our teachers.
We ask you to vote yes on HP
201. Thank you.
Morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
John Dirts with AFT New Mexico.
Unsurprisingly, we are standing
in support of House Bill 201, as
we have when this, uh, pair of
sponsors brought the 25K for
educational assistance bill a
couple of years ago. Um,
The bill is simple as it was
mentioned, but this is mostly a
thank you to this committee in
particular and the interim work,
because you've not let up on the
gas on this issue appropriately,
we're looking at increases to
teacher salaries and other areas
of compensation, but this is the
critical one, and this committee
in particular has been at the
forefront of this. And I think
the important part of this bill,
as we've heard, as we've debated
over the year, are the stories
that everybody has. I remember
the school secretaries in my
building, Mrs. Lesco, Mrs.
Panzarella.
Um, and obviously the cafeteria
lady that slipped me an extra
slice of pizza, probably a
couple too many over the time.
But, uh
Mrs. Sowry went on to be a
school board member, the longest
serving school board member, and
she was a classified member of
my high school. So we remember
those stories and it really
humanizes the people that do run
these schools in a way that if
they didn't exist, the schools
would not run. And so we
appreciate that those stories
are being brought to light of
these critical folks. So we urge
your support for this bill and
we continue to urge your support
as a, as it finalizes this
funding process and it moves
forward hopefully to the
governor's desk for his
signature. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Others on my
left hand side that wish to
speak in sport.
Right.
Any hands on Zoom last call.
Um
Don't have any raised hands on
Zoom.
All right. Opposition is their
opposition to House Bill 102
either on Zoom or in our
audience. I don't see any,
right, so we'll come to
committee first on my list
represent me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, um, panel, uh, I'm, I'm no
questions really. I am just uh
just wanted to speak out and I
am one of them that signed on to
this, I 100% believe in this. I
personally think it should be
more.
Uh, but, uh, because, um, I, I
mean,
I remember a time I started out
as a school secretary and I was
making $8 an hour.
And, and, and, and that is,
that's, that's crazy, the the
the kind of things that they
have to deal with, um, on a
daily basis and they have to
deal with all those crazy
teachers and the students, so,
um, so yeah, so definitely.
This minimum, not to mention a
100% agree with uh
Representative Baca about, um, I
could not do what I do as a
classroom teacher without all of
the people that, that function
and do what they do in my
building in in in in my
district, um, and, and just
think, I mean 30,000, like I
said, I, I wish it could be
more.
Um, this is a state job. And,
and that's like it, it should be
more my, my personal opinion.
Thank you.
Res.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
um, first off, I want to echo
your your everyone's sentiments,
and I wanna thank you for
bringing this, uh, this to light
about all the many, um, you
know, unsung heroes there at a
school site, um, but I did have,
um, maybe just a clarifying
question in response to maybe
one of the comments and one of
the thoughts was, um, I
appreciate the new standard for
a minimum. Again, echoing
wishing it could be more, um,
and the, the thoughts to pull
everyone along, but is there any
plans for compaction, um, and
how to reward at some point.
You know, the work for, for
years of service and the things
that say someone that has been
working to finally get to this
point, um, you know, just to, to
also reward them for being at
that point to plans long term to
to maybe also bring them to a
higher level.
Uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Gonzalez, thank
you for that question. I, I did
think about that, that's I think
should be left to the local
level, um, again, there is a 4%
increase, I think that we're
considering and so I think those
decisions really have to be made
by the superintendent and and
and the leadership team at the
local level, but I'll turn to my
uh colleague to uh respond to
that since he has that job.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative
Gonzalez. I do think that that
is something that we need to be
mindful as, as this committee
has supported and through the
LEC and the Senate education.
have made the recommendations
for teacher salaries, it was.
brought up when we talked about
the compaction issue as well.
And I do think that we also have
to be cognizant of.
compaction issues that this has,
and so that would be
Through our interim and through
our work plans, there's, we
would have to be taking.
A look at that is what it means
and its impact not only to the
employee but also the district.
And that we may come back and
make recommendations for that,
but you're, uh, your, your
question is very, is very
pertinent. It's very valued, um,
it's very spot on, and we want
to make sure that we
don't create some.
Necessary
problems with this bill, so I
thank you for the question.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representatives, thank you for
that response. And again, just,
just wanting to value. I think
this is a new standard, and I,
you know, and again, hoping all
school districts would also
realize the value of rewarding
their employees for, for those
extra years of service and just
that extra, extra years of work.
Thank you.
Reso.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, sponsors of this is long
overdue as has been mentioned.
And as I
Agree with the sentiments that
have been expressed so far. I
wanted to point out two things
and ask a question. Um,
I see that we're going from a
minimum wage, which is
ridiculous and I want to note
that we've gone way beyond the
15 as being a living wage.
Amount
And then in our uh and to
support that, there was
Part of the analysis that LESC
provided was um
The Census Bureau information
and then um other information
about the minimum living wage
current.
And I just wanted to point out
how far behind we are.
Which will lead to my question,
uh, for one adult, the minimum
living wage is $20.10 an hour.
For a family of 4.
With both
Working, uh, heads of family,
the minimum living wage is
estimated to be approximately
$24.51.
In New Mexico, that's where we
should be. And across the
nation, um, that's an estimate,
but more or less, that's where
we should be. When the minimum
wage, Mr. Chair was established,
and I.
the year.
Um, if you
had
Advanced that minimum wage to
where we are today in 2025.
Um, I believe we'd be in the
30s, close to $30 an hour.
We did not do that.
So consequently, Mr. Chair,
where were we?
We have what has been described
by you, uh, as in presentation
and others.
Um, a, a big gap that we have to
fill.
My question is, when you were
considering the um
Minimum wage raise.
Did you at all consider indexing
it uh to be cost of living.
Indexed because my concern and
it's been a, you know, over the
years, my concern is that.
Until we begin indexing cost of
living with our minimum wage
bills. We're gonna continue to
stay behind.
And as opposed to a head.
And what we want is to create a
permanent.
Security, Mr. Chair, for our
employees so that they can
anticipate.
Like every other household
that's working.
How much to anticipate in their
salary. So that's my question.
I, I'm real concerned because I
don't want us to keep coming
back and trying to raise the
minimum wage every so many
years. Once we set it and index
it, then it's set and.
And that's my question.
Did you consider that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Roel
Caballer Caballero, um.
I did think about it, um, and,
and we've had this conversation
before, so I know how important
it is, but.
Ah, I
I'm, I always try to do
legislation that I think is
possible.
Um, not always what I want. I,
I.
I don't live in a perfect world,
um.
And, and we haven't done that
for state employees anyhow. This
we as a body, we decide whether
it's gonna be 3% or 4% depending
on the budget at the time and I,
I also apologize for not getting
this in the in the uh budget,
um during the interim, um, but I
had some things going on, but I
wanted to do this because I just
think it's really a basic
necessity, um, I think it's a
starting point.
Uh, we don't have cost of
living, uh, raises, uh, for all
state employees, as you know,
and I think if I did this and
separated that out just for
them, I think that would create
a problem too. So I'm, I'm going
with what I think.
is the best option, although.
Although in reality,
I'd probably do what you do, but
I, I just don't think, uh, at
this point in time, and I would
say that this is really a
problem with all our state
agencies.
Um, uh, the good news is, I
mean, the bad news is I don't
think we can do that. We aren't
in the, uh, House Bill 2s
extends, uh, the good news is
that we have representatives
Baca, Representative Chatfield,
Representative Garrett,
representative Vincent, uh, on
and myself on the house
appropriations Committee and
Representative Chatfield, did I
see you, Jack? Anyhow.
So I think we can pull this off
and and pull it together and,
and and uh try to align it so
that it works the best we can
for our uh school employees, uh,
for the heart of our schools.
Uh, but you know that's gonna
take a lot of work and uh it's,
it's, it's a big lift for
recurring funding. This is
recurring funding, folks, not a
one time funding, but I, I think
we can do it. I think we can do
it. I think we can get it
through and do the best job we
can and I think that the the
questions, uh, representative uh
Caballero about cost of living
increase for our entire state
workforce, I think is a a
question for the future.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative.
I just want to, the point was
not to direct it necessarily.
As to why I couldn't or could I,
and I appreciate your, your um.
Your position, it's for us to
get into the mindset.
And to begin approaching it.
from the longevity and
sustainability and for the
future. So this is a good lift.
I'm not criticizing it. I'm,
I'm, I appreciate it. It's a big
lift, actually.
And um it's well overdue, as I
stated.
However, if we begin and I, I
just needed to state it also for
the record that I think if we
begin to
Legislate
Be bold.
Um, and consider where we're
gonna be in 10 years.
In 20 years.
With the decisions that we're
making today. So,
That's the point of bringing
this up, and I will continue to
pursue uh
Of wage, minimum wage increase
across the board for the state,
which is my, it's been my
mission. So I, I, I think that's
important, Mr. Chair and thank
you. I appreciate all of the
sponsors and for doing this.
This is really important. I've
been on this, on this road with
you all.
I
all my prior years. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative Lana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sponsors for bringing
this forward, as always, really
important.
Uh, I do have a question though.
Regarding health insurance.
So now with uh now that with the
possibility of this of this bill
getting signed by the governor.
Do you feel either of you feel
that more school employees would
be able to have access.
To the, to the health insurance
that's provided by the school
districts.
As opposed to the currently many
don't now.
Mr.
Um
Mr. Chair and our Representative
Vlada I, I.
I doubt it, to be frank. I mean,
I think they're still at a level
where they probably qualify for
Medicaid, um, and I, I hate to
say that, but it's true, uh, but
I really don't know the answer
to that question and maybe my
colleague can uh shed some
light.
Mr. Sherman, and thank you, uh,
represent a lot for the
question. I, I do think that
That there has been, or there
could be a challenge as we talk
about district proportionate
share.
As they pay a portion of that
salary. So
I do think that uh you bring
To light a great point.
As far as does this create
another situation.
Whether in the affordability or
access of healthcare. Um,
And, and quite honestly, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Lata, I'll have to do further to
Annie if she has any input to
that, but uh.
I, I definitely think that's um.
Something that we need to look
at.
Thank, thank you for that
because, you know, this is, this
is really important because as
we all know.
Employees who have access to
healthcare or healthy employees
that come to work.
And so it's like a, it's like a
a a rippling effect.
And, and, uh, and our children
deserve having their teachers
and personal assistants and
school staff in school every day
with them in this journey
for their education. And I
believe that
That's one of the critical
things that that we all have to
consider and look at.
I
Health insurance and how
It can, if we can balance that
with the, with the increases in
salary.
Yeah, this is one thing that we,
that we've talked about, Mr.
Chair, and that's been discussed
is, you know, we get the
increase.
And the health insurance.
And, and then a lot of our
teachers, a lot of our school
staff, you know, they, they
don't, they don't see that race.
And, and Mr. Chair and
Representative Baca, I agree
with you.
With the uh
With, with the school districts
having to put their portion and
so they not only does does it um
Not only is there an obligation
for the employee to put their
part in, but also the school
district. And so we also have to
keep that all into consideration
because many of these uh
employees.
qualify Mr. Chair for the 80/20.
And so, uh, even then at that
point, many still.
Don't
Can't afford the the health
insurance school districts, and
I just wanted to, to, to make
that point that it's also very
important that we take that into
consideration.
Uh, once again, thank you for,
for bringing this legislation
forward. I fully support it, um,
and, uh, thank you for the good
work. Thank you, Mr.
You representative color.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
You know, and I, I'm
Supportive of this, but as some
of these.
mentioned
Still really low. And I mean,
that's really.
Our EA's
Your staff, um,
I, I have friends that work in
these in these districts and it
is a shame at how low this is,
so I'm appreciative that we're
at least putting.
No, I minimum standard, however,
um.
My concern is, is the retention
rates, and do we know the
retention rates of EAs within
our district.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
a great question. I have never
seen data to show retention
rates for EAs, but I can tell
you that the vacancy rate it's
very, um, high, um, I think it
was between 3 and 400 for this
past school year for.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Representative
Collins, the question. One of
the things that we're talking
about and how I see this bill
fitting into places we, we also
have another program that in our
within our education system, our
educator fellows.
Right? So as we provide
opportunity and we provide a
livable wage and maybe it's not
livable, but we make some
strides towards that. It also
kind of these folks.
that are in these rolls could
then.
if they have a desire to be a
teacher or otherwise they, they
can actually transition out, I
think, and I, I could be wrong,
if somebody would have to maybe
Danny or someone else.
was talking about the tip
infrared Fallows was somewhere
around 35.
was some somewhere I see Stan
kind of shaking his head. So
I do think that this is a
transition and I, I agree 100%
with the comment that was made
about
The amount being too low
You know, and I think that for
us, take a look at it is.
made
The
minimums for our teachers.
raised them to, you know, even
though not 5000.
And look at our EAs, we also
wanted to be.
Not only consistent with that,
but that's important if we raise
our teachers to the minimum of
5000 for the EAs, and then I
think that it is something that
we need to study and see, is
there other opportunity to come
back.
Right now with our teaching
staff, we moved from one of the
last of the nations to somewhere
in the middle around 21.
I think it would be good
information to figure out is
where do we stand nationally
with our support staff.
And do we as a state make an
investment, which I think that
we do.
what that number is.
And is going to be important as
well as sustainability of
reoccurring cost.
And I think that's something
that we all have to do, but
As we provide better leadership
as we provide support and we
Grow our own
As we see more successes, I do
think that the um
The numbers will increase with
our kids as we see a decline for
the last 10 years, and we may
recognize and see some of those
growths and gains that we've
been.
Wor
so hard for her so
I do think that and I do think
that that brings up a great
point is that in the interim,
we, we probably need to take a
look and see what is the data
there and come back with even
more recommendations for the
future. So, Mr. Chairman.
Represento, um, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, Colin, I, I
too would like to say that.
7 years ago we had teachers
making $35,000 a year.
I mean, so we have, we have
done, I, I, it's hard to
remember that and it's
impossible to think about that
now, but that was, that was true
when I came to this legislature
and, and we've come a long way,
but.
Is there much work to do? Yes.
So, but I think you've, I think
uh the whole committee for your
sentiments, for your knowledge,
uh, for the understanding that
yes, we do need to keep this.
Keep this path forward and uh
and really see how we can
strengthen every single.
Um, every single part of our
school system. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
herbs in Sheffield.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
I thank you, representatives for
bringing this bill forward.
People that cook our food, our
janitorial staff, our EAs,
they're an important part of our
school and uh we need them to
make enough money.
To survive
Like 111
What do you know what the total
cost of the state is of this.
Program.
India, an estimate of
The, the excuse me, Mr. Chair
and Rep Jackfield, the uh FR
should be 28 in recurring costs
28 million.
So I understand the concept of a
living wage.
But for those of us on LFC, it's
like you're
Checking account at home, if we
take money.
From here
Yeah
So and move it over here, and
you have to decide where to get
it from.
So if you're pulling to get out
of one place, you lose it from
another.
Sometimes if the bite is too
big.
There's not a place to pull it
from.
Well, I appreciate, uh, that
you, you've made it at a level
where
It might be doable, or when we
look at the budget, we could say
maybe we, maybe we can fund
this. Maybe we can find the
money over here.
And actually fund this bill, so
it's not just important that the
bill get passed.
Because if it gets past and not
funded.
It's dead.
So
It's important that it get past
at a level that we're able to
look at the budget, find money,
and actually appropriate money
to us, so I thank you. I support
this bill, and I appreciate you
bringing it, and I appreciate
you bringing it at a level
that's doable. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, uh, Representative Chatfield
stole half of my thunder, but.
I keep, I keep going back to
compaction.
And I don't want to cause a
problem there and I'm very
intrigued what Mr. Rounds had to
say about compaction.
Could you give me an example
where this would adversely
affect.
Our people
Uh, our EAs, our custodial
staff.
If we just put a $30,000.
appropriation to it.
Um
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Vincent, I'll never forget when
we passed that I was so happy
when we passed the 25,000 for
EAs, and the next day I got a
call from uh EA who was making
25,000 who had been there for,
you know, many years and had
worked his way up to that 20 and
said, what are you gonna do
about me? So I, I do understand
it. I
I, we have a 4% raise built in.
I'll try to.
Appropriations not to have that
setback for for the the.
Um, for the people who are
already making um that amount of
money, but um.
I, I really think that is a
local decision level, you know,
we get, we get accused of, of
interfering too much at the
local level with how these pay
structures work and I, I do
think that it's always a problem
for a manager to keep things
even and to keep things just and
and uh I think our local
superintendents and school
boards, so we'll deal with that.
It's not an easy thing, but it's
something you have to do in
management wherever you are.
That's always a problem, so I,
I'm, I'm just gonna leave it at
that at the.
level and my colleague might
wanna uh chime in.
You, Mr. Chairman and thank you,
Representative Vincent.
You're right. So we could, it
could be that we have a support
staff that have been working 10
years and
And, and maybe they because of
the district's decision, their
ability to make changes to this
that it may not impact them and
you're absolutely right and it's
the same thing and I, I have
myself sat here and I'm brought
up when we give teacher raises.
When we increase the factor for
our principles.
I do think that there is,
there's always compassion issues
in that, and I think that this
bill
Um,
Although the, you know, the
intended.
Goal was to make a.
Um,
Make an increase that was
sustainable.
It will also challenge that, and
I do think that it's going to be
up to local school districts
and.
And uh superintendents to make
those is to make sure how what
it is that they can afford and,
and just like a representative
Chapfield said, is that we've
got to fund it and we've got to
make sure that we're not having
for local school districts to,
to have a negative impact as
well, so.
I, I do think that it would be
important and I do think that
the ongoing conversations with
our, with our superintendents
and with our staff.
Um
Would be an important part so
that we can address a problem
that we create.
Uh, as we move these salaries
up, so I, I do, I do appreciate
your concern. I share the
concern, and I know, I know that
it's going to impact some people
very positively.
And for other they may be
may not then it's dependent upon
their calendar year is dependent
upon the local decisions and the
length of their calendar day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
You know, I know that
This is a bipartisan thing and
we want this to happen.
And
You know, I know
Represented Bach as a.
MVP MVP on the football field as
well as in the legislature.
I'm just sitting here looking at
you and I'm, I'm looking at
Representative Garrett.
And then I look at
Representative Chatfield, and I
look at Representative Herrera
and
It might be a heavy lift.
But I know some people that are
on appropriations they could
lift that.
And I know that
Representative Chatfield and I
think a lot alike, and we could
figure out, I know where to pull
that money from. I'll tell you
later.
However,
I'm looking on the physical, uh,
impact report.
And for 26, it'd be 28 million.
For 27, it would be 28 million.
And then for the 3 year overall
cost, we're talking 56 million.
And so if we doubled that, that
would go to the 35.
As I've already heard that 30 is
not enough.
We know 25 is not enough.
30's not enough.
Maybe 35.
And then the other thing I
wanted to ask you not to muddy
up your, your legislation.
But would you be willing?
To put an amendment
On that to where we could tie it
to something where we wouldn't
have compassion problems.
Mr.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh, a
representative Vincent, I would.
I will study that if this bill
should pass this committee and
see what we could do before we
get to appropriations.
Um, uh, it's an interesting
question. Uh, how much would it
take or, or to just give schools
some leeway there, so maybe an
extra, I don't know, we'll look
at the numbers, you know, maybe
an extra couple million would,
would give some, some, uh.
Some schools more flexibility
when it comes to compaction, so,
uh, I will look at that, uh,
I'll meet with you and, uh, the
uh my colleagues on
appropriations and it's it's a
good suggestion. I'm not ready
to do it now at this table, uh,
but we'll look at it and we'll
talk and see what we can do if
we can, I don't think we need to
double it, but I think if we
gave a few more million to help
with compaction issues that
might, that might be the answer.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and I
support your bill. I just want
to make sure that we do it right
and that everybody's taken care
of.
And
The longer I'm here, Mr. Chair,
the more I like to make deals.
Good ones, good deals.
I've, I've heard that before,
unfortunately, at the national
level and that doesn't seem to
be working out, um,
at least from my perspective.
So, um, thank you. I'm
encouraged by all the talk of
raising minimum wages, maybe
when we bring this to the state
like represent Royal Caballero
was mentioning. We can have a
similar conversation in a
similar bipartisan note to
raising the minimum wage for all
New Mexicans, but it's
conversation for a different
day. So with that, I accept
Chaffield.
Chares the past.
Alright, so you have a due pass
much by Representative
Chatfield, the 2nd play our vice
chair Garrett, um, based on all
of the talk.
Is there any opposition to the
Du pass motion.
saying no.
You have a do pass. Thank you,
folks. All right. So I'm gonna
go to a representative Lata
while we change and I make my
way to the um presenters table
to represent Vlada, you have
some FFA students here if you
would, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'd like to recognize,
um.
Mr. Gonzalez and the Gadsden FFA
students, if you all would
please stand up.
And Mr. Chair, if it's
