And and Dr Lee and Dr Martinez
are are two of them and and
these experts trained teachers
develop curriculum.
Create native American language
programs and provide behavioral
health solutions they can assist
cools that struggle to meet
those students needs
specifically to those that are
referenced in the Martinez
Yazzie versus state of New
Mexico and so this bill
leverages wealth of indigenous
expertise to improve our schools
it is not a higher education
bill rather it's leveraging
those people spoke in higher
education capacities to help our
students and our tribal
communities to develop their own
curricula within their own
communities and so collaboration
is essential to improve our
educational system early high
from early childhood to higher
education we need everyone to
work together to improve
educational inputs and and
outputs this is the test set
forth by the cordon Yazzie
Martinez there is also mandated
by the Indian Education Act.
If we want to succeed we cannot
remain in silos this bill is
based upon detailed proposal put
forth by the indigenous
faculties and I want to
acknowledge all those that that
it put their minds into these
series of bills and while in
your FIR there's maybe maybe
mention that there is over a
billion dollars to native
American education I think that
is embellished the quite a bit
that while house bill two does
not include appropriation for
this bill I have secured some
funding for the trouble in the
framework as a whole with the
view faced in implement
implementation.
At the moment of the funding is
only half of the thirty million
dollars that was with the
included in the executive budget
for the temporary framework it
is certainly nowhere near as
much as again the F. I. R. the
implies that I really wish that
native American students had the
access to that one billion
dollars that the LFC is
referencing but despite the
LSE's creative accounting of the
fact that right at this point a
target funding for native
American students indeed Indian
education fund is really only
about point zero six percent of
the entire state budget so it's
a it's a small sliver drop in
the bucket if you will to try to
repair a broken system I'm in
discussions with PED and members
of the Senate about leveraging
additional funds which will
include some of the proposals
within this bill some higher
education programs have based
budgets entities in eighty two
yet many of them are too low to
fund any of the initiatives
within this bill that's why I'm
asking for the support so in
closing Mr chairman and members
of this committee want to
highlight what this bill does
first the bill supports pipeline
from native American educators
currently only three percent
teachers are native Americans
meeting that we need about
fourteen hundred more native
American teachers to achieve
adequate representation not an
easy task this bill would put us
on a path towards doing that
second the bill creates to
indigenous curriculum materials
and development training
centers.
Senator would collaborate with
tribes do that to decide
instructional content that is
relevant to students last this
is important because often times
what's done is in our of peas
put out and and third party
private individuals come through
and try to develop from scratch
these types of materials we have
people professionals already
doing this in a higher education
institutions so let's cut out
the middle man and this get the
work done third the bill
establishes to the American
technical assistance centers New
Mexico already has regional
education cooperatives support
of the state funding this bill
at two centers that specialize
in Indian Education.
Specific these are examples of
how we will harness the
expertise with higher education.
And improve our schools and I am
asking for all of your support
in doing this so with that Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I don't know of a
doctor Martinez or doctor Lee
had anything at but if you would
please level quick moment.
Please doctor Martinez Dr Lee
who member me you wish to go
first welcome yes good morning
everybody good morning
distinguished representatives of
this morning I am here to
support house bill eighty seven
that was designed to
operationalize the Yazzie
Martinez ruling and to address
decades so it should issues of
injustices embedded in
curriculum instruction
assessment and policy the best
way to understand the
Miseducation that has
proliferated since the late
nineteenth century is different
as a part as president
manifestations of historical
oppression these of the western
education however to assume that
indigenous peoples have remained
passive is also for Christmas
Education.
Indigenous peoples have exercise
agency in multiple ways at many
levels to sustain and preserve
the integrity of our cultures
languages governance and
connections to the land the
legislation sponsored by
Representative Lane T. Johnson
and Luke was recognized as to
historical significance of not
only the Yazzie Martinez ruling
but it also points to the rules
at higher education have in
serving indigenous you families
educators and the community at
large this is historically
significant a historically
significant moment in which
there is a robust capacity of
native faculty and staff at each
institution of higher education
that is named in this bill to
realize the goals which include
the recruitment training and
retention of American Indian
students seeking to become
education professionals to to
establish a curriculum materials
development center to develop
culturally and linguistically
relevant curricula three provide
professional development for
teachers and administrators and
culturally responsive
instruction for establish a
technical assistance center to
support tribes and tribal
education I provide training in
trauma informed practices and
professional development for
educators and administrators and
six to prepare pre service
educators to deal and to it and
to be effective educators
culturally racially and
linguistically diverse students
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you for your attention I
honestly hope that you will
support this legislation
as a curriculum writer who has
worked with schools across the
state and the state certified
secondary history and social
studies educator I hope you will
contribute to the promotion of
excellence thank you very much
and I'm available for any
questions I have some
information from you and if that
is necessary everybody have a
great day thank you for your
service I know you're almost
finish their session thank you
top.
Thank you Dr Martinez Dr Lee
please.
Hello good morning thank you for
for having me here to share a
few words about my support for
house bill eighty seven like Dr
Martinez said this is a by daily
and in fundamental important
bill for the state of New Mexico
in terms of education I've been
I'm part of a two entities that
are part of that building native
American studies department at
UNM and then also the institute
for American education.
I to be eight of our faculty at
UNM as well as the other faculty
from the other institution
really have a long history of
working with American Indian
education in the state and and
nationally and I think one of
the things that you really see
is that this these connections
that faculty have are very much
tied to the communities that
they're from as well as a native
communities overall and so the
support that you can find was
this bill I think would be
tremendous in in in
demonstrating the fact that
those relationships and those
connections are really key to
helping our students not just
native American students but all
students that focus on education
in the state so I just wanted to
to mention that as well because
I think sometimes we we may not
miss it necessarily know who
these individuals are but I I I
know many of these individuals
in in these institutions and
they really are committed to the
education of students when it
comes to native American history
when it comes to education
journal so thank you very much
for for for being here for the
work that you do in your service
that you provide you have.
Thank you doctor the gentleman
we stand for any questions.
Great thank you Representative
thank you excerpts for being
here so we'll go to the
attendees list those in support
of house bill eighty seven
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Those of you that wish to speak.
Give it a moment.
All right.
All right so you will have up to
two minutes but please do not be
repetitive of the people that
spoke before you but you'll have
up to two minutes.
Johnny good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Johnny one part of the state
government affairs director for
New Mexico State University and
would really like to thank the
father and and all of the
borders of this legislation is
an important piece of
legislation that it really
offers potential the potential
to increase outreach and
recruitment of American Indian
students and contributed in half
and half of the student services
delivery your greater retention
and greater recovery our
graduation rate of rules
American Indian students across
the state ultimately be improved
educational outcomes for
American Indians doing both well
not just for New Mexico state
our campus but the communities
we serve so Mr chairman and
members of the committee we
started seven stock part of the
legislation thank you great
thank you.
Dear me.
Morning Jeremy welcome back you
have up to two minutes when you
chair members of the committee a
gentleman thank you directed me
to learning for Santa Clara
public speaking on behalf of
governor Kataria we are in full
support of house bill eighty
seven and do believe as all of
the speakers have have said that
this leverages the wealth of
indigenous knowledge coming from
our communities and helps us as
a code of five this in the
higher education departments we
stand in full support and I
believe that all the speakers of
already hit all the topics that
we well mention for thank you
chairman great thank you so much
chairman.
All right so we'll go to song
tree.
Morning sentry welcome back you
have up to two minutes.
Are you there okay I'm sorry I
have a bad connection I stand in
full support of house bill
eighty seven and I hope we need
to thank you right thank you so
much.
Good morning welcome.
Morning chairman Romero members
of the committee my name is
Patricia Jimenez late them I'm
the project manager for
transform education New Mexico
and former director of the
center for the educations they
have diverse populations at New
Mexico highlands house bill
eighty seven harnesses existing
New Mexico expertise and
technical assistance centers in
our New Mexico higher education
system the programs listed in
house bill eighty seven have
provided technical assistance
and professional development to
school districts across the
state and played a major role in
supporting it and ensuring New
Mexico teachers are legislative
research training and support
for delivering culturally and
linguistically responsive
instruction to the diverse
student populations they serve
over the past decade many if not
all of these programs have
struggled to stay in existence
due to funding cuts was
surviving on about half of the
original appropriation CST pay
for example we cannot afford to
continue to short change these
programs possibility seven
provides the necessary funding
to ensure the survival and
growth of these programs that
have served New Mexico pre K.
and our native American and
Hispanic serving institutions
for decades losing these legacy
programs would be a huge step
backward in delivering
an equitable education for our
students transportation Mexico
and it's twenty three member
affiliates would like to thank
the representatives Lente Lewis
and Johnson for sponsoring house
bill eighty seven and we set
stand strong support we kindly
ask this committee to support
hospital eighty seven thank you
for your hard work and the
opportunity to share.
Great thank you so much all
right so we'll go to mark.
Earning mark you have up to two
minutes welcome chairman members
to me thank you and yes I want
to the representative Lente
Representative Lewis
Representative bring in this
legislation I represent the
seven four year universities in
New Mexico and former universes
would be receiving funding from
this piece of legislation and I
just like to point out how long
how we probably imported is to
recognize that when the
representative said that this is
a hard pill is in the past and
we do get funding for these
programs and subtraction other
funding and hire it this
legislation brings new funding
for these programs that actually
meant higher it funding in New
Mexico and the importance of not
only tracking these bin American
students with these American
Indian students also provides
for proper at the group sitting
and in our universities are
critical and maybe the bigger
pictures looking help Martinez
Yazzie funding can help support
these programs were bored are
asked for students at the
university's in New Mexico so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Lente and we
support this legislation right
thank you.
All right so go to jasmine.
Morning welcome back you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yeah and I am standing in
support on behalf of the tribal
educationalists we'd like to
thank the sponsors for bringing
the bill this bill is an
inclusive yet targeted approach
to building out the pipelines
for native American teachers
curriculum developers and other
ancillary staff within schools
such as mental health
professionals school nurses X.
cetera studies have shown that
at risk students can perform at
the same levels of academic
proficiency as their non at risk
appears when they are given the
adequate programs and services.
House bill eighty seven does
exactly that and will not only
help build out the pipelines for
the service providers but
continue to strengthen the
cultural relic the way that the
services are provided and making
sure that they are provided in
in a culturally relevant in a
culturally relevant way.
And therefore high in the bar
across the state for these
reasons we stand in strong
support of house bill eighty
seven and ask the committee to
pass this legislation and the
state to provide the resources
to fund it thank you right thank
you.
All right JD.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
JD bowing to begin on behalf of
on Antonio in the Pueblo of
Laguna the presenters of this
legislation did an excellent job
in explaining why it is
important and critical and the
public Laguna strongly supports
the bill thank you thank you.
All right to reset.
Comments welcome you have up to
two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Teresa Gomez I'm the director of
the honoring native life.
Program at the university of New
Mexico community behavioral
health and I stand in strong
support of the tribal remedy
framework to build capacity at
our higher education
institutions to better serve our
American Indian students we must
support our youth in social and
behavioral health by providing
trauma informed and culturally
relevant services and curricula
and again stand in full support
of house bill eighty seven and
thank the sponsors and thank you
Mr chairman for allowing me the
opportunity to speak this
morning.
Course thank you for being here.
All right so we'll go to Mickey.
Good morning Mickey welcome you
have up to two minutes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Mickey Barnett of
speaking on behalf of the Pueblo
center along with Dan as you are
we thank the sponsor of
representative Lente for
bringing this bill we're in the
what was a strong supporter of
and we urge all of you to vote
yes on this legislation thank
you very much right thank you
for being here all right Sean.
Good morning Shani of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee I am
John secretarial I am an
associate professor at the
university New Mexico college of
education and human sciences and
I express my full support of
house bill eighty seven which
supports our teachers and
leaders I concentrate a lot of
my work with educational
leadership and school principals
are the key to the success of
our schools and this bill is one
that supports increasing the
number of native principles
which only number about two
percent of our our schools so I
am full support of house bill
eighty seven thank you Senator
nineteen and all of the
committees and Dr Martinez and
Dr Lee for being so involved in
these initiatives.
Great thank you for being here.
All right we'll go to Paris and.
Good morning person you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
person CYO hound and covered
back up thank you for allowing
me the time to share act was
position HB seven
I don't want to be repetitive
for but for all the reasons
Representative that to highlight
as well as the rest of it all
Agnes stands in full support of
a V. eighty seven and I have use
for H. B. December the two
passed both thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee this because my
comments.
Thank you Mr lieutenant
governor.
We'll go to Chris.
Good morning Chris him up to
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman
crystals on on that was just a
lobbyist for the next college
the net colleges that will
support off this piece of
legislation I think the experts
and the sponsor of expanding the
explain include very closely and
very comprehensively what the
purpose of this bill just and
keep the short and sweet we
support this bill please
vote yes for the specific
decision thank you great thank
you so much.
All right we're going to Norman.
Welcome back to our many of up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee I want to thank
our Representative Lente for
this bill also want to thank a
doctors going to buy Martinez
and likely for providing the
testimony.
this is one piece of the puzzle
that is going to hopefully
address the inequality in and
inequity of Indian education in
the state of New Mexico.
This bill really supports the
other system of education that
is beyond the community and
extends an opportunity for all
of the faculty and staff that
are native American in the
different institutions to
provide to our expertise to the
students as they leave their
homes and move into other areas
of their interest to gain an
academic education that will
reciprocate back to their homes
are including those that are
from the health careers and
adding that piece of the puzzle
to the tribal remedy framework
is a over all when and that good
investment for the state of New
Mexico.
I am Norman creati M. the former
governor for the pueblo of Zuni
I currently work as a tribal
relations liaison at the center
for native American health and I
stand in full support of house
bill eighty seven thank you very
much right thank you for being
here.
All right so we'll go to care
and.
Good morning Karen you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Welcome thank you very much
chairman and members the
committee we want to thank the
sponsors for their continued
diligence on this issue.
And we stand in very strong
support I'm sorry Karen what
lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico tractor thank you
very much.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to Matt.
Good morning Matt it looks two
minutes.
Good morning chairman of the yes
registered lobbyists University
of New Mexico are you understand
the order representative Lente
that for we've been working to
fund several of our at the
program yet the RPF peace
process.
Through the legislature and have
had some success Chicago study
Afrikan a study the native
American at eight the new year
at.
However this year the LFC cut
funding for the institute for
American Indian education and
the bill would provide that a
funding source for that program
and others in the bill but those
recently in order that
legislation thank you chairman.
Thank you.
To take.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee good morning to
take us on the honest registered
lobbyists for the Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president we strongly support
house bill eighty seven for all
the reasons stated we think
representative Lente blue in
Johnson for sponsoring the
legislation we are tremendously
blessed with native American
faculty at UNM NMSU.
You M. H. U. in a calling into
you city among other related
higher education institutions.
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee we ask for your
support on the bill and thank
you.
Right thank you.
All right so go to Vernon.
Good morning for any of up to
two minutes please.
Vernon you may be muted.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee.
As part of the Honda chairman of
the board of education what
what.
For the reasons given by my.
Reddest sisters because.
Language is of the essence of
our cultures.
We stand in full support of this
bill the.
Just the same your committee we
appreciate all the work that you
do for us thank you right thank
you so much.
All right Steve.
Good morning Steve you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
young is government relations
director for any a New Mexico
I'll be brief on behalf of our
members we stand in support of
this bill we echo the public
comment in support of this
legislation thank the sponsors
and respectfully encourage the
committee to vote in favor of HB
eighty seven thank you.
Thank thank you.
All right.
So I don't see any more in sport
I will go to opposition those in
opposition to house bill eighty
seven indicate by raising your
hand.
All right see none we will come
to committee committee members
comments questions concerns.
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sanchez on and committee members
and thank you to all the
comments and so in support of
this bill today I think it's
important to note just a couple
of things Mr chair this is a
bill that that I and others and
together with the sponsors in
previous years have been on
introducing I think it becomes
more and more apparent
every year that we come forward
that the gaps are increasing in
our educational pathways from
our public education
Elementary to secondary to
higher ed.
The more.
Years we spend not.
Providing adequate sufficient
funding.
The greater the gaps continue
and we know from Mr chair from
the rulings and the findings in
the Yazidi Martinez lawsuit that
these gaps have contributed.
To our failure to
find the educational frameworks
and curriculum and programs that
our students need better
culturally relevant to
linguistically relevant and
Contribute to the futures to
their better futures Mr chairman
and and members of the committee
and the public so it's very very
important to note that.
I believe personally.
That the institutions of higher
education and our public
education institutions have an
obligation to ensure that we're
adequately funding.
However when there are severe
gaps as we've been experiencing
then we have to them take our
responsibility to ensure that
we're filling the gaps and the
only way for us to be able to
fill those gaps are to ensure
that we have not only the past
please educationally the correct
curriculum pathways the program
pathways the social service
pathways all of the pathways in
place as educators.
We also then have to provide the
funding the sufficient funding
are not.
Lower than than I expected and
so this this legislation Mr
chairman and members of the
committee is not meant to be in
lieu of the responsibility of
the institutions.
But it in support of assisting
them as they progress forward in
terms of filling those gaps and
so it it has to become ethnic
studies should and should not be
applied as we mentioned on on
the on Friday thanks that he
should not be considered a
supportive service.
He should be considered an
integral part of our
educational.
Curriculum from kindergarten all
the way through on higher
education so Mr chairman and
members of the committee I stand
in full support and hope that
everyone votes in favor of this
legislation today thank you.
Thank you Representative vice
chair care please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative when I don't want
case I love the way it's crafted
you targeted systematically
every area where we need growth
my question is how will
reporting take place like we
know some of the starting yes X.
but your by here what mechanism
what we use to measure the
impact of this investment.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that question it's it's
that's very important aspect and
so measurement aspects to this
would simply be if we're looking
doing to to increase the number
of native American teachers in
New Mexico that would be
beginning point where we see the
increase at the mid American
teachers to our public schools
second aspects would would be
a matter of being able to
develop curricula specific to
native American aspects that
will be flowing into our
communities as opposed to
perhaps our of peas issued by
the Public Education Department
four four curricular development
and just being years Alvarez
these institutions already at
this point are developing this
type of important work and so
that the focus of that going
directly into our communities is
going to be quick in their
turnaround aspects and so I hope
that the snapshot of vice
chairwoman Mr chairman of that I
don't know but Dr Marty's has
their hand up and if you would
like to include anything else Mr
Clinton yes thank you very much
as an excellent question and
metrics are always important
what you are doing research as
well as when you are putting
money House I appreciate that is
a director program as well if I
can share screen a like to share
with you the current state of
education preparation and UNM is
that possible.
Dr Martinez I don't believe so
if you could just narrate for us
that would be great okay well
it's a lot of statistics that
basically if you take a look at
the statistics here at U. N. M.
for the spring twenty twenty one
of four American Indian.
Our participation this includes
undergraduate and pre admit we
make up possibly total thirty
eight percent which is our
largest number of native
students in a program the second
one is elementary education we
make up seven percent at created
undergraduate and graduate at
seven percent and physical
education which is there are
preparation for K. through
twelve we make up
a little bit higher number we
have pre admit and undergrad we
have big about twenty five
percent however in secondary
education which is middle and
high school certification we
only make up at the pre med
undergraduate graduate committee
only two percent.
Percent is special education
create undergrad and graduate
with make up six percent and all
the others who are in non
educator preparation like they'd
be looking at athletic training
nutrition
possibly edit ministration so
one we make up nine percent so I
would be happy to share the
stats for you with I consent
immunity to our Representative
plenty but this is where we're
at right now spring of twenty
twenty one I hope that helps
address your question and of
course the numbers would speak.
Did you wish to address that as
well.
Yes I just wanted to mention
that.
Within certain parts of the the
the
The bill there's a mention about
of faculty support and I know
for us here native American
studies and and our relationship
to the institute for American in
education.
Our that funding is specifically
for research and examining
American in indication in the
state there are quite a few
faculty that have a.
Good background of doing
research in in education and so
I I expect that to continue and
I know that for us and the other
institutions there other faculty
that are very similar in those
experiences with reserves and
with collecting both qualitative
and quantitative type of of
information.
So thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to our expert witnesses
because yesterday I got some of
the APS shockingly low
statistics so I'm I'm hoping all
of this you know does what we
wanted to do because it's
vitally important and then Mr
Chairman representative I only
other question and this is
something you might check.
With U and M.
Page three it says five hundred
forty five thousand dollars to
support the bilingual education
degree programs in English about
one point English and Spanish
and if appropriate I would just
add degree at endorsement
programs because I don't want
people who have a degree and are
seeking an endorsement not to be
included and that's my only
comment thank you Mr chairman
thank you representative Lente
for the year if you invested in
developing that so I appreciate
it.
Right thank you Representative.
The questions comments.
Mr chair I move that do pass.
All right so we have just
motion.
Okay was it a second by a vice
chair Garrett I'm.
So but before I accept the
motion I would like to say that
thank you representative Lente
for bringing this forward I know
you've been working on these
initiatives for a while and I
think a lot of your hard work is
really paying off in terms of
the broad support that you've
been able to garner round these
initiatives and really aligning
them with the policies of the
colleges and universities and I
certainly appreciate that work I
also appreciate I think in your
opening comments you were
talking about the.
if I had called to give you are
quotes the creative
Our accounting by LFC on this
and I can't remember a time when
I've heard more supplanting
language in terms of federal
money using federal money to
supplant or try to supplant.
State money we know that
education is in dire need of
funding for programming for our
educators for culturally
responsive materials for
Recruiting teachers and
educators and staff that.
That truly represent New
Mexico's deep cultural roots in
the students that we educate I
am a teacher that's very proud
to educate the students in the
community that I was born raised
went to school and and I think
that's vitally important to have
however I I find this narrative
incredibly troubling when we're
saying well all of this money is
out there it's coming in the
form of federal money so there's
a lot of money already for at
risk students when we know that
we need so much more so I think
that's a that's an important
narratives to keep out there
especially us in the education
community because we know
intimately at the the lack of
resources that currently exist
for our students and in this
case are higher education
institutions and I think we
heard that quite clearly by
those who
the doctors that are with us
hearing as well as the attendees
I spoke in support of this so I
do I think it's it's fantastic
you for you've really put
together something in the past
couple years that has a lot of
flags and I think that that we
all can support but with that
We have a motion Representative
Lente if you wish to close place
I may just to that point very
quickly you know that that this
is the third year of of of
bringing these types of bills to
bring attention to put on a
higher platform and and
honestly every year it's great
policy great policy met with a
road block of no funding and
that is a tough pill to swallow
and I know that I am not alone
in this that every single one of
us has great policy we brought
to this body breakfast
legislation on behalf of our
students and our constituents
that is met with the lack of
funding or that there's already
funding in there in the billions
of dollars that you should
already be happy about it go
away until we can come back next
time to address it and in some
cases were this year many of us
have been subjected to use our
junior monies to address
critically important purpose to
build institutional framework
for these programs just to name
a few like like the Hispanic
Education Act the African
American Education Act the
special education but then
program you know programs like
these that are truly great
policy but we have to scramble
to find these types of funding
and so it is it is disheartening
to say the least Mr chairman and
members that we are in the
situations where we have the
best of the best experts to to
help was news developments of
policies that that we ourselves
have education at the forefront
of our intentions but are met
with the the ugliness of the
bureaucracy and politics at play
internally and so with that Mr
chairman at thank you for your
comments as well and and
appreciate the discussion this
morning.
Great thank you Representative
so we had to do passed motion by
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative Garrett madam
secretary if you call the roll
wanted to pass motion for house
bill eighty seven please
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
So.
Representative dial.
Representative Dalal.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lang.
So.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative above cover a at
all.
Hello Lee yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative vice chair
Garrett yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Nine two three all right out of
ninety three have to pass on
house bill eighty seven thank
you all you.
All right so we will go to house
bill two eighty two so
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you good morning how are
you this morning everyone.
I'm here.
To bring you house bill two
eighty two the external diploma
program Mr chairman and members
of the committee.
Representative if if I could do
that so I was just getting at
could you say their names one by
one in the state and if you when
you hear your name and your
you're going to be demoted to
our panel and you can.
With I know it's going to be a
shock to all of you but my
expert witnesses Matt Paul.
Okay.
If you would please raise your
hand.
Right.
This is a long time coming.
Thank you are we ready.
Not yet Representative phone
case making its way in they
promoted him to peddlers.
Do we see Matt there is here.
Okay.
All right so I think we're ready
to go ahead Representative thank
you very much I really
appreciate the opportunity to
present this bill for those of
you who know me and my role in
education and in this particular
committee you know that I have
pushed for access to adult.
Education
for many many years I think it
was in twenty eighteen or twenty
nineteen that a bill was passed
in which
High schools could do would only
allow
Adult and for a certain period
of time and then it would stop
they would stop the funding so
what the we've been trying to do
the last couple years just
trying to get resources to
schools that provide adult
education funding especially
schools that have students for
example
that that would struggled in mid
school struggled in high school
just couldn't complete the work
and then they've had a a
wonderful turnaround and are
trying to get their degrees come
you know the high school
education completed I I didn't
struggle in school but I did
quit high school Mr chairman
after my sophomore year.
It was during the Vietnam War
and I ran off and got married
and I should have done that.
And the it took awhile for me to
get my GED and I have a
particular.
Sensitivity to folks who are
struggling to receive that the
rest of their education I know
for me I always feel like I.
That there was something I did
not.
Get because I didn't go through
my junior and highs in my senior
year and clearly that's not the
case I mean I miss the fun stuff
I suppose but the educational
work was the process that I
think we that we needed to work
on and what ended up happening
Mr chairman is that.
Teaching in the south valley at
that kit Carson alimentary
school teaching at what the
style of Menteri school and
teaching at Kit Carson.
The Los Gonzalez.
You know we had a mixture of
kids and all those schools some
struggled some didn't and I know
as adult learners some of them
quit young adult learners they
quit and then they want to go
back this these are the reasons
that I'm pushing this but Mr
chair I also have an amendment
do you want to deal with that
now or.
Or would you like to.
Representative if you were
finished discussing yeah if you
containing okay so we do have an
amendment so all next at the
motion on the amendment.
Mr make a motion that we.
Of.
You're allowed scratching thank
you.
Thank you Representative Lane on
second thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and be a
man yes the amendment is strict
we are just of a process in
which we strike all of section
two.
You see that.
It's on page two six of us
starting on nine ten.
And it goes through.
Of the page six and nine five
line fifteen.
And then I forgot back up one on
page one line thirteen after the
semicolon to strike the
remainder of the line.
And strike line fourteen through
the semi colon I hope I didn't
confuse everybody.
And that's it.
All right are there questions
about the amendment.
And the gentleman Representative
Representative of Representative
huh.
Director got Joe's here if you'd
like at the a clear explanation
on the amendment said she helps
you Mr chairman.
Representative Stapleton place.
Representative Trujillo have
gradual explained.
What the man was taken out that
piece of language in the bill.
What does the amendment do or
does not do please.
Yes director gradual so Mister
chairman Representative section
two is the definition section of
the public school finance act
and so it intended to change the
definition of a qualified
student if you remember that's
the the section that defines who
will be eligible to generate
funding that was changed in
Senate bill one and house bill
five of the twenty nineteen
legislative session after
talking with Representative
Trujillo I think it was on
intended to include that section
in this bill so she didn't
intended to open up the public
school
The public school funding
formula for adult students but
instead intended to fund the
adult diploma programs a section
to wasn't needed to achieve that
that goal.
Representative Stapleton you're
on mute.
So sorry so Mr chairman and
Director gradual and
Representative Trujillo I'm.
Taking out that piece of it
which is the funding formula
because the funding formula does
not relate to adult education is
that correct director glad you
don't.
Mr Chairman representative yes
so it leaves you with and
amendment to the proposed change
to the adult diploma program and
requires PED and ATV to work to
mend together to administer the
program and then that section
three leaves you with an
appropriation to the higher
education department to fund the
adult
diploma program so that is it
set up much if need be as TD is
administered by is GT is
authorized by PED or hide set
but then overseen by the higher
education department.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Representative Trujillo and
directed at you and Mr chairman
I'd like with your permission
I'd also like to bring Matt Paul
in to further discussed the
amendment if he feels it
necessary.
Sure please.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think there's a
there's
dispute about how much fiscal
liability this brings to the
state and given that that that
we are on certain I think it
makes sense to take this out of
the bill for now so it that it
that the idea was that they they
continue on and as long as
they're continuously rules that
they receive SCG funding and
it's just unclear how many kids
would do that and so it makes
sense for the time being to us
to take this out thank you Mr
chairman and Representative you.
Thank you and I saw
Representative Figueroa you've
been patiently waiting but your
hand had gone down to have a
question.
At the amendment Mr chair
Representative Stapleton asked
my question.
Great.
Just double checking all right
are there further questions on
the amendment.
Mr Chairman Representative
Trujillo due to the fact that
Matt Paul mentioned something I
have a fun question about the
SCG how does the I'm I'm I'm
directed gradual as adult
education get funding from the
SCG a public school funding.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
if you were in your house bill
five which was enacted two years
ago the language was saying
changed under qualified.
To prohibit students over twenty
two years old from enrolling in
public schools but it did
include language that if there
was somebody over twenty two
years old at the third reporting
date in the FY nineteen school
year so that would have been
February twenty nineteen they
are allowed to can you to stay
enrolled until they descend role
that's correct.
Some adults who have continued
their educate indicate twelve
system who haven't yet graduated
who are enrolled in twenty
nineteen but it prohibits new
adults from in in the system so
adults are primarily funded or I
should say only funded through
the higher education department
which oversees adult basic
education programs right now so
then Mr chairman and director
gradual all application of this
bill this this bill I'm and what
was said earlier would apply
only to those individuals that
are currently in the system is
that correct.
So Mr Chairman representative I
think there's a priority on here
to continue to support those
public school were in existence
prior to it over I'm twenty
twenty one and at the time of
the a language change in FY
nineteen that were serving
adults
it would be through.
The adults
The adult diploma program that's
administered or or or authorized
I should say by PED so we
checked with PED they have
actually put a rule in place
stated that I believe at least a
year ago but there is no
approved programs the meaning
there hasn't been funding
allocated specifically for this
nor has ATD authorized any
Grants are funding allocations
to fund an adult diploma
program.
Thank you but there is an adult
education program Mr Chairman
representative and director but
you'll there is currently an
adult education program current
correct Mr Chairman
representative there is an adult
basic education program funded
through AG do I want to say that
appropriate around the six to
six and a half million dollar
range I'd have to go back and
look to get you an exact amount
I see Representative Trujillo
shaking her head yes
that is thank.
Adult basic education with
matching federal funds there is
not a funded adult diploma
program thank actually gets you
we PED issued high school
diploma.
And that is the intent of
Representative Trujillo as bill
as to fund that program.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative Trujillo and
directed.
Thank you representative
Representative Baldonado place.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative just to pull a
little bit further on the thread
that Representative Williams
Stapleton was just on
would would would be able to see
home school kids participate in
this program and and get a PED
issued diploma with this built
in.
The chairman I am up I am
probably.
Going to give that to Matt.
If you don't mind thank you.
Mr chair and Representative
Baldonado the intent of the bill
is not to service home school
students but rather adult
students if a home schooled
student had had issues
completing their coursework over
the time of the traditional
schooling period this would
certainly be an option to them
if they if they reach that age
of of twenty two or older but
but the intent of the programs
that you know if you're under
the age of twenty two that
you're you're covered by the
public schools in that sense of
this program would.
That
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Matt and thank you
Representative that's the only
question I have.
Great thank you Representative
remember we're still on the
amendment discussion of the
amendment also Representative
Jenkins.
Things were.
Mr chair of the questions that.
Okay thank you Representative
Chatfield representative out to
have a question on the
amendment.
My my question is on the bill.
Okay.
Option of the amendment.
Right so we have Representative
Garrett still on the amendment.
Yes thank you Mr chairman so
does the amendment.
That students who were not
previously enrolled in two
thousand nineteen to twenty new
students could enter these
programs being sponsored by a
public school.
Mr chair Rachel.
So Mr Chairman representative.
The language in the language in
I'm looking for that in Q.
subsection it's actually
subsection O. on lines twenty
two through.
Eighteen on pages four and five
I think was intended to allow
adults to enroll but it didn't
quite get there so technically
that language we feel doesn't do
anything so I'm.
Right now right now current law
if you were enrolled in in
October and
February of twenty nineteen and
you stayed continuously rules
you were able to generate
funding having said that there
are provisions where you attend
a public school if the school
would allow you if you're an
adult but you just wouldn't
generate funding and so
with all the language if the if
the language or drafted
differently I think it was
intended to allow adults to
continue to enroll in public
schools but it technically
wasn't done done right.
Mr chairman and Rachel.
My twenty five year old child.
Decides to date to go back to
what state charter school that
offers an adult program like
this.
They would be funded is that
correct so.
Mr Chairman representative if.
It was an adult diploma program
so rather than the.
Regular SCG funded high school
program yes
would not be able to enroll as
an entitled students save and
get funded through the public
school funding formula today.
But Mr chairman I Rachel they
could get rules and generate
five thousand dollars for
getting that enrolling in the
program.
Mr Chairman Representative I see
pursuant to this bill yes if
this bill is enacted they would
be able to you know eighty is
going to set a program up
whereby if this if this gets
funded they would probably do
request for applications to
figure out what programs they
wanted to fund and then if it's
a funded program an adult could
enroll the school or the program
would generate
five thousand dollars per
enrolled student pursuant to the
bill to get their high school
diploma through a PED issued
diploma.
Other than a high school diploma
then then the high school issue
diploma.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for the questions on
the amendment.
All right so we had a motion to
adopt the amendment
Representative Stapleton all
second it is there any
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment.
All right you have been amended
bill Representative Trujillo
thank you
So
that wish to have questions from
the panel please indicate raise
your hand
and I will take them down or
percent down I'd already gotten
you thank you Representative
Trujillo did you wish to close
our show we go to the attendees
I don't have a closing the mark
but you know I I wanna give Matt
Paul an opportunity to do the
closing for me because he and I
and the a couple of other people
have invested a lot of time and
he's much more eloquent than I
am so I'll let him do.
Please thank you Mr chair just
to I think it's actually been
covered in the discussion on the
amendment you know adults were
taken out of the ability to be
funded in the funding formula
public schools we have a number
of charters that were were
feeling that need and in doing
so we've taken away any options
for a for a school whether
they're charter or a traditional
districts will be able to serve
students towards a diploma and
gets funded many are in GDP
programs or work force
certificate programs those are
good programs and an important
part of the Max we believe there
needs to be a pathway towards
having it at a program for
adults to get a diploma the
outcomes are better for us those
they get a high school diploma
compared to those that get a GED
on and there's a great need
across the state if we look at
look in years past that our
graduation rates which are
rising in the state of New
Mexico and I think that's
something we can all be out of
it still means that twenty
percent of kids are getting a
diploma if you if you multiply
that over many years there are a
lot of eligible potential people
that adults now that that that
might find this pathway
appealing
Just another note on the
programming the external diploma
is something that's operated on
nationwide on number of our
schools are are having gauged
with the program in the past and
what it does is it provides a
personalized half for students
as they move through their
education journey towards a
diploma so we think the sponsor
and we think the committee for
hearing today.
Right thank you and with that we
will go to the attendees list so
those that wish to speak in
support of house bill two eighty
two is amended please indicate
by raising your hand.
We.
All right since support.
Chris good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
this committee on Chris Paul's
auto and on the register
lobbyist for Garber now charter
school many of you know go to
but now try to school we are not
just an average high school up
there are going to run as a high
school with a curriculum and
environment designed
specifically for adult students.
Could not have been in school
for a while but also we are the
we have the campus inside of the
banning of county metropolitan
detention center are we assist
those inmates out there are we
also assist all the released
inmates of the banning of
community costs the program as
well any adults who want to get
their lives back on track we
appreciate that this sponsor
bring bring this bill again this
year we work really hard on
making sure that you know all
the stakeholders to gather so we
create this framework that would
assist this population so
members the committee we ask you
please to have yours you to
please support this piece of
legislation thank you very much.
Thank you Chris Robert good
morning Robert you have up to
two minutes please thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Robert Beatty with
Robert internet charter school
and a founding governance
council member of our garden but
now try to school.
RK are is been are serving its
community for twenty years now
adults of always been a major
part of of how we do business
with our evening program.
I'm so when funding for over
twenty two year old students
with taken away R. K. continue
to serve those students I'm
currently we have twenty nine
students that are over twenty
two seven of them continue to
generate money in the SCG and
twenty two I do not but we
continue to serve those students
out this external the farmer hi
great another opportunity for
for the students to be able to
benefit one of the most powerful
things that that happens in our
school was when a dog comes back
and their child sees that their
parent or older brothers and
sister are care enough about
education the changes the
attitude of the younger students
and it changes the attitude of
the family about education I
want to thank Representative
Trujillo the sponsor for staying
with this it's been a long
struggle and I absolutely
support house bill two eighty
two thank you great thank you so
much.
Is there other support on the
attendees list.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome yes good morning
this is doctor quite about
Martinez for the University of
New Mexico and I just would like
to up with my support for this
bill as a former upward member
of our educators school as well
as a pro as a supporter of the
Gordon Presnel school both of
the schools are critical in
developing and and and
supporting of all of our people
as well as adult learners as we
know sometimes there's some
challenges in life as a teacher
who also taught at foothill high
school at CYFD our commitment
level and what he DC schools
it's critical that we that we
invest and we take care of our
people so I whole heartedly
support this as an educator as
well as a former member of the
boards thank you.
Great thank you.
Other support.
All right so we will go to
opposition is their opposition.
To.
Still to.
All right resistant all right so
we will come back to community
so first MLS Representative Dow
please.
You Mr chairman and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill I'm a little familiar with
the topic because I think it was
Representative Garrett and I
were on interim group that
worked on this for awhile and
this seems like a really
reasonable solution and Figaro
as well and so I just have a few
questions to make sure that
we're getting the job done and
this is this is a great I feel
like it's a great solution so is
it's.
I K. per year or is it five K.
for the program.
Madam chair it would be five K.
K. per year per student.
year student okay and madam Mr
chairman and representative what
is the average cost when they
were if when these adults were
rolled and public education
department.
I'm gonna let the Mr chairman
let the Matthew Paul respond to
that because I don't recall the
number.
Mr chair and representative of
doubt be somewhere along the
line of nine or ten thousand
dollars per student thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative and perhaps
higher if they had an IEP.
Mr chair and and Representative
Dow because the students are
were over the age of twenty one
they would okay sterile funds
okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative so it's a it is
that it it it's much less than
what PED was paying and what we
were struggling with this have
you given external diploma if
PED to if I'm hired to this on
they would have to create an
accreditation process they would
have to go through all this is
very very complicated and
difficult for higher ed to take
on high school diplomas and so
it sounds like this is a
partnership between higher than
PED where the existing
infrastructure of PED will be
utilized the higher ed will
oversee or maybe dispersed these
programs I'm is that correct.
Matthew.
Mr Chairman representative out
that's correct okay thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative now is this is
this going to go out to R. F. P.
and people will say we want to
focus on adults external
deployments or will they will
they register in the one child
at a time I'm thinking about
rural are wanted all the time
thinking about rural New Mexico
where there may not be adult
education programs that are
offered in rural areas when they
are offered you know we talk
about these barriers they have
to enroll at the semester level
sort of on the college rotation
because they're run through
college programs so fall spring
and summer semesters they can't
just walk in the door and start
a program this provides the
flexibility they need to enroll
in real time and to pursue their
individual needs in real time
that's awesome so how will.
Program access these dollars in
order to service student.
Go ahead.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
that it would be open to any
public school to be able to
serve the students and where as
you mentioned
the higher the public at
department and the hiring
department would need to create
some sort of kind of
accreditation process rooted in
this external diploma program so
if they can show that they can
find that curriculum for the
students they would then be
eligible to apply for the
funding.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative and is a
private school will it will this
law disallow a private or non
public school for me being able
to do an external diploma
program even if they're not
funded because right now some
non public schools issue next
they issued diplomas through
their accrediting process with
that for you they don't need the
money with this prohibit them
from being able to you to do
that.
Go ahead.
Mr Chairman representative out
it would not prohibit them to be
able to continue on with their
programming they just want to be
able to get funding through this
this these provisions here.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative and then just
one last question Most this is
Rachel if it's from at.
Rachel seem to indicate that
we're not quite getting where we
need to get what is the language
barrier and and can we fix it
here is it are you fixing it
before the next committee I
think this is critically
important for anyone who knows
what's going on with adult
external deployment right now
what's going on with adult
appointments.
So so I'm Mr Chairman
representative my comment was in
reference to the language that
was in section two that
stricken.
you're getting where you need to
get more the Representative
wants to terms of intent with
sections one in section three.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative and thank you
Representative for hearing what
folks are saying for making this
pathway I to share your desire
to see adult learners who have
some bumps in the road and and
have some have some road blocks
that kept them from getting in
the traditional time frame to
help them get this done and I
really appreciate it this bill
thank you so much I'm looking
for to voting for it.
Thank you.
Representative lane please.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to make a simple point
emphasize why think an issue
like this is important.
That that simple point is if you
look at the bills lifetime
earnings differences between
someone who has a high school
diploma.
And someone who does not it is
substantial differences between
those persons.
And so to the extent we have the
legislative body can encourage
more people become diploma
holders I think it's going to be
nothing but benefit our state
and.
Overall so just a point but I
think I think it's important
understand there there are real
limitations with this type of
legislative session I support
thank you.
Thank you Representative baster
Derek please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so my
understanding is that Public
nonprofits who offer an external
diploma program are not eligible
is that correct.
that's correct.
Mr Chairman representative
in this definition in a
community college who offers an
external diploma program is also
not eligible for additional
funding is that correct that's
my understanding madam Mr
Chairman but Matthew will you
correctly.
I will not correct you.
That is correct.
Mr chair and representative no
no problem no new programs for
example there's an external
degree program bill going
through the Senate right now no
new program can be created only
programs that existed.
by the two thousand eighteen
nineteen school year is that
correct.
Mr chair that is the question
for Matt.
Mr chair members of the
committee this bill simply says
that those programs that were
existing in that school year
will be prioritized for funding
so new programs could come but
it but it would prioritize those
schools that we're serving the
students in that school year.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for that clarification
those are my questions.
Thank you vice chair do we have
further questions Representative
Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair last question
Raise a question for me I'm
looking at page six of the bill
in section three so it's not in
the expunged charge or.
This chart is just to receive
funds and public school must
have been in existence prior to
July first twenty twenty one.
That is must have been in
existence that's pretty clear
then it goes on to say the
department of your times funding
to public schools that are
served adults students.
In the twenty eighteen twenty
nineteen school year so that's
the prioritization piece but it
seems to clearly states that
only schools in existence prior
to twenty twenty one.
Well get these funds so I'm
going to push for a little
further clarification on that.
Mr chairman Matt speak.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Figueroa yes
that's right so so the it will
prioritize funding towards
schools that had programs like
this in the past but yes no new
schools can come out so there's
that there's a difference there
between programming in the
school so there are any high
school in the state of New
Mexico that had existed prior to
July one of this this upcoming
summer would be able to and that
program if they didn't have it
before but those that have
actually done this in the past
and that eighteen nineteen
school year would be prioritized
for funding.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that clarification so it's
an issue since the question of
program new program suggests new
schools no.
my other question Mr chair
involves the five thousand is
considerably less than a public
school students regular public
school non inTaos students.
And yet is considerably higher
than what we are currently
spending as the state I'm
getting adults to meet you
Senator high school education
getting them of their do we at
least according to the S. I. R.
which I'm swinging back to that
indicates that about six hundred
and fifty five dollars per
student we are spending
So I'm wondering where the
number five thousand came from
and why is so much higher than
than six hundred fifty five.
Matt go ahead.
Mr Chairman representative
Figaro that number was came to
buy it by practitioners in the
field and looking at the
supports that these students
need if we think about it G. D.
program in order to successfully
accomplish a program and pass
that test a student must have
pretty high level and functional
reading skills and and other
skills that allow them to take
that test for these students in
in some cases there many of them
are not ready to to take the GED
their skills are commensurate
with what you need to accomplish
that and so the supports that
students like that needs are
very different so the five
thousand dollars number comes
from the practitioners kind of
walking back with the cost of
their program would be to get
the students across the finish
line and I think you
appropriately identified that
yes it's more than adult basic
education but less than what we
had been been spending before
and I think that that's a
positive of the bill.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Sir.
Those are all.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa further questions.
Mr chairman of the.
All right thank you
Representative Baldonado.
so we have to do passed portion
is our second all sector in the
future okay thank you
Representative line so before
except that motion all our all I
had it one question myself so
thank you Representative
Trujillo for bringing this
forward I know this is been
something you have been working
on for quite awhile now I my
question is what sort of
insurance to we have in the bill
that this won't be used for
private institutions and it'll
stick strictly to to our public
institutions.
Well Mr chairman and of members
of the committee.
In my conversation chins with
the folks that are very
interested in this they know
that I'm a staunch public
education supporter and it would
be very difficult for me to
bring a bill like this forward
if it had
A prerequisite for the things
that you're talking about but
that you know what I can ask
Matt to clarify because again
you know the goal is getting
those adult learners educated
and and guess anything is
possible but.
That is my feeling.
Mr Mr chair the intent of the
bills to fund public schools I
think the the languages we had
worked with and through the
drafter head cover that but but
leave it to the sponsors there's
just something we want to
address but I think we're you
know everybody's unified who who
support the bill that this
should be for public schools I
believe.
Right.
Thank you for that
Representative Trujillo and I
and I certainly understand
history in doing that we just
want to make sure continue to
double check that that's always
the case
the other the other thing I
wanted to ask about is I'm in
the two thousand nineteen
legislative session
Representative this was of
course an issue as we were going
through house bill five Senate
bill one and Senator Brandt had
a bill that came up rather late
but was really pertinent to our
discussion is a Senate bill
three ninety one high school GED
external diploma program do we
know the status of that and what
the point I think it was the
public education department that
was tasked with coming up with
this external diploma program do
we know the status of that and
and why is.
That may or may not have been a
topic of discussion to go this
route.
Mr chair that's a Rachel I think
Bill that this is the direction
we need to.
So Mister chairman
section one of this bill is that
law and so it is
explicitly the changes in here
noting that PED shall
collaborate with ATG in
administering the program as I
mentioned earlier PED drafted
rules
I apologize just because sure
that information with me on
Friday last week and I think it
was.
December of twenty twenty might
have been even a little bit
December twenty nineteen I'm
sorry so about a year after that
the bill was enacted eight
months or so after the bill was
enacted but no programs have
actually been authorized to
offer an adult diploma program
so.
I think part of that is because
there's been no direct funding
and ATV gets funding for adult
basic education but this program
is a little bit different than
adult basic education so.
PED according to Mr Senate in
our conversation with him just
because conversation with him
said they felt like they done
their job in terms of setting
the parameters in the rules for
the program it just I there
needs to be funded or AGD needs
to take it up within the funding
that they have for adult basic
at.
Right no no thank you thank you
for for answering that I mean I
think like I mentioned is that
this is been a topics and since
I've taken this chairmanship and
and Representative Trujillo
you've certainly been an
advocate for at
No matter what what that the
fate of this legislation or or
others like it this session you
know I think this is something
that certainly we need to to
figure out is the funding piece
for this because as has been
mentioned right is is that this
is
vitally important and can serve
a lot of our adult learners it's
just finding that the devil is
always in the details funding
that funding mechanism in order
to make that possible what the
proper amount should be where it
should be directed how it should
be directed and all that stuff
so so
even with that said I'm I'm
happy to support your piece of
legislation here and certainly
despite where where it may end
up this legislative session as
we get closer and closer to the
end of not that anybody's County
days or anything but as we get
closer to the end right that we
certainly continue to explore
this in the interim and that
funding piece in where it's
directed but with that except
Representative Baldonado is
motion second by Representative
lane
madam secretary if you call the
roll on to pass for house bill
two eighty two as amended they
are Linda.
Representative all.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative dal yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative were brought
Caballero yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Hello Lou yeah yes.
Representative vice chair
Garrett yes.
Chairman yes.
You happen to pass just amend
it.
All right so you have a do
passes amended Representative
Trujillo best of luck in finance
and appropriations I know and
thank unanimously endorsed thank
you all right so we will go on
to Senate bill fifty one so
Senator Hemphill.
It sees new faces in here if you
could raise your hand please
Senator all right.
Going to demote you to our panel
promote you.
Depending on how we feel good
morning senator do you have any
experts that you wish us to
bring in.
Mr chairman thank you it's a
honor to be here this morning I
have expert witnesses including
Casey Bennett beat us.
Matthew Paul.
And Todd now this.
All right so if you could raise
your hand in the Celeste's thank
you all right thank you Mr
Benavidez.
And then who is your last expert
I'm sorry Senator.
I'd now just Mr chairman.
What.
Do not see that may not be
available Mr chairman okay well
great so we have the rest of the
crew if you would Senator please
Senate bill fifty one okay thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee I appreciate
having this opportunity to
introduce Senate bill fifty one
which provides enrollment
preference for students whose
parents are employees of charter
schools
this particular enrollment
preferences already provided and
traditional district schools
it's a family friendly work
policy that helps parents
balance family and work
obligations having children
attend the same schools where
parents work reduces family
stress it helps parents be more
involved in their children's
education it helps make morning
and afternoon commutes easier
and for all those reasons that
helps schools retain and recruit
teachers and employees and that
helps foster stronger
connections with in the school
environment and I've worked in
both charter schools and
traditional district schools
over the course of my twenty six
years in education.
I have four children of my own
and when my children have been
able to attend the same school
and working I know that it's
made life so much easier for me
not and not just myself but also
for my husband and for my
children and also the students
and families I work with we've
all heard of the analogy when we
have to put our oxygen mask on
first when we fly in an airplane
and we're supposed to do that
before we intend to children and
before we attend to others and
that's a principle that applies
in life to we are not able to
take care of the needs of others
and tell our needs are met the
state the brain states that the
adult to San is what dictates
the state that the child is in
so if that dealt feels calm and
valued and respected children in
his or her care will also field
valued common respected a child
isn't able to be in a higher
brain state than adult so I
don't and it also stressed the
whole class through the whole
school is also going to be
stress we all know that stress
releases cortisol and that
negatively affects learning and
memory and it also increases the
likelihood that that person who
is in stress is going to respond
to any kind of social conflict
in fight or flight mode which
increases aggression and
violence in our schools and our
community.
So by providing enrollment
preferences for students whose
parents are employees of charter
schools we're going to be
reducing stress.
In the for the employee for
their children and for the
students that employee interacts
with so charter schools are
often they often require
employees work longer hours and
parents are required to be more
involved with regular contact
with teachers and volunteering
for events and extracurricular
activities so this is going to
help those employees meet these
increased demands so Mister
chairman I'd like to yield to
Casey Bennett beat us if she's
available.
Yes Casey briefly.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Casey
Bennett yes and I'm the director
of the aisle as international
school in Albuquerque
I'd like to first it describes
you know once you know with the
dual language charter school
with a Max capacity of four
hundred and twenty four students
every year we host a lottery
which is primarily for incoming
kindergarten students and a few
spots here and there that might
become available ordinary our
lottery yield at least three
hundred applications and with
only limited spaces available
less than ten percent of the
applicants get accepted to the
school.
So right now state law provides
that there are only two
exceptions one are for students
that are already
enrolled at the school naturally
they don't have to go and go
through the lottery process
again and the second exemption
is for siblings so siblings of
US school of a student who is
already enrolled they don't have
to go through the lottery
process are there automatically
accepted so Senate bill fifty
one will assist primarily number
one and recruiting highly
qualified teachers which is
oftentimes difficult the
candidates know they are well
we'll have to go through a
lottery process to have their
own children accepted into the
school
it makes it more of a a
balancing act for them if a
student of a teacher is not
accepted for the lottery process
this could cause an undue burden
on a teacher who would have to
provide transportation to and
from a school in their own zone
home area.
So the second the second area
where Senate bill fifty one will
assisted in retention of highly
qualified teachers if teachers
are not provided this exemption
or their own children or
grandchildren this student these
students often go on a waiting
list at a highly competitive
charter school with you spots
available this could mean
staying on the waiting list for
the remainder of the year with
little chance of actually being
accepted to the school and
waiting this and at the end of
every school year in my
experience teachers have become
frustrated with this process and
take jobs closer to whether
students are able to attend
whether that be a public school
or public charter school
where there's no need for a
lottery.
so I would like to point out
that this exemption is
especially important for stand
out was
international school and others
for the following reasons I
currently have for staff members
that are desperately hoping
percent bill fifty one to pass
allowing for the addition this
is the additional exemption I
have a kindergartner a
kindergarten teacher sorry to
have to wait three years in
order for help her own children
to get into the school I have or
in exchange teachers being that
our school is a dual language we
speak a lot of teachers from
Spain or Mexico I currently have
two teachers that have their
students are completely the
other side of of Albuquerque and
they have to transport them and
then come into work.
another major of point to this
is that this will not require
any additional funding and it
will not affect your school
operational fund.
I hope this gives you a little
insight into how this occurred
this exemption would greatly
benefit not only our charter
school but others around the
state and thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
Then you wish to say some brief
words.
I will be brief yes just two
things first is that this
enrollment preferencias provided
for in statute for traditional
district schools not sure if
that was covered and then just
secondly that
you know when we talk a lot
about mission driven education
and students selecting schools
that are the right fit for them
we forget also that teachers
select schools that are
reflection of their values they
they want to teach at a school
Lexi and out west because they
believe in that dual language
education their beliefs are are
likely something that one would
still in their own children and
so by being able to to provide
them with the education that
they favor and and and and that
they chose add in applying to a
charter school or a mission
driven on school like like a
magnet school I think it's
really it's it's just really
powerful though this families to
have that alignment and have the
the parents and the children
going to that school so that's
all for me thank you.
Right set it the stand for
questions Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for questions.
Right thank you all so before we
come to questions from the panel
we will go to the attendees list
those in support of Senate bill
fifty one please indicate by
raise your hand if you wish to
speak.
Given a moment.
Board shuffles.
All right.
Then that good morning you have
up to two minutes please.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda of
on I'm the executive director
New Mexico kids can we stand in
support of this bill as was
mentioned it during testimony
this benefit exists for teachers
in traditional schools and we
simply want to extend that for
our educators and our public
charter schools thank you for
your time and thank you for the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward.
Right thank you.
All right so before we go on
madam vice chair.
All right I'm gonna call you
into action I have to be in
Senate education I'm getting.
Thank you madam vice chair we
are in support and then
opposition would be next on the
attendees.
Thank you so much Mr chair okay
we heard from Amanda our next
speaker is Robert Robert you
have the floor.
Our.
And now you really have the
floor yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee Robert
Beatty with Robert F. Kennedy
charter school I want to thank
the sponsor for this this piece
of legislation is long overdue
and RFK's certainly would
appreciate the opportunity to
allow students of our staff to
with a ten dot org gate as
needed I appreciate the
legislation thank you.
Thank you Robert of any C. O.
Baldonado you.
R. one.
Yourself.
Madam chair I don't know what
happened I do need to raise my
hand thank you.
Okay our next speaker is.
But Cheryl.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Sarah fitz Gerald I'm senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
chamber strongly supports this
bill and we we think the sponsor
for bringing it forward as you
know charter schools often
operate on different schedules
of traditional public schools do
squares that's that's start
earlier different holidays
longer school days and I can
make things logistically
challenging for trip school
teachers with school age
students our educators and
school staff have always been
heroes in our communities
they've proven just how
incredible they are this year
many times that we're this bill
makes it just a little bit
easier to be a teacher or in
other school staff member by
keeping educators and their
children in the same school so
we are the committee to pass
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Okay do we have anybody else who
wishes to support this.
Okay is there anybody in
opposition.
Okay seeing nobody in opposition
we will move to the committee
committee members are.
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanna make sure I understand the
current process so if I am a
school teacher at a charter
school and I have school age
children they in order to go to
my charter school they would
essentially have to get through
the need to get like a lottery
process that that currently
works.
Madam chair representative
that's correct they would go
through the same enrollment
process as other students.
Thank you madam chair thank
Senator and welcome to the house
admitted Senator after this year
So if I mean I guess it's
possible that they may give them
but there there's no guarantee
the and honestly how how why
look at a bill like this is like
you know from my I guess when I
look at it as as a working mom
and a working dad bill you know
I was a child that was raised by
a single mother and so I I saw
her having to juggle getting to
work on time dropping me off at
school trying to make
arrangements to get we pick back
up and and all those single
shoes trying to work
and so I think this is a bill
that would actually support.
Ingle parents.
Working parents even if their
merit so I I think this is a is
a good gap that we're feeling
here.
This bill thank you.
Okay thank you our necks of
penalises Christine Trujillo
Representative Trujillo thank
you madam chair and thank.
Senator Hemphill I welcome to
the committee
I served on the state board of
education when the original up.
Rules were created for charter
schools and one of the biggest
issues that we had was the the
first of all that they all
needed to go through the process
of of
The I forgot what it's called
where you apply and it's like
you your name out.
Randomly one of the issues of
concern was that preferential
treatment would go to the.
The families of the boards of
directors or the families of of
the ADVATE yours and that that
that way if you have a at a
charter school that had a cap
that all those players would
would take up the the room for
the kids that were actually
supposed to be
part of the process and so there
was actual language as you were
trying to deal with today to
prevent that from happening how
are you going to address that if
you if you have a board member
kids and
teach your kids that are taking
approved up from those regular
kids that are trying to get in
and may be bumped because there
are the others are getting
preferential treatment the
reason I'm saying that is what
ended up happening in a towel
school one of the first ones was
that all the all the.
We were told that a lot of those
I think that cap was eighty kids
and pretty much all those all
those kids that were involved
with the kids of all of the
administrators and teachers
except for a few random kids and
and it was one of those for the.
Of the neighborhood kids that
couldn't go there would call it
the the white kids school
because it was really creating a
segregation kind of for those
kids how are you gonna dress
that because I do like this bill
that how we can address it to
make sure that you're not
leaving other kids out.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for that question
I think that's a really good
question and I definitely can
see that as being an issue and
and recognize that that could be
one of the reasons that that
what's not rules enrollment
preference I do see that many
Employees of charter schools
have been treated very unfairly
because they haven't been able
to bring their children there I
know of a colleague who is a
social worker and she had to
travel fifteen minutes to drop
off and pick up her kids and
that meant that she would
arrives for sometimes morning
duty a little late because of
having to transporter kids and
she couldn't drop them off
before other teachers for their.
And it created so much stress
and she was being right not by
her principal and she ended up
leaving and ended up leaving
education all together we
weren't able to find another
social worker to take her place
and so those students who were
in her who she had on her case
load ended up going quite awhile
without having that those social
work services so I think that
it's it's something to consider
but I think that there are so
many other students who would
and parents and who would
benefit from this work friendly
policy and I'm curious if my
expert witness Matt Paul has
something to add to that.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator career until
and Mr Chairman representative
Trujillo just a couple things
that I would add there is one
that
most charter schools do not have
a waiting list it's around
thirty to forty percent that
actually are in this situation
and in the cases of those that
that do have a waiting list
their largest bear here is
actually facilities and actually
having enough physical space to
our house more kids and I think
what we're seeing just over the
last
our.
I'd say for five years that that
schools that have large waiting
lists are really trying to solve
for that facility issue so there
isn't a long line of students
who want to attend the school so
I think one way to address your
concern is just the overall
capacity at those schools and
ensuring that they can roll
those extra fifty or sixty
students and I think that that's
happened in your community I
think Mr Benavidez could
probably speak a little bit to
that as well and he's going
through that process but was it
just that it's a it there are a
couple other elements at play as
well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I I still have the
concern but I do understand that
the capacity has a lot to do
with it.
Thank you Representative our
next panelists in this order
will be Representative Dow
Representative Roybal Caballero
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and
welcome Representative Senator
can help and I just want to make
sure what you're doing here if
they public school teacher works
at a district outside of her
home district is she allowed to
enroll her children in that
school.
Where she works.
Madam chair and representative
good to see you this morning.
that is correct so if a teacher
is working outside of her
district she is or he is able to
have that enrollment preference
in the traditional districts
school.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you senator and what
is the reason for that why is
that.
Madam chair representative I
believe that that is a work
friendly policy to help to
encourage families to be
together reducing stress of the
the parents and helping to
create that life that family
work balance.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you senator and so
what this doing is creating
parity.
in our public schools which
charters are part of Madam chair
representative that's correct
okay thank you.
I want to Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator welcome to the
committee.
I have a
similar.
Statement and concerns that
Excuse me Representative
Trujillo was talking about in
terms of
Our charter school enrollment
process this I understand.
With that and I'm sorry I didn't
realize it didn't have my video
on sorry.
I understand that there's a
lottery and and you had someone
discussed the the lottery.
And I also understand for
enrollment a lottery process
that is fine Roman purposes and
I also understand that currently
and you might just correct me if
I'm wrong currently siblings are
already given preference.
in charter schools is that
correct Senator.
Madam chair representative yes
that is correct thank you so
currently.
My.
And based on that understanding
about a moment and lottery my
understanding then is if we're
already gave them.
Siblings.
Preference.
How does that affect.
The.
Lottery and open enrollment
notion.
that.
Has supported it
Charter schools or that that we
used in terms of supporting
charter schools public charter
schools.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna see at
Matt my expert witness not call
could speak to that.
Thanks madam chair and
Representative Roybal Caballero
you know charter schools are
public schools as you mentioned
that are funded the same way as
our districts schools and follow
roughly ninety five percent of
the same provisions in law this
provides parity with the rest of
districts schools in in in doing
that the lottery system and
again it's not every school it's
it's less than the majority that
actually conduct a lotteries but
it is the feature of the school
that provides equity and
fairness in and ensuring that
those rules all had an equal
chance the siblings already yes
you're right it does take away a
few slides we believe that the
and when I say slots I mean
suits for kids the sedan or or
enrollment slots
We don't anticipate a very large
impact from this bill we think
that Mr Benavidez and see
analysis actually on the high
end of the of this and so it
does provide that the rest of
the seats would be equal access
access but this would be doing
exactly as you noted is
providing a preference but
because it's on payer on par
with a traditional district
schools we believe that it's
it's rightfully in the spirit of
what public schools are doing
across the state.
Thank you and so.
Mr chair madam chair and and
Senator.
But my concern is.
Charites one thing and providing
equity is another.
They're not one in the same you
can be in parity.
With what public schools.
We.
Stand with you one.
But that doesn't necessarily
mean Madam providing equity in
education and when I talk about
equity in education I'm talking
about the fact that.
Charter schools.
Are to provide.
Equal education.
To all populations.
Especially public public charter
schools obviously and when you
have them and enrollment system.
That reported to be quote
unquote in open enrollment
system but yet you have a
lottery associate it with that
and then already siblings are
taking on part of those slots
seats I I I with Mr Paul I
prefer calling them see this
rather than slides are children
take seats and not **** but in
any event
Then it seems to me that that's
going to reduce your capacity to
be able to provide equity or
equal education to those
students that have traditionally
been excluded.
Whatever reason for multitude of
reasons from our educational
processes and which we were
assured that through the public
charter school processes they
would be treated in the same
fashion so it just logical my
logical assessment of how this
is unfolding on leads me to
believe that the waiting lists
that currently are held
are going to continue to grow
because we're reducing the the
the slots by in my excuse me
assigning or giving preference
to them so just you rationally
there you know even the the
answer madam chair about.
We predict.
You know little to no real
impact or
whatever is you know there's no
way to predict that it there is
a way to protect it because
there's a historical pattern and
there are waiting lists and we
already know that we're not.
In rolling
the sufficient numbers that we
projected or anticipated to be
enrolled in to be providing the
same equitable education to our
core
Under served populations that
are living in the very charter
school neighborhood.
And then very neighborhoods
where charter schools are so it
just doesn't make it doesn't fit
logically with
what my expectation and
anticipation is in terms of
charges where it comes to on
charter schools and I understand
exactly what's being said about
public schools on in public
schools offer these
privileges I would say in this
case your the title billets
preferences and that makes it
even more difficult to to for me
to accept because I don't think
that we should be providing
preferences to begin with period
and I understand all the
arguments about accommodating on
long hours of teachers and
administration I understand the
the the whole discussion about
accommodating the needs of those
teachers if they have extended
days or extra
curricular activities all of us
the children and the children in
my neighborhood.
have
parents that work in the
cafeteria
parents that
work as as janitors parents that
work as just a sistance parents
that go in with you know we all
love to have that and that's
where I get concerned
with these types of
Suggestions that we should be
and acting as law and so it just
it just concerns me that we're
getting farther and farther away
from the intent and purposes of
what we want it with public
charter schools and that was two
four fair equitable
Education for all students and
and so that's my concern so and
I'm not really quite sure it
just doesn't make sense I feel
madam chair and senator that the
waiting lists are going to get
greater and that on those
waiting lists the children that
All of the reasons other than.
There are social economic status
should be afford it.
preference for equity purposes
not for Parities so I'm not
really quite sure how
differences not equality.
Preferences not equity.
you might be getting parity but
you certainly in my
View of what we should be doing
in terms of charter schools
public charter schools you're
getting accommodation you're
getting
Madam chair and and senator
you're making things more
comfortable for people
you're you know you're you're
you're providing your intent is
to provide those kind of
Entities I would call them
that just don't fit well in what
I believe we should be doing and
I think that the we're going to
be creating longer waiting lists
and we're going to be excluding.
more and more children that that
we should be actually affording.
educational opportunity to
because of the history on not in
the you know a poor child living
in that neighborhood that
you're.
Located in should have the
ability especially if that child
and that parent selects science
and math as a preference or
whatever the charter school
special specializes in should be
a language maybe they want the
Lawrence but they know Spanish
or another native language but
want to have the opportunity to
learn that third or fourth
language they should be able to
have that same equitable
opportunity so those are my my
major concerns and I know that
Mr Pompeo and you Senator and
others in their speaking address
this but not sufficiently enough
to get me to understand or to
accept so I appreciate you
bringing this forward I have a
lot of problems because
everything I fought for the last
fifty plus years of my life in
order to achieve a fair and
equitable education for all our
students seems to be
Going under the mat in in this
direction so
I know that you're giving all
the assurances.
Madam chair but I just think
that it's gonna play out in that
in that manner and I still feel
that I can see I can see in in
the various neighborhoods that
we visited I've gone to school
meetings where charter schools
are held and they're in
neighborhoods
and how do you tell a child in
that very neighborhood that
they're going to be on a waiting
list when you've given
preference to the children of of
the two siblings number one and
then two on children of faculty
and staff to accommodate them so
I have difficulty with that
madam chair and Senator let's
hope that maybe in further
questions I might I might get
more clarity thank you madam
chair.
Representative down on that
point you wanted to say
something yes yes thank you
madam chair and thank you
senator Matt can you tell us how
many of the charter schools have
a waiting list and it could you
explain to us if the waiting
list is based on their capacity
or is it with based on a cap of
enrollment that the state has
established.
Madam chair and Representative
Dow it is rooted in in something
that looks like both and they it
is it is formally an enrollment
cap but also oftentimes
enrollment caps are set by the
capacity that the school has and
so that cap which is provided
for by the authorizer is is you
know if they if they have a cap
of three hundred and they get
two hundred and eighty
applicants every student gets
admitted to the school but as
soon as they go past that as far
as the number of applicants than
they would have a lot right.
And Mr and and madam chair
Senator and Matt is that cap of
three hundred for state example
based on the facilities square
footage or based on a
restriction given by the state.
It's a restriction provided for
by the state.
Thank you at thank you madam
chair and thank you senator so
theoretically it sounds like
everyone agrees that we want
students enroll in these charter
schools and it provides an
opportunity for students
especially in the neighborhood
yes there were at this bill
moves forward thank it sounds
like everybody supports the
charter schools see the value of
the charter schools believe in
the charter schools and so maybe
there could be at the cap could
not apply to employees children.
Would be one way to fix that.
We're going to
further clarity just on that
question because I'm not clear
what of the answer madam chair
so.
Representative Dow brought up
another I guess another way of
looking at it however just to be
clear if there's an enrollment.
The cap and it's based on
physical facility capacity then.
By giving preference you're
moving someone into that
preferred position but you're
removing whoever is in line that
could possibly
fill that preference a telling
is that the way your are you
meant it to be Representative
down by madam well madam chair
representative I asked if the
cap based on square footage and
the answer was no.
The schools have adequate
capacity to serve more students
the cap has been placed there by
they're at the work there there
appropriating about you're the
their oversight Representative
okay yeah we're we're gonna move
on Representative Lara you're
next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing this
bill hi I I'd like to our
schools I I believe in their
mission I believe you could do
because could work in our
communities however I do have
Representative slowed by going
into brought some very good
points that I was going to make
also Representative Dow brought
up of some very good points and
so that leads me to my question
madam chair so we talked about
or enrollment council block will
brought up with with a regarding
the charter schools and I
understand why you know limited
space X. amount of students you
know our student teacher ratio
or all that stuff I understand a
lot.
But earlier that was the that
was a question or example maybe
about parity between the
district schools and charter
schools when it comes to
enrolling the children of
employees so does a public
district you Senator in and
madam chair anyone who would
want to answer this does a
district elementary school have
an enrollment cap.
Madam chair representative I
believe that there is an
enrollment cap
And I had traditional districts
school if you live within the
district they they have to make
room for you but certainly if
there wasn't room for a student
that lived outside of the
district then that students
wouldn't be able to attend.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for for the most
point with for the most part
without approval from usually
the district's superintendent
that would be the case but if a
student shows up at the doors of
an elementary school they are
enrolled in their own place in
the classroom as opposed to the
charter school that does have a
limit that does have a cap the
that that child of the showed up
at the school's doorstep would
not be immediately available
correct Madam Representative
Senator.
Madam chair representative
that's correct thank you thank
you senator and thank you madam
chair so that that's my point
was earlier there was a point
made about parity and district
elementary schools or districts
schools and charter schools that
that's where I see we're
comparing apples to oranges and
we shouldn't do that because we
are really doing a disservice to
to the cost of what you're
trying to accomplish here
because those of us who work in
in in the districts and the
public education no with the
system know how it works and we
very well know that if a trial
shows up they are accepted
regardless and I I I understand
the limitations madam chair
Senator to the charter schools
once again you know I I like
what they do I I I know the
serve us the the specialize in
certain areas and I think the
source students who don't
normally put in the traditional
district schools.
I I I like the.
But when the one of the things
that that.
Concerns me in Representative
Carroll of everyone coming in
about this up and I won't
belabor the point was that you
know other other students have
been waiting in line will be
bumped off if we allow the the
students of our staff to enroll
in the school.
And madam chair and I understand
that I understand the the the
need or the don't want to for
parents to be able to bring
their kids into the school with
up I I you know what I would we
my wife did it with with our son
you know she took into her
school where she was at and and
it worked out.
For the most part it was okay
then things change with the you
know it was okay.
So I I saw I have concerns about
that you that if the the
students who are waiting
whether it's because of space
whether it's because of
enrollment we'll get bumped off
the list if we allow the
employer the students of the
employees who to bring their
children and you know I
understand the need to once
again and I appreciate all the
work that the charter schools to
appreciate this bill but that is
one of my biggest concerns about
this.
Madam chair I move to table
thank you madam chair.
Table takes precedence madam
secretary would be taking.
Is there any discussion on the
table help me folks this is my
first table motion as chair you
madam chair you don't take
discussion you just move
straight to the motion okay we
have a motion to table.
Madam secretary can you take the
vote.
Can you call the doctor.
I have to I knew myself first.
Thank you doubt Representative
Stapleton second that in my
correct.
We don't need a second for a
table okay
Representative Adam for a table.
Representative Baldonado
Representative Chatfield for
table.
Representative Dale for table no
to table.
Representative Figueroa.
Table
Representative laying noted
table.
Representative Lara for cable
yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes you.
Yes but.
I'm sorry
Representative.
Madrid for cable.
Representative Roybal Caballero
for table yes to table.
Representative Stapleton to
table yes.
Representative is with different
table no.
Christine Trujillo to table.
Yes ma'am.
Chairman.
Vice chair German to table.
No to table.
R. it is seven seven two five
chair Baldonado is back your.
Okay
To table Representative.
No okay.
Eight to five.
It failed.
Madam chair of the past.
Second.
Okay.
Get a.
I'm I'm I just want to but.
Motion to a vote for it to pass
in a second.
so we will go I will decide that
I strongly support this bill I
think that it is a really
helpful bill for our families
and may I ask madam secretary
can you call on me to go first
because I have to go to another
committee Christine Trujillo
will take over as chair okay
then asked for the person who
second for the two paths.
In.
Who seconded all the not second
lane house motion then was the
one that okay.
Thank okay thank you
Representative Garrett do you
want you say yes for two passed
yes okay Madam.
Secretary Christine Trujillo
about share okay Baldonado four
do pass yes.
Chatfield for two passed yes.
Representative doll yes.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative laying.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Know what.
Representative Lente.
No matter.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative.
I don't know.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative chair person
Christine Trujillo.
No.
By a vote of seven to five.
We have to pass.
Thank you Linda and thank you
senator of for being here this
morning our congratulations on
your bill thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee.
The next item on the agenda is
house bill one fifty med school
This is it scholarship that'll I
have a partial okay and this is
Representative bash she on.
I don't know she's here I don't
know how to control this thing.
Does anybody know how to access
that.
The to help you just apple juice
and K..
Our.
When we doing our as far as the
one that Representative Garrett
does I don't I don't have access
to that but
So so we just need to
Representative bash.
And I don't see her on.
C..
The attendees she's not
C..
Can someone give her a call.
I'm trying to get a hold of her
okay Natalie skull Natalie's
calendar I mean representative
to get office calling their
okay.
So we'll just have to be patient
from.
Mr Bennett the this are you
going to be a witness in this
call.
Okay so so you don't have to be
in this committee.
Now I'm gonna try to move him
back.
Okay our.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative bash is
currently presenting a bill in
health right now she has asked
that I present then changes H.
B. one fifty that are on page
four of the bill and she
indicated that a doctor would
grow is available as an expert
witness okay so of
Representative Figueroa go ahead
and everyone has a the the
changes to the bill in front of
them.
And madam chairman asked for a
couple minutes for me to pull
them off okay sure.
It'll give up Representative
Madrid time to go get coffee.
Because I know you Sir.
We can move and German crew is
an expert witness well I'm
pulling this together.
Madam can you have
Representative your **** as well
please Representative Madrid the
copy of a copy for
Representative lane.
Representative Lane there some
in my office whenever you want
Carrig.
But you have to go up and get
it's on the fourth floor.
Well there's drive me to my
group.
Okay and go ahead then Natalie.
Not yet she's just testing us.
Is there anyone else that needs
to be moved up.
I would.
In just my.
Was it is it is there anyone
else just.
Thank you madam chair and is in
the area okay.
Yes.
Yeah.
In that.
Data.
The project is.
But heroes okay of the eighty
that is fine too.
I am.
Okay go ahead but he has an echo
so it's not me so go ahead and
get started.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee this is house bill one
fifty medical school
scholarships and we sent it back
with some recommendations and
concerns primarily about
information on page four so I
would direct your attention to
page four
Madam chair do we need to move
the committee set up.
Like that was the.
For discussion.
Session yes for discussion at.
Then I will move committees for
house bill one fifty four
discussion Mr the point three
point three at the bottom of the
page make sure you have the
right one.
Thank you.
So four point three there was a
concern about making the
requirements that the can it be
a graduate of a post secondary
institution in New Mexico so
that has been removed there was
a concern about including
students
from the Navajo Nation in your
John error sona so that has been
removed.
There was a concern about home
school students so that has been
added on line nine.
It madam chair I'm I'm.
Madam chair I don't know I have
done during the group has other
specific changes in this version
that she would like to point out
document grew Trichet Dr recruit
being here to help do this.
You drive a group go ahead
please on mute.
Madam chair Representative
Figueroa thank you so much for
the opportunity to be here I
don't have other changes that
I'm concerned about
Representative Figueroa I am
excited about this bill and hope
that we can do the changes
necessary to to make this move
forward
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Are there any questions on on
these changes I don't see I
don't see any.
Let's move these changes.
Who wants to who wants to make
the motion to make to approve
the changes I'm sure I'll move
adoption of the committee seven
two okay of.
And then a second is there any.
I don't want to pass on the bill
there's a motion for a do pass
on the bill with all the
corrections is there a second to
that.
Second.
I second that so is their
discussion.
That would.
The call roll okay.
Okay.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dowell.
Representative del.
Representative Figueroa.
Unfortunately no.
Representative Lane.
Yes yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative you were Baca
viral yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Vice chair Garrett.
Chairman.
Romero.
Well known both of the other
folks now.
By a vote of eight to three we
have a due process.
I'm sorry thank you Linda and
thank you Representative do you
get all up even with their no
vote you have a good you have a
do passed Dr McGrew thank you
committee I can't give you any
more instructions because you're
real chairs aren't here but you
have a pleasant.
Whatever's left of the morning
and we will adjourn till
tomorrow no when state know what
what day is it today Monday
Meet on Wednesday.
My god
okay you all have a great day
thank you committee.
Thank you everyone thank you.
See you then.
