All right,
good morning, folks. I hope you
all are well. Um,
House Bill 194, we will not be
hearing today. We're going to
roll over. We have a Senate
version, um, that is on house
intro, so I'll be 194, we will
not be hearing, so we'll start
off with Represent Brown House
Bill 272. Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, so I'm
very pleased to have uh a bill
before you this morning. Uh, Eve
is gonna try to join us, but he,
um, Mr. Chairman, let me start
you.
This would enact the trade
education, um, the, the reason
for the bill, but may lack the
um.
The wherewithal to do that at
home, um.
Perhaps
So they could have the living
expense we're, we're really
looking, Mr. Chu and career, but
just.
Uh, what would happen here is if
it uh the bill passes by their
higher ed department. So that's,
that's the gist of it really,
um, there are some
qualifications that would have
to be met, uh, the person would
have to be a resident and um.
Uh, there's a few other
requirements here as well, not
have yet earned a batch program.
And
And so, um, there would be for
no longer than 62 years, the
maximum with that, I guess I'm
um. Great. Thank you so much. So
we will go to our audience and
folks on Zoom, if you wish to
speak in support of House Bill
272, please indicate by raising
your hand.
We'll go to our folks in the
room.
Is there anybody that wish to
speak in support of House Bill
272, please indicate by raising
your hand, right, if you
wouldn't line up behind our
presenter please and
always in house education,
you'll have up to 2 minutes for
public comment.
So please, good morning. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
Committee, pleasure to be here
this morning, and I want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward. Uh, there are
several bills going through the
Senate or the uh the session
this year, uh, that are trying
to lead to economic development.
Of their sight readiness bills,
and I think that anything that
goes at points us towards
workforce readiness is important
as well, which, um, it seems to
be what this bill is sort of
aiming at and uh we really
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing that forward so the
Mexico Association of Realtors
is in full support. Um, again,
my name is Kent Cravens, and I'm
a registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Association of
Realtors, so thank you. All
right. Thank you. You're
mind any others in support of
House Bill 272.
All right, we'll go to
opposition on our Zoom if
there's anybody opposed to House
bill.
272, please indicate by raising
your hand. Anybody in the room
that is opposed to House Bill
272, please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
All right, if you line up behind
the presenter, please.
you'll have up to 2 minutes.
Welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO, um, standing
here, uh, in support of our
brothers and sisters in the
building trades. Um, you know,
uh, it's a tenant of organized
labor, we are obviously huge
proponents of apprenticeship
programs and training the next
generation to come into this
industry, are concerned with
this particular particular
legislation is, um, having
the right type of training and
training, uh, potential workers,
uh, to be on a journeyman track,
which this uh it it was not very
clear that that would happen
with these funds, uh, for these
training programs. And so, we
believe in uh producing
qualified, uh, uh, workers to
work on important projects
around the state, and
unfortunately, I think this
measure could produce, um, maybe
not the most qualified workers.
So for that reason, we do have
to stand in opposition.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. So we
will go to a person on Zoom. So
Stephanie.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, can you all
hear me?
Uh, we can, please.
Thank you, Stephanie Myers. I'm
a registered lobbyist
representing the New Mexico
building and construction Trades
Council.
We're an alliance of 15 track
unions with about 15,000 members
statewide and um also today
speaking in opposition to House
Bill 272. Do want to thank the
sponsor though. Um, we
appreciate the intent of the
bill as Mr. Liz stated, you
know, investing resources in the
trades is a very worthy and
necessary use of public dollars,
um, John, I think did a great
job of outlining what our
concerns are at the building
trades council.
Um, it is our understanding that
these programs um included in
this bill would not necessarily
result in journeying workers and
um for us, really, that's the
gold standard and the joy of it
which trade program, so, um,
again, thank you to the sponsor
and, and we appreciate the
intent of the bill, um, however,
we do not support it as we feel
like it's necessary to invest in
those programs that will result
in um qualified certified German
workers. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
right, I don't have anybody else
on the list, but we've been
joined by the co-sponsors, so if
you wish to add anything on to,
please.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, actually a little surprised
to even hear.
The opposition and, in part, um,
we have a backstop for virtually
every public project that we
have, which is prevailing wage.
Um
And uh
We have no idea, folks who are
not working with the union when
they're receiving prevailing
wage, what?
If any educational background or
any training that they've
received.
Um, this, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Uh, really all we're trying to
do here is give an opportunity.
For people who
Have missed their opportunity,
uh, maybe folks who have gone
through school.
After 12, after
Uh, going through preschool.
Uh kindergarten, then going
through the 12 grades.
Didn't want to go to school
anymore and just frankly went
out, wanted to get on with life,
and then after
Uh, getting out and
Having a family, um, or maybe
starting a family or just
getting out on their own and
realizing I can't do anything
better than a minimum wage job.
And all this does is give them
an opportunity.
To have a second chance all some
people want is a second chance.
Uh, they're not unions, trade
unions all across the state, uh,
available to take people in. Uh,
there's not always work for
them.
This just gives them an
opportunity.
To go to a good.
Trade school, uh, most, most of
these trade schools are in our,
uh, in our junior colleges.
Or in our community colleges,
which we support with public
dollars and so
A little surprised to hear maybe
the education.
At these community community
colleges besmirched a little
bit. I, I was actually surprised
to hear that.
That that education that they're
getting at a community college
isn't worth it. Maybe we should
stop spending our setting our
tax dollars there.
Um, if it's, if it's not a good
education, uh, to get people
into the trades, but what I
found in my community is those
people in those trades.
Uh, most of them in my community
go through the local community
college and the trade school,
whether it's auto mechanics or
whether it's
Um, uh, uh, plumbers,
electricians, um, we have a very
robust, uh, carpentry.
And building program in San Juan
County and most of the folks
that are working in that
industry in in San Juan County
are doing so because they went
through one of our trade
schools. So all this does.
is for a very limited amount of
time because most of those are
certificates, by no means, they
don't come out as a journeyman
anything.
But it does put them further
ahead than somebody just walking
off the street and going through
an apprenticeship program with
zero experience.
And it also would guarantee that
they come in with a little bit
higher wage than just a laborer
coming in at the very beginning,
and a lot of folks, that is not
much different, uh, going from
Uh, minimum minimum wage
flipping burgers to then going
to minimum wage.
Uh, shoveling cement as, as an
apprentice.
Uh, uh, this is, this puts them
much further down the road. It
gives them a new lease on life,
and that's all we're trying to
do is give people a second
chance. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK. Thank you. So we'll come to
questions from committee. So
represent me Omoa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Um, I, um,
It was, it was pretty perked
when I was reading this, but
there was a couple of questions
that I had, um, it, it talks
about a stipend.
Um, Mr. Chair, and, uh, but, uh,
and it gives me a limit per year
and it's for 6 months, but it
doesn't give me an amount. Is
this a per month thing is this,
you know, how, how is that gonna
be paid out?
Um, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, that would be set.
Um, that would, I think that,
that there would have to be some
rules propagated by the higher
education department.
Because uh certain.
Certain courses take shorter
period of time.
Um, and certain classes cost.
different amount. So the reality
is, it, it, it, I think uh the
intent was.
It could be applied for and it,
the amount that would be set
somewhere around
Whatever it would cost for a a
household.
to pay bills, and that's really
what it's what we're looking for
is how, how, how can they pay
rent? How can they pay whatever
bills that somebody may have
gotten, I, I don't, I didn't
envision any more than about
$2000 a month, but even then,
That people would struggle with
groceries and everything else,
um, but, but potentially these
folks might already be receiving
some sort of other assistance.
And this is really
Trying to get people from
Not being stuck living on
existence.
So that really is open for
interpretation. We know this
money is not in.
House Bill 2
Um, and, and, uh, the chairman
was very gracious to let us do
this here because we want to
have a robust conversation here
and we want to have a robust
conversation through the
interim.
Some of that can be ferreted out
this more than anything is us to
have start.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and,
uh, being that this would be in
um in higher ed, hopefully our
bill passes so we can study
higher ed in the.
In the in the interim and so
then we can definitely discuss
this, but um, but, um, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So and, and
Representative, so, um, so
that'll be done through rule
and, and what I gather it's
it's, it'll be like a a course
by course basis depending on, on
the length and and and the and
the requirements for that
course. Um, because, um, Mr.
Chair, what I, what I gather
you're doing is because uh this
is because of the requirement of
a um a dependent.
This is basically the
breadwinner wanting to turn
course and hopefully better
their life instead of staying on
on their lower wage uh job that
they're that they're working at
now, correct?
Bingo
Now, um, Mr. Chair and, and
representatives, I know that
many of these, OK, so this is
mostly going like you said,
community colleges, um, them
deciding to do it on their own.
Is there any exclusion for
someone that uh possibly maybe
has already worked with uh a
certain entity and that they
would be paying them also, so
they don't, they no longer
qualify for this if they are
getting paid elsewhere from a
company that's like hiring them
and sending them to school.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative. That would be a
perfect type of marriage.
In my mind, this could I in my
also I don't believe this would
be exclusionary towards, towards
the traits. I, I think if the
trades had folks that wanted to
become apprentices. I don't, I,
I, I see this as complimentary
and not adversarial even to the
trades. I think, I think there
could be.
A way to work that together as
well.
OK. So, so, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, so it's so it
it definitely it's uh you would
be fine with them, which I guess
would be a minimum wage job, but
that but um, you know, cause
they'll be getting paid labor um
um but although if this is their
only paycheck, they're pretty
much getting paid the labor
stuff too, um, so that wouldn't
exclude exclude them so they can
get paid from another company
and from this if they qualify
for this at the same time.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, exactly the,
the, the key is that would
probably be about the only place
where they um the the the the
problem is.
Um
And I guess that's not
necessarily the case. If they,
if they had an employer that
would would work around their
schedule.
Because this, you know, these
certificate classes are pretty
much, they're pretty intense.
There's, it's a lot of hours
every day.
And so, um
I believe this could work with
employers, but I, I think it
would really work if, if they
were able to get a job, and I,
and I do see that in, in, uh, in
my community, some of these
folks are able to get on with
the local builder in particular.
And when they're not in school,
They're on site.
Um, but
I see this
I see this as that as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I
mean, because this is similar to
how we pay our our our student
teachers the last year and, and,
and as far as our residency and
that kind of stuff. So, so, um,
but, um, only because at that
point there.
They're they're doing a full
time job and then and uh um for
that whole year and not getting
paid. So at least they'll be
able to get that done and it
helps them out. Um.
And we do need a lot more
quality people in the trades,
and I am all for instead of
raising a minimum wage, I am all
for paying for the training in
order to get people to earn a
higher wage. Um, I think that is
our key rather than than
bringing the lowest up.
It's let's train them so they go
up further.
Um, and, uh, so, uh, so I, I
appreciate your answers. Thank
you very much.
And you represent Colin.
Um, I did have a couple of
questions and she did ask a few
of them I had.
Um, because one of the things
was, uh, they're gonna be paid
by how many credit hours they're
doing, so it sounds like it's a
lot of work.
The higher education, but um,
But the process and
I'm a big advocate for trades,
you know, so, um.
My understanding is, so they go
to a CNM.
They they take their classes.
They're done. They get their
certificate. Do they go in as an
apprentice with the company.
Or um it takes a while to get
your license. So how does the
process work?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think that would be
Company by company. I, I think
that's the reason maybe some of
the because there's no, it
doesn't mandate.
That they have to forward, but
as I stated earlier, that's not
everywhere across the state, uh,
as a realtor.
And as a realtor
You know that
We're dying for affordable
housing.
And one of the reasons is
because
virtually every builder in the
state.
is understaffed.
Virtually every builder in New
Mexico.
Uh, just can't keep workers.
And uh
What's happening is people in
the trades are aging out.
And they're retiring. It's a
good life, it's a good living. I
mean, what we're talking about
here is a journeyman plumber.
can make $40.45 dollars an hour.
Easily
All across the state. I mean,
I, I prefer if we can create.
Those positions that really
helps the economy if we can do
that, but it also helps, it'll
bring the cost of housing down
because if I'm a builder,
What I want to build tract
housing and build a whole bunch
of them and make the same amount
of money I could from building
custom homes and just build 2 or
3 a year within a number of
staff that I have.
We need to bring up quickly.
A bunch of of people who are
qualified in the trades, and
those are jobs that are here.
I mean, those jobs, they won't
leave the state. Those jobs are
here and especially because,
because what we're talking about
is people who are already living
here, even if it is on.
Minimum wage, they're doing it
here. So, uh,
This
Opportunity.
Fixes
A, a big hole, a big hole that's
taking place in New Mexico,
which is we just don't have the
trades, and that means
We just are not going to be able
to build housing, even if we
had, we're pouring money, we're
actually offering money to
developers.
The Pillars love that
opportunity for us to offer them
more money.
Or, or to be able to take home a
better profit, but the problem
is they just don't have the
staff.
And this, this could
Quickly
put a bunch of people who are
not just at the very to train
somebody up to be a journeyman.
takes years.
This is more of an intensive
program that teaches you in a
short period of time, and then
you're not coming in with zero
knowledge you're coming in with
much more knowledge. And then,
Depending on where you are with
that and, and if we and the
standards that we're teaching
across the state, that could cut
down your journey, your, your,
your time to become a
journeyman.
That's, that's what this does.
It helps with the housing crunch
that we have right now.
So my, it's only gonna be
limited to like this is this
electrician, plumbers, gas.
Its
Uh, metal workers, oil
operators, firemen.
Well there's
Reflection lines are.
That correct, so it's
OK.
qualify
Uh yes, ma'am. And uh
Once again, if, if this were to
go forward and and we
This could be open, I think,
potentially to water treatment.
As well, uh, you know, that's
becoming more and more
important, but the reality is
that we were looking at
What is our biggest need right
now? Obviously, you start adding
more.
Disciplines to that opposition.
And uh Mr. Chair represents, I
guess I was a little bit
surprised by the opposition as
well because we're looking at
for a technical education in
schools, and this is part of it
is learning some of these grades
we have welding come out.
And so I guess
And
Try to figure out what.
Really with the opposition is.
Um, they're becoming er
hopefully
out of our
Out of high school
And
What that issue would be with
them coming at that certain.
afraid, so I'm not sure why that
opposition so I would like.
But I am supportive of this,
anything to get people into
trades, very important, um.
Well,
Um
It
The economy, um.
Awesome.
Of the state. So thank you for.
For and I look forward to maybe
in part if this doesn't go
through the session, uh,
working.
Zumba.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for uh representing us for
bringing this forward.
So, um, Mr. Chairman
Representatives, um.
I know much of this, the details
haven't been worked out, but.
Which colleges would be impacted
by this, in other words, does a
college have to meet certain
requirements to have a program
that is approved and makes
somebody eligible.
For the stipend.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Represent
Baca, thank you for that
question. So, um, I, I think
that's why uh the bill education
program and so whatever that's
understood to be in there, but
it says it means a program
approved by the ad to train
individuals to qualify for
licenses or certificate. It's
kind of tightened up there, uh,
and again, any, um,
Institution, higher ed, a lot of
them have programs, programs, so
I think the opportunities and in
my community, um, we have, of
course, the uh uh southeast New
Mexico College.
And one of the things that that
college is doing is going to
spend about 15, this is the kind
of thing that we need and help
achieve that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative for
that.
And uh I'm gonna tell you right
now I support this.
Yeah, I do. I think that what I
would be looking for is for me
and everyone, it's consistency
that there would have to be
certain requirements.
That any of our 27 or 28
institutes would have to meet.
In order to have an approved
program.
for individuals to qualify for
this, and I think that's
important, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I agree, and I see that
being a natural outcome of this,
uh.
I don't know if you guys realize
the first bill I ever passed was
uh getting uh
A common
Uh, numbering and uh
a level of consistency across
all of our junior colleges and,
and our universities so that our
junior, so that folks in our
local community college,
colleges and junior colleges
that if they stayed there, that
all of those uh credits would
transfer.
Um, that bill had been passed.
19 years before I became a
legislator 11 years ago, but
there had never been a
completion date on there, so I
came and put a a a to be done by
date so that and so that we
could then get that consistency
through all of our
All the way from our, uh, uh,
community colleges all the way
up to our universities so that
people staying in those local
community colleges that all of
their
All of their credits was
transfer. I also helped uh the
nursing consortium get permanent
funding, um, so that that level
of consistency across the
nursing.
Disciplines in New Mexico and
all of our community colleges
and universities was consistent,
so anybody hiring a nurse would
be getting the same quality of
nurse. So I agree with that as
well. I've participated in that
twice. So I, I see that, uh,
being a natural outcome of this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative for
your answer.
Now the other point that I want
to make, Mr. Chairman
Representative.
is that I think that there is
and must be collaboration
between K-12.
And, uh, and you're in the
program that you describe.
I saw those high school students
that have walked in, um.
Imagine how powerful it would be
that we have these and we back
it up with the investment that
we've made the CTE.
That is a high school junior and
senior, you are participating in
this, and then be eligible to
receive this stipend.
It not only would likely
encourage completion of the
program.
But for some families, this
could be life changing. It can
actually help to change the
trajectory.
Of a family or a student's life,
so that would be one thing is
that the programs we would also
have to collaborate, and that's
why I do agree, Mr. Chairman.
That the EEC should have
oversight of this as we truly
transition our students from
You know, preschool.
All the way up through colleges,
so I just want to make that as
a, as a statement because as I
said before, my senior year, my
internship as I loaded Coke
machines. And so, um, so imagine
how powerful be these welders
and these students are making
$30,000 a year.
So Mr. Chairman, in the last
Statement I really want to make.
I was, I was really kind of
questioning how this all fit
together. I, I'll be honest, um.
But then it's almost like a an
opportunity scholarship for like
the trades and we talked about
it. We have the legislative
lottery scholarship when these
guys immediately go into a
post-secondary school.
But this provides those folks
second career folks and
non-traditional students like a
high school student.
An opportunity to go on there
and get a part of these trade.
Just like a representative me
Bob Moy. It's almost like paid.
A student teaching. So, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Representatives, I
will be supporting your bill.
represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representatives for
bringing this bill forward I, I
totally understand the intent of
it.
I do have some questions though.
Representative Montoya, you had
that in your
In your presentation of of the
bill. You had mentioned that
families.
who are assistants would be
eligible for this as well.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I, I that.
That really, in my mind when I,
when we started working on this,
this, that was the target group.
Um, people
How do we, how do we actually
give a hand up and where is the
biggest opportunity of need and,
and where can you make the
biggest difference in a family
that is on a system. If you
gradually move up.
You get to that point where you
have that cliff effect that
comes into place and you lose
all of those.
Uh, benefits
It's almost impossible to to to,
you get up against that glass
ceiling.
And it's almost impossible. What
you find is people working up to
a certain point, and they don't
work the rest of the year.
They they have to, they have to
quit that job. Next year they
get another job, they get.
Because the, the assistance that
they have.
Is, is, it's too hard to lose
all of those things at one time.
If we gave them.
An opportunity to get a job that
will jump them.
Way up higher than that glass
ceiling.
Then whatever they, they, they
lose.
They, they've more than made up
in wages. And I, and I think
that
There's just a lot of people who
are who feel stuck.
And in my mind, and once again,
this doesn't preclude somebody
coming right out right out of
high school.
But in my mind, this
Uh
Allows those folks on assistance
to to immediately.
Take a, take a giant leap
forward.
Thank you for that
representative, Mr. Chair. So
that's post.
A certificate, but
the, but during they can be on
assistance and receive this as
well. There's not any no thank
you for that. I, I, I unders, I
appreciate, I understand that,
but
certificate.
So the family is receiving
benefits, and if we give them
the stipend, then their benefits
are reduced because they're now
they're earning income.
So that's one of the things that
I'm concerned with is.
I
Is this stipend going to be
considered income, Mr. Chair
Representatives by the IRS.
And that moves them into a
different level now.
Whether or not won't be eligible
for these services
pre-certificate.
And, and that's what I'm
concerned about, Mr. Chair
Representatives. So, Mr. Chair
and Representative, that is one
of the reasons we didn't set a
level.
There needs to be a, there needs
to be a study to find out.
Cause if, if there's a certain
amount of money that they can
make during the year.
In, in whatever level of
assistance they're on or
We need to make sure that
That whatever we do doesn't harm
that.
So we didn't set that because I
don't know what that is.
Hey, thank you for that. I
appreciate the clarification. I
really do because I was, I was
concerned about that, you know,
we want to give them that hand
up like you had said, our
representative, Mr. Chair, and
if
You know, we're pulling down at
the same time while we're giving
the hand up, you know, I, I
really want, I really uh wanted
that to be, to be clear, and I
appreciate your explanation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Gonzales.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Um, one, I
really appreciate, um, this, I
know.
education passion here. Um, I do
have some questions though with
maybe some background on this,
um, what conversations, um,
maybe have you had with HED a
large chunk of this bill relies
on HED to make the rules, to
determine the program, to
determine the specifics, um.
I know this is the start of a
conversation, but particularly,
um.
In relation to that question,
you know, thinking about the
application process for this
program, the eligibility, the
rollout, maybe some of the
specifics. Have you had
conversations with HED about
what this may look like.
With the specifics of the
program.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
not this year, but I, we, we
initially presented this last
year.
And so there were some initial
discussions about this last year
and uh generally,
Uh
This was well received and, and,
and because we were leaving it.
Open for
A lot of input, because the, the
reality is, it would have to be
administered by them.
Um
And uh I think somebody I heard
this in one of the committees,
um, I, I don't, I haven't found
a single department.
Uh, in the administration that
if you're going to offer more
money to administer a program
that are against it. So uh this
uh.
Initial discussions very well
received.
And that uh department.
Uh, again, uh, the presentation,
I think we, we had.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, no, I
also agree that this is within
the wheelhouse, just, um.
My only concern is, you know,
some of the specifics that
aren't included in the language,
but I 100% appreciate the
conversation in the start, and I
think it needs to be had. I
think this is a time for it to
be had for all the reasons that
you mentioned.
The career shortages. Thank you.
Bye bye.
I was.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for
bringing the bill forward to
both of you.
Um, I really
Somebody, I've had several bills
where people asked me to turn
them into house memorials for
study.
And I feel this needs robust
study.
And the reason is, um, first of
all, the apprenticeship programs
that are registered in the
state, 3 of them are non-union,
2/3 are union, so to me this
isn't a union or non-union at
all. It's how do we successfully
do this, and people have
mentioned.
Um, like the teacher residencies
were now you get paid.
Um, but what's also the goal
because um there's credit
bearing and non-credit bearing
and rep representative Brown,
you've worked really to make
sure we can give
kids who are taking the non.
Credit bearing classes support.
And um
So I, I think that we have to do
this, but we have to do it
right.
Uh, so my first question, Mr.
Chair, is the 100 million, is
that in in our current uh HAFC
budget program, Dan.
Uh, as I think you know, and
probably most members of the
legislature know by now,
including the new members.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, the, the
House bill to the appropriations
budget is.
pretty much staff that deals in
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative, um.
The only reason last year we put
a
The dollar figure even in the
bill is because it was a budget
year.
And so to even
We knew that it would have to,
um,
We are hoping to get this passed
out of this committee to go
before appropriation because
that'll put us before another
group of folks.
Uh, it's not in, it's not an HB
2.
But
As I've had discussions with the
chair, we really want to get
this into our interim committees
next year, and there's two ways
to do that. One, it becomes a
proposal that people like.
And then you have those
discussions in the interim, and
then it moves forward.
Um
Memorials
Don't have the same weight as if
you present it as an actual
proposal.
And that's the route we chose to
go was to have it as a proposal,
get in front as many, many
people as we can.
And then determine.
It's, it's value, and I, and
once again, it becomes then
scheduled in the interim. It
allows us then.
To have much more
Uh, strong discussions with the
departments, higher education in
particular.
Uh, but, but LEFC.
Uh, as well, uh, from, from our
side. And uh that's what we're
hoping for. I think this is, we
know we have a housing crunch.
We know we have poverty. We know
we have people that are living
on, on minimum wage and on and
on subsidies that
don't want to.
And uh I think that for, for all
that for all those reasons,
we're hoping to get this out of
this committee and be in front
of a committee of what, 18 at
that point?
And have this discussion there
as well.
Thank you and Mr. Chair and
Representatives, our committee,
as you may or may not know,
tries to send out bills.
I don't need changes. Um, I have
another question.
Um, on the, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
from our committee analysis it
it comments that the bill
requires a student to claim at
least one dependent on their
federal or state income tax.
And mentions that in Santa Fe,
they have a program where
students are given stipends in a
similar program, but the
dependent has to be a min. Uh
So I just have a question about
the dependent.
And sometimes people can be
their own dependent.
Have you looked into that?
Representative Garrett, yeah,
thank you for that. You know, I
think we were just going with
the.
The general knowledge basically
saying this person is still
beholden under, you know,
financially under the, under the
parent or the guardian.
Whichever it might be.
Um, and again, it would apply
to, you know, we're looking at
federal and state that.
And again that that.
particular dependent would not
So, um,
I, to me, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think that's
under that way. There are some
instances, I believe, Mr. the
question. Yeah, thank you very
much.
Um
Mr. Chin representatives, I'm
just concerned that.
An enormous weight has been put
on HED to determine
Several dozen items.
And on one hand, we don't want
to put all the weeds in a bill.
But on the other hand, it's a
lot of questions, credit
courses, which could be paid for
by opportunity scholarship
versus non-credit cards, uh,
excuse me, non-credit courses
which are um
covered by what we did with the
growth funds last time, and
which continued for two more
years.
So I'm concerned that the robust
discussion that shouldn't just
involve HED.
That needs to involve
representatives of the trades
representatives of the junior
college, community college
programs.
I just feel that there needs to
be.
Some robust working out of
things.
Uh, and, and also the other
thing is,
Some of the um unions or
non-union, it doesn't matter,
apprenticeship programs, some of
them do draw on.
The the 2 year college programs,
but to be a journeyman,
You need
For 1000 hours of experience,
and I feel like there's just
things that should be talked
about.
Before we actually and and they
need to be talked about in the
interim, uh, whether it's
House commerce, um, LESC,
hopefully you'll support our
bill.
Hopefully the governor will
support the bill. Um, I just
feel it has to have that robust
stuff.
So that there's guidelines for
HED, um, or it might be a hybrid
model, HED and apprenticeship
counsel, I don't know, I just
feel we have to be creative. It
needs to get done, but how it
gets done, there's just a lot of
procedures and processes that I
feel
Need a more deeper public dive.
So I really appreciate this.
Um
I think it needs more. Thank
you.
Represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives.
I think this is an excellent
idea.
And
After listening to the
conversation, I wasn't gonna ask
any questions, but, uh,
Representative Latta.
You made my brain start ticking.
And
I, I guess where, where I'm hung
up is
Our idea.
Your idea is to get people off
of assistance.
Have them join the, the
workforce.
And what I'm hearing is,
If we give them an amount of
money this amount of money, then
it brings down.
There
It brings, it brings it down to
where they have to, they want to
stay on assistance.
So there's got to be a bridge.
That we can build.
The show folks.
You know, Mr. Chair and
representatives this summer I
read an article where out of 2
million people in New Mexico.
From the ages of 24 to 54.
They did not want to participate
in the workforce.
And I mean
What I'm saying, Mister Cherry
is.
They don't even want to
participate.
It's not that
It's not that, uh, they can't
find the work. They just didn't
want to participate.
So
I started thinking in my mind.
How do we convince folks that.
When you get a trade.
And
My trade was, I think, is one of
the best trades in the world.
Mr. Chair, I was a fireman.
And there's, you know, there
was, uh, I don't know, on a
daily basis, it was just
fulfilling to me, and I stayed
there for 25 years and I loved
every day of it. I still miss
it. I don't want to go back.
Because I'm too old now, I, I
want them younger guys and gals
to do it.
But Mr. Chair and
representatives, how do we
bridge that gap?
where
We're giving people the option.
But it might be a little bit
easier to stay on assistance.
Can you answer that for me, Mr.
Chair and Representative. Oh
Montoya wants to add.
So I think we're already
starting, um, this current
generation.
A
A lot of them realize they can
have a if they actually have
really really better for their
families increase a skill and,
and put it to work. And then
also, Mr. Chair.
I'm from a family, uh, my dad
had 13 productive, it provided
for them, so that's, that's
where I come from.
You know, I would hope people
would realize they could do
better, and I remember one.
On public assistance, her family
had been before her.
And she to her children.
And that was, so I believe that.
Dynamic is is playing out and
yes, we want people to have.
I feel good about
you and representative. I, I
live this out.
Um
So, um, my, my wife and I got
had a child right out of high
school.
And I went to work.
Instead of going to college.
Uh, we
It was very, very hard. We never
went on assistance, public
assistance, but we had a lot of
parental assistance, both, both
my, my parents and and my wife's
parents helped us with childcare
and with all kinds of other
things because we both, we both
worked minimum wage jobs.
I was able to get on with the
mines.
As a laborer
Our world changed because all of
a sudden,
My
Pay doubled.
automatically.
Then
So I'm a 19-year union member,
so I don't want anybody to think
I'm anti-union.
Um, I then was able to get into
an apprenticeship program within
the mine.
Uh, that
Uh, carried me through the rest
of my
Life
Which was another jump.
I, I mean, I, even that labor
wage was tremendous.
But
Once I was on the other end.
Of that apprenticeship. Once
again, there was another big
jump.
And becoming a a a
In my, in my field, it was a
licensed explosives.
technician.
So
I, I, they're, they're, they're,
there were two jumps there, one
from
Being a minimum wage employee.
To then going to be getting a
good job, which is what I think
would happen with this is.
Because you have more experience
than the guy walking off the
street, the, the unions are
going to want to hire you.
You're way ahead.
So, so, and then you get in that
apprenticeship program, then
when you're on the other side of
the apprenticeship program and
become a journeyman.
Then your world changes again.
And I think what people are,
are, are, are the reason they're
not wanting to get into the
workforce.
is because
They just don't, they don't see
way past that that ceiling, that
glass ceiling, and, and that
cliff effect.
If they see that you can
Jump on the other side of it,
and then there's still more
opportunity to go.
I think there's some a level of
despair among folks that this is
all there is.
I think that's where there's
some even anger among some folks
that are, that are stuck. I
think if they feel like they're
not stuck.
I think that will cause people
to get into the, into a program
like this because they see
They see that there would be an
immediate
Benefit, but then an opportunity
for long-term benefit.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Appreciate
it. Thank you for the question.
Thank you. Um, so I had a few
questions. Um, and actually, um,
Representative Vincent's point,
um.
What sorts of trades would this
be?
eligible for.
Or apply to.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh,
Mr. Chairman.
Um
Yeah, I do do this. We're at
that time where we're, you're
demoting me like that.
So
wait, don't, don't put that evil
on me, Ricky Bobby, right? Um.
This is, this is geared towards
the building trades.
Um, it can, it can go beyond
that. Obviously, we need uh more
CDL drivers, and that's a much
shorter certificate.
To, to be able to get, we need
truck drivers all across this,
but this was meant to to fill.
Uh, but, but even with the CDL
driver.
The one I think for me, once
again, since my experience as
going, as I just described.
Um
A CDL driver, they can get in
and start making a good amount
of money right away, but there,
that's kind of it. There might
be a little increments.
But in the trades
You have that opportunity to
become a journeyman.
Once that happens, then your
opportunity to really be able to
build wealth.
And
Poverty to
Not just to escape poverty, but
then to have an opportunity for
some level of prosperity.
Because that's what we're trying
to accomplish here and I think
the trades do that.
And, and
Thank you for that. So under the
trade education program and
program approved by the
department to train individuals
to qualify for licenses or
certificates of competence. Um,
do you mean that?
Well, I guess I should say how
comfortable are you all with
that language because the way
I'm reading it is um something
like being a teacher.
Like me, and I could qualify for
this as a trade. I is that what
you would mean is to be that
encompassing.
Um, thank you for the question,
Mr. Mr. Chairman. So
Um, I, I think what this is
doing is establishing a, a
pathway.
And it could be in a number of
areas, for example, um,
electrical plumbing go in a lot
of different directions. The
question is there a, is there a,
a standard uh set, it's a very
broad field, and I think we're
actually gonna see some
expansion in that.
So, um, I, I think as rep
Montoya said, Mr. and uh.
So that's. And I appreciate
that. I mean, I think in the
language that it's pretty broad
to give the department leeway in
in determining that because I do
appreciate the construction
industries's licensing Act
because they have very specific
traits, which you all are
getting to, I think in the bill,
um, I have the same problem as
vice chair Garrett is that we're
giving a higher education
department, lots of leeway in
this bill, and we've heard
several times it's come up in a
lot of our debates. Um,
What happens when we have
changes of leadership.
What those definitions turn
into, it could include, it could
be very inclusive, it could be
very exclusive, um, so whereas I
appreciate um being able to have
this discussion because as you
all point out and everybody's
pointed out, it's a very
necessary discussion to be had.
Um, I think this is something
that we do need lots of work on
it.
Certainly in our committee in
the education committee, we try
to get to those solutions before
passing bills off to two other
committees to to have that
discussion because we want to
make sure that the education
portion is buttoned up before
sending it but represented
Montoya.
Mr. Chairman, where I think this
is different than maybe some of
those other areas where we're
worried about getting broad
discretion to
The administration
Uh, the housing needs.
Of New Mexico.
And the absolute lack of people
and trades.
As I'm hearing the discussion.
Everybody, Republican and
Democrat alike realize this big
hole.
So I don't see a
I don't see another
administration coming in.
And this being meant for
To, to, to build that, to, to,
to fill that hole.
That hole is gonna exist no
matter who the next governor is.
I, I just don't see.
The priority being pulled away.
And then saying, OK, we're going
to do this for teachers because
we have programs for teachers,
as was discussed. I, I don't see
that happening.
And whenever I'm, I'm, I'm less
concerned about broad discretion
when
When there is a big hole,
everybody's trying to fix.
Mr. Chair, if I'm a trade
education program be familiar
with, and I think
Again, um, I, I pers um.
The need for certain types of
staff and, and trained people,
it does change and when.
I don't understand half of it.
There may be some field, so
that's kind of why I, I, I guess
I don't feel so concerned about
it because already higher ed is
approving these programs. Thank
you.
Right. Thank you. So that'll
entertain emotion.
I make a motion for due pass
right do pass motion by
represent calling because they
saw her hand up. Yes, Mr. Chair,
I move,
make a motion to table a motion
to table represent Roel
Caballero.
You would, Madam Secretary.
Caro on a tabling motion.
Noted table.
Recent in Chatfield,
representative
Gonzalez.
Yes, to table.
Representative Coola.
Representative Ladder.
Yes.
Representative Maribal Moya.
No to table.
Representative or both
Caballero.
Yes to table
Representative Collin.
No.
Represented Torres Vales.
A
Yes, to a table.
Representative Vincent. Not a
table.
Madam Vice Chair Garrett.
Can you explain a table book.
Yes to table.
Yes.
Right,
625. Bill has been tabled, but I
certainly look forward to
working with you all in the
interim. Please bring this
through LESC so that we can
start working on but represent
Montoya.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, what I would
ask is it does seem like
Even those who
the table are interested in
hearing this in the interim. Um,
one thing that I think would
help is if
You, this committee would
entertain.
Instead of us doing it, if this
committee would entertain
bringing forth a memorial for
this to be heard, that would
help us.
Because then the departments
then are
Compelled to help put input
rather than us having to go and
request it and representative,
go ahead and get that drafted
and then we'll take a look at
it.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
Ah, your bill has been tabled.
Sure,
sure, I just wanted to add the
memorial should include also LFC
to study it.
Thank you all so much. All
right. So we'll get rolling with
our next item so represent
Garrett before, um.
We get started, however, we have
some students in the audience
that are with Albuquerque Public
schools. They are the
superintendents, uh, student
advisory council. So if you all
would please, please stand up.
Welcome. We're gonna have you
all introduce yourselves so you
can get the microphone.
It's coming with that.
Right
Yep, school grade, name.
Please
My name is Damon Amaya. I'm in
grade 11, and I go to CCHS.
My name is Joaquin Ole. I am
grade 11 and I go to early
college academy.
My name's Ray Herod. I'm 12th
grade and I go to early college
academy.
My name's Lacey Torres and I'm a
senior at West Mesa.
Uh
Hello, my name is Elizabeth
Esparza Clark. I'm in 11th grade
and I go to West Mesa High
School.
Hello everybody. My name is
Joseph Martinez Baca, and I'm a
junior at Highland High School.
Uh
I am Eva Platt and I'm a junior
at Highland High School.
Uh, I'm killing Monsales I'm a
senior at Highland High School.
Hello everyone, my name is Kayla
Garcia, and I am a junior at
Valley High School.
All right, welcome to health
education, folks.
All right, so Representative
Garrett, we have House Bill 195.
the return of.
So we have an amendment if we
could get the amendment passed
out, please.
Moment all they get gets passed
out.
Mr. Chair, I moved for the
amendment for discussion.
Thank you, Representative. Just
a second.
OK, robot. Thank you. All right,
so
Representative Garrett, vice
chair, if you would explain the
amendment, please.
Thank you, and this is, uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair. This is an
amendment to House Bill 195,
school nurse salary er amendment
simply adds section 6 and
appropriation $250,000 is
appropriated from the general
fund of the Public Education
Department for expenditure in
2026 to increase school nurse
minimum salaries is provided in
this act in a balance, I would
revert to the general fund. I
spoke with uh the HAFC
leadership.
They
Suggested this amount, they do
not believe it'll actually be
required because um in our
budget line items we already
have uh money for pay increases
of 4% to equal the and then an
additional line item to make the
55, 65, and 75, but they said do
this, and then probably it will
be so.
I
add it to remove it. Yes, so um
I did as
All right. Questions from
committee on the amendment.
Mr. Representative, so we have
to by Moya saw the microphone,
but.
All right, so do we have
objection to adopting the
amendment that might get taken
out. OK, see you then.
We have an amended bill. We're
back on the bill as amended. I
do have emotion on the bill.
Representative,
right? So you have the do pass
on House Bill 195 is amended.
I can probably represent you
know Moya. Is there any
objection to
The Du pass motion.
See none.
You have a 195 is amended. Thank
you, Vice Chair.
All right, folks, so that's it.
We will have committee on Monday
morning starting at 8:30, so.
We'll see you out on the floor.
Enjoy a little bit of a break.
