Representative Dowell.
Representative gal.
Representative Figueroa.
Here.
Representative get.
Representative.
Representative Lane.
Your.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lara
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Senator Sweetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chair cannot.
Your.
Here we do have a.
All right thank you and and.
Madam secretary if you if you
would please
Send the link to Representative
Baca he's having some issues
with the like which.
And then so we'll start off with
house bill fifty seven I think
it's something we've heard
before we heard it last year yes
it last year I'm so madam vice
chair if you wish I can do the
if you want to do the attendees
when we get to public comment
and call them out by name I just
move them over for you that
that'll work.
Your muted minimized her.
Turn off my lights.
Yes.
Mr Chairman.
Okay I.
Mr chair are you ready sorry I'm
sorry madam chair Molly what
was.
Question.
We would think we were all
working on the Representative
Baca thank.
That was that was the thing
thank you all.
Mr.
Mr chair are you ready to
present house bill fifty seven.
Yes ma'am please go ahead when
you're ready all right so just
as a heads up I will have an
amendment that we can get you at
the appropriate time but house
bill fifty seven madam chair is
the transportation hold harmless
so we heard this last year
obviously is is using pre
pandemic numbers adds the
transportation distribution
population is based on ridership
so we know that the pandemic
continues
and there are all sorts of
attendance issues that we need
to sort out but one of the most
pressing things that I've heard
that continues to be an issue is
along the lines of
transportation so we want to
make sure that all of our public
schools and charter schools are
able to
have the appropriate funding in
order to continue to operate so
we'll take pre pandemic numbers
for the distribution amount so I
do you have we are deputy
director of legislative
education study committee this
is Simon socially distance Max
you're next to me in order to
help answer questions madam
chair so with that
We can and if we may madam chair
move to be imminent.
Yes can you please read Mr
chair.
The hold on is.
Is it up loaded into the shared
file.
Yes.
The amendment.
Thank you I would the amendment
for discussion do we have a
second second.
In seconded
Mr chair if you can present your
amendment.
Great thank you so much so again
that was point two two two one
nine six point one on that
amendment and so this was
brought to our attention by the
Public Education Department on
this is to address the issue
that some charter schools were
having that didn't have
enrollment from twenty nineteen
twenty twenty so this is a way
to keep them whole as well so
that we're on incorporate we're
being inclusive as opposed to
exclusive with on the bill and
it was an issue we didn't have
last year I think it also aligns
with winstar what's being looked
at in terms of hospital for the
transportation hold harmless and
and we have everything makes the
uniforms kind of like we just
talked about before with that
madam chair stand questions.
Discussion on the amendment.
Madam chair representative
adoption of the amendment.
I think in.
Okay
move the adoption.
We those representative Lente.
Okay Representative lane and
I'll get the second two of
Representative Figueroa is there
any objection to the amendment.
I see no objections so Mr chair
you have an amended house bill
fifty seven.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee so all stand for
questions.
Okay and with that we will go to
our attendees
I'm going to take.
Any comments of people who first
of all object to house bill
fifty seven as minute is there
anybody that objects.
In the audience raise your hand
if you have any objections.
I see no attendees objecting to
it if you are in support of
house bill fifty seven as
amended please raise your hand.
Okay Hey.
Thank you for raising your hands
keep them up until you're called
on our first commentator and a
reminder that you have two
minutes to slowly may Ortiz
early may.
Mr chair you're moving them
correctly is that correct can
you hear me.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes we can hear you would make
thank you good morning members
of the committee madam chair I
am lonely more T. sorry but
Representative The New Mexico
school board association as
their legislative liaison and
madam chair members of the
committee MSP has meant
maintained a long standing
position to support legislation
that funds and covers the cost
required by districts to
transport students in saving all
of the ways and most recently
chair because of the public
health emergency NMAA BA
supports legislation poll
districts harmless from the
prior year enrollment visions
which if implemented would have
the effect of reducing current
year funding also subsequently
placing districts and the
position of not having
sufficient funds and I'm able to
meet the needs of the larger
number of students that are back
in person the school years of
this legislation over parts that
lack of funding and and allows
or disincentive sufficient money
this year to cover the cost it's
critical in order to provide
actual costs that are local
districts are needing to pay
this year we ask your favorable
consideration and we think the
committee and the sponsor for
bringing this for than the
committee for hopefully
endorsing thank you.
Thank you thank you lily may our
next speaker is John thirds.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John birch with a
hefty New Mexico we I think the
school board association really
summed up the the main points of
why the bill should earn the
committee support and we are
here just to show that support
to preserve transportation
services and our drivers
employed providing the services
to students thank you very much.
Thank you our next speaker is
your returns that Condit.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee this is
Deborah Condit I'm the
registered lobbyist for public
charter schools of New Mexico
and we like to thank the sponsor
producing this amendment which
includes charter schools
currently charter schools need
to use our operational funding
to pay for their first year
transportation costs this
amendment allows for money to
stay with the students in their
classrooms and not for buses we
strongly support this piece of
legislation and thank you to the
sponsor.
Thank you and our next speaker
is in room three oh nine please
I'm it yourself and introduce
yourself.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee the staff around
for the New Mexico school
superintendents and the New
Mexico college of education
leaders well it may sound of all
the issues we need to hear we
appreciate however the.
The committee here amendment
made today by the by the sponsor
because we understand as we look
across our pastor New Mexico
students who are sure they all
have the transportation needed
we're in the apartment thank
you.
Thank you Stan I'm seeing no
further attendees who wish to
make a comment we'll go to our
members starting with
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair whenever
you're ready I'd like to move do
passed.
Okay Representative pocket did
you have comments or were you
going to second that.
I will second that.
Is does anybody else have any
comment.
I see nobody else making a
comments we've had a motion and
a second for it to pass is there
anybody in opposition to house
bill fifty seven as amended.
I see no opposition Mr chair you
have a two passed house bill
fifty seven as amended.
All right thank you madam chair
like deja vu all over again.
Thank you very.
All right so.
Thank you madam vice chair on
will move on to.
House bill one old three so
everybody would start shifting
gears.
We have Representative Serrato
Representative Dixon if you all
would please.
Raise your hand in the chat.
Our.
You can decide.
Representative Dixon if you're
in the.
Well.
Chairman I think that
Representative Dixon is actually
presenting another build
another.
All the local excellent thank
you for that I had seen her name
a second ago maybe.
Alright.
We have an expert Representative
yes my expert witnesses and
merry Galvin thank you to.
All right so merry if you would
please raise your hand.
All right thank you.
More hearing given moment.
Three.
All right so house bill one of
three Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members the committee house bill
one of three is requesting five
million dollars to fund venture
studios at the ingenuity Center
at C. N. M. okay the stock
comments very brief and I'll
hand over to merry to give a
little more contacts and she's
the executive director of C. N.
Ms ingenuity programs a venture
studio Mr chairman is a smart
and innovative evidence based
model for start up companies to
deploy capital as efficiently as
possible for start ups and help
the committee the company with
experienced entrepreneurs that's
a very different model the
business incubators and
accelerators that we see in New
Mexico right now and has a great
success rate for business start
ups the scene invention studios
opens a pathway for CNM students
to gain real world experience
with entrepreneurial ventures
related to their choirs skills
from business losses cutting
losses deep dive boot camps and
then the activity New Mexico
I'll turn real training I'm so
those that that's kind of the
basic view would have interested
in this and this will help fund
the creation that under an
engineer ingenuity if I can hand
it over to my experts with miss
merry to add some more
information.
Welcome.
Thank you chairman thank you
committee members and I have a
colleague here is well I don't
know if it's possible to promote
him T. J. Cook is well
positioned to answer some
questions I am stumped in anyway
but it is my privilege to add
some additional information on
this exciting opportunity.
As it was stated this is a
unique model it is a great fit
for New Mexico based on our
seven years of experience
running entrepreneurial
programming and investing in
companies in New Mexico and it
is a great fit for the work we
do at C. N. M. being an
innovator in education and
workforce development and
learning as Representative
Serrato said this is a at
slightly different model we are
very familiar with the
incubators and accelerators and
have.
Is there this is an organization
that really builds companies it
deploys capital effectively
applies talent effectively and
that ideas of methodically just
a few highlights to point for
you start ups are critical to
the economic development
strategies of an area
interesting fact half of new job
creation in the U. S. comes from
firms that are five years old
for young.
This inventor studio opportunity
the goal is to generate four to
eight companies four to eight
start ups a year I'm in to
create jobs tied to both of
those companies as well as to
the venture studio itself we
believe this opportunity solves
some of the perennial challenges
that entrepreneurs
entrepreneurs faced from that
talent and brain drain issues to
capital scarcity to really
having access to expertise in
managerial talent and with that
I will pause I think that
teaching has joined if there any
questions others have for us
about really excited about this
opportunity and what it can mean
for New Mexico.
And that's our presentation so
we welcome any questions from
the committee and from the
public thank you.
Thank you Representative thank
you very so we will move to the
attendees list those in
opposition to house bill one oh
three please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
All right so we'll move to
support do we have support for
house bill one of the.
If you wish to speak.
All right so just to reiterate
you have up to two minutes once
I call you and so we'll go to.
JD bowling ten.
JD good morning you're with us
good morning Mr chairman members
of the house Education Committee
this is JD Bullington speaking
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
this legislation will help start
new technology ventures in our
state and it will bring high
paying jobs in targeted
industries what we're trying to
compete in the future CNM is
again to be commended for the
serious interest in investment
that it continually makes in
training and growing our
workforce and seizing
opportunities to diversify and
strengthen our local economy the
venture studio initiative will
succeed and we look forward to
celebrating the New Mexico but
he's it will help launch and we
want to thank the sponsor
representative Linda Serrato for
bringing this forward thank you.
Great thank you.
Others that wish to speak in
court.
Senator.
All right.
Welcome to committee where I see
a and Representative Garrett
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Serrato and
R. C. N. M. T. I just have one
question so I understand that
the New Mexico space valley
coalition which CNM ingenuity
are part of have submitted a
Okay a grant to the challenge of
the year finalists in the build
back better challenge is this it
would appear to me for phase two
of the challenge which is to
work March twenty second that
having this studio is an
essential part can you just
clarify that it's very exciting
by the way.
It over to you on that I know
you've been working with
includes the.
I TJ can chime and you want to
take this tier.
Thank you our Merion we're we're
looking at this from the Senate
education and the House
education which is why I wasn't
able to service the expert here
but we.
Chairman and members of the
committee it's a great question
there are two separate venture
studios that we believe
can be very powerful for New
Mexico the one conceived of in
this bill
supported by Representative
Serrato will be actually focused
on the future of work force and
the future of adult learning so
it's an educational technologies
focus studio the studio that you
reference which is a part of
what's conceived under this one
hundred million dollar build
back better.
Which we are feverishly pursuing
for New Mexico
is a space technology focused
grant and and venture studio we
are not.
We are not pursuing provided
support for the space focused
venture studio
we have other partnerships and
things that are are going to be
our match for that right
requirement whereas when it
comes to stand them and what we
have learned over the past
several years about creating
start ups and what is our core
mission to change lives and
build community a venture studio
focused right in line with that
mission which is innovating
workforce development and
training and innovating with
adult learning so that we close
the skills gap we reskill more
effectively we scale solutions
that's where we believe it's
it's right and good for us to
act ask for state support to get
back going I hope that makes
sense.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you T. J. very helpful that's my
only question Mr chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
say congratulations on being a
finalist on the build back
better that is super exciting.
I'm I'm hopeful that that you
will be successful in that my
only question is I noticed it
that your request was not
included and see any Ms requests
for higher ed or for regular
funding and I'm just my question
is was it a timing issue was.
Administrative issue exactly why
built into that request thank
you Mr chair.
But if to
As well.
So I'm having a little bit of
difficulty with my internet can
you hear me we can
Representative merry TKO wish to
address question.
In short it it was a timing
issue as we as we crafted.
All that's in short and slightly
longer
we have been active with our two
existing funds A. B. Q. ID Fund
in and do noted venture fund and
those funds as of this month
will be fully invested so now we
can turn our sights into what's
the next frontier so it was
essentially a timing issue and
when when it was appropriate to
bring this force for support.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
Mr cook and and Representative I
know often things are moving in
multiple ways in those budgets
have to go in earlier than some
of some of the initiatives are
for it and so I kind of wondered
if that was a match that was my
only question thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative and read out
please.
Thank you Mr chair I'm just
curious is is it appropriation
included in house bill two at
this point no it is not that it
has still to this point.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative Lara
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative reading this bill
I have a very simple question
how is this.
Bill and houses program gonna
benefit southern New Mexico in
particular I legislative
districts south of Los crucis.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the question
I'm happy to to start on this
and if Marian to get into Adam
happy to have them as well you
know as as you know
Representative and Mister chair
I I represent Santa Fe but I was
still very eager to support this
legislation because of the
information learning that is
created on with CNN on in
talking with Santa Fe community
college which is service my
district personally you know
they talk a lot about the and
and I've heard it across the
board of the community colleges
collaboration and so truly
budget you know but you can
colleges across the state but
then also you know they're not
restricted only to location with
the with the with this venture
studio so I I think they at TJ
and merry can talk a little bit
more to that as well.
Thank you at I would echo what
you said and one of the things
we learned in this global
pandemic as evidenced by the
conversation we're having right
now is we can do so much more
with technology and our
programming is serving people
from across the state and it
will be a goal to make sure that
geography is not destiny for who
can participate in the venture
studio and there are
entrepreneurs and small business
employees who are all across the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you thank you thank you
for the responses thank you Mr
chair so that now so then and
when the when our talking about
accessibility then it out
someone from my legislative
district wouldn't have to drive
two hundred plus miles
Albuquerque to take advantage of
this right.
Thank you chair thank you for
the question committee member I
believe that to be true I
believe a lot of what we will
offer will be virtual there may
be times where they choose to
come in person for specific
opportunities but I think we are
in a new reality where people
can get their work done from
where they are where they are
based and this is a huge win for
a state like New Mexico to be
able to support people across
the state.
If I may add as well chair and
representative
because venture you know support
at you know really last year as
long it is not just a one time
enrollment you know that you
that you know look at I know
there's a lot of boot camps and
and and programs like that I
guess I should say that that you
know you come for six months
then you go back this is really
an ongoing support and so I
think that really does serve on
the broader parts The New Mexico
overall.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair and I I I wish you
the best with this bill yeah I'm
curious to see how how is your
it plays out you know obviously
we we still have to go over the
hurdle with the funding part of
it but I'm curious to see how it
plays out and I'm very
interested to see if we get to
that point how this is really
going to yeah I would really
love to see the results and how
what's the the impact is
statewide thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative my questions
around performance expectations
there's nothing in the bill that
indicates what would be success
so what are you shooting for and
how do you measure it is that in
terms of the number of companies
that start up successfully and
That state in New Mexico in
twelve months and three three
years and five years what what
are you going to measure what
are we going to get for these
funds.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative that's a
wonderful question I can I turn
it over to actually teach and
this and merry think with his
experience with the NGO
ingenuity studio thank you Mr
chair and thank you
Representative Serrato you would
be able to accept TJ is now
appearing at the Senate
committee but he prepped me well
and so I am going to do my very
best we are looking at a four
year time horizon and there are
multiple elements we will be
measuring one is the number of
start ups that are created and
keep in mind not every start up
is going to make it through the
various stages gates for success
but the goals we have stepped
forward is to create four to
eight start ups each year which
will be successful in their own
fundraising and growth what this
bill funds is not the investment
fund as we know TJ has lots of
great expertise in the funding
mechanism so the venture studio
will work with the start ups to
gain funding to grow and expand
so the hope would be there would
be four to eight start ups each
of which raise at least a
million dollars in outside
funding rounds out so that is
one of our metrics there is also
job metrics related to the
venture studio itself out and
one of the things I will add to
the earlier comment is in
addition to the entrepreneurs
coming from across the state the
expertise is going to come
across from across the state so
there may be people working for
the venture studios serving in
advisory capacities from all
around New Mexico so it's our
anticipation that we will be
able to create about four
hundred jobs through the studio
itself and our network of
experts into the start ups
that's been out from it so I
would say those are two of the
primary metrics.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
that's that's an excellent
answer we love to hear about
jobs and numbering the start ups
that grow that's great I I want
to make sure I understand
clearly one of the differences
in this model generally an
accelerator works with a start
up for three months or so and
then help some get some funding
and shoved him out the door and
it's my understanding that this
model is more working over a
twelve month period to give them
a more solid foundation and get
a little further down the line
to a successful business am I
understanding that correctly.
Thank you Mr chair you are
understanding that correctly and
what I would add to it is
typically in an accelerator and
incubator there is the founder
or the start up and they are
getting sort of additive
Services trainings workshops
here the venture studio staff
effectively serves as additional
staff for that start up
organization so they're
providing financial expertise
they're providing management
expertise they're really walking
alongside a founder when you
have a business idea you're
usually good at one or two
things and then you have to
learn the whole world of
business so this is providing
talent and people tied to the
venture studio can be working
with several different start ups
that wants to make sure they
have the expertise that they
need there isn't it is
definitely longer it is not a
specific time horizon that we
will kick you out at that point
right the goal is they will
either move forward and achieve
milestones and some of them may
Peter out right it may not
alternately be a viable business
so we will work with them
guiding them toward success we
are not the first state to
pursue something like this there
are several interested users who
have leverage this model before
with great success so we're
excited to learn from those that
are best in class and the this
will be a really great next step
for the New Mexico economy and
if I may add Mr chairman and and
Representative two things real
brief on this is that one of
what I what I've seen when a red
on especially in venture studios
is that you see a lot more
success when you go through an
educational institution or
business process use it for
something specific that's
another piece that really kind
of helps toward success and in
conversations with a number of
on printers across the state one
of the things that came up time
and time again was navigating
you know all the different.
The budget that might exist in
our state that they don't know
or you know paperwork there to
vote for file and it is an
obstacle to getting started it's
even an obstacle to finding
funding if they can't get kind
of those basics in the Adelaide
so having again the venture
studio with that the general
expertise plus so much more is
really going to set up a lot of
businesses and startups for
success.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you
panelists time going to be
excited to see some results
across the state I think it has
the potential to do great things
I would like to see some kind of
reporting requirement along that
lines in the legislation so that
we do hear back but I am sure
given who the sponsor is Mr
chair that we will so thank you.
Great thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for on have patience in getting
me back on I got knocked off and
I don't know why but thank you
Representative
and
everyone hear from that I miss
of the testimonies and Dave are
but I'm sure that
they were outstanding I do have
a couple of questions because I
in my work as community economic
development lantern developer
around my forty five plus years
of of doing that professional
work I've seen the development
of.
What we in the eighties began to
term thank you banners around
the country and I felt important
Senator Mr chair along the way
and so
And and I'm a huge proponent Mr
chair representative of
community colleges.
steering the our development
and however the one.
Experience Senator experiences
that have in doing this is that
and this comes my question is.
Shoring or ensuring that
community based development
organizations that are already
in place and have been in place
for example we have the south
valley economic development
center that's been around and
I'm sure Mr chairman and others
have are quite familiar with the
efforts especially in on
incubating successfully
no restaurant entrepreneurs of
retail and now and a cultural
Products.
And for distribution and
marketing they have a multitude
they've been around for a long
long time you know this took off
then Mr chair back in the
eighties I'm gonna be dating
Mexico when I was just.
Close to the beginning of my I
and then met involvement
mid profession involvement and
so there are several of those
entities and our New Mexico
around New Mexico there have
been very successful ask
community based development
corporations not scared any
other way they've been
successful in generating and
seeking funds from the federal
government they partnered
they've just had outstanding
successes so I would.
Here again for your presentation
so I'm not sure if you
identified if.
This effort would be partnering
and actually putting them at the
forefront because they've got a
vast array of of experience
whether they are an integral
part of what is being proposed.
And how you have our work for
you vision back to be
Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I can head over
to you because I know that you
have all those out there a lot
of these pieces as well so I
think and right over absolutely
thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the great question
Representative I'm one of the
pieces you may have missed is
that the venture studio concept
we will focus on education
technology companies so I
believe and I on behalf of C. N.
M. right there are we absolutely
need to partner and there are so
many great organizations doing
different work some start ups
will benefit from an incubator
some started so benefit from an
accelerator some start ups would
benefit from being part of the
venture studio model by no means
do they need to go through all
three and by no means are we
going to be able to serve all
companies in the interested in
model but the goal is not
exclusivity it is leveraging the
amazing ecosystem that already
exist here in New Mexico and
taking what's best of the best
it may be that people come to
the venture studio who are
really better served by the
Economic Development court there
may be people tied to the
economic development work could
be mentors or provide expertise
so I see it as absolutely away
to partner all of New Mexico
budget when we are moving in the
same direction and leveraging
the great people who are already
here to build the next
generation of businesses here in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative MUSTELLO yes I
miss that and I'm sorry I missed
that because
obviously educational
technologies are incredibly
Critical they're not even
important anymore there employee
their net absolutely necessary
for taking us into the next
Here is a more and so we need to
be ahead of everything so the
more that we promote in that
direction the better so my only
other question Mr chair and
representative and I'm not sure
if you address this in your
presentation but.
How in terms of the funding
stream but also from technical
assistance stream how will
The central community college
work with
business related entities such
as the C. R. I'm sorry the small
business administration SBA are
small business development
centers that are located many of
them in our roundup close to
community colleges.
And they are often times the
first ones to receive are
requests for technical
assistance in in the analogy
feels because it's a little
available so how will you be
partnering with those entities
and fulfilling
All.
Thank you want to go ahead and
add Mr chairman and and at
Representative sheet I the
reason why passage to merry so
much is that you do in the
immunity programs and so
phenomenal in kind of creating
the bass line for this and
really kind of the the speed in
my view it's expanding upon a
lot of their good work already
so more if you want to take on
that one absolutely thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Literally sitting in my office
at the workforce training center
and right down the hall is the
SPDC chapter here in Albuquerque
so we are in close conversation
I think one of the challenges we
have is to me that people and
related organizations know about
the resources that are available
to them so just as you alluded
to if add entity came to SPDC
that would be a great fit for
the services of the venture
studio we want to make sure
those connections are made and
so that they know about it and
we can I'm vice versa if someone
came to the venture studio and
that wasn't the right front door
for them to help grow their
business we want to be managing
and building partnerships which
we have already done you know we
are not new to this work and
there are so many great
relationships across the state
but that is what it is all about
no one entity can do all of it
we have our sweet spots the
venture studio sweet spot will
be education technology and
venture studio model and we want
to make sure we're communicating
and connecting the dots and
building great partnerships to
help serve all of those who have
an interest in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that responsible critically
important because we have a lot
of very young
Wiring entrepreneurs who are
wanting to go into on the
various areas of our technology
and
And then we have a need for
example in higher education
Many of you know that I I am
teaching and it's been online
and there is has just been and.
A growing curve learning curve
in in staying on top of the
increasing development and
constant improvement in
technology especially
educational technology and so we
need to create that screen and a
place where those young
graduates who are seeking a
place for there are either
independence of working
environment for immersing with
the institutions of higher
education and finding that way
so I would say that that is all
of these components are capped
in the forefront of the cheating
on what you wish to achieve I
think we'll be all set in motion
and I'm just a very proponent of
hearing in guiding our young
people into those areas that
will serve them not for today
not for tomorrow but serve their
career path as a entry into
their new career so I do
appreciate Mr chair and
Representative Serrato and
everyone thank you so very much
for your patience let me today
thank you.
We had Mr Duran
who is a lobbyist for CNN that
wish to add a little bit more
more color to an issue please.
Thank you Mr chairman I sure
appreciate it we look forward to
be back in front of you Mr
chairman and committee very soon
in Europe all the committee
will.
I really do miss you I just
wanted to go back if I could Mr
chairman and I Representative
seen them and been proud to
represent stand them for thirty
years.
And I wanted to address
Representative Sweetser question
and no doubt that it comes from
her her sitting on house
appropriations and the question
was whether or not this was
included in our budget request
and and the answer was known it
was correctly the reason Mr
chairman really there's no room
for a project like this to be
submitted as you now in our
normal I. N. G. personale
contractual services a request
but there is that a section on
in the bill for in higher
education four of our research
and special projects this is
what we are hoping to get a
project like this included band
in the budget.
And then I liked also mentioned
that this request is to we're
on a venture studio for four
year period we're becoming a
very realistic as to what amount
of money might be available
still to fund a project like
this we are able to cut that
fourth and to have this one
experimental project is a
venture studio run for one year
prove it and then come back in
future legislative sessions to
grow it to be a multi year
endeavor and one of the things
Mr chairman that's already been
set and I'll just repeat one
more time is how of successful
the concept has been and so
we're really working with
Representative strong
Representative Dixon will follow
up with Representative character
in our other Albuquerque
legislators to to see if we can
get funding of for a venture
studio one time experiment with
it prove it success which I'm
sure will be able to do in the
budget issue thank you Mr
chairman I just want to make
those great comments on the.
Great thank you.
So at this point I don't have
anybody else on my lists all
entertainment option.
Pass.
So we have Representative for
about half of.
With the past motion I'm gonna
give that one to Representative
Figueroa the second on that I'm
sorry Representative care but
they were both unmuted at the
same time and working to make
the motion I'm.
Is there any opposition to the
past motion on house bill one of
three.
See
pass Representative Serrato on
house bill one three thank you.
All right so we'll see what's
which appears to house bill one
of nine to Representative
Serrato looks like you're a
beginner I'm do I need to
promote or so more is going to
be held at the service the
expert witness again thank you
Mr chair and then Representative
Dixon was able to join so she
can come over that would be
wonderful all right so we're
pushing up a little bit against
time Sir creek.
Make sure that questions are
very direct and answers are very
direct as well please but
Representative Dixon welcome
so when you all are ready
remember me go first.
Please thank you Mr chairman I'm
happy to take a service off with
this and I'll be very brief
House Bill little line is
requesting five hundred thousand
dollars to fund boot camps at
CNN where employers our meeting
I Giles fast and relevant
training for existing and
upcoming job openings so
potentially share about sixty to
seventy students and it will
also help support the
development of new training
offerings as employers and
unemployed workers in the state
emerged I'm following the
pandemic so it really answers
love those labor supply concerns
that been popping up and
especially for us to respond to
the new economy with job
opportunities and workforce
training needs so more if I can
hand it over to you as well if
you have any additional
statements I would be great
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I almost wish
that this bill had presented
first because this is how we
will build a workforce that can
work for the companies that come
out of the denture studio that
was such a great question that
was asked and we have a long
history we have over seven
hundred alumni who have
graduated from our immersive
boot camp training programs we
started with the one that boot
camp more than six years ago and
now we have six full time boot
camp and several part time do
camps as the industry emerges
and it is constantly changing
you all have remarked on that
this year we will be introducing
for example a new game design
Avid can't do business
innovation boot camp we recently
launched a data science bootcamp
and in internet of things and
rapid prototyping to camp so
these funds will help us to
continue that work of staying
connected with employers to make
sure we best understand what
they're not workforce demands
are to develop those boot camps
for which we have a very
successful model and to help
unemployed and under employed
individuals change the
trajectory of their lives by
participating in these the last
thing I will add it is one of
what we think is the most
successful part of our model is
what is a hallmark of C. N. M..
Which is the wraparound services
so we want to ensure these
people can be successful by
removing whatever barriers there
may be for them in participating
and so they whether it's access
to supportive coaching services
for emergency service funds so
that they can remain in the
training we are excited to do
that I lied I have one more
piece at CNM ingenuity Act is
also able to serve people from
across the state if they are
interested and but because of
the pandemic has inspired us to
teach courses both remotely and
an hybrid format we can have
people from across the state you
want to participate in these
trainings and then deploy those
skills in their communities and
with that I will close thank you
very much for considering that.
Thank you Mr the merry
Representative said if you want
to have anything you want to
add.
I thank you Mr chairman Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
nothing that I think that that
it's been well covered thank
you.
Further all right.
Thank you so we'll go to the
attendees for us so is there
opposition to house bill one oh
nine.
Please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right so we'll go to those
in favor of house bill one of
nine please indicate there is
here and.
All right so we'll we'll in that
case come to committee for
questions so first on my list
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for presenting this bill which I
totally support I have one
clarification that was covered
in the this call analysis what
is the actual cost to the
student it was confusing at
first said ten thousand I didn't
know if that was supposed to be
ten dollars or what you just
clarify this student tuition
costs for boot camp.
Merry if you wouldn't mind
answering yes thank you chairman
thank you Representative our
boot camps the cost varies based
on the duration of the boot
camps are sales force we can't
for example is two thousand nine
hundred and ninety five dollars
our data science bootcamp is
nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety five dollars so that may
have been a ten thousand dollar
element we typically try to
deploy the funds to serve as
many learners as possible so the
way the model has typically work
is we can fund up to a hundred
percent of their tuition but we
often have people who can pay a
portion of the tuition I need
additional portion to help make
it possible for them so we would
use that flexibly to help assist
as many learners as possible
that is your question.
Yes thank you very much that's
my only question Mr chair.
Thank you representative
Representative please.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you for a great
presentation I I guess I'm a
little confused because I
thought with the combination of
all the scholarship funds that
all students a tuition and am a
extra because we're going to be
covered by the state so I don't
understand why this cost them
anything I guess that's my
question.
Mr Chairman representative okay
headed over to Merion she can
answer thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative I I
believe that what you were live
are these programs are offered
by CNM ingenuity these are non
credit training and so they are
not available for traditional
financial aid and that is where
they gap in funding comes from
there are some questions out
there are some funding sources
this it's important to note that
this is not supposed to
replicate or replace any
existing funding streams we do
have some of our programs are
eligible for we are finding
someone may choose their GI bill
but we still know there is a
large unmet need and these funds
these programs are not eligible
at the moment for traditional
financial aid.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I I'm just I'm just curious why
you don't offer them just just
kind of a regular regular
college credits so that people
can get this money I mean seems
to meet qualified eight
community college you know this
is a great question this is
higher ed is in a place of that
I'm really thinking about what
learners need and what they need
what act of New I think we are
having this very conversations I
think some of these are offered
on the for credit side but the
for credit model is
traditionally much longer and
last members of so our focus is
on accelerating that time frame
that you can get the training
and then immediately get into
the work force so I think it's a
complimentary for what the
colleges offer and it depends on
what fits for you I have the our
focus is really on in eight to
ten twelve weeks we can change
the trajectory of your life take
you from someone who doesn't
have any experience in
technology.
Able to do an entry level front
end web development job which if
you were to do for example an
associate's in computer science
would take you two years to
complete so it is a different
approach.
To to pursuing that learning.
Yeah I'm just curious Mister
chair about this because I I
used to work at a college are
you I worked at number The New
Mexico community college when it
was a community college so I'm
familiar the hardest part we
used to have with and
establishing new programs great
idea just like yours because we
kind of pay in arrears you know
you have to get that student
enrollment before you get the
pay back added for me so I I'm
just still very curious.
That we have done a lot of
things in higher J. shorten
to shorten of course we're to
help adult learners which most
of our people adult learners now
they're over twenty five
how do more night classes have
at you know how to handle a
parents with kids I in a school
in the university or college
setting so I'm I'm just curious
I I guess I need to study this
market and just curious why this
one work anyhow what you would
have to separated out of the
college curriculum especially at
at the lower levels that though
one and two hundred parks level
when when it really there's a
lot more freedom at a community
college to really kind of design
and.
Pretty much any way that this
the school wants to if you would
answer that again and maybe I'm
just asking the same question
twice but I'm just curious why
this isn't can't be handled
under the the the the normal
For me.
If I may Representative chairman
merry give it a shot a small
shot and you I feel and
analytics hi my conversations
with Santa Fe community college
with their as as merry is
talking about they're also
experiencing that gap where the
a lot of the funding is
dependent on four year or two
here or or degree seeking
programs where is these are
certifications or especially for
this this is to get people up
skilled in in what's demanded in
the community immediately so the
goal here is to get people's
trained and then out on the work
force immediately and keep that
that constant communication
between the business community
and the students connected but
that is currently not have for
that that funding form really
exists it's kind of outside of
that and so for in Santa Fe for
example we do have you know
fairly successful
three D. printing program right
that again they've sought out
grants and other option of
funding opportunities to assist
but you know they can't go
through the traditional way so
you know a lot of merrily you
speak a little bit more about
how CNN has kind of sought out
additional funding for these
things.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I think you're
asking all the right questions
and this is I believe where
higher ed these are the
discussions that are happening
at this moment in time UCM
launched the NM ingenuity about
six years ago to be more
responsive and adaptive because
there are a lot of steps
processes policies as it
pertains to that traditional
higher ed curriculum structures
and formulas and we want to be
able to be responsive to
industry we want to be able to
try things that we want to be
able to make sure we understand
learner demand I'm so I I think
that we might be in a different
place five years from now in
terms of how we serve adult
learners at the moment at the NM
there are two paths one that is
this more xcelerated opportunity
through ingenuity where we can
stand up I'm new training
programs with rapid speed and
one is the opportunity through
C. N. M. and R. for credit
programs and I think there are
great pros to both of them we're
really excited about the work we
have been able to do at the NM
and actor deep dive programs in
particular and would be grateful
for the opportunity to continue
to grow that.
Thank you Mr chairman everybody
thank you for all of that thank
you Representative Serrato yes I
know we have I know we have ten
million in the budget I think
it's called act thank you for
technical education I don't know
if this blows into that but it
certainly seems like it should
but obviously I need to go
further and and and and figure
out how we really how how we
help programs like this at the
community college level on in
first two years getting out of
high school getting into
something and then directly
getting into a job so you know
that's the whole purpose really.
How community colleges were set
up in the beginning was to
immediately the two jobs so I'll
look into that more I have a lot
more questions that we don't
have the time so thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Lara.
Mr chair I don't have any
questions I I I'm sorry I
apologize about answer to my
hand out.
Okay.
Either you did or I did.
No worries I don't have any
other numbers on my list
entertain a motion somebody
would wish to me.
I move that we adopt this bill.
Now you to pass on.
They do pass on house bill of.
What are we one of three one oh
nine.
One oh nine.
All right and I'll give.
Yeah I would thank you
Representative Roybal coming
into is going to give it to you
both and you did at the same
time is there any opposition to
the do passed house bill one.
See you have a perfect score
today thank you
thank you presenters thank you
committee
So.
For members we will not be
meeting on Saturday we are back
on Monday at eight o'clock we'll
have a few bills please look out
for the calendar on that should
be sent out here pretty soon I'm
with the list of bills but we
will not have a Saturday session
you a which is very rare for
education on what we're doing
such as work.
We are awesome and we will
reconvene on Monday so we'll see
you all back on the floor.
Bye everybody thank you Mr
chair.
Senator did you find out if and
at age eight is going on the
Senate floor I'm sorry I I I
have not but I will make an
announcement on the floor as all
do that right now and find that
out for you and everybody else
thank you so much.
Definitely thank you all by.
