Can we poor the
expert who is online.
Are they are they in attendee
what's the name
windson.
Yes yes sir.
Madam secretary called.
Ribs in chatfield
representative to visa
representative.
Represent headed up
representative lane
representative later.
Representative madrid here
representative my balmaria
here
representative
but a cancel but a horn.
Representative for a baltimial
vice chair garrett
chairman here.
We do have a car.
Yeah.
All right so then can we do have
winston as a handle is so
whenever you want to turn it to
him just be sure to give a
verbal indication but he's with
us as a panelist you'll be able
to
unneed himself very good thank
you mister chair and good
morning committee members
this bill is referred to as the
student loan bill of rights act
in this committee heard this
specific bill last year and was
passed out we adopted all of the
amendments that this committee
suggested last year so it's in a
form that was presented and um
passed
before
the bills sets forth a
regulatory framework
for
student loan servicers and
private education wenders and it
also creates an ambuds who
is a sign various
responsibilities including our
student loan individuals with
student lounge in the state
helping them navigate the
untangled wave of student long
processes on the both of us on
the federal level as well as
state level and interacting with
the service certain and so on
this bill has in some form has
been passed by nineteen other
states so far that's eight more
than last year when we were
talking about it so there is
some momentum growing over it in
the need i'll remind you mister
chair and and members that
payment son students resumed in
the fall it's it's essentially a
consumer protection bill
designed to support those
waited down with the burden of
often very significant student
mountain det and without mister
chairman happy to turn it over
to.
My expert his name is winston
earthman breen and he is the
legal director of the student
loan are protection center.
Thank you all and mister chair
can you hear me we can please
welcome it thank you and I will
note that my videos disable
blizzard okay by proceed with
albertio I think so.
Okay great
perfect well good morning mister
chair members of the committee
thank you for the chance to
testify and support of h p
seventy one my name is winston
berkin brain and i'm a legal
director of the student bar
protection center were a
national policy organization
focused on allebiating the
burden of student debt prior to
joining spc I was the student
loan ombudsman for the state of
new york and a financial
regulator there and I was
illegal services attorney before
that serving low income new
yorkers from these perspectives
that I testify and support of
the bill today so I will be
brief but wanted to walk through
what this bill does it is a long
document but many of the pages
are dedicated to the routine
regulatory provisions that an
agency like the financial
institutions division needs when
it supervises an industry so
they're pretty run of the mouth
the bill essentially does three
things and I walk through each
of them that licenses the
student loan service in industry
it provides consumer protections
for private student loan
borrowers and it lays out the
fids authorities and tools to
supervise the industry and
educate borrowers including as a
sponsor mentioned creating an
ombudsman roll similar to my
form of briefly explain each of
them so first license until
about twenty sixteen no states
license to student loan services
it was an under regulated
industry and we're seeing the
harm now that took place then
due to that under regulation at
the states started to license
these private companies at new
mexico as you heard would be the
twentieth state to regulate
student one service or
specifically it is well within
state's constitutional right to
supervise non bank financial
institutions through license and
student on services are for the
most part non bank companies for
example new mexico already
licenses check cashers debt
collectors and money
transmitters so this is really
no different than that.
The bills first sixteen pages or
so are the routine provisions
required to bring any industry
into the divisions oversight
this is things like the process
for applying for a license
application
pages sixteen to twenty then lay
out the business practices that
are a specific to student loan
service seem and how they should
reform this includes things like
how overpayment should be
applied how complaints should be
handled our account transfers
from one company to the other
for services should operate
pages twenty to twenty three
then lay out consumer
protections associated with
student long servicing and to
these essentially prohibited
services from engaging and
unfair deceptive acts and
practices and from failing to
comply with the business
standards that I just mentioned
for services and the business
standard to consumer protections
are nearly identical to those in
the nineteen other states that
have adopted similar regulations
and they are also your identical
to federal student loan service
in standards.
Just the first part of the bell
the second part of the bill
relates to private student
lounge this is roughly page is
twenty three to thirty five
there are problems with this
market the private student one
market that had been well
documented by both state and
federal law enforcement in this
section addresses those finding
specific specifically
all highlight the major parts so
the bill would mirror some
protections that already exist
for federal student loans for
private student loans namely
that if you have what's called a
permanent or total disability
that prevents you from working
you can be released from that
debt next co signers are an
overlooked but growing
population in the private
student loan market there are
type of private student mobile
almost all private student ones
these days require a cosigner
the bill would ensure that they
have equal access to the loan
documents as the primary bar was
due and had every seen equal
treatment since they are just as
on the hook for the loans also
win lender offer a cost on our
release provision which most do
as an incentive to to get a
coast on her on the bill
insurers that the release terms
are fairly administered there
are documented instances of
cosiners seeking release and
being blocked for inappropriate
reasons a bill addresses that.
I'm finally the bill would
prevent lenders from putting
someone into default for any
reason other than non payment if
you are current on your lump you
shouldn't be put into default
and had the entire sun called do
just because you have a
technical deficiency like
failing to update your contact
information or something like
that
this part also protects barrel
with the private student long
part also protects borrowers
from unfair and deceptive
practices which against already
applicable understandard federal
into my protection line the term
unfair and deceptive practices
as a term revert in the consumer
protection world it's very well
defined
the pinel section is about
administration and oversight and
runs roughly pages thirty five
to fifty six here too most of
the pages are routine
authorities given to the
director of the financial
institutions division to ensure
that they can do their job the
bill and powers the director to
monitor the industry and collect
data on services and lenders
including investigating
companies as needed gives the
director the ability to enforce
violations both administratively
and in civil court the bill
provides for a private right of
action if borrowers right can't
be enforced than they are
meaningless and I know that for
my time in government the state
cannot go to court for every
individual violation it's just
not the best use of government
funds and so this insurers that
everyone can be made whole if
they are harmed by violation
and the bill finally creates a
student on ombudsman this role
is a point of contact for new
mexicans who need help with
their loans are interacting with
their servicer they handle
complaints into out reaching
education the ombuds supports
the directors market monitoring
and will issue an annual report
of the legislature on the
divisions work and can join a
national coalition of state
level student loan ombudsman
passed by similar loss so again
this is a long bill and it
covers a lot but I hope this was
a helpful explanation of its
core parts and i'd be happy to
answer any questions about the
bill or about the state of the
student on service and industry
overall and thank you.
Thank you and mister chair and
committee members without we're
happy to entertain your
questions.
Great thank you so much so we
will go our folks on our soon if
you're here in support reason to
keep by raising your hand.
Thank you or in a hold off on a
resume members and let that
populate those in our audience
on my left hand side those in
support
i'm free in the house will now
have seventy one pleasant to
keep areas in your hand okay sir
please you have up to two
minutes welcome thank you mr
chair and members of the
committee gender to the empty
new mexico
we're supporting house bill
seventy one for writing reason
you've heard that technical
reasons why I feel like this is
important but on the human side
and with the folks that we work
with the education feel we hear
that people who are burdened by
misapplied to loans or loans
should have been discharged
based on public service when
that doesn't happen it prevents
folks from buying a home from
starting a family with some in
the cycle of debt
the statistics for new mexico
are pretty appalling when it
comes to student loans and other
hurts folks it disproportionally
impacts better information women
barrers barbers of color need to
american bar whereas and
importantly as the sponsor
mentioned co signers and those
are folks that are potential
because any per grandchildren
and then they are on the look
for those misapply or deceptive
long practices
in some you want to think the
sponsor for bringing this bill
again as they noted the still
did pass unanimously form after
this committee last year sweet
but hope for your strong support
again today
great thank you others please
serve you have up to two minutes
welcome thank you care members
of committee john let you.
Are my colleague.
Also you know we're talking
about the generation.
Folks who were just graduating
birding with terrible student
debt
really just trying to make it
into our world and try to be
productive members of our
society and they need the help
they really do this is about
fairness it's about as I said
promoting our future.
Great thank you anybody else on
my left hand i'm a ray handset.
Alright so we will go to.
Our folks on zoom
married in.
Good morning you have to two
minutes welcome
mister chair thank you very much
and members of the courty i'm
married nation speaking on
behalf of the american
association of university where
it and the legal and voters of
new mexico and i'm also speaking
as a long time educator myself
student debt has burned out far
too many individuals in this
country this is a fabulous bill
and I think the sponsor I don't
need to repeat all of the
reasons to support it at
something it's needed and and
we'll help a lot of individuals
of family throughout their life
thank you
great thank you.
Emily good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning mrperiod chair
members of the committee i'm
among well doubt new mexico
voices for children and we stand
in support of hb seventy one.
Op can you hear me this morning
yeah we hear you sorry my my
computer tried to tell me it
couldn't
anyway
we want to think representative
chandler for carrying this bill
again
I I believe everyone has stated
the case really well so I will
save us some time and disaster
the committee to join and
supporting echoing everyone
else's reasons thank you great
thank you so much.
Wolf good morning you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning mister chair money
spoke on burning around from the
new mexico center on on we also
stand in support of this bill
and and I will not repeat all of
the facts that work and brought
up by the other speakers the
only thing that I really want to
add to this conversation as that
as the consumer protection
attorney I receive calls from
people all the time
our
confused with how to pay out
their student loan debts they're
completely confused with how to
find out with their student loan
debts
and this bill would go such a
far away to just helping folks
navigate the actually that's
involved with paying off your
loans as well as making sure
that people are getting
protections that they're legally
entitled to so thank you he
asked that you support this
pill.
Great thank you any others on
our zoom that wished speaking
support of h.
We'll go to opposition is there
any opposition to house bill
seventy one either in our
audience or on zoom.
Well come to committee committee
members represent that at all
please
thank you mister chair thank you
sponsor I well this bill be
might might be complex and long
it's because that's needed when
you try to attack attack credit
very long practices in this
country and that's really what
this bill is all about and I
just went a comment are the
sponsored for bringing this for
for the second time twenty is a
good number
it'd be nice to be the twentieth
state
to vote in favor of this
legislation and hopefully it
will make it to the other side
of the
ireland
on the senate side I mean and
I get it through this year it's
a very worthwhile i'm very
practice support this
need your representative
that mister chair
mr appreciate a lot of what this
bill sixth accomplish
I remember being an eighteen
year old legal adult my mind is
probably more like an analyst at
the lot of ways
then didn't understand so the
long term implications of going
to debt and and didn't take out
a lot of student loan death
thankfully because I had a
sports and academic scarces but
I took out some that I think was
probably unnecessary
to appreciate sort of the
parameters this bill I like that
concept of an ombudsman
but there's a couple sections I
have some harbor with I just
want to ask a couple questions
on those lines so on page twenty
three sexual eleven.
This is this section gets into
if you have a total disability
of that the loan is completely
discharged and I I understand I
think what I what is what the
bills trying to do here is if
you don't have the means to work
out do you have the means to pay
back the loan my concern though
is there's nothing in the
language that I can tell mister
chair that would tie that
discharge to what you're what
your network is at the time
and so I instead I think this
would discharge you from the
loan because you become disabled
even if you actually have the
main means of repayment now
mister chairs if I can yet maybe
some feedback on that
mr chair i'd like to request
that mister berkman bring answer
that.
Thank you mister chair members
of committee for that question
so the bill
as that committee noted does
provide for discharge of someone
has with all the total
impermanent stability and that
is defined in the bill itself my
page is five in six and again
practically speaking means that
you have been found by you know
if you're that by the va or by a
physician to have such a
deposibility that you are unable
to work or have quite frankly of
suitability and impending on
death so it's a pretty strict
standard and it mirrors the
federal standard it is true that
there is not a means testing
component to it aren't that as a
policy decision again mirrored
by the congress in the federal
context that created the total
permanent disability discharge
for federal student loans which
is mirrored here their private
student loans are it may be that
there are individuals who are in
that having what called the tpd
total and permanent disability
discharge who do have the means
are in the vast majority of
cases I think that is not true
and adding additional barriers
like an audit or a means testing
for those individuals has proven
to be owners in the federal
context a few years ago and I I
want to save twenty eight to
twenty nineteen up until that
point you had to affirmatively
apply for
a discharge under the tpd
discharge in the federal student
long context and a review of
reporters and by the government
found that
even if you proactively sent a
form to borrowers who had a
qualifying disability when you
have this disability it becomes
such a
hurdle to take in the
administrative steps that you
have to take to access this
benefit that the vast majority
of them were not actually doing
the paperwork needed so the
intent here is to ensure that
there is some gate keeping make
sure it's really only going to
folks or population of folks who
need it but not to add too many
bureaucratic layers or make it
to owners because we know from
history that especially for
folks living with extreme
disabilities.
The more
hurdles you add and a fewer of
the intended people who need the
benefit will get it so using
this proxy of a total and
permanent disability from the va
from your doctor has been deemed
more appropriate than adding and
a financial factor as well
thank you mister I can
understand the federal doing it
I mean.
They get a print money frankly
we're time about private lenders
and so i'm just worried about.
In particularly since subsession
have just says they have to
notify uhm and if you do look at
the definition I I actually
think the definitions a little
looser than what we are just
told it doesn't require a
medical.
Declaration.
But that I think that sort of
beside the point I my concern is
more because we're talking about
private linders they're gonna
assess risk on the front end.
And if you are able to discharge
a loan entirely regardless of
your network mister chair
just by getting notice of a
permanent disability than what I
think could potentially happen
is
it's going to drive up the rates
for everyone because that rises
going to be spread across
everyone um since we're tired
about private money.
The other question I had and
it's kind of a similar theme is
paid twenty five section twelve.
Paragraph is an alpha.
This says essentially if a
lender of a private window.
Offers any flexible modified
repayment options they have to
provide those to everyone and
mister cherry I I think I
understand sort of sentiment as
we don't want people to be
unfairly treated which I can
understand but but also when you
talk about the private market.
Often times it's the people who
need the most help that need the
most flexible options and i'm
just thinking of it from the
lens of a lender if if I now
have to offer that that sort of
unique.
Repayment planned everybody i'm
not going to offer it to anyone.
Um in some worried if if we
apply this sort of uniform
standard.
It's gonna result in.
And nobody getting the relief of
uni.
Mister chair and representative
so my reaction is the opposite
that it makes it easier for the
lender because we're adding
consistency where they don't
have to create unique situations
mister chair and committee but I
imagine this on provision has
been implemented elsewhere so I
would ask our expert to address
it briefly.
The.
I thank you mister committee and
that's exactly right we haven't
seen a a change in the market
based on this requirement in
other states and that you know
this can take many forums right
so the offering of an income
based repayment plan may be
universal but that might apply
differently to different bar was
based on the circumstances and
which chair but I also speak to
the last question a more general
I just want to remind the
committee that in the instance
where someone has no longer has
an income but still has
substantial means to pay a well
and it it seems less likely that
a person what had taken out debt
so we're really focused on
people
very outlight there may be
instances for someone has a
disability but can still pay
alone but that does seem like a
very outlier case
and so we're really trying to
make policy the legislation here
to fact and provide relate to
the majority of student a lot of
bars.
The mister chair so my
experience with smaller lending
institutions they're actually
very flexible to one of the
benefits of using a smaller
learning institution
and specially when you're
talking about private money.
And if they have to sort out
offer that same unique set of
circumstances to everybody it it
increases their exposure.
And so I think what will happen
is they are not going to offer
it to anyone so those are my
concerns of bill overall I like
it I just those two provisions
i'm i'm not sure I can quite get
over so thank you mister chair
great thank you represent
broadband courier
thank you mister chair and dumb
thank you representative it's
been quite a few years that
we've been improving in and
reviewing them improving
this bill and i'm happy to stand
in support as a sponsor of this
bill I think I speak from
personal experience and the
reason why i've been
joining
my colleagues so adamantly and
consistently every year's
because I am one of these loan
recipients that has been
not only discriminated against
but unable.
Through all my years of having
been in school.
To seek some sort of.
Ah
help which is what one of the
key components of this bill does
provide some ombudsmen
and i've had to navigate it
mister chair on my own reading
all the fine lines
going through amaze of
regulations.
To try to find my own answers
and still unable to do that and
still having mounting debt.
And not being able to receive
the answers and so I understand
in sitting in the lunch rooms at
the university
in the break rooms and in other
areas that i'm not the only one
literally.
Hundreds of thousands of
students are faced with this
dilemma nut just from the stem
point of having to seek a loan
in order to receive an education
but often times having to seek a
cosiner who happens to be a
family member and
that family member doing
everything in their power out of
good will and left there
student family member siding in
that understanding also.
The full implications of those
fine lines that are associated
with these types of launch
historically student alones have
been.
The subject of of many
investigations and many um.
Challenges because of the
nature.
That the nature of the predatory
nature sorry I say that mr chair
and representative because it
hits close to home and I think
on the disability I am
particularly.
Um.
Drawn to our disability.
Clauses because I recently had
to claim that
and I had no one to be able to
help me through that process.
And
although in my particular case
things finally got I had to go
to my senators us senators us
congress people they had to
assign specific staff to help
myself in others to be hittle
that gets resumes and this
started three years ago and as
of this day.
There's still a lot of questions
but the beauty mister chair in
all of this is that I want to
remind to solve it we do have
federal laws that we have to
comply with and there is a lot
of federal oversight involved in
protection
the general public against
predatory practices and the
department of education
especially under this new
administration has been
particularly.
A committed mister chair to
ensuring that the vast majority
of our student loans are
protected against these
practices so as a state being
able to step up and further
protect our population I think
is a when when situation for
everyone because we're not
eliminating loans we're trying
to
improve the processes for the
loans to.
Benefit everyone involved in
these processes so I just wanted
to make that that statement and
I I want it just one question to
clarify
further.
Mr chairman and representative
and I just fighted it and now I
don't know where.
Where I spotted the question was
they believe in that insight.
This
representative this is a
consumer protection.
Bill is that correct
mr chair and representative
that's certainly how I view the
bill
so mister chair and
representative and that's
exactly why I think it's
important for us to clarify that
we're not here to protect
necessarily the rights of
lenders although right of
lenders are important because as
long as they're following the
letter of the lot then we have
good processes but we're also
the main impetus of this bill is
to
by far protect the interest of
our student consumers so I doubt
I just wanted to make those
statements and clarify and I
hope that if I you know if
there's any questions that then
I need as a personal from
personal experience i'm happy to
answer those questions thank you
mister chair
thank you.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative thank you for
this bill but I do have some
problems with first off how much
does this
does your particular bill mirror
the federal bill.
Mr chair and i'm sorry I should
have continued with that with
the precautions geared towards
the line at the bar
mr chair and representative i'll
ask the expert to give a high
level of view of that I imagine
i'll ask the expert to give a
high level view that mister
chair
thank you mister chair and many
so they are
so this bill is near identical
to the other bills and was at
the state level at the federal
level there are not as.
Granular.
Protections around the student
on servicing industry which is
in part why states have decided
to step into this void the
federal government the
department education
specifically has endorsed this
these actions by state
governments last summer in july
they put out a notice to the
federal register welcoming what
they called cooperative
federalism for states which are
traditionally consumer
protection bodies and are just
closer like you know their boots
on the ground welcoming them
engaging in the student loan
service in oversight provision
activities specifically because
the federal government isn't
really equipped to do that kind
of work that being said the
consumer protections are very
very in line with the spirit in
the star sort of technical
components of federal consumer
protections
in the way that they prohibit
again this current art
unfairness up to practices they
they mirror a lot of the sub
regulatory practices by the
consumer financial protection
bureau when the cfpb audits and
examines these companies but
just away the federal government
is set up they have not issued
sort of a less of practices the
way that this bill on other
state laws have but again that
is that's done in concert with
the federal government out in
that balance so far has looked
very well
thank you very much for your
response of appreciate that.
O I been read through this i've
read over the couple times last
night again this morning in it
seems to me like we are trying
to.
Become unified as far as getting
these.
A student learned bill of rights
act going that i'd think it also
has to take place with the help
of the fed as well
mr chairman representative
representative lane has asked a
couple of my questions but I do
have some
page
i'm looking at the one of the
nalises and I picked it up over
and paid fifty one of your bill
under section twenty seven
and it says a
stood loan bill of rights for
created purpose appropriations
and i'm not seeing an
appropriation about listed
anywhere but whenever you do
read the f I art brings that
issue up could you give me some
inside their
um
mr chair and representative if
the question is will are we
seeking an appropriation we will
be presenting to.
Appropriations after that next
the second committee isn't
no
commerce okay.
Or mr chairman representative
according to the fire that some
of the analysis both analysis of
the operational expenses for
this phone will be around five
hundred sixty nine thousand
dollars per year but I don't see
that number showing up in your
bill anywhere
and that is.
And now we're swimming in many
right now
it's all being spit in a hurry
and my concern is if you go
forward with this how how is I
think that falls under didn't it
license yeah regulation license
department
how will they be able to cover
the expense of those that they
could stir three it might
correct your lives if I can find
it again.
Three full time employees is
that correct
mr chairman representative
that's my understanding of the
fire.
Okay so the three year cost of
that is going to be a million
point seventy one dollars.
Yes it is
so i'm just really really
concerned about that let's see
where we hear.
There was also on one of the
analysis and in them i've got a
big to so many marked.
Yes it's in the fire and in the
analysis as well and page
thirteen.
Uh in section c starting
online's twelve going through
line fifteen the sixteen
actually it is stating in both
of those analysis and the fire.
The financial institution vision
is stating that there is a
potential conflict are you aware
of that
they did offer as suggested an
amendment
mr chair and representative I am
aware of out but we looked at it
and we don't think a and
amendment is is needed at this
point mister chairman
representative okay will
miss mr german representative
what the financialist to
division is proposing is that
the language be changed
to be compatible with the mls
system the licensing period
should begin november the first
to not be considered light until
after december thirty first and
I understand where they're going
with this
there they're explaining.
So what they are saying further
notes that the applications
failed between november the
first and before december thirty
first must be a camp need by a
one hundred dollars light fee to
offset that that's why they are
suggesting suggesting that the
licensing period should begin
november the first and.
It makes sense to me
but matt mister chairman and
representative I appreciate you
take the turn to answer some of
my concerns here
still have problems with that I
think needs to be addressed
thank you very much the year
represented me to almost
thank you mister chair thank you
representative I too share
a lot of the concerns that a
representative lane had when I
was reading through section
eleven.
Something kind of stood out to
me are not starting on line
twenty one it says when notified
of total permanent disability of
the student loan borrower or co
signers shall release any costs
on her from obligation my my
question on that is so the way
this reads as
I have my father my grandfather
co signing alone for me and they
become totally disabled as that
mean that I am now not I don't
have to repay it.
Could you refer me to the page
and the page twenty three
section eleven on and and the
statement starts on line twenty
one through twenty three.
The.
Madame chair and representative
the way I read that is if the co
signer is deemed disabled then
that co signer madam chair and
representative I mean mister
chair and representative art
release not the original data.
Is is or yeah it says when
notified of the total and
permanent disability of a
student
loan borrower or a co signer
shall release any costs on her
obligation from the loan and
then it goes on a little bit
further and kind of explains it.
The lender shall not attempt to
collect any payment from co
signer upon the debt of the
permanent disability of a co
signer or borrower so which I I
get it ice I get that it
releases it but it's still kind
of with that or it doesn't say
that the borrowers still has to
pay at the borrowers still may
be able to work
it just because like like I said
my my father grandfather might
be disabled may not be able to
due to pay this loan if I
default on it but in in there
does it is there any provision
that that that definitely says
that the that the borrower is
still
liable to pay pay for this mr
chair and representative I am
not reading that provision in
the way that you are if the
borrower is disabled yet he or
she may be released if the
cosiner is disabled he or she
may be released but one
disability does not check the
other dispersion on the list
that is not how it reads out
mister chairman representative.
Although mrperiod chair
representative when you put or.
It ties that it's kind of like
my checking account be it it's
me or or my husband we can
either be there it's not and we
nuts it's not both so if either
one of them is disabled then it
it so I have I have issues with
with the wording there thank
you.
Not seeing anybody else in my
list to entertain emotion.
Alright so we have a due pass
motion on house seventy one
second second second by
representative on
them secretary of colorado on a
due pass much for house will
send you one.
No.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
The.
Right by a vote is seven to
three you have a due passenger
house still seventy one thank
you mister thank you many
thank you so we're gonna
transition now
how's going on seventy one so
represent result we have a vice
chair gone
be I don't.
All right.
Yeah.
It's just.
The.
Yeah.
You need.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Alright we do have an amendment
that should be passed out and if
I could get a copy as well.
Op.
Yeah.
Will get morning mister chairman
and minority floor later thank
you all for being here to
present house bill one seventy
one.
So any time you want to start we
can hear it all right thank you
madame chair good morning
committee members from the other
side of the table
and this is house bill one
seventy one so this is a bill
that
representative lane and I have
worked on for a couple years now
that i've carried for a few
years and for a few years we've
worked on as a part of the
legislative education study
committee I don't know madam
chair and this is your
preference if you want to start
out with the amendment the
amendments pretty clear to
explain and then we can go into
a full explanation of the bill
members of the committee house
bill one seventy one the minute
has been passed out it is not
any substantial changes is just
minor changes so I would
entertain a motion to accept the
minimum representative rare of
moves and representative madrid
seconds
so it you gentlemen would like
to o get through the amendment
to the bill we would appreciate
that sure i'm thinking medium
chair and members so the
amendment is striking the
alternative demonstrations of
competency or the demonstrations
of competency so
as an example of this if you
remember the previous
administration had implemented
i'm certain bench marks as an
alternative to four graduation
among students namely the
um I can't remember the name of
them now i'm blanking I used to
give them park was one of them
and then the subject tests
the e o c's in having a
threshold for the end of course
exams
this would present the prevent
that from happening should
administrations change and have
a change in how graduation
is
attained by our students so this
would go to.
You as a student having two
fully finished the course
requirements by the state and
your district in order to attain
graduation but with that and
staying questions on.
Do we have any questions
regarding the minute to the
bill.
Do we have any comments from
anybody on soon in regards to
th.
Okay
do I hear motion to accept the
amendment to the matter I moved
to adopt them and thank you very
much a representative roy ball
copy or a moves to adopt the
amendment to house bills one
seventy one we don't need a
second is there in okay
representative rare is there any
option.
You do have an amended bill.
To go ahead and list.
Thank you madame chair thank you
committee i'm so back on the
main bill as they mention this
is something that we've been
working on for quite a while
i've actually worked with we
have our director of the
legislative education steady
committee doctor when better
warner meant I mean we.
For the LESC just could half
away
this is something that
director or better warnament I
have worked on for a few years
in her role as
deputy secretary of the public
education department when I
first carried the bill all the
way through now
I think it a few things to know
about the bill i'll refer you
all to page the breed of the
legislative education steady
committee analysis for a four
break down of
what the current requirements
are in the proposed changes one
thing I want to preference
preface remarks by saying and
you've heard me say this for a
few years now is that our high
school graduation requirements
bill is really meant to be
student driven and engage our
students one thing we're really
having an issue with as we all
know is engagement and
attendance and one of the main
factors we're hearing from our
students is that the classes at
their taking their having a hard
time making the connection
between what they made to in
real life with the classes that
they are taking also being able
to see themselves reflected in
the classes they take and really
have ownership in those classes
that they choose and so in this
bill we've really made a
conservative effort to make that
a case in each and every subject
available so as you see in
english their fore that are
required for students three of
them are are predetermined for
students but that fourth one
allows them to choose whatever
class may be available to them
at their school within their
district to take to fulfil that
english requirement on same
thing within the mask credit
two of a sequence like algebra
wine or geometry but the third.
Sorry the subscript classes
could be
career technical education for
example
the sciences there must be two
that include a lab component but
again you have another that's
included on social studies the
one that's near dear to my heart
since i'm the social studies
teacher three are on laid out as
definite requirements but that
fourth requirement could be
filled by a number of classes
right I will remind the
committee that we went through
in the past couple of years
since we've been proposing this
legislation of a change in the
social studies requirement
so as i've been mentioning to
the committee madam chair is
that there aren't necessarily
every specific classes outlined
cause we know there are a whole
lot of groups that are buying
for all sorts of different
classes but by embedding those
in two our standards and leaving
those as options for district is
what we saw the best way to move
forward with this legislation
because it's been a long time
coming of physical education has
been moved to one for credit
health stays five can be taken
high school or middle school and
then elect years five point five
and then I do one issue
direct the committee's attention
to the two that would be
district driven arm i'd be
component of this legislation is
also having our districts come
up with with profiles of a
graduate which word show what is
truly a important to the
district in what they'd want to
see of their graduate and so by
giving two of these requirements
over toward a local school
district would help priorities
on an emphasis what it takes
for.
Their students to be what they'd
like to see within their
community and for a state on but
with that madam chair alternate
over to my coast sponsorer are.
Thank you
good morning I look forward to
singer more republican chairs in
the future this is a nice nice
thing to see.
This is I think a bill that
sneared dear to my heart many
people that that are members of
the body because we recognize
the importance of of our
educational system and I think
this is something overseen a lot
of biparts and support that was
moved the needle
mentioner not surprising chair
romaro in good teacher fashion
did it rejob of explain the bill
i'll just mention a few things
that I think are important for
from my perspectives to why the
spill should move forward
one is i'd really think this is
a unique approach to make sure
that that our students have more
control over their own destiny
when it comes to an educational
standpoint this
I think helps accomplish that I
love the the concept of the
developed developing graduate
profiles to have somebody sit
down and and walk them through
what the next few years of high
school could look like and how
that applies to what's robin
your wife
the other thing i'll mention is
there's a lot of cte that are
now can be incorporated into
high school not just in shop
glasses how it was when I went
to school but now we're talking
about mouth classes we're
talking ab.
And then the last thing I
highlight
that I appreciate is my district
and aspect could be wildly
different than representative
laura's district and so by
allowing those two local credits
I think it
it pays homage to that truth
about education that it really
should be specialized at the
local level and so I do like the
concept of letting local boards
decide what's best for their
students and adopt two credits
that would become high school
graduation requirements so thank
you manager
thank you would your expert
witnesses like to say anything
while we're right here please
identify yourself
good morning madam chair went
through the ornament director of
the legislative education study
committee I will just say it's
been an honor to work on this
with the response or.
Thank you madame chairman stand
for questions
okay i'm gonna start over here
on decided to reimburse their
anybody here and support this
legislation yes sir go ahead.
Madam chair good morning stand
rounds for the school
superintendents and the
coalition of educational
leaders.
You all don't work the item
understand our position on this
we fully support for this is
gone you've heard the attributes
of the.
Let me just tell you as a twenty
seven year superintendent in new
mexico one of the things that is
that convolutes how we help
students get the course work
they need is to assure that they
are rigor on one side but
options for their interests on
the other and when you have
twenty four credits to play with
with the things that are in
statute today there's a there's
a balance between electives or
that is those things they choose
outside of statue and those
things we want to require in
sight of statute as we talk to
you during the summer during the
interim this build balances that
nicely it is a thoughtful way of
doing business we appreciate
both sponsors in moving this
forward and is representative
line said the importance of
having local control to to
schedules is exceedingly
important especially the smaller
you get.
This bill accommodates then we
fully support it thank you
madame thank you anybody else.
Good morning madame chairman
women and members of the
committee then is that our size
i'm with the public education
department and we send in
support of the bill we greatly
appreciate that the work that
the sponsors have put into this
legislation and yet thank you.
Yes sir
men chair members of the
committee my name is matt paul
with public charter schools of
new mexico we support the bill
we'd like the connection between
a graduate profile and having
more automatic select for
graduation requirements at the
local level if it's right in the
charter schools and we
appreciate the sponsors and i'll
just say
I as I understand what that
amendment did I think we really
like that edition as well it was
one of the big concerns and and
a I have no reason to think that
that's not been alleviated here
so appreciate that thank you
anybody else i'll get thank you
go ahead ma'am good morning
madam charges a cameratine as
alba kirky public schools we are
happy to stand and support this
bill we appreciate the
opportunity to have participated
in discussions surrounding the
development of the legislation
thank you.
Okay anybody else on this side
of the road.
It's good at this side of the
room
looks like we have quite a few.
Good morning
good morning share i'm kirk
clothes i'm super intent of
current public schools and my
board myself and and full
support of this we totally agree
with the concept that
diversifying education allowing
our students options to graduate
because we have such a diverse
population of small school
district we appreciate the work
to to representatives have done
on this by engaging
superintendents and school board
members and all that for the
last two years has been a
critical part for our support.
And we spent in full support of
it one thing we would like to
see at a local level for future
consideration we would like to
expand the eighth grade options
down to include cte options for
our students so our pathways can
start sooners for our students
as representative lane and
represent a romaro point out we
have a huge engagement
attendance issue in this state
by giving kids in the middle
school the opportunity to take
classes that are in in their
pathway with greatly increased
their ability to attend school
and be actually engaged in a
pathway they'll lead them to
game for employment
or apprenticeship or whatever
they want to do upon graduation
we love the bill the way it is
but just winning a tacademic
options we feel could be a step
better next year if we were
consider adding c t options such
as ocean training
cpr first day there are also a
ton of coding technology classes
or middle school kids could take
that lead in my path when
technology that that be
considered and dinner session
for smaller school districts are
kids can get a head start on her
collars or appointment careers
thank you thank you very much.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee my name
is witness holland president of
after new mexico as I said but
we were doing excuse me slow
down in your talking
I want to get this I can't
listen to
as an elementary teacher so I
got to as I said when we were
doing this last year this bill
would modernize what's required
for graduation and would allow
us local school boards to our
local school districts to
establish units for graduation
which fit the needs and months
of their community.
We believe that with greater
flexibility and local decision
making we can keep our students
in square thank you
thank you
yes ma'am madame chair members
of the committee my name is
ellen burnstein i'm the
president of the abu kirky
teachers federation throughout
the years that we've been
discussing this bill and several
iterations of this bill I think
it's time to connect all the
conversations were having about
high school anybody that's how
to conversation with somebody in
high school knows that they're
amazingly sophisticated they
know what they want and this
bill enables them to follow
their path and have freedom of
choice it also takes the
conversations we've been having
for several years around
re establishing growing our
career connected learning cteat
classes and we know that when
somebody is engaged in ct
nationally there's a bad of
fifteen percent increase in
graduation rates so I think
exactly as a chair romaro said
this is going to increase
attendance engagement and
graduation and I would
appreciate your support thank
you thank you very much.
Yes ma'am hi my name is laurie
or tagan the executive director
of any any mexico and we stand
and strong support of this bell
thank you
anybody else yesterday thank you
better chair members of the
committee john lipsheets within
a mechanical federation of labor
if l c I l four all the reasons
that are wonderful educators
have already said we stand and
strong support of this bill but
specifically to allow more
education into the classrooms
i'm sure all of you are aware we
have a a real issue with needing
more career technical workers
out there and so bringing them
into the into the system at an
earlier age giving them credit
for this education will go along
way and turn up our workers
ordered thank you
thank you very much for anybody
else that would like to speak
and support this before
regardless of.
Okay thank you.
First off we have emily I can't
read the name i'm sorry
why doubt.
Emily are you still there.
Am yes thank you go ahead please
will doubt
thank you madame chair members
of the committee my name is
among well doubt I am with new
mexico voices for children and
we support the spell think you
representative romaro and
representative lane for carrying
the spill again the session our
students need their high school
education to be diametic and
relevant to their future careers
and their post secondary
education opportunities whether
that's pursuing a four year
degree or continuing down a
pathway of career technical
education we support the
flexibility and these changes
and especially support the use
of graduate profiles that will
allow each district to ensure
that those subjects and skills
most relevant to their families
communities and students are
included in the education
provided and we ask the
committee to join us and
supporting each b one seventy
one thank you thank you very
much.
Hello danny parker from our t
should go ahead mister parker.
This.
They would go
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee my name
is danny parker and i'm an
assistant superintendent for the
artist republic schools and
thank you for the opportunity to
come in on this bill I I just
want to assure everyone that
this build is not lower the bar
for our graduates but it makes
it more appropriate for students
with a different definition of
success uh than just going to
college after high school and
and so and I want to assure
everyone that high schools will
always keep algebra too for
students who have better college
your university pathway or for
any student who's future plans
required that algebra too
i'm really believed that this
bill values other post high
school paths have been great
than uh then just a full egypt
path this bill values trade
school military other other
parts of career and it allows
our students and our school
boards the flexibility to
prepare all of our students for
their plans after high school
too long we have just been
preparing our students for
college in college and this
really helps make that college
in career pathway possible and
i'd like to think chairman
romero and representative lane
trawl their work on this bill
and and recognizing doctor pray
warnament and analyst hath away
for really doing a good job of
making sure the districts and
and administrators and school
boards are included in the bill
preparation so thank you all
very much thank you mister
parker will move on to kevin
summers kevin are you with this
this morning still with this.
Mr summers can you unmute please
there we go I was waiting for
the the front I trust you can
hear me
we can go ahead thank you very
much good morning madam chair
members of the committee i'm
sure you've probably grown tired
of hearing from me but my name
is kevin summers i'm the
superintendent of the second
minute for school district are
our organization stands in full
support and endorses fully house
bill one seventy one while
slightly different than last
year's house bill one twenty six
I think ultimately what it does
to echo the sentiments of all
those before me is it simply a
freeze up some capacity of our
students to be able to explore
student based interests are
current graduation requirements
don't necessarily allow for
engagement and relevancy but I
also believe that this bill will
assist with our graduation rates
are absentee as
as well as just seeking a work
force locally and developing at
work force locally whether again
that worked force requires
certifications or industry
certificates
to your degree or for your
degree I think that this is a
great way to get students
interested in to assistance
superintendent parkers statement
it does not lower the bar so I
ask that you strongly consider
supporting house bill one
seventy one thank you again for
your time thank you mister
summers we now move on to.
Mike I can't r.
The.
Debris debris I can't say the
name i'm sorry mike.
Are you with us this morning
mike
I am with you
greetings can you hear me okay
i'm sorry that I mispronounced
your last name debrio is that
it's okay it's david
thank you
good good morning that i'm share
members of the committee my name
is mike debris on the education
and richmond director at the
line of foundation letter
foundation stands in support of
HB one seventy one seventy one
which updates our state's
graduation requirements to be
flexible and take into account
student voice and interest we
appreciate the inclusion of
graduate profiles cap stones and
next step plans building on the
current great work that is
happening through the innovation
zones initiative these just
allow graduation requirements to
reflect individual community
norms and values this bill also
lose the ground work for schools
to integrate career technical
education and core academic
opportunities so students are
applying what they're learning
in the classroom in real world
contacts thank you again to the
committee they keep.
Moving on we have.
Jerry washburn from carl's bed
municipal schools go ahead
please.
The.
Madam chair members of committee
thank you for this opportunity
to speak I will keep this
extremely brief I think this is
great legislation and not always
a great legislation its
legislation that's been crafted
the right way by involving all
of the players to do that so I
applied
to remerrill and representative
lane for all of their work to
keep this moving forward and I
strongly approach urge you to
vote the support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next we have done at the darker
don't go ahead please.
I good morning madame chard
committee members my name is
start off the rocket and the
super tenant of mounter public
schools and I am the current
president of the new mexico
super general association I
would like to start by taking
chairman romaro and
representative lane for their
continued hard work on this bill
and I stand in both support of
house bill one seventy one
thinking
thank you very much.
We have a list.
Who.
The.
At least he a big area from like
arthur.
Miss mam good morning name good
morning
same here good morning and
members of the committee my name
is at least now big idiots
superior intent then of the car
there
was then in full support of this
bill we appreciate the work
around or trade of a graduate
cap stones and CTE and just
thank you so much for all the
hardware full support from the
counter schools.
Thank you very much.
The.
And that is all we have on the
zoom we will now go to
opposition
is there anybody on decided to
read that yeah exactly.
The.
Is there anybody on this side of
the room that is supposed to
somebody just put their house
i'm sorry we do have one more
that got in here like the list
all the
we will hear from sarah
fitzgerald
sara go ahead please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
saraf had sterled in senior vice
president of the greater
obligation chamber of commerce
we have to respectfully oppose
the spell today this is a
challenging one while we
appreciate the emphasis of
places on supporting students
and planning for their future in
a way that all lines with their
communities needs were still
concerned.
Ultimately we're opposing this
bill because we strongly believe
that our graduation standards
should contain a financial
literacy requirement it
shouldn't be optional it is a
necessary skill for a student
whether they're on a college
track or whether they're
learning a trade and they might
one day manage or run a
business.
Death debt can stifle a young
person's dream and basic sound
investing can begin to produce
inner generational wealth where
there had previously been none
we can't say the worst state who
takes our poverty problems
seriously when we don't require
our young people to understand
from an early age how to manage
money and set themselves and
their families up for financial
stability and success thank you.
Thank you very much before we
take any more comments from zoom
that are in opposition we will
go to our live body and here in
the committee room so if there's
anybody on decided to rim that
is an opposition place written.
I don't see anybody on this site
what about this side of the rim
yes ma'am.
Good morning i'm chair members
of the committee first we are
being out of an executive
director of mexico kids can't
we're sending an opposition to
one very specific component of
the bill which is the algebra to
a requirement we would really
urge i'm sorry can you come up
speaking the microphones were
somebody can hear.
I hate read to start over but
they couldn't hear you a problem
good morning madame chair
members that the committee I
mean out of executive director
of new mexico kids can we
support so many components of
this bill with the exception of
making algebra to no longer
required what we would really
recommend is allowing students
to keep it as a requirement but
allow students to opt out as
opposed to adding them out and
having them up in if they would
like to keep it the reason for
this is too fault one we know
that high school students often
times change their mind in fact
my own brother who was in the
former position was able to opt
out and ultimately changed his
mind and wasn't able to attend
the university of new mexico and
when he changes mine to do that
senior year and it took him then
fifteen years to go back and get
his four year degree because of
that her extra hurdle that he
had and the second reason is
really because in new mexico
we've chosen to make our high
school statewide assessment the
sat and the sat includes a lot
of algebra to so we are really
looking at without our students
taking and having access to that
eligible to requirement all of
them I know that it'll still be
available to the students who
want it i'm i'm worried about
our statewide results in high
school on the sat which is our
current high school assessment
for all high school students
thank you very much is there
anybody else on this side of the
roof that is some opposition to
house bill on seventy one as
amended.
If not I we will look at our
zoom audience and I don't see
any
hands up here
okay thank you very much for all
the audience participation we
will now go to our committee for
a step I have representative
right back up a year.
Care.
And I to appreciate you being
there.
At the at the helm
madam chair
thank you.
Madame chairman representative I
know that this has been a long
process I followed it through
the legislative education steady
committee and throughout the
years and I just want to say
thank you both of you for for.
For for house when seventy one I
followed one twenty six I
believe I signed on last year I
don't know but we've been at
this for a very long time in the
discussions have been pretty
extensive
I do have to zero in because I
do think we have some students
that are listening and students
that are following
not just
at the high school level but
also at the university level and
the interest is strong
at the university level because
of their pathways that we've
spent the last I don't even know
how many years I think I got
involved in twenty sixteen or
twenty fifteen the years
following ethnic studies and the
rise and ethnic studies.
And the intentional
the
the intention intentional steps
that we've taken
into challenging on the studies
in particular i'm speaking to
to create both career pathways
and hired pastways.
So that our students could
take courses that they felt were
both culturally in
linguistically relevant to both
careers and higher education so
on that note and I think we've
had students addresses that
earlier sea we had senator linda
lopus was been very consistent
along with me to raise this
point and
I know that you've answered the
questions during those processes
but i'd like our students to
hear
this this particular question
and I think it's it's really
important because of we see
nationally
especially since twenty twenty
we've seen a rise in
the focus on ethnic studies
I think the black lice matters
movement
brought that back and miss
madame chair and and
representatives
it's particularly close to my
heart because i'm a founder to
connection on the studies back
in nineteen sixty nine i'm
dating myself i'm one of the
original founders and so
it's wonderful to see the
resurgence and focus on ethnic
studies and how important it is
to our families and our students
so my question is if because we
focused on student riven and
thank you representative chair
of romania for driving that
point
what would you say
to a student what would happen
of a student.
Came and said in their as
they're going through their
development of their plan that
they wanted to pursue a halfway
a career pathway or hire it
password as next steady where
would that where could they go
what we say to them
thank you madame chair thinking
representative i'm so there are
a couple different things that I
would say so the first is armed
through the new social study
standards there are six strands
one of them is ethnic cultural
and identity
studies that are a part of all
of the new social studies
standards so me as a history
teacher as a social studies
teacher now has to meet those
requirements in each of those
strands where students from the
early grades would get
introduced to these concepts but
later on in high school be able
to refine them in that leads to
the second thing that I would
say madam chair i'm to these
students and that that's why it
was important to us to leave
particularly in social studies
but also in in electives the
space for students to be able to
if they truly want to pursue
that to be able to pursue ethnic
studies as their fourth
requirement for their social
studies or for unelective credit
because one of the pathways is
dual credit so I know that there
are dual credit pathways for
ethnic studies and this would
fit right in for those students
so there are multiple ways of
expressing both ethnic studies
in altion was some of the
criticism financial literacy as
well so we've been really
careful in being able to embed
these in the standards or as a
part of the bill as a whole but
leaving it up to the students
with their diverse choices to
make those decisions.
Thank you madam charlie
representative that's exactly
what we were looking for eight
are feeling a little bit I will
tell you that they have
articulate it a great deal of
trepidation over whether.
Or where that was addressed in
the particular bill but I did
refer to them them.
I referred them to the standards
as you had mentioned so I wanted
to make sure that they
understood that very clearly
from you and I also wanted to.
The.
I guess both comment on
financial literacy is directly
tied to
the cycles of poverty and
getting out of the cycles of
poverty into the cycles of
opportunity so we spent all
great dealer time in in pushing
in and and trying to draw the
connection
and that's why it having
financial interseat is so
critical important and it is a
strong point
and then
when you said that one when you
mention the
the strands that the first
answer
there have you and I don't know
if this is for your for or
whomever but I think when you're
when a student is enquiring
about ethnic studies for
example.
The.
And i'm not sure who can answer
this
in their talk about well I want
to correct I really want to
study ethnic studies again going
to studies in particular
but what are the careers
um associate it or how how do we
how can I get benefit from
steading ethnic studies and also
follow a career pathway what
would you do
representative I would you
respond madam chair
representative I I appreciate
the the exercising that question
and I think it's a really good
one for students and
particularly in social studies
and one of our my with think is
critical reading and critical
thinking on particularly because
ethnic stays along with social
studies in general is really
being able to look at multiple
points of view to come up with
a point of view of your own and
being able to be sympathetic to
different perspectives
throughout history and the
complexion of our world so so
thinking on my feet here as a
such stays teacher that would
that would definitely be be an
answer which I think are skills
that are very much translatable
obviously to what we do here in
the legislature to what
attorneys do
to why a lot any sort of
profession really does it does
even if it's in the trades and I
think that are also social
benefits as well to to social
studies and thinking along the
lines of of ethnic studies thank
you madam insurance thank you
representative chair that
I didn't mean to give the cheese
to a reply is however these are
some of the questions that are
being post and the and also I
just want to add that in the
sciences that so very important
I think snady's isn't just
a field of studies it's actually
across interdisciplinary and
that's what I want everyone to
understand it doesn't stand
alone it's interdisciplinary and
in the scientists and math.
Mouth and sciences world it's
all about promoting
those of us that are communities
of color in those fields and
exercising how we are just as a
depth as everyone else and we're
also recruitable as everybody
else to be astronaut to be
scientists in other fields and
so that's why that would be
another component in responding
to that as well as that we want
encourage more communities of
color that have been
historically
disadvantaged
from these fields and others to
be able to enter into the field
that's the importance of ethnic
studies and why the strands and
being embedded or so critical to
understand so are advisers and
everyone that's at the front end
of working with her student
driven plans need to be aware of
all of this so thank you madame
chair and and uh thank you
representative.
The.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representatives of for bringing
this bill I
last year with one twenty six I
had a couple of concerns a being
a former p teacher it really
concerned me that we were trying
to lower it and take away a half
a year when I definitely being
in the high schools like a
mr romero
you see so many of them that
don't move unless they're made
to move and and they need it
their brains need it of the hurt
their bodies need it so and very
thankful that this one
actually keeps it at one full
year and then that does have
many options and it keeps all of
those options for that might my
comments are mostly
things that I really like about
the difference between last
years in this year's but as i'm
reading through here I really do
like that like in a page
fourteen in section curious and
are
how it definitely draws out how
those those district
requirements those two two
credits that are district
requirements that it gives the
the student that freedom because
so many times we transfer even
within our blood like even for
us in valencia county i'm sure
it happens a lot often in you
know bigger districts like
albert you schools are but if we
go back and forth to different
districts they don't lose that
what they matter requirement in
one district they move to an
another district and they don't
have to retake other stuff in
and stop there pathway and it it
doesn't prohibit them from from
keeping going forward on that
pathway that still counts and I
and I like that flexibility it
really does as.
Or as mr rounds had said it
really does give
the students
there that they're they're the
driver's seat here it's not the
school that's the driver see
this not the state that's a
driver seated student it is
their education and I think that
is the key to making sure that
these kids own their education
because when they don't find
relevancy and what they're doing
every single day they one don't
show up and they too they don't
see the point in finishing I I
see many of my my students that
already have a job and they
already make you know decent for
them right now decent amount of
money and they say it won't why
do I have to finish school I can
just keep working
but this gives them that
ownership in order to better
their lives and and and and that
flexibility to do that I do like
also the fact that.
Um
our financial live I know that
was a big huge thing last year
that people wanted us to require
it but it we can still require
districts can still require it
within that at those those two
elected that they or or courses
that they can require but I like
the fact that it's left up to
the district what what is it
local control is huge and and
it's often said in on on this
panel um and I think that that
that needs to be preserved
because what's good for
albertricky schools is not good
for is not necessarily the best
for jail schools and and and
they and the people that know
their community and know their
students should be able to be
able to make those decisions
rather than us up here you know
sooner you know i'm velency
county is completely different
than uh then
um
any of the other districts in in
our in our eighty nine districts
in our
state so that's right really
really like about this is it
gives that flexibility umm and
it puts the ownership of
education back into the students
hence thank you thank you very
much next we have representative
horrera.
Thank you madame chair
thank you sponsors this has been
years in the making and I truly
support an admirer the work that
has gone on with the leading
sponsors on this on the spill.
Um and I would also like these
sponsors to explain that we
worked hours on after two hours
on financial literacy and we've
looked at best state practices
throughout the country and we
went to our superintendence and
we asked for their input over
and over and over again it is
not easy to create change at the
educational level at the local
level where you have really
amazing agreements so if you
could both comment on on those
two items it was brought up in
opposition and I think we really
took care of that and
in bringing this legislation for
it thank you managed here thank
you representative thank you
madame chair she did ask okay a
question so if I may refund
madame chairs
about algeria to
that none of the higher
education institutions in new
mexico require our.
Um was the big thing that we
have heard obviously within the
bill were keeping algeria to as
a requirement to offer at the
school so schools are not going
to do without algerbir to
students will still have the.
The other thing is that.
New mexico uses a common core
standards
which are up to also
in terms of their teaching the
other thing is is on the sat
where there are a few alger for
two questions arm students don't
often take altered or two till
after their junior year which is
when students take
there as a t exams so so I think
to clear that assume up in then
you said there is a second issue
and I can't remember if it's the
financial literacy
the financial literacy issue is
just like I mention
representative all cover you
know and and in representative
right while cover you concerns
about ethnic studies is that
there is financial literacy
throughout the standards from
elementary middle and high
school and then in high school I
teach economics in economics the
classes economics and personal
financial literacy because I
think it's important that
students not only learn about
the large picture about
economics and the forces driving
the stock market
but also the personal part how
does this affect if I choose to
play in the stock market how
does this
how does this affect whether I
save or investing government
bonds I think students are able
to get both they're able to at
the person but they're also able
to get the overarching picture
of of what forces drive
economics so that's where we've
had that sort of back in four
through these years to address
those questions as to what would
be best for new mexico and then
again if a district so chooses
that it's an absolute
requirement to really
drive home and emphasise
financial literacy ethnic
studies the school district is
able to do that and make that
decision.
And manager i'll just.
Briefly addressed the question
to thank you I I think it's
actually an entry in question so
on the outer two front you know
I I got a batches we're in mouth
math is near and here to my
heart I can send you all to to
that like it's fun like a
meeting a bowl of ice cream but
I recognize them i'm a little
weird in that way.
And I think we need ask the
question what is the most
relevant for our high school
students for the rest their life
and taylor or high school
graduation requirements
accordingly and you look at
algeria too only fourteen
percent of careers require
elsewhere to fourteen percent so
why are you creating artificial
bared success when it's such a
low threshold the professions
require that in the workplace
rate I think that's for me
that's some of the driving force
behind make an algeria too
optional because i'd like said I
love math
I need out in that but we also
need look at what's relevant for
two thousand twenty four regard
to financial literacy it is
embedded throughout the
curriculum in the cater twelve
standards I think that's really
important it is a part of
economics
it can now under this bill
actually be taken and count
towards a substantive math
credit which is the change as
well not just an elective
credit.
So I think that's a move also in
a positive direction
and so I I think that this bill
actually strengthens high school
graduation requirements while at
the same time making it very
relevant for our students.
Thank you both and thank you
madame chair I just wanted I
just want the public to
understand how deeply an
studiously this committee in the
leadership really looked at
these issues to to really make
it meaningful to make high
school meaningful and I would
like to congratulate again the
sponsors and the committee on
their way thank you managed
chair thank you representative
here next step we have
representative gorola
thank you madame chair and thank
you for putting into this bill
again
are you light of flexibility I
mentioned in last year sometimes
his difficult in the language
program find the specific issue
for the specific subject in the
specific label so here give us a
flexibility to do that and my
question about your brother to
clarify some root western
reality printed here right up I
use my couple of things I do
believe i'm at the show that is
not better way to learn mad
through their hands on
activities so city classes then
classes them they will provide
all olders learning good on thus
and on that need it
and also having the flexibility
to have a given to no right out
way thing great limiting great
the brain of the students bring
this developing the better way
when you leave it on so that
will help do they have seen it
with my students
and my other comment is
following up with we have seen
in the end of the committee and
printed react of a you know
mentioned miss madame chair
we mentioned
financially too many subjects
even though we shouldn't in this
trans is I should studies and in
other areas because he was a
request over and over and over
right so it was spill out
several several times so it is
part of the strength by we had
to spell it out because he was
not being clear some
multiculture location on ethnic
status is part of this transport
is not always been part of that
somebody just mentioned
this wouldn't seem back seeing
themselves and I could recall.
You sold was a positive and
encouraging way to scontinue
school and motivation to stay in
school so does the risk on that
I would like to see it spell out
also in their bill now because
he's not there but is because he
will make it I don't know so how
clearer like financial it is
needed is important it makes the
finance in the life of a stories
and does the only reason that I
don't want it to see it there
but I love the bill I think you
helps
the students coming choices I
think I was happy with a twenty
two years now because we are in
the standards is because i'm
where actually making sure that
whatever is needed is what this
was receiving making a difficult
for them but human choices but
thank you so much for ringing
this for thank you
representative girl are there
any more questions from the
committee
I do have just a couple of quick
comments
was there any reason given I
know that it was a park veteran
but has been one twenty six that
was introduced in the ninety
twenty twenty three session was
there any comment given from the
fourth floor odd why that bill
was not active
madam chair
members of the committee I can't
remember I think it did receive
a mess
veto message on it and some of
them were I think the some of
the concerns that we've heard
that dropped from twenty four to
twenty two credits arm I think
the **** which
requirement was also an issue on
which we've included into the
pathways.
If you had director
think you managed here the
message from the governor's
office was a concern that we
were lowering standards that the
new requirements were not
rigorous enough the primary
concern was the drop from a
twenty four to twenty two other
items of note were I think an
incorrect or a misconception
around language language
currently is not required in the
graduation requirements it's a
list it is a possible offering
for electives but not
necessarily required and so
there was miscommunication in
that space thank you for that
explanation I was just cater
curious sir had feeling is
probably long those lines the
thing that.
I push and you all have heard me
from the time I got on this
committee local control.
To me that's very important.
I
am very appalled what's going on
right now extending school days
instead of time at hours at
school but whenever i've paid
fourteen year bill online eleven
through fourteen is talking
about each local school board or
gavening body
to me that speaks volumes right
there so I just wanted to
comment you on the that
particular area
do I have a
representative horrera met
menchair I recommended to.
This.
As as amended okay we do have a
motion from representative here.
For a pass on house bill one
seventy one as a middle second
by representative more year.
Do we have any opposition let's
take a roll to call vouchers
just to get it on record.
Website backer
everything is good cha.
Yes we have a sense of heaven
yes representative lane yes
representative yes
representative but yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes
if I vice chair here at.
Yes.
Yes.
So.
Thank you
by a vote of tint nothing you do
have do pass on house build one
seventy one as a minute thank
you gentlemen thank you manager
thank you committee.
The.
The.
Madam chair if you were like to
continue because we have also
memorial for and i'm carrying it
on behalf of representative gear
not so fast you're not
alleviated yet
we will entertain a mouth of
motion to adjourn right now
until twenty twenty fire
open no motion the second
okay at this time we have
representative to
remerit that we'll be presenting
house memorial for on behalf of
representative go ahead
thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee on
behalf of representative
who was in the house
appropriations and finance
committee finishing work on our
budget she'd asked me to present
house memorial for which is
requesting the legislative
education study committee to
study middle school on this is
something obviously you're
coming on the heels of the high
school graduation bill there are
we were hoping last year with
the passage of the high school
graduation bill that we would
have been a year into studying
mental score
because that was ultimately the
goal but this is the memorial in
order to do that obviously
representative garrett
knows a lot about middle school
as she taught middle school for
a number of years and it's near
and dear i'm to her heart I know
representatives that in yana as
well
as she was a middle school
teacher to really dealt into the
formative years a representative
of that as well so there's a lot
of interest in looking at the
years of middle school I will
say that with two young boys
obviously their path was pretty
clear about what schools they
are going to attend as my wife
teachers at kick her snow
amendment score in the south
valley of albuquerque was.
And scote there
as my wife teaches there and
then I teach at a triscal
heritage academy so should I be
there in a few years my student
my children will follow you
there but there is what to do in
terms of middle school which is
I think what a lot of our
families
are are interested in looking at
as well as what sort of
programming may continue on from
elementary school what sort of
programs could students we heard
it from the audience today what
sort of programming could we
introduce into the middle
schools to get them ready for
high school on all of the above
so this is really the memorial
in order to formalize that and
and work on a middle school
redesign in the enrman obviously
all of you as well as our
members in the legislature
welcome to two participate in
those discussions just like the
high school graduation
requirements i'm but again I
have just gonna have the way
from the legislative education
steady committee with me in
order to answer any sort of
technical questions but with
that madame terrible stand for
questions in would you like to
make any comments at this time
think you madam turned no
comments at this time just got
half though senior policy
analyst with the less and just
happy to answer any questions
you all may have thank you very
much do I have any comments from
the audience at regarding else
memorial.
Go ahead right here in the front
row
madame chairman stand rounds for
the school superintenance
coalition of educational leaders
thank you for considering have
this house memorial.
Of all of my years and education
of which this is number fifty
one.
I spent six as a middle school
teacher in the formative years
of my career and was actually in
middle school teacher for the
very first time in the
albuquerque public schools when
we went to middlescope.
That research is still a
appropriate to today's children
middle school kids are different
in fact if you look across the
nation it is our greatest
challenge in age of education in
the united states is horribly
lose more students will lose
more academic foundation
this study is critically
important to the state of new
mexico we fully endorse this we
thank you for bringing it for
any more comments on this side
of the room.
Okay about this side of the room
with anybody like
okay go ahead and stand up
please good morning better
chairman just risk
public schools we think the
memorial being proposed we've
been looking at middle school
for the past sky you are too and
I think we get a week we have
some information offer and the I
have a seventh grader that you
could always interview with his
experience.
Is that all on the side of the
room that's moved to this
saturday if you'd like to speak
police down madame chairman
members of the committee ellen
burns the naval curky teacher's
federation we created a middle
school task force last year in
collaboration with the aps
administration and middle school
teachers we took a deep dive and
what's going on in middle school
any of you that have been
talking a middle school teachers
recently know that of all the
levels this level
the students are still more
disregulated after the pandemic
than anybody else and their
crying out for help and what we
found in our study of early at a
lesson learning is exactly what
missed around talked about is
the reason we created med
schools and moved from junior
highs they need personal
connections they need their
teachers to work in families so
they know their students well
and over time in our connected
with their families they need
that with a mad in bed social
emotional learning they need
personalized connections because
this is the time in their life
when they're experimenting with
all kinds of things there are
sexuality and drugs and we need
really to personalize that time
so we can get them in the high
school so there are high school
redesign can actually impact or
middle school kids thank you
very much.
Love it and the current schools
full support in this bill like
mrperiod rounds I started my
teaching career with six years
of middle school experience in
the state of ohio and understand
the imparts of the transition
between middle school the high
school and having serving on the
high school transformation in
this past year for pattern along
with half away we keep talking
about the connectivity between
the community into school and it
came activity of case with
twelve education and we feel
this study will be a huge
advantage to looking at what our
schools should look like further
we also need to look at any
staffing implications that are
occurring at those levels
because being a small rural
school district like me by
teachers also teaching my
science classes and with teacher
shortages and staffing and
licenser we need to make sure we
take an independence look
because my teacher's teach from
sixth grade to talk grade and
some of them teach middle school
down to elementary so could have
huge impact so we need to make
sure we take no account to
staffing part of this as we
could look at this as we go for
thank you.
Thank you very much is that i'll
for public comment in our army
I don't see any hands on a soon.
So would you like to close with
other
we had a late when go up
we do have comments from greg
rockled mrperiod rocket go ahead
please.
The.
Mr rocker can you and mute
yourself please.
Okay sense thank you madam chair
since twenty seventeen a hundred
and twenty three thousand
exposed students have not had a
license teacher and are state.
So the teacher shortage is
extremely critical
we're passed the tsunami has
hit.
And we need to correct that
immediately so thank you for the
opportunity to throw address you
ladies and german thank you
thank you
but we have one of the comment.
Emily well will doubt go ahead
emily
thank you madame chair good
morning again to members of the
committee I memory well south
new mexico voices for children
we stand in support of house
memorial for and i'd like to
think representative gear it for
carrying it and for cherry step
stepping in to present it this
morning.
Yeah I agree with what everyone
else has been saying we really
echo that middle schools are
critical time and our kids
development in this point of
transition deserves a thoughtful
study in the attention to ensure
that our middle schools are
meeting our students where they
are and keeping them engaged
while setting them up for
success as they continue to high
school so we ask the community
to support the memorial thank
you
thank you.
And that looks like all of them
could do we have any comments
from the committee.
The.
Representative
thank you madame chair and I
get it it's not here
I guess my only question will be
uhm
I spend all my classroom dishing
experience he middle school I
really love it but I saw there
the difficult summaries to
restrict the transition to high
school especially from the
classroom yet along classes
trying to end creating high
school and I was where they were
not ready and middle school they
can is to get that way with
failing some other classes i'm
going to high school
they were not ready for that
is any part and i'm trying to
understand it is any part of
here what will you
see how can this couldn't be
prepared for the transition not
only on the all the areas on
their styles but in that
decision of having to work for
credits instead of going travel
wish on the whole year
madame chair representative yes
so and page one one of the
warehouse
I think it's a recognition of
that transition from elementary
school in two high school.
As it reads
page w.
Vital transitional feature phase
when.
Diverse in advance curriculum as
a per prepare for academic and
career I won't for the page but
but I think it's a recognition
of that transitional phase like
you're mentioning academically
especially is there's certainly
a mention as well throughout the
memorial of the social emotional
development of students during
this time period so really
getting at all of what.
Experience
think you think you manage here
my other question and comment is
a appreciate the acknowledging
of taking out your middle school
I was in all the british and
those call and I saw that huge
success on my students going to
high school with that er
preparation even if they had to
take it again he was always
happy positive team we were
asked by high school not never
to stop it to continue the
winner
so I want to ask all to in other
subjects I know some was cold
have like a ap classes or
spanish in middle school
or they're other classes like
that yes matt uhm will that be
waived acting through that too.
Madame chair if I may ask I see
that the the memorial sponsor
has joined us to be able to
answer questions.
Thank you mr cherry doing great
job and we just put it on the
budget so i'm as I told our
cheer here and catching my
breath can you just ask the
question on my turn them figure
out i'm sure thank you for read
and I really like the I don't I
mean as you're right in the
middle school and looking into
that site that's what I thought
most of my
timing means colon I saw the
benefits of the students but
among also where that's on
middle school offered other type
of app high school credits in
middle school I well then
impressed with one school who
essentially offered AP spanish
glasses and that we was very
successful to.
Oh madam chair and
representative it looks at the
curriculum overall we haven't
made every single thing but that
would definitely be part of the
curriculum most squares offer
geometry in middle school so
things like that absolutely
would be looked at thank you
thank you manager and thank you
for this I think is I love it I
really want more companies thank
you
thank you representative
representative madrid.
Documentary chair and thank you
for the memorial I sure it's a
it's a it's certain of said long
ago and that is a newty is gotta
happen in the earlier stages so
that the way of doing this I
think is going to be tremendous
asset particularly in the cte as
superintendent grona said it's
it's essential that we get his
kids set up and away that by the
time they're in high school and
now with the previous
legislation the kids are better
to plug in and out as a
intermediately change their
likes that once the desires but
the pathway is set accord for
them to to do this at the middle
school I think that's one of the
things it's really her entering
city is that there's an are not
transition in early years of
cteat and I think that's a funny
metal it used to be that way I
mean it used to have some good
bases of ct now it's gotten
broader so that being said every
school will have its own
discretion to be able to line
itself to what it's best suited
to fit them but I guess I would
always like to remind people
it's not about us trying to make
it a fit as much as they has
suit to fit so thank you
madame restaurant chairman for a
good memorial I think the house
of good success and getting it
transitioned back up at the
middle of school level is work
thank you thank you
representative madrid next we
have representative errera.
Thank you madame chair think you
response for introducing this
bill it is deeply needed and i'm
just gonna tell a few stories
mayor my twelve year old
grandson started middle school
this year and and so we were all
excited about his first day and
we said how was it how did it go
on these toll the story said
well I met some my friends and
we walked into the assembly and
was a welcoming assembly but it
didn't seem too welcoming to and
and we laughed me said well
that's because in middle school
you know your brain is a lot is
a lot higher than your judgment
level i'm just going to tell you
so there are a lot of rules in
middle school said it's sure
principle start talking about as
soon as you hit the door is to
help you it's to help you avoid
mistakes that's why they say
those things and then I remember
going back.
Twenty years ago and my my
nephew who just started middle
school saying I was you know all
i've said about middle school in
his older cousin my son was two
years older and he said looks
act it's just this way middle
school sucks just get used to it
it'll be behind you pretty soon
you'll get over it and you'll be
in high school just remember
that don't worry about it
everybody hates it and i'm
thinking with this legislation
what if kids look for a demil
score what have we found out
what attracts kids and what
excites kids in how we implement
that and put in in the middle
school so that's why deeply
appreciate that we all know this
is a difficult time in kids
lives we do know that hormones
are raging judgment is not there
they're kinda smart at some
level they certainly know how to
get at you let me see that
so so I really welcome this
legislation
representative and i'm looking
forward to working on i'm really
looking forward to hearing from
the
Middle school is tough.
Kids are smarter than their
parents at that age that they
know more than anybody else i'd
taught middle school as a
substitute teacher that I don't
i'm not going to do a lot ago
but it was
filling it for a teacher that
was having some problems with
their pregnancy and everything
and they were a couple of them
that I was was not sure we're
going to be up to leave that
classroom at the end of my ten
year trade teacher them cause I
was ready to throttle but you
know what
we do have to make excited
exciting for those children they
are in the process of making new
friends their world has changed
their sometimes going up but
more often than not they have it
reached that stage they still
want to be able to go home and
do it maybe a little bit of
sobbing and everything so it is
important and I do appreciate
what this memorial does I do
have a do do pass motion by
representative gorilla who was
the second by representative
garrett in that right yeah.
Let's take a roll call vote
madame chair of lender excuse me
i'll let you take over okay
representative
representative chat fill
percentage in good roller.
But with.
Yes.
We have
my rebul more yeah yes
yes.
Representative.
Yes
wise chair yes.
Yes.
Never said it is an insurance
yes.
We do have a unanimous due pass
on house memorial for so
congratulations representative
gear I want to think all the
members of the audience and both
here in person and on ours zoom
calls for participating in this
folks please stay down it's
important we have to get our
kids
great up and we have to make a
success out of so thank you very
much madame chair before we
adjourn we do have a student in
turn for the day
if you would all introduce
yourself where you go to school.
Hi i'm all of the cora I go to
the new mexico school for the
arts and was sophomore and i'm
in the credit writing and
literature
program
thank you joining us thank you.
Do you want to talk about the
dinner tonight sure we have
committed in her tonight
you have an invitation of
committed dinner tonight in
those that have an ap and would
like to attend please let us
know
matlan is taking the
already.
Talk to them after a committee
thank you
well we'll handle that once we
during the meeting thank you
thank you we are adjourned
