Madam chair.
Here.
We need one more person to have
a quorum.
Okay.
And madam secretary I I do
believe.
when it actually comes to time
to what we should have a quorum
but okay all right thank you.
Madam chair okay so we're going
to begin to date with house bill
one twenty two that schools
cybersecurity program and
presenting it today will be
Representative Rebecca Dow and
her expert witness will be the
Reynolds so when you're ready to
start Representative Dow please
start thank thank you madam
chair House Bill what looked at
least tell you what we agreed to
with the chairman is that we are
going to roll over till Monday
there are issues with the bill
and there will be amendments on
Monday so we've got about twenty
minutes to discuss the bill we
Reynolds is with us today he is
the director of the statewide I.
T. group that's been working on
this for a couple of years in
the making recommendations and
so we're gonna talk at a very
high level about the bills
quickly as possible and allow
the members to ask questions and
so we can come back with the
minutes on Monday and have a
bill that's workable and so the
bill is making appropriation
over the next from starting in
next twenty twenty three through
twenty twenty six to be able to
help schools that protect their
their IT systems from cyber
intrusion and so it the the
details of this I'm going to
leave to my expert Nestle
rentals on a go ahead from that
every him so we can spend as
much time with them asking
questions as possible.
Thank you.
Oaks.
Madam chairman and members the
committee thank you so much for
having me on the day and trying
to help explain the the
importance of cyber security to
our to our nation.
And to our schools so as you
been well aware of the news and
what's been going on within the
state I'm not going to talk too
much about the fact that house
boards under security is because
at it and the fact that
everybody really needs it and it
continues to burden all of the
school districts across the
state in order to stay up to
speed up basically continuously
protect the integrity of our of
the network as well as the data
that Janet you seem like a
solution issues that the L. how
to compromise of what I can do
to the students as well as the
district and financially to the
state so this bill is to try to
help correct some of that the
fact is that currently the
school districts do not have the
budget to support these continue
press has a continued coming out
we do try our best.
Due to do our best and to get
that stuff but we've gotten
surveys back from the number of
school districts across the
state they do not have the
resources or the.
Expertise to actually take care
of a lot of the stuff so we are
in a position where it's just a
matter of how many going to fall
to prior to this the content
ransomware attacks so this bill
is an effort to try to correct
some of that providing funding
to the school districts across
the state I'm for numerous years
I and doctor developed a
cybersecurity strategic plan
which clearly outlines a lot of
the issues that we have across
the state what corrective
measures we can do about it from
training to hiring expertise and
continuously using our resources
leveraging our higher education
institutions and everything to
try to come combat this so this
correct we are so the whole plan
is to that's posted on the PED
website but the if they get that
funding out to the schools and
improve the schools for district
needs so the schools could
potentially initiate grant
programs back into the PED part
of the funding program not
necessarily determine where the
money is supposed to House in
fiscal agency but the it is PED
is the direct resource that
takes care of K. to twelfth so
and hence that's why it's there
but the intent is like I say
this is grant program the school
districts we've done the surveys
will continue to do surveys to
understand the there are
cybersecurity profile which is
the first level that's part of
what restaurants was doing last
year and integration tests to
identify the threats and where
they are but it does not provide
money for the school districts
to go said what here yeah you've
got all you got a leaky boat.
When these are these areas you
need to address and are going
well how do I do that and that's
that's the next level how do you
get the resources of fiber
companies to come in and help
you prepare your your boat your
seals on the the district as
well as in in making new prop of
using best practices are helping
should be set up from from
servers are on site to cloud
based servers to the entire
everything in between so it's
very difficult to set this up
and do it as the districts
become more complex and
different information systems
when student permission system
set learning information systems
and so on and then on top of all
that you've got all these I O.
T. devices which are what's
called internet of things and
these are the little devices
that they put in our net and our
schools to monitor and maintain
their conditioning freezers
temperatures all the elevator
stopped it's amazing amount of
stuff that's in there and you're
going oh my gosh and then you
got printers on top of all that
it's just very complex in order
to make this happen something
like I said school districts do
not have the expertise of the
resources to make it happen so I
stand for.
And we're quickly on the floor
as the way the bill was set up
was how to set up its
strategically in the fact of
being kind of a skeleton in this
regard because it does require
bonding the plan is there the
guidelines out there it's just a
matter of just getting in place
so thank you.
Okay you.
Representative Dow I do not I
want to spend as much time
getting feedback from the
members of the public so that we
can make this bill better for
Monday.
And thank you for those just
joining us we're hearing house
bill one twenty two and school
cyber security issues we're
going to get feedback from the
public questions and answers
including our expert witness Lee
Reynolds as as well as our
sponsor Rebecca Dow and then
it's going to be amended and
presented with the amendments on
Monday so today we're going to
hear from the public we're going
to get questions and answers
from our committee members will
return on Monday so we're going
to go to the attendees now I'm
if you would like to make a
public comment you will have two
minutes and I'm going to start
first with people who oppose the
bill and then second with people
who support the bill so if you
would like to make a comment.
Critical of the bill if you
don't support it please raise
your hand now.
I'm for the person in room three
oh nine.
would you like to make.
Okay I don't see anybody's hands
raised in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand if you're
here to support house bill one
twenty two.
Sure we have several people in
room three oh nine who are in
support of.
Okay I'm going to start with
Chris bell's auto who is on line
and Chris you have two minutes.
Thank you.
I'm sorry we're starting
off.
Okay.
Chris but I'm sure I can you
hear me.
You madam chair on Friday
night skills over
those.
Fourteen dollars all taxpayers.
In this one Madam chair in.
R. I don't.
Okay.
One thousand dollars these you
thank you okay Chris you now
have two minutes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members the committee I'm
crystals on on the register
lobbyist on behalf of Roger
public schools and schools of
public schools
I have spoke with many a few in
person about this you should off
cybersecurity around our state
and our school districts
including the school district
that I represent we asked the
committee place to support this
policy this bill
something that is important we
all have heard stories watch
that you have spoke with the
superintendents are school
districts have been attacked
constantly.
we are working behind the scenes
not to make sure that yes has
the.
Funding that is required to be
placed on house due to
to be able to push this policy
implement this the school
districts for those reasons
please support this bill and
that's what you working to get
it and pushing this R. for
school districts thank you.
Thank you Chris we're going to
go to our next online speaker
Joe Escobedo.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee just so that's
where the with Albuquerque
public schools and we think the
representative for bringing this
forward obviously you've heard
the news about what we suffered
just a few weeks ago with our
cyber attack and appreciate the
efforts to continue the
conversation to ensure expertise
since part not all only all
eighty nine public schools are
school districts throughout the
state to but also all the
charter schools thank you so
much.
Thank you Joseph are next on
line is called.
Madam chair members of the
committee we just want to echo
the support that's already been
wants to this bill
you know when Albuquerque public
schools gets hit with something
like this they have the scale
and expertise on to respond in a
way that's very different than
what's possible for a charter
school where the majority of our
school districts which are
actually about the same size so
we appreciate adding some
capacity to this art to that to
the effort and believe that the
cyber security program can be a
budget public school thank you.
Thank you Matt we would like to
have maxed Baca speak online.
Thank you two minutes Max.
Yes Max Bach in New Mexico
highlands university and I'm and
I'm glad that this this
important topic is being brought
forward.
And university in the fall of
twenty nineteen.
Suffered a cyberattack we
brought awareness to this and
I'm glad the efforts have been
put forth on the state and I
think we're we're behind the
scale on this and we need to
move quickly on this because
more and more schools are going
to be vulnerable that's only
going to hinder our students and
I thank you very much for this
committee in the Sanchez.
Thank you Max now we'll go to
the people in room three oh nine
are you each have two minutes
please introduce yourself before
your comments thank you the
first person.
No one is commenting on this
bill three oh nine.
Okay.
It's forty three regarding on.
Thank you very much for
comments.
Next we'll go to questions.
From our members of our
community please raise your hand
if you would like to ask a
question or.
Get any clarification just a
reminder that this bill will
come back on Monday with the
mandates okay I'm Representative
Sweetser and then Representative
Lara Representative Sweetser
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow for
bringing this forward I just
wondered if you can give us a
hint as to what those amendments
are going to be are they
financial amendments are date
sensitive amendments just just
high level thank you thank you
madam chair I'll give my what I
know is gonna be part of it may
not be able to preclude any
school or charter from being
eligible and the way that it's
written it somewhat does so that
making sure that they know that
all are eligible that just you
know the the the numbers that
came here came from the people
who chose to participate in the
statewide task force or this
this group and and wanted to
come into the system but we're
going to make sure we change
language that's brought
the other part that yes there
are some technical issues do it
wants to take this on that we
would you explain that I'll go
ahead let my expert witness
explained that part the pros and
cons of do it versus the system
that's in place.
Madam chair.
Thank you thank you Rebecca and
madam chair members the
committee to that point is right
we're not it's not meant to
augment any school districts
charter school or a school for
the deaf school blinder anybody
is open for all this has to do
with the fact just I'm not
trying to confuse things but the
state education in that work
PSSA is working on that
broadband initiatives this this
has to do with fixing the
homework gap mentally which is
all part of the tire of the
logic stuff that we're doing
it's just it's just so complex
anyway but in order to actually
get a better handle on what
schools to go with what's how
would have broken out was just
based on the number of people
are going to commit to the first
person on the us and so that's
what a lot of numbers came from
is never meant to amend anybody
so to just want to clarify that
and to the other another part
now you're asking for do it
Department information
technology to actually run this
and what does make sense on the
surface for this to happen my
understanding is that the
department of correction
technology is not the fiscal
responsibility for K. through
twelve and handling that kind of
input and handling that however
I do want to point out that the
fact is that there is a
cybersecurity side so a bill
implies that actually might
start may work into that
direction this can't wait we
need the funding we need it now
so the idea is that if the cyber
security working with best
practices and things up been
going on throughout the state of
New Mexico do what is working on
their stuff PED that some of
their stuff with the rest sense
of stuff money last year and
identifying a lot of like I said
the pandemic and tracing yes and
then find that so the idea is to
get this in place today and
right away so if you used to do
it but think that due it would
be it's hard pressed at
currently to actually take care
of all the stuff with addition
other start responsibilities of
handling all the rest state
agencies I do like the idea of
having the common thread of
cyber security guidelines and
practices and so the.
We all make the same threshold
that are really outlined by the
federal the fed basically on
this and putting the stuff out
there's a couple several
agencies are actually doing this
kind of stuff in this has to do
with the requests the things are
combat which the president
Biden's infrastructure bills and
all that money so there's that's
that's totally different that's
that's stuff is designed for the
state in order to make these
things happen that's down the
road and that's great one in the
future years we can amend things
and try to try to get all under
one roof that why state once
again this can't wait so do it
at if they have the capacity to
make this happen which I don't
think they can't currently do
and it's not it's not practical
for that for them.
Thank you thank you madam chair
so and and Representative
Sweetser so that that the other
part and that is just making it
there it's questions on how are
you measuring standards are
missing options in it be to the
grant process and maybe that
wasn't clear me to talk more
about on Monday but through the
RFP process people would
demonstrate their ability to
measure and show their outcomes
from participating in the
programs so those are those are
the three things that I'm aware
of we wanna make sure aligns
with the federal guidelines with
the with the S. site with the C.
I. S. thank.
All right thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Lara
and the Representative Figueroa
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Dow
this bill is a very important
bill Centenario and I'm looking
forward to seeing amendments was
you know I we do need to be
inclusive of all of everyone but
that you know I I really support
the idea I really think that's
it's necessary because of the
school districts the LEDs are
need to have the ability and the
support to combat the state's
and so my my question madam
chair representative is for Mr
the rentals at this rules you
had mentioned earlier about
training.
Any is very important because
you know many of the issues that
are you see in our primarily on
a on a every day basis or
phishing emails and and and and
in my works Q..
Wondering how many of those
how many of the instances of
cyber security threats are a
result of phishing scams do you
what do you know what that is.
Representative Lara at in the
members of the committee go
ahead.
I'm gonna pass very very briefly
we if we were only given twenty
minutes.
Okay
What looks almost all of our
come into a phishing scams
ransomware in the in the dental
provide those that's all and to
that point training is one of
most important things and making
sure people are aware we do have
these programs available
currently within Rio Rancho
schools a lot of a school
district's public project but
those as well and it is part of
the cybersecurity analysis plan
and to have that training
available and Senate out
statewide as a as a ubiquitous
addressing that season.
Thank you thank you for that.
Mistrials and our manager I I
think that's really important
because you know some our
teachers will be receiving
station scams your lower volume
that their invoices late you
know and teacher opens up the in
that backed up that attachment
even though the teacher had
doesn't have anything to do with
an invoice they have nothing to
do with purchasing but they
still open up that email so I
think it's very important the
training aspect of it is is in
my opinion half the battle and I
hope there's a a lot of emphasis
on that tree aspect that's all I
have madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsor this is a crucial bills
and I agree with Representative
Lara that training is not going
to be a big part of it and
getting the entire educational
workforce on the same page and
trained in this this is a big
job in and of itself and that is
outside of that the technical
aspects you are talking about
accomplishing here
madam chair and sponsor you
you're gonna clarify the
districts thank you for making
sure that it's inclusive I think
you also need to define the term
either because you have eighty
nine school districts if all the
charter schools other could be.
Higher ed universities other
could be childcare education
preschools mothers could be
private schools what are we
talking about that need some
clarification.
Because it will affect I'm the
FIR as well.
So roll out in stages makes a
lot of sense but there's no
clarification I guess as to who
they will be it sounds like it's
an RFP process so it's whoever
steps up for the grant and you
just set a limit on capacity
year by year that seems to be
wide spread across three years
too I understand that correctly.
Madam chair and representative
yes no I'm taking your you
always are very good at
critiquing our bills I'm taking
lots of notes but yes that's the
intent and we don't know that
this is sufficient but what we
know is that for three years
even asking for the spending
every three years our school
districts have not had the the
ability to secure their systems
and for three years we've been
paying ransom or negotiating to
get students back online and so
when I saw that the at when we
we made extended and and full
day your round optional and it
looks like you know millions
tens of millions of dollars
became available that this is a
at will board because and we're
working on getting it amended
into the Senate so that it can
be recurring if this bill passes
it'll be recurring.
If this bill doesn't pass it'll
be one time.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow
I think it's it's a great time
to trying to go after this and
we need to do it between now and
Monday I hope you can clarify
the best and to do to do this
I'm leaning towards do it
because of their expertise the
broadband office things
happening there also for that
I'm going one point of contact
and final for federal funds is
gonna up west in our ability to
get those federal grants down
the road and if this is one time
funding I really want access to
that federal money do it is
working and over capacity but so
is PED and do it has the edge on
expertise some gonna ask that
you look really closely at at
putting it through that
department
and that's all madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa are there any other
representatives of questions at
this time.
Okay I see no I do have a your
comments and questions thank you
Representative Dow for
recognizing the urgency and
thank you Lee I know that you
participate on many committees
it's complicated because we have
PED we have the public school
school organizations we have to
do it and so I know that PED has
commented that they would truly
need more staffing to adequately
address this so I'm I'm
confident Rebecca Dow that you
have heard all that feedback in
making the amendments so I look
forward to seeing them this is a
statewide problem
we have our regional
educational
Collectives we have our
districts we have our charter
schools us forward to seeing the
amendments
If possible if if you do get
amendment if you can even make
sure we get it.
when it's ready so that if we
have any additional questions or
suggestions we can give them to
you would be great.
At thank you madam chair that's
a great recommendation we're
gonna do it as quickly as we
can.
Okay.
Thank you very much thank you so
much for being here and giving
so much of your expertise to our
analysts.
With that we're going to move to
the next bill house bill forty
three which is charter school
facilities I'm going to ask
Christine Trujillo.
To take over that share.
I'm and I'm going to ask that
Matt Paul.
Peter Russell be moved again as
my expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Good.
Let's go ahead and get started
Are you presenting madam chair
I'm madam vice chair.
Yes I am go ahead.
Let's see we need to move in
Marquita Russel and Matt Paul.
You're on your way to do that
right.
Yes G..
It's Marchi did their.
Yes.
Is call there.
I heard earlier Matt can you
raise your hand if he's on his.
Okay I'm I'm happy to introduce
house bill forty three it's a
charter school facilities and
what this bill does is provide a
mechanism for charter schools
that have already been renewed
their charters been renewed at
least once they've done to
audits so they've demonstrated
both effective academic results
and effective fiscal
responsibility however they need
a mechanism so that they can
address the acquisition of their
facilities and so what this bill
does it requires notification to
charter schools property
available for their educational
operations it allows school
districts to develop facility
prior prioritization I'm it
modifies the terms applicable to
requests from the public school
capital outlay fund for leased
facilities it specifies the
dates by which charter schools
must provide information.
I'm so that they can get funding
for property tax imposition and
I'm madam chair I have I have an
amendment and it's really
significant because it changes
some of the key issues of house
bill forty three as it exists
may I introduce the amendment at
this time.
Matt go ahead and introduce.
The amendment for discussion.
Thank you.
And I second go ahead.
And it's amendment two two two
two nine six point two.
This makes some significant
changes that's where we have
Marquita Russel for NMSA here so
that we can really do this right
in a way that doesn't take away
from existing funds so on page
one it is authorizing the New
Mexico finance authority to make
their charter school facility
loans creating the charter
school facility revolving fund
and report a required part so
this takes away.
Previously it was the in the
public project revolving fund
that's no longer there it
replaces section one
with creating the charter school
facility revolving fund
which is a new fund and then
there's some
if you read the amendment it
describes all the sections I'm.
All the aspects of section one.
So with that I stand for
questions on the amendment if
you have questions on the
amendment please raise your
hand.
I don't see any questions.
Go ahead.
Okay then can we move can we
vote on amendment.
Sure I move adoption of the
amendment.
Their second.
It
looks like Bryan Baca seconded
okay.
I don't see any opposition is
our opposition.
No go ahead.
Okay thank you.
Team and with that I'd like to
introduce Matt Paul and Marquita
Russel to make a few brief
comments and then will stand for
questions go ahead and start
Matt with that fabulous
mustache.
Thank you madam chair I normally
get not so nice things said
about my mustache I appreciate
that members of the committee
the bill the bill does a few
things here just want to dress
some of the some of the issues
that it's addressing one in
simplifying leases systems as
you'll see in the FIR and the
analyses this really makes it
easier for charter schools the
plan on how much funding that
they will have to.
We have schools that are
actively considering new
facilities on Indian speaking
about that move it's really hard
for them to know what what they
might how much revenue they
might take in I'm Lisa systems
by making this on a permanent
basis or all of the square
footage really helps them plan
for that it also takes away a
significant amount of
administrative burden for TSSAA
and we it we like that this this
whole process can run more
smoothly as the representative
and sponsor of the bill
mention on it creates the
revolving loan fund for charter
schools charter schools are able
to access capital awards through
the public school capital outlay
council however there are two
things that make it very rare
for them to be able to actually
access those on the first is the
folks that own the facilities
that they are leasing from they
rarely let their their their
facilities get in such yes
Representative here to allow
them to qualify on second we are
qualify for those capital awards
and secondly it's very hard for
charter schools to save up
enough money to have the local
match requirement that because
we don't have taxing authority
on the same way that school
districts you I'm so that
revolving loan fund provides
access on to those those same
funds and just allows charter
schools as public institutions
to get public funding for their
facilities where is now they
need to go to the private bond
market or two other states Bond
bonding authorities to be able
to pay for those so what's
happening is New Mexico dollars
are going out of New Mexico this
proposal keeps New Mexico
dollars here in our state.
Lastly it just creates more
transparency around on access to
facilities on that our partner
school districts have as well as
easier access to mill levy
dollars just to just to provide
one example there on there's a
new superintendent in Silver
City I think folks are excited
about him and that's a good
thing he got right to figure out
what the mill levy with look
like
for the schools and started
working with this board on that
the charter school and
historically been been operating
with the previous superintendent
or they would notify them at the
end of June in this case the
school district had already
figured out what they're what
they're asked would be and and
that charter school now isn't on
that that will let me ask.
We are flying the time lines
just makes it easier for
everyone to now thank you is the
deadline and and and and the
requirements that need to be met
so we think it'll enhance the
the collaboration between school
districts and charter schools of
which we have a lot of great
partners so I just want to
thanks though those school
district partners they had input
into the states that are put in
there on and then just thank the
sponsor and miss Russell I'm for
helping us provide a better path
forward what loan fund might.
Do you have any additional
comments.
I'm thank you madam chair I
think I would only mention that
the public project revolving
fund which is where these loans
for to be made from initially in
the original bill is really not
a very good vehicle for charter
schools because they don't have
a revenue stream that they can
pledge they have this lease
reimbursements that comes
through annually and that puts
them at a disadvantage in terms
of securing loans our bond
program which has been wildly
successful really is based on
our borrowers having access to
our during revenues those
revenues that can be pledged
like a tax stream or a general
obligation pledge the committee
pledged over many years charter
schools can only
a budget with revenues they have
available annually so that puts
them at a disadvantage in our
program the program itself was
set up in nineteen ninety four
and really isn't very easy to
maneuver to adopt to the
specific needs of charter
schools so our recommendation
was to move them out of the
public project revolving fund
and to put them instead in their
own fund where we could create a
mechanism to really serve the
unique needs of charter schools
and that's what this ammendment
does and we're really energized
by the thought of being able to
serve them
you know with the needs that
they have so with that I would
be happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you we go ahead before we
go to the public.
Madam chair we stand for
questions.
Okay I'm.
Are there any Molly or didn't
are there any folks on
underlying that would like to
make some comments.
Three three oh nine yes there
are.
Ask questions let's go ahead and
get started okay three oh nine
yes okay.
Now thank you madam chair
Representative go ahead
this doesn't touch anything.
X. three room three oh nine I
see your hand but I don't hear
you doesn't have any questions
just comments you know.
Supporting okay well they
couldn't comment.
Two minutes.
Yes.
Madam chair members.
Good morning.
First grade bilingual.
New Mexico international.
Plus policy balance can you hear
me OK yes.
The twenty twenty one image.
I thank the sponsors for
bringing forty.
Three point.
Mexico international school a
charter school in Albuquerque
the language of ours and and
trans disciplinary learning
school it's the heart of what we
offer in fact this week we had
another excellence award from
the language and culture
division for a bilingual
multicultural education program
but we had to do this and
facilities that require in our
administration and governing
council to go above and beyond
with ingenuity creativity and
scrapping as justifying real
estate.
Since our school was founded we
have occupied four different
campuses none of these
facilities were designed to be
schooled and into our current
campus lease agreements loomed
large with pricey rent to
private entities and while our
current campus can now better
accommodate our growing student
body we still need funding for
and take our maintaining the
entire facility not just this
basin we've converted into
classrooms to where the very
bodies of our students remain a
topic of concern with families
and teachers alike because our
playgrounds have always been an
asphalt parking lot and that
means so many scams maybe it's
really hard to learn when you're
wounded.
Better awareness of facility
availability and the ability to
take advantage of them can
really help keep more money in
our school districts instead of
private entities and also
fostering a culture a deeper
culture of collaboration among
our districts really underscores
the focus on education for all
the students in our area and the
more streamlined access to more
funding sources can ultimately
lead to more and better facility
conditions for our kids and your
skin's needs thank you again for
bringing this bill forward I
hope and different path thank
you.
Thank you and thank you all for
keeping it under two two minutes
and then to who is the next
person.
Thank.
Good morning.
More members of the committee
and go down about the two
thousand and eighteen New Mexico
teacher of the year by analyst
twenty nineteen New Mexico
people spell of the year and
current New Mexico T. policy in
your ballots I understand
educator at Marmion academy
charter school located in the
south valley of Albuquerque New
Mexico and I also served as a
board member personal all right
we do charter school I'm here in
support of house bill forty
three for as long as I can
remember I've always heard
children are our future this is
not just a motto we have to show
New Mexico students we mean what
we say our students deserve
access to safe quality
facilities to ensure the best
educational experience as
possible.
As an investment in our students
and staff is an investment in
New Mexico's Beecher thank you
for the spot thank you to
sponsors of this bill and thank
you for all of your time
commitment and investment in New
Mexico educational system.
Thank you next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
called to make happy in the new
teacher coach Albuquerque
collegiate charter school and
intervention teacher are you in
support of house bill forty
three as a teacher at a public
charter school I'm very aware of
the struggle to happen adequate
building public charter schools
receive substantially less
facility funding the traditional
public schools the facility
funding for charter schools does
not allow you to finance long
term homes for schools and does
not adjust to meet the needs of
growing successful school like
obligately charter school my
charter schools it's between the
family dollar in an inner marker
although in a shopping center
every day at recess I'm reminded
of our location when is the
loading dock we transform into a
playground there are days over
time not to smell the trash bins
and hopes it'll commence by
students four small open okay
does not exist what delivery
trucks pass through the narrow
space our playground and
neighboring family dollar they
pollute the air session ways I
struggle to raise my voice to be
louder than or screeching.
We would treat.
Industrial environment that
exists behind our schools in
dire reminder of the reality
that many charter schools based
on funding our facilities.
I'm a teacher I know my students
deserve to arrive a school
facility that reflects the value
we see in each and everyone of
them tricycles have established
that they can excel and create
like change directories for
students yeah continue to
struggle with funds for
facilities parents in search of
schools create a pathway to
college to look past the pigeons
and the state department lines
to do is go these high
expectations our responsibility
funding might finally have
bipartisan support your house
bill forty three which would
ease the process of leasing
constructing a purchasing a
building for new instincts and
charter schools our students
deserve a building that reflect
the value we there are education
I urge you to vote yes on house
bill forty three.
Thank you very much next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is hope
what I listen I'm the executive
director for teach plus New
Mexico I have the honor of
working with policy fellows and
network teachers across our
state this year are teachers
have identified different areas
a priority for spending and one
of those areas is to ensure
quality buildings for learning
more than two hundred of our
network teachers have signed
onto this letter and I want to
review the section for buildings
and learning.
Mexico students including
charter students should have
access to an educational setting
that is updated state and
inspiring current funding limits
opportunities related to
building maintenance expansion
and remodel particularly for
charter schools as one of our
member stated charter schools
have proven to be the best
choice for many families in our
communities funding for charter
school buildings will benefit
New Mexico students who
currently attend schools without
the same quality facilities as
students in traditional public
schools all students deserve the
same access to funds that will
enhance their educational
experience.
Funds should be available for
building upgrades that are
deemed essential for student
learning thank you madam chair.
Good morning go ahead members of
the committee I mean out of on
I'm the executive director New
Mexico kids can't I just want to
reiterate a couple of really
important point about this bill
one I think it's incredibly
pragmatic and then it takes
existing funds and transfers
them to a fund that would be
accessible to all public schools
so that the costs as low and the
impact is massive because it's
just incredibly unfair that some
of our students struggle to have
access to high quality
facilities and this is a very
smart pragmatic way to fix that
so I think the Sanchez and NMFA
for all the work they've done to
work on this thank you.
Thank you next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee reviewed the
Chavez I am speaking to you
today are interested and
involved parent of a student who
recently started to attend a
charter school here in Santa Fe
also I am the spouse of someone
who have dedicated their lives
to the education based in our
state and now also works at that
charter school we are due to
support SB forty three I don't
want to repeat anything that's
been said by the the main thing
educator for for me but we urge
you to support and I just wanted
to make sure that a voice of a
parent joined the conversation
thank you for your time.
All right turning this to
anybody else in the committee
that which the.
All right thank you.
So to our attendees in support
so Christy you have up to two
minutes good morning and with
welcome.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee and
thank you to the sponsor as well
my name is Christopher ideas of
eight OO I am the head
administrator at turquoise trail
charter schools here in Santa Fe
in this bill I stand in strong
support of this legislation and
I can speak directly to the
situation that this bill
addresses because we find
ourselves in this moment ours it
right now.
Are we are in a building that is
has been around since nineteen
ninety where the state's oldest
charter school and we are
currently trying to find a
pathway forward for a permanent
structure for our middle school
as it is as a as a sort of long
standing promise to our
community and in the process
I've become sort of a real
estate novice at least but have
found that most of the past
funding options for us exist
either with private banks or as
Mr Paul said out of state in my
strong preference as as a New
Mexico a citizen and as a person
who holds the task of stewarding
financial funds
our sorry state funds in the
highest to keep those dollars
here in the state this bill we
believe would give us a really
strong chance to be able to
update our facilities for our
students keep money keep dollars
in state and actually create a
situation that lives up to the
aspirations that we have for our
students so thank you so much
for your consideration of this
legislation we stand strong
support here to question thank
you right thank you.
How do good morning Patty
welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Representative Public Education
Commission district seven I
thank you madam chair I stand in
strong support of HB forty three
and the amendment as has been
adopted.
Charter schools lead the way in
innovation and creativity and
that should not encompass how
they provide facilities and how
they finance their facilities.
These are public monies and
these public monies should be
able to be our state in the
state and we support the the
concept of.
Money is not going to put
private entities and outside of
the the state charter schools
use up to forty percent of their
operational money for when you
take into consideration they're
least money and the two percent
setback for their authorized Sir
and it this is a matter of
access and equity as far as I am
concerned and charter school
should have the same ability to
have access to quality
facilities and we strongly
support the.
The least reimbursement being on
a permanent basis thank you very
much was again I stand in strong
support of this bill.
Thank thank you Mr.
Making me good morning thank you
of up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I join
you this morning as a parent of
two charter school graduates and
current charter school educator
and I'm here to advocate for
more stable and equitable
funding for charters including
access to lower interest loans
for purchasing and building our
own facilities and inclusion in
school district mill levy
allocations I have worked in
charters there were an old
office building the grocery
store so I know that this is
important and I support all of
the for the previous comments
that were made as well charter
should have also have access to
Bacon unused school building so
that cars can provide adequate
effective sustainable learning
environments for their students
in their communities finally
lease assistance for charter
should be based on the number of
students in our schools rather
than the square footage of our
buildings find more effective
planning and used for the
allocated funds that we are
given thank you so much for your
time.
Right thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to charity
morning Terry of up to two
minutes welcome.
It's good to be with this
committee this morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm Terry Cole
president and CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
if you believe the following two
things then we believe you
should support this bill number
one every child's public school
building should be safe high
quality learning environment and
number two no public school
should be forced to spend
operational dollars intended for
the classroom on rent payments
despite being public schools
through and through our charter
schools don't have equitable
access to facilities funding
fortunately we have tremendous
charter leaders who make the
best of this difficult situation
often locating in vacant
storefronts are old industrial
buildings families appreciate
the learning that happens there
even if the facilities are
subpar we need to fix the
situation provide more stable
and adequate lease assistance
and access to unused school
buildings and school district
mill levy questions whether in a
rural urban area in a wealthy or
low income neighborhood or in a
district or charter schools are
public school students deserve
to learn in a comfortable safe
space where dollars are spent in
the classroom where they belong
we urge your support thank you
good to be with you this
morning.
Great thank you.
Robert good morning Robert you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Robber you may need to a new.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee Robert
Beatty with Robert F. Kennedy
charter school
I'm twenty three years ago when
our case started we were in
those facilities that people
have been speaking about in two
thousand six from charter
schools were invited to
participate in the Albuquerque
public school bond our seven
schools that I participated of
the district the invested thirty
million dollars in those schools
I it's not or not R. K. still in
portables are more work needs to
be done this bill is the first
step of many steps that need to
be taken I have turned that ten
million dollars is not enough
I'm and that somehow Albuquerque
public school can continue to be
a partner are and that charter
schools should be included in
the Albuquerque public school
bond thank you an extended
strong support of this bill.
Thank you for.
Right Carrie good morning Kerry
of up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee Kerry
robin brindar registered
lobbyists with the Naka inspired
schools network we support house
bill forty three we think that
there's a couple of really
critical components of the bill
particularly the new calculation
from the systems which we
believe will create a lot of
stability for our schools moving
forward we also have a unique
perspective on obtaining
facilities for charter schools
that operate in rural
communities and believe that
having access to additional
capital from the New Mexico
finance authority will permit us
to have a better financing plan
for all of our schools moving
forward thank you so much Mr
chairman and we urge you to
pass.
Right thank you.
I don't see anybody else in the
list but is there any
opposition.
Opposition.
Going once twice all right sold
back to the committee so
Representative Lara yeah have
you on my list to go first good
morning.
Thank you Mr chair of thank you
for bringing this bill forward I
do have a question.
On the on page four of the bill
section F. R..
We're a again concerns a school
districts and have a concern
when we see here where's of
lying one fourteen fifteen so if
the facilities are currently
used for other educational
purposes shall make facilities
and may make land available for
lease.
Why are we mandating that the
school districts.
lease space to for charter
school.
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative lar
I'd like to have Matt Paul
answer that question.
Before we go to that then I
forgot to announce to the
committee were expected to be on
the floor at ten thirty so we
can just keep questions brief
and pointed as Representative
Lara has greatly.
Maybe an example of I appreciate
it thank you.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Lara on that
language on making a facility
available to charter school is
already on the books what's
what's added is the may make
land available and so what does
the real change on this one is
adding the land and it is a may
and that's pursuant to
discussions earlier discussions
with school districts
yeah that that is the only
change.
Okay thank you thank you Matt
thank you Mr chair so when
usually when we have our under
lying to language arts new
language that we're adding and
it says on page online.
fifteen it's is it shall make
facilities.
It says in an interview
continues as may make the land
available but it shall make
facilities so Mike my question
is is why are we mandating this
on the school districts to
offer.
To basically forced into offered
these these properties without
giving them the option or giving
the school where the option
where they want to do our our
and I'm just concerned that
we're removing that local
control.
Mr chair and representative
Laura thank you that great
question if you read the whole
section
it does say a school district
may develop a facility prior
prior to that so we're heard to
say privatization plan that
identifies which charter schools
may lease lease purchase for
purchase available school
district facilities so it really
has to fit into the district's
master plan it's not like I want
this property today it's more
like this is the school
districts five year plan and
does is that even appropriate at
this point for that facility to
be available and then you may
want to add something to that.
Yeah.
Mr chair and representative of
Lara I do hi I'm that language
is actually crossed out at the
beginning of the section that's
currently in line it says a
school district in which a
charter schools geographically
located shall provide a charter
school with available facilities
and so the advance what's in
statute now I I don't think the
adjustments to the language
changes that and to
Representative point you know if
if the if there is an imagined
you use for and I'm used to so
the district gets to hold that
reserves and not make that are
available.
Thank you for that matter thank
you Mr chair with the the very
first word online fifteen is
shall make.
Shall and that that that really
concerns me because I I don't
believe that the school
districts should be forced into
making that available maybe if
you were to change that sell
into may unite that building is
part of a pill for me to swallow
you know initially I was I was
leaning towards supporting this
because I think it's very
important to offer that type of
funding for the for the charter
schools but if we're gonna be
forcing our school districts to
to just give up buildings and
you know because because it's on
the plan I I I I just I don't
like that I I do I do believe
that it should be controlled
locally and that there the
school board should be deciding
whether they are going to the
south properties or not yeah and
I don't believe that state
should be making the school
districts do that and that's all
I have thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative out
please.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative for
bringing the bill I am really
looking forward to voting yes
destroy your your hang on one
second thank you your I'm it's
long overdue these are public
school students they should be
treated but with with equity to
other students and that's the
funding needs to be equitable so
I think this is a great step in
the right direction I'm so proud
of our charter schools across
the state that are serving a
majority of low income at risk
kids children of color parents
are having options and they're
they're choosing schools that
meet their children's
educational needs thank you to
the innovators at these
institutions and for the work
that you're doing to help our
students reach their fullest
individual potential for their
educational outcomes and I'm
just looking forward to
supporting the bill it should
have happened a long time ago
thank you.
Great thank you Representative
other questions comments from
committee.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair I just I
think maybe I need a point of
clarification to on the points
that Representative Lara brought
up because if I.
So if you look at that paragraph
Beth.
I see make sure if I'm reading
this right because a buy it if
you let's say this bill does not
pass.
The language that struck through
would remain in statute is how
I'm reading this and it looks
like it's already showers that
is that correct.
Mr chair and representative lane
yes.
Okay so Mister chair and then I
I don't think this bill this
bill takes facilities to the
shell category I think it's
thirty bear I think what it if I
understand this language
correctly it's it's now adding
in the real estate if you have
bacon on occupied real estate
it's now a may option is that's
how I understood the bill is
that right.
Mr chairman Mr presented.
Representative Lang yes when I
read it thoroughly and talk to
to the APS charter school
director
who works for APS and works with
the charter schools that it's
not something the charter school
cannot come and say I want that
it's empty the district in the
boards have to determine what
truly is available and what is
not available it's not the
charter schools decision it's
the district's decision to
determine what facilities would
be available.
Do you want to add anything.
Well stated.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
project clarification.
Right thank you Representative
Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair Mister chair
I'm not finding in the share
file an FIR with the amendment
and the amendment is a
substantial change in how these
financial mechanics are going to
work and I would feel more
comfortable if I had some
analysis on that is it somewhere
else that you could direct me
to.
Representative I believe the FIR
start prepared with stale itself
and they're not prepared because
we have been adopted any sort of
amendment prior to committee so
they wait till the amendments
are adopted because they're just
proposed they're not accepted by
the committee.
Mr chair I have sent the
amendment to both LFC and LESC
but that is one reason why we
have miss Russell here it may be
miss Russell you could address
the financial aspects that
Representative Figueroa is
asking about.
Please mistrustful thank you for
joining madam chair I'd be happy
to I think the the issue that
exists is that the way that the
law currently reads without the
amendment that NMFA already can
make loans charter schools
within the public project
revolving fund that exists so
that's not an issue the problem
is that it is a theoretical it's
the radical access because our
program is structured are bonded
program is structured in such a
way that it doesn't really
provide the kind of funding that
charter schools need so so while
it exists again in law they are
eligible under the public
project revolving fund the
mechanism really doesn't exist
for us to make these loans
because we're subject to such
appropriation risk and frankly
land value risk of so the by
creating a program outside the
PPRF we're not handcuffing the
unique needs of charter schools
with our bond indentures so this
allows us to structure a program
that serves the actual needs of
the charter schools without
having to take into
consideration bond indentures
are almost thirty years old.
Mr chair and and Marquita thank
you I am really clear on that
public the.
Revolving fund does doesn't work
for charter schools and why it's
it's got all the strings and
it's just not set up to serve
them well so we're making
something new where's the money
coming from to make something
new.
Mr chair if both Madden market
can address that Matt.
Representatives Mr chair
The amendment actually takes out
The appropriation and the and
the reason for that is you know
the fight for funding will still
happen on the Senate side with
the with the budget being over
there but the policy changes in
a place to put the money are
important at aspen as they stand
the original proposal and and
hopefully one that will be
looked upon favourably by the
Senate is to transfer public
school capital outlay council
funds over to address those
funds were designed for public
school facilities but we we've
only had one charter school ever
get access to those awards funds
and that's why we.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
Paulette what I needed to know
where's the money coming from I
didn't know if miss Russell meet
miss gonna be moving out of
something else and NMFA or
exactly where so the assumption
is it's going to eventually come
out of the public school capital
outlay fund I'm gonna ask then
something brought up by by one
of the folks giving public
testimony where does the figure
ten million come from how do we
know it's enough to do the job.
Mr chair and then if you can
address that.
I'm sure Mr Chairman
representative is to grow it's
not a not necessarily to take
care of everyone on but it's a
start on we have sure school
facilities are very inexpensive
compared to what our
expectations are surrounding
facilities for our traditional
public schools you know when a
new elementary school is built
right now it's kind of along the
order of around twenty million
dollars on charter schools do it
for for you know somewhere
around I and and you know we we
we make some sacrifices in that
but it but it's it's less
expensive what would we have a
number of schools that are well
into their lease purchase
agreements and some of the
principle that they own is
actually quite small and they
and they may only over a million
dollars or two million dollars
so this in million
Representative the the potential
to have words of you know seven
to ten schools participate so
there could be one loan that's a
larger dollar amount and I think
all of that should be fill up
the million dollars would
justify future asks to put more
money into the full.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr Paul so in a sense this is
just a number we picked because
we thought we could do it and
it's a good start may change
later depending on how it works
and how effective it is but it's
just a number at this point not
calculated based on the number
of charter schools we have or
the number of charter students
versus the overall school
population it's just a number
okay got it last question is
about the audits
the language if I'm reading it
correctly says that applicants
must have gone through to audit
processes but it doesn't really
say anything about.
Who is value waiting those
audits what if the audits are
positive
it just says check the box to
audits were done and I'm
wondering if Mr chair is miss
Russell might answer is looking
at those on it's going to be
part of the application process
on the NMFA and and how is NMFA
going to communicate with PED to
ensure the other criteria in law
are met.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative so currently yes
we will review the audits of
what the finance authority will
look at as it does with all
other loans is the the chances
of success for the for the
project to be completed and so
we are looking at the revenue
streams are coming and making
sure that we're not over taxing
the schools
ability to operate by using more
than just their lease
reimbursements to repay the loan
so that's a critical part we
don't want to have a pretty
building but use all of their
operating funds in order to
support that pretty building so
that's a critical part of us and
we look at the the audits for
the schools to ensure that they
have the right systems in place
to operate that school to
operate the facility on a long
term basis we do that with all
of our entities now we also
currently
touch base with PED on all our
other schools transaction so
when we.
Purchase a general obligation
bond issued by school district
into our public project
revolving fund we also check
with PED to see if there are any
concerns about that particular
school district when we do this
make loans to public bodies we
check in with DFA so we already
coordinate with these regulatory
authorities and an oversight
authority so that we understand
of the the status of the entity
that were about to lead into.
Thank you and thank you Mr chair
my last comment is going to be
about we already know you're
going to have more applications
for these funds then you have
the funds available to
distribute so your application
and your prioritization process
that you build out the NMFA is
going to have to be carefully
done as it always is it
beautifully executed as it
always is but this will plan to
some factors that maybe our
normal for NMFA in terms of not
just the financial situation of
the school like you talked about
but also at.
I mean how it considering the
length of service quantity of
students sermon at that
educational outcomes being
achieved there and there are a
lot of factors in there that are
a little unusual so thank.
Wish you luck developing those
rules and I hope you're
collaborating as you always do
with PED and entities that will
help with those aspects that are
outside of the usual NMFA brown
thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you Representative.
Further questions comments from
committee.
I'm.
I'm sorry I would say that I
move would do passed all right
so we have to pass much more
Representative Trujillo can I
have a second and then all
pocketed for a moment I'll
second it Mr chairman thank you
Representative Sweetser some in
a pocket for a moment
well I guess kind of my closing
remarks before we and I accept
that promotion I want to thank
you Representative Garrett
Meister Garrett
Mr Paul mistrustful on on on
really working on this this is
something that since the bill
was dropped certainly are
committee analysts have done a
wonderful job as well in really
doing a deep dive into to this
bill and making sure that I
think we get it right because
we've had on this issue as a lot
of the the members in the
audience that pointed out for
for charter schools and getting
them into public buildings which
is I think one of the the main
efforts though there are still
struggles with that certainly
three public school capital
outlay our our task force is is
something that we can keep an
eye on this as well as the the
council and the counselors
themselves into the future but I
I certainly want to thank you
all for for the changes that you
all made
To the bill I think we have some
things that a lot stronger and
something to definitely build
off from here
and and with that all except the
motion from Representative
Trujillo the second by
Representative Sweetser
and madam secretary if we can
call the roll on a do pass
motion on house bill forty three
as amended.
Yes.
Representative
Chatfield yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
You love all come from yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Well zero.
Right panic unanimous vote you
have a do pass on house bill
forty three and cement that
thank you all so much.
Community.
Thank you everybody.
Right.
Great work for today everybody I
appreciate it thank you
Representative Garrett thank you
Representative Trujillo for
pinch hitting this morning
so we will meet again at eight
o'clock on Mondays so look for
to a few bills so we will not
have a Saturday again we will
not have a Saturday ADA for the
third consecutive weekend
but we do have for sorry that's
out of my hands so we have full
floor session now at ten thirty
so please keep a look out for
the agenda for Monday but will
meet and reconvene right here.
At eight o'clock Monday morning
thank you everybody we'll see
you on the floor when I first
heard it.
