Vice chair erit
chairman here.
We got a couple more so it looks
like we do have a quoom so will
start off house building one
twenty three represent cates
represent but a hon good morning
good morning chair and good
morning members of the committee
i'm represented kathleen kates
and i'm here to present house
bill one two three
I would this is a very simple
bill
that follows already in existing
process with our public
libraries to create their own
paul processes and policies
that are based on the library
bill of rates you have to hand
out some front of you so you
know with the library bill of
rates and i'd like to introduce
my consponsor and expert
witnesses will start off with
representative.
Good morning mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is casino but a hun and I sit
next to you every day and i'm
excited about this bill because
it will ensure that i'll public
libraries in new mexico remain
open and inclusive spaces.
Thank you.
Representatives my name is
valery ni I am the library
director at santa fe community
college i've been working in
libraries professionally for
thirty years and have been
working on intellectual freedom
issues for the last twenty I
just want to give a short
statement about
professional librarianship and
why this bill is important to us
intellectual freedom is a
foundational value for americans
and professional library work
librarian for the library and
profession includes a core
belief that all people should
have the freedom to access
information they need and went
regardless of their age
education at the city language
incomes or physical barriers
librarians don't just provide
material to and services to the
most educated in our community
or the loudest voices or to
those people who love our
libraries we serve everyone.
And my brains purchase material
for our communities based on our
budget constraints and the
analysis we do to understand our
communities we rely heavily on a
reviews and
professional magazines and
journals to make our decisions
this bill will help us
add strength to our policies
and.
Mr chair good morning good
morning my name is you like an
am to stay librarian of new
mexico.
We are happy to support this
bill you think the sponsors for
for bringing it
I have the pleasure of working
with
many wonderful public libraries
across the states and this bill
will recognize that they are
well positioned to make
decisions based on their deep
knowledge of their community
and they represent with their
collections and declaration of
their collections the full
diversity of their community and
we stand ready as should this
build pants to align our
administrative codes you
meet the needs of this statute
thank you very much.
Thank you mister chair and think
you member so once again house
bill one two three is a very
simple bill it just states what
we are already following in
public libraries throughout the
state that i'm libraries will
need to follow written processes
and procedures
are based on the library bill of
rights the bill takes a step
further saying is that they
don't follow their own processes
and procedures they will lose
their state funding and we rest
for questions
thank you so before we go for
two questions from committee
will go to our audience if
you're on our zoom and you wish
to speak in support of house
bill one twenty three if you
would please indicate by raising
your hand on zoom
well if that populate so again
our zoom folks if you would in
which you speak in support of
house bill one twenty three
please into keep a reason your
hand or wait for their to
populate will go to our audience
on my right hand side those part
of house bill one twenty three
all right so awesome we
appreciate you being here you'll
have up to two minutes but as I
was safe refers better so please
those in our first row.
Sir you have two minutes welcome
to the
family member that you tell you
mexico
that library books
I haven't admitted into this
issue sometimes I started my
senior year high school studying
for finals was interrupted when
a group attempted to more public
by that is my mess
for me please book challenges
that party product people
colored my clear indication for
an eight more visceral in
harmful direction this carified
policy adopted
was therefore states that
largely what libraries in our
state are you doing fighting to
stay lost as a representative
funding this bills are common
sense matter they recognize
everybody's right to read what
they want to learn what they
want to do this bill
specifically is a powerful tool
for me coming from a two l plus
family it recognizes that my
family is just as valid
in the freedom to read the
version of our stories and
continue on this ground breaking
work in this endeavour of a
nation
twenty three it's just one way
to do that we ask you to send to
for this.
Not really this bill.
Thank you others in that first
four row that was speaking.
No no sorry we'll head to the
next or members welcome you have
up to two minutes center shadow
library director in los angeles
and i'm also could share the
limit and mexico library
association legislation
committee i've been doing this
for twenty nine years and.
We go through and we look at our
needs assessment uh to look at
what our community is like.
And we want to make sure
whenever patrons come in the
door that they're able to see
themselves in the books that we
carry.
So you know whatever people are
banning.
Read off on less ultimate was
actually challenged and that's
such a culturally significant
book here in new mexico.
And you know it's things like
that but our collection
development policies also
protects both sides of issues.
So somebody can come in and
challenge the bible.
And the way we have it.
Set up we protect both sides and
have the issues like that.
Where we're looking at both
sides of the issues and hot
carrying books for everybody so
we i'm asking you guys to
support this bill
thank you or there is a network
sir please you have up to two
minutes to tear committee
members i'm just sabitating the
other co chair of the library
association legislation
committee in the new mexico
library association does support
the scroll.
Um I worked for thirty five
years in the all the kirky
barely county library.
And uh was involved in the
selection process is there
which.
As broadest as a city indicates.
We're what we offer is driven by
what are patrons are customers
you go to the website of the
other car key library today
there is a late where you can.
Ask us to ask the public library
to buy a particular book that
you know so.
We are very conscious of our
communities
now regardless of how
supposedly liberal or
conservative you think you are
community is.
You are in that community going
to help the whole ray of.
Religious sexual cultural
racial diversion.
They'll be somebody in there in
your community and either end of
those spectrums and the
deserve to have access to
knowledge so that they can know.
What's with the other parts of
the community.
So I would convince a house bill
want twenty three do you thank
you for your attention.
Thank you others in that similar
there's nobody else now.
The next row there's a wish
speaking sport alright sir he
have up to two minutes please
german members of committee
gender trip AFT n mexico in
october eighteenth participated
in the american library
association backbooks we can one
thing that we heard from
educators from across the state
was there students desires to
act
spoke to them and the things are
meaningful to that in their
lives and so we found librarians
in our public schools from
across the mexico setting up
books we displayed encouraging
students to pull something off
the shop that maybe they haven't
bought it before or maybe that
they were unaware of so we're
here in support of this but this
bill today
are boston
so that when our students go
outside of the place of
education they have the same
access to four breasts of
information and knowledge even
when we don't necessarily agree
with what is available to that
we want that free and open.
Great.
Others in that road that wish to
speak and side in sport police
man you have up to two minutes
welcome
hi i'm a little bit of my two.
But i'm also a former executive
director of the american library
association so i've been
involved
around the country for a long
time
and recently in the last few
years libraries have been saying
that.
Read freely.
And so while we welcome
everything all the things that
they w.
The.
We don't t.
So I hope you remember this.
Great thank you others in that
road that was speaking sport.
Alright we'll head to the next
row which I think is the last
throw any they wish to speak in
sport house but one twenty
three.
Alright we'll move to my left
hand side the first four road
those that wish to speak in
sport.
Alright the next row right now
you have a two minutes welcome
can tell which row you are at we
start skipping around
the
chair thank you for bringing
this bill for wording I think
you representatives you work on
the spell development condition
here and i'm not standing today
before he has registered mobiles
but as a bookstore owner of an
independent bookstore now new
mexico I grew up with only being
a large read one book and that
was a bible in our house so I
found myself in library studying
and reading anything I could get
my hands on so a lot of that did
my parents because then i'm
going to have no store
anyway so
last year and twenty twenty
three according to npr nineteen
hundred titles were banned
throughout the country nineteen
in one year
so I stand in strong sport of my
librarians my brothers and
sisters and literature and have
really wanted I wanted to open
the store to bring diverse
titles in diverse authors in so
that when someone comes in that
they are there they could
explore things that that may not
be familiar to them and so in
any book that I don't have I
would recommend the library or I
would order their back so I I
really am apart at what is going
on across the country will
criminal my criminalizing my
brain towing puts and closing
these doors for students to be
able to read these read box and
in their good flex so I support
this bill and i'd like to think
responses for bringing it
forward thank you madame mister
chair great thank you others in
that same old sir you have two
minutes welcome thank you
represent my name is garett
hosteller i'm public libraries
works in he's international
district but today i'm all here
representing myself I work in
libraries with service areas of
three thousand two million.
I support this bill because
we'll help protect libraries
from partisan political pressure
to exclude books that would
otherwise be available.
I support this bill because of a
whole librarians remain places
to have something for everyone.
No places where a few people or
even a noisy group decided what
everyone should not read
I hear some people say well
that's the end of the dogs but
what about kids what about teams
I can't library stick to having
books in those sections that all
parents all of their kids
thirteen reading the whole time
that they're in the age group.
Well good luck with that
we expect parents possible
preparating their families to
with a judge best we like ready
respect to all families.
Great thank you others in that
same rather wish speaking sport
has gone through.
Alright so go to the next row
does it wish speaking.
Alright the following row all
right ma'am you have up to two
minutes welcome good morning
chairing members of committee my
name is not just some queer
lucky name one living in the
order lands
i'm also the daughter and
several retired educate
educators in order lens area
last crucials native and current
passive residents been coming
and either science or a two book
series starling dante about two
young people on a journey itself
discovery and he did that
because he didn't feel soon or
reflected on the library shelves
growing up in mass when I
listened to the audio books I
felt seen and I fell in the with
them they are now.
The books were set at a school I
literally went to and the very
neighborhood
it unpacked issues of chicken
and fortunate identities the
complex in loving relationships
and anti queer violence.
All of that took decades to pack
but from my kids and other kids
growing up day had the
opportunity now to start that
journey way earlier because they
are reflected in the books on
the shelves of the public
library with that can not happen
without legislation like one
twenty three great thank you
others in that same relationship
to be pleased man me over two
minutes welcome
my name is everything else.
Yeah.
I think that libraries are.
The.
Like this.
As the product.
Is what it is and thank you.
Great thank you any others in
that same road that was speaking
the next throw back
please you have up to two
minutes welcome good morning mr
chairman members of the
committee.
My name is look at you and I am
the director of equity and
culture at conservation borders
in mexico as conservation as we
believe that all people
especially don't people but
access design to be information
a selection of theories and non
backs to an end.
The legislation affair that's
access to signed up not with a
young people who will be tough
and ensure no single ideology
can control what our community
can see.
Great thank you others in that
same role please you have up to
two minutes of
mister members
active director quality new
mexico.
I'll be take your young people
growth leaving we are isolated
that we are broken that we are
the only ones like us even with
support of parents and families
like I had we can have an
incredibly difficult child in
back to forty percent of us try
our artist not just surviving to
adult because of these feelings
one of the most helpful things
for me when I was a young person
with access to supported plus
and
that
people like me everywhere and
these were things that my
parents could not found on their
own in my world and quality the
mexico we believe that all
people deserve access to the
information
regardless of our identity
our ideology
hard.
Thank you any others and that
seem earlier which speaking
sport.
Alright the final roaders which
speak in sport
all right anybody that was
speaking sport rates in nine
will go to our folks online so
folks online please be ready
emily
good morning emily you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee i'm among well
down with new mexico voices for
children we think the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
this morning it's pretty clear
from the testimony that
libraries are really important
to our communities ensuring that
they are protected so they can
maintain diverse collections
that really reflect the full
human experience is critical to
improving racial engineer equity
in our communities so we asset
the committee join us and
supporting the spelled today
thank you
thank you.
Linda good morning window you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Thank you very much i'm glad to
sign clear i'm the president of
the friends of the thomas
branding him a more library in
los cruces and I support this
bill because I think it helps
protect libraries in librarians
by demonstrating the support of
the state of new mexico per
having libraries continue just
sir as a safe public space for
the diverse population of new
mexico I think that public
libraries are very important
because they are especially
valuable to people of limited
financial meanings and so by
protecting libraries so they can
continue to develop collections
that speak to a variety of
people with a variety of diverse
interests that helps.
People of every economic level
it also makes a big difference
for people whose would not have
the opportunity to purchase
these kinds of materials for
their children thank you very
much
thank you my rate will go to
susan's ipad hello citizens i've
had you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Susan are you with us.
Will give it a moment susan.
But will go to carol.
Yes good morning my name is
carol bray I am currently the
quality of life director for the
city of last cruises although I
am speaking from my own point of
view this morning as a member of
the new mexico library
association past legislative
chair and also a past president
of the american library
association I worked as the
director of the thomas brandican
memorial library from nineteen
ninety six to two thousand and I
have maintained close tyres to
my beloved state of new mexico
and tell my return in twenty
twenty two
state is one that celebrates our
diversity and that must be
reflected in our public library
collections the libraries are
open to all and this is
something that we must maintain
here in last cruces we have
reviewed our collection
development policy we have good
procedures in place to review
any complaints and we totally
support or I totally support
this bill thank you for the
opportunity to speak you today
great thank you it will go back
to susan I saw that you muted
susan are you there.
No susan if you're unmuted we
still can't hear you.
The.
The.
All right so we'll go to lucas
and we'll try to sort out susan
but look as good morning you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you chair
thank you to the committee for
hearing this my name is lucas
turned in I am the energy policy
director for progress down new
mexico however i'm here today
speaking as a parent of a high
schooler in los crucials new
mexico
and as a member of our last
cuses public schools book band
review committee
in was cruises there was an
attempt at the school level to
be books from a library and
parents were selected at random
to serve on a committee and I
was chosen the reason I bringing
this up and I understand that
this bill is dealing with our
public libraries but that's the
point
there are attempts currently
happening in this state two band
books at school libraries and
you know other places around the
state and so now it's more
imperative than ever that we do
whatever we can to protect
access to all kinds of
literature for everybody not
just our kids of course but
specifically for them.
I will just say very briefly as
an antique doubt that as a
member of the committee I had to
read the book in question and
I will tell you it was a young
adult marvel but it brought me
deters because
had that book been around when I
was a kid it would have it would
have saved so much heartache and
hurt that I have gone through
in my life because there were
just nobody to ask nobody was
talking about these kinds of
things
books are powerful and words are
powerful and you you all today
have have such an opportunity to
ensure that you know other kids
have those opportunities you
know no matter where they live
in the state and have access to
all kinds of amazing literature
at their public libraries you
know let's keep it that way
thank you so much.
Thank you
susan are you there.
Alright doesn't seem so we'll go
to elizabeth morning it was with
you of up to two minutes
welcome.
Hi my name is elizabeth aster
and I would i'm a parent.
I'm also an anthropologist and
i'm not from new mexico but i've
lived here for thirty years
and I raised a child here and
the wonderful
holdings in all of our libraries
in schools the wonderful state
library a place revenue
professional academic research
and local libraries in many of
our little communities my
favorite being the library and
hamas springs new mexico and I
would just like to say that as a
parent and as a professional
scholar that I think it is a but
most importance that we keep our
libraries
open and available and if there
is a need to remove something
from the shelves we go through a
process such as the process that
is supported by this bill I
think the people who have
brought it forward for doing so
and I just would like to read
everyone with a reminder because
these bands that are
contemplated or attempted
ten to be a wide the lines of
partisan college and religious
affiliations but the very first
book that was ever banned ever
in history of our world was the
bible I hardly support this bill
and again I am deeply grateful
that it's been crap forward I
think it's
up most importance
thank you.
All right is there anybody else
in resume that we're speaking
support.
Susan
maybe the last opportunity.
Alright.
Okay so you will go to the
audience for opposition is there
any opposition to husband when
twenty three in our audience I
wish to speak.
All right is there any
opposition to house bill one
twenty three on our zoom that
we.
Seeing
nine week will come to
committees to represent madrid
your first one.
Thank you mister chairman and
and thank you for this bill this
is a very important bill that I
can tell you makes it somewhat.
What I think is coming since
with a mistake and now I can
tell you from personal
experiences working too have a
library built
in my first year was the first
bill I passed and people said
why do you make it a bill I said
because I wanted nobody to stop
me from getting this liberally
done and I made it along so I
was strong proponent to the idea
you know it's as she said if
you're free your free to read
what you want to read and I
think we have to preserve that I
think there is a process of net
of what we need to have this in
this legislation to help refine
anything might be in question
and I hope that we always
remember that the reading of a
book is the most enrichening
thing you can do to the mine it
preserves it
escalates it and as we get older
it's a real necessity I think to
have libraries in our existence
and remembering that those are
one thing the exercises the mind
most along reading and I say it
because we can't control it
can't stop everything we can
certainly have the freedom to
pick a book of our choice in
this day and aids now with
libraries i'm looking at even
books online you know that can
be done and it's a proficiency
of our times that lets us have
this capacity so I hope and I
employ the body of our of this
committee to give strong
consideration of that
understanding we're not
invoicing anything but
maintaining a freedom of speech
to be able to pick and choose
what we want to read in a
lightner minds thank you oh.
Presenters for this
representatives thank you for
bringing the support thank you
sir
representative
thank you mister chair thank you
sponsors for bringing this
forward I deeply appreciate this
legislation I think books safe
lives are on many different
levels and
I remember as a teenager I
really wanted to go see this
movie as called his summer place
and it was about teenage love
and I was very interested in the
time about that at fifteen and
my mum wouldn't let me and so I
said well.
The next day I said could you
just take me to the library
everyone spend that day and need
to do some research it was
summer time and so she said she
read she took me to the library
and of course I checked out that
book and spent the whole day
reading it
I have to say we have one of the
best little libraries in him
buddle in in dixons called the
ambulance valley library has won
a national award under president
bush for a point of light it's
really got national recognition
it's a great little library of
course they have started a bam
the book a reading club.
I at index and so I can hardly
wait to get out of here and go
during that then the greeting
claim so that's all I have to
say except thank you for
bringing this legislation for it
may hear representative about
coming up
thank you mister chair and think
you both and everyone here that
supporting this legislation I
have a couple of personal points
stories that I want to talk
about
I grew up spending every summer
from
from the beginning of great
school all the way through high
school at this summer at the
summer programs at the library
and our personal personal public
library my parents felt so
strongly about as being immersed
in reading and whatever it was
they provided for us to this day
the home that I inherited from
them as you when you walk into
the home you walk into the
library.
The first room and the mother
had its convert it into a full
library and has a fireplace and
it's a comforting room and that
still is and we still use it the
live of my little grandsons that
are now living there.
The little one year old when I
walk into the house he comes
running to greet me none not
none of my non scaring a book in
their bedrooms they have
bookcases and box
as you can tell i'm a mister
chair and about supporter of
reading and the importance of it
I also want to mention that
I was invited to the american
library association in the early
eighties to make a presentation
I was invited as a chicana.
Community activist to talk about
the importance of not just
ethnic studies but the
importance of incorporating
the literature.
The chicken it you can
literature in.
Every aspect of everything that
we did
but how to fill the gap that was
the most important point how did
in the eighties how do we fill
the gap of this important litter
train our libraries because even
then as a part of economics
mister chair
there were still
there was an attempt at the
national level to it wasn't
called banned but to limit.
The amount of public occasions
and she can on to cannot let
literary writers were having
difficulty first publishing
their works and then having them
avail made available and so that
was a tat hat topic in the early
nineteen eighties so I wanted to
mention that and finally better
philly on failing
with an internationally
renounced scholar was my member
from the very beginning he was
the person responsible for.
Insuring that I am followed my
educational
aspirations he wrote every
single letter of recommendation
for me to enter into my.
Graduate school masters program.
And i'm so grateful that he was
able to write my letter for my
phd i'd message here at your
name and he was in english
scholar he was a used to say he
was that she cannot from chicago
which was very rare
at at the time and and still is
anti madame huge contribution
and he's the one that actually
invited me to address the
american library association
this was a huge honor for me.
My brother mister chair is a
library
he's at the university level you
tap utios done and now at the
university of california son
bernardina.
So books and libraries and
access have been an incredible
influence in my life and it's
spilling over into the life of
my grandchildren and my children
they still read they give us box
for every holiday we celebrate
mister chair rays models instead
of really christmas we celebrate
the feast of smuggles and it's
been our tradition to just get
books and so we still receive
books so yeah I think it's
really important for us to.
Fight back.
Against efforts.
To control.
The way we live what we.
Read
how we express ourselves.
It's an imposition in an
infringement on the very basic
rights human rights that we have
it's humans and so this effort
is incredibly important because
we have to send a very strong
message and that strong measure
message we have an obligation as
legislators to do that so thank
you very much mister chair thank
you to the sponsors with this
bill
thank you representative
thank you mister chair thank you
representatives for bringing a
sep profound differences and how
any given individual looks at
any.
Given book I mean we have the n
word and hockey bearing fine
that made some people remove it
I just I carry this book with me
it is the story ruby bridges
about a six year old who for a
year walked past angry white
parents because and she was the
only student for a great deal of
that time a parent successfully
banned it in both school and
public libraries in tennessee
maybe other places so I just I
carry with me as a symbol of
what manning books mean so thank
you for bringing this bill and I
support it thank you represent
corolla
thank you mister ship I move a
motion to pass for our house be
one twenty three
so we have a due pass motion on
house but one twenty three by
representative a second player
representative madrid um ma'am
secretary colorado in dupas.
Yes.
Yes.
Buys chair parents yes.
Chairman yes.
All right by a vote of age
seriously ever do person house
bill one twenty three thank you
thank you alright thank you
great so we will move committee
to senate bill seventy six so I
am presenting that
madam vice chair
expect english
really hard please take any
conversations outside so we can
go to the next bill.
Okay our next bill is senate
bill seventy six school local
share adjustment waiver and
chairman romair will be
presenting it great thank you
madame chair good morning
everybody so senate bill seventy
six is really to
change a unforeseen mistake as a
result of senate bill one thirty
one the public school capital
outlay
over all that we had passed as a
body last year
part of the issue was is that in
order for some of our smaller
school districts to get the
local match they were having to
raise their property taxes which
was an unforeseen air so senate
bill seventy six would seek to
correct that's of some of these
school districts on their five
of them impacted would not have
two raiser property taxes in
order to get their local match
for their capital projects and
madam chair I do have time but
i'm senior policy analysts with
the legislative education steady
committee with me to answer any
sort of technical questions that
there may be but with that madam
chair will stand for questions.
Thank you chair
going to go to the audience is
there anybody and support of the
bill.
Please start.
Good morning chair members of
the committee literally our
teeth
on where the rescue school
association and i'm sure school
school for social support
and reduction of.
Cancel for several years
supported so last year
session which was direct.
Consequence as was mentioned was
also it was created and lives of
twenty twenty three made some
school districts and eligible
and this bill so
I just thought the waver
priteria that will correct.
We strongly support this will be
asked for your son consideration
and ask you to move forward and
we think the sponsor working
with the.
I'm thinking so much thank you
anybody else on this side who
like to speak in support of the
bill.
Okay anybody on this side like
to speak and supported the bill.
It will go online is there any
anybody online who would like to
speak and support of sp seventy
six.
The.
Case see nobody is there anybody
in the room who would like to
speak against the adoption of
speech seventy six.
Is there anybody online who
would like to speak against the
adoption of senate bill seventy
six.
He would go to the committee is
there anybody on the committee
who has questions.
I will be too passed.
Can we have a move to
a two passed from representative
laura second from representative
headed a is there any opposition
to adopting senate bill seventy
six
senate position we have a due
pass for senate bill seventy six
thank you and we'll move now to
the school board training.
Bill.
Representative and more in hind
please.
Thank you thank you
mister chair I
i'm proud to present speed one
thirty seven before this
committee this bill is really
about transparency it's about
transparency with our local
school boards and and really
help how we help them how we
help them get the training they
need to understand you know
budget sir
and newly elected school board
member it takes a lot to
understand a local budget of
thirty five to whatever millions
it might be and this bill sits
up
series of training set scuba
members are required to go to
its really only ten hours for
the first year and they have to
take that before
you know we want them to take
that before they start voting
and we we want them to to then
you after after the first
sharing let them to make sure
that they have five hours a
training a year so it's it's a
continual learning process and
we're trying to encourage this
are
the
legislation also provides that.
We won't terminate a new
superintendent right after the
election tell sixty days after
they take office again that's
the create some
some time and some consistent
state for people to really
understand what what's required
of a superintendent and how
school school laws work.
Um so we are also have a were
mandating with this webcasting
all of you should know that
during covered most schools we
were able to prop provide
broadcasting of a scubard
elections and a lot of things
none the elections but
schoolboard meetings through
webcasting and we're just
requiring that they do that so
that.
So that everybody can kind of be
more informed and learn what's
going on and we also do the we
also include them and campaign
finance reporting again another
method for transparency in how
local elected officials are are
are backed at the local level
and again all of this bill is
about transparency and with
that.
Mister charles stand for
questions
thank you representatives so we
will go to audience so those in
support online of senate bill
one thirty seven is amended
please indicate by raising your
hand if you wish to speak equal
at that populate for a moment
i'll go to committee on my
handside does this port
we'll start off in the first
moro ma'am you have up two
minutes welcome.
Great thank you alright anyway
else in that first moral alright
the first for as we're speaking
sport ma'am you have two minutes
welcome
good morning mr chairman my name
is body life but president of
the new mexico collision
education.
Great thank you.
Please you have to two minutes.
September numbers we committee
and this one major
does the part well the first one
train it's on a new initiative
okay has been turning board
members
taken the lead role to do this
for
full remember
nine seven.
Annually provided by
the great support this is the
number I was on the committee
when I was in the school board
to and worked to the well both
rule for five hours so it's but
sometimes that will be
initiated for you know
the majority and we've seen
majority for school or members
about the state.
Criteria
ten hours will just get them a
little bit more
cashier for you so definition
changes people that need to
report
now
segments of small distribution
for for it and you can provide
information we have to
look at concerns for smaller
distance
to probably get that
on the time
of the meetings that cool
again there's the smallest
technical because it's still and
and all the training of the
trade do that and
still and it was
it's
another last year
we hope that this creates this
process
for the leader.
Alright there was two minutes
thank you
all right my rate hands I don't
wish we can sport right sir you
have up to two minutes welcome
it's german gender today next we
really like this bill primarily
for the transparency
as you can imagine that's good
school
very wildly
knowledge and all of that thing
believes the training will
really ought to do that but we
also really believe that you
actually voters should know who
are funding any candidate public
office we've been proponents
even last year
the financial disclosures i'm
school were candidate and
finally really believe that the
left casting and archiving
especially in our smaller rural
districts are going to open up
those decision making processes
perhaps families and other
members of the community that
don't exist and educational
able to be on a particular day
at a particular time you can go
back and review the decision
being made for their students
the educators are not district
so we're strong
thank you great thank you others
on my hand side there wish we
can sport
please spend me of up to two
minutes welcome good morning
mister chairman and committee
members i'm to with the greater
out chamber of commerce.
Sp one thirty seven is just
smart and long overdue.
And the transparency that we
require them to avoid by two
often well intentioned
individuals run for school board
positions in of do it for the
fame they don't do it for the
fortune they do it because
they're true believers
and then they win and they find
that they're under prepared to
deal with everything that's been
played on their plate and
they're overwhelmed.
That's frustrating for the board
members and it short changes are
students and our parents and a
taxpayer this year that school
board members get the annual
training on everything from
school and finances to how to
oversee and really support their
superintendent and also requires
of the candidates to disclose
their campaign contributions and
i'll school boards webcast in
archive their meetings that we
families
can stay informed.
It's just about giving those
folks who are willing to step up
and do the hard job as serving
on our school boards the support
and the training that they need
to do the great job that they
want to and is about providing
the transparency required so
parents and the community
members can be involved in the
system to support it thank you
thank you anybody else on my ray
hand sign which is speaking
supporter cynical one thirty
seven alright we'll go to my
left hand side does wish he can
sports please spend me of up to
two minutes welcome.
The training requirements in
this bill are evidence based on
what members to do their best
job.
Forty four.
Sure that family members can be
important.
Just want to highlight that new
mexico butters overwhelmingly
support.
And found that eighty eight
percent of voters support the
tra.
Great thank you others on my
left hand site that we speak and
sport certain please you have
two minutes mister chair.
Churches have actually done this
for nearly a decade we've had
our leave requirements and
topical requirements but those
have changed the rule.
So we appreciate that this will
be put in law.
Each board has different needs
on some of those.
Better in this bill so we
support the bill and appreciate
the work of the sponsors thank
you others certainly have a few
minutes with members that's what
I was ever just lobbyist
and.
Specifically the public
disclosure requirements really
is the public space you know.
Great anybody else so which
speaking sports
alright so we'll go to our folks
online.
So emily good morning emily
welcome back you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning again mrperiod
chaired members of the committee
i'm among the well down with new
mexico voices for children and
we support as me one thirty
seven and we'd like to think the
sponsors for carrying it and you
I think most of most of what
everyone has said is exactly why
we support this bill as well you
we believe this will lead to
stronger leadership in our
districts and budgeting
practices that are more strongly
tied to the programs that will
support student outcomes and we
support all the elements of this
bill that improved transparency
from the requirement for all
school word candidates to report
campaign contributions to the
webcasing and archiving of
schoolboard meetings so we ask
the community to join us and
supporting the bill thank you
so want to say seven senate bill
seventy six was also good
Thank you mister chair
representative in the
I I agree with this bill I have
a couple of questions
can the general public because I
know a lot of times I didn't
know a lot of things that I had
access to before I would sat in
this position but can the
general public look up somewhere
to see exactly which one of
their school board members is
complaint.
Ah yes mister chair and um and
representative that meet about
what they have to do now is post
on their dashboard whether or
not they're schoolboard member
has done the training how many
hours they completed I mean we
don't penalize anybody for not
doing that training but the
public can see whether or not
they have taken the training how
many hours they've spent and
that's that's an important thing
for people enough
thank you mister chair and
representative I I one hundred
percent agree with that because
my next question was kind of
like what if they don't you know
and and while I don't think that
they need to be penalized but
public knowledge is is power so
I think that that that's that's
a great thing that if if if you
know that you're in a it'll kind
of keep them themselves and
check
that the more knowledge that's
out there so so thank you thank
you for bringing this.
Thank you represent corolla
thank you mister chair I think
you're a pretty for this I like
also like everybody's
that kinda really also
have a liability to
have access to webcast for
everyone I have a question on
the training part
as teacher we got training every
year up at the same topic of it
and over and over the at one
point we can actually answer the
questions that test yes with our
looking fight so that's
something that I want that make
ask how are these mister share
of these hours of training are
going to be the bill up um
couple of concerns one is just
repetitive and we just click
click click and stand and the
other one is who decides a
topics
there are some
I will be concerned that
somebody will decide
I don't know how to put this one
but
there are some brother
understanding of the finding of
a location or other proficiency
on linguistics
it could be a misconception if
we will have the hood that the
experts of the area and is just
definitely what of the month on
or something like that at all
those are my consensus.
Oh I think what's important
about this legislation it really
spells up spells out what kind
of training they need and
so i'll just go down for you if
you look at the bill on page
twelve in their first term they
need to complete ten hours and
that two hours are covering law
and department policies and
procedures affecting local
school boards republic schools
including ethics and school
personnel two hours covering
public school finance budgeting
and fiditious responsibilities
of local school boards at least
number three is two hours
covering legal concepts
pertaining to local school
boards or school districts
including the open meetings act
and the inspection of public
records
the
fourth thing is that they need
two hours covering effective
government
governance practices and
effective methods of supporting
and supervising the local
superintendent and the fifth one
is at least two hours covering
student achievement and students
support services so the first
ten hours of training that's
that's what they will do and I I
think those are I think that's
important to um to spell out in
this legislation so that we know
that people at least have kind
of an understanding can you
learn all of that in two hours I
don't think so but it's
introduces them to what they
need to do and then they
probably need to and the and you
know that the new mexico school
board association give some lot
of additional training so they
will understand what more they
need to know and then they can
go to the new mexico school
board association and yet
further training on the areas
that they have trouble
understanding
thank you mister thank you for
printed soft and then just
trying to understand that to see
this so they they got to the two
hours training and does the only
requirement to sit there or to
listen.
To that training that's the only
requirement correct ah yes.
Thank you mister thank you for
presidential
the representative
thank you mister chair
two things i'm glad to see that
charter schools also have to do
the webcasting I think we all
get multiple requests to give
allocate funds to charter
schools and it would be nice to
actually check for meanings
whether question is
and represent a mister chairen
representative last time I think
the passlaw was that only
districts with twelve thousand
are more students had report.
Um
nat now is that still in place
because there could be
candidates.
For though is that still in
place I know the mister chair
and representative here know
what the with the large now says
is that all school boards ask
have to oscar board members
campaigning have to report their
finances if it is
a more more than a thousand
dollars so in a small school
district where you know
campaigning is kind of like
talking to your members at
church you know and and then we
do have small districts and
small school words probably they
don't spend a thousand dollars
on on a campaign finances but
any school board member who
spends more than that now is
required to report
some as you're sure that means
if someone in.
Ah I think actually santa fe
went below that number the san
of a kirky board of education
can a date would not have to
report if it's less than a
thousand dollars exactly ok
thank you for that
clarification.
Do you represent but I want.
Mr terror representative thank
you so much for bringing forward
this this bill my question is
about the
about the training itself will
there be the opportunity I I
think I understand you know we
want to stand or dies training
across school boards
but will there also be the
availability of being able to
tailor that curriculum for the
specific needs of that school
board area i'm thinking
specifically for training
related to and schools and rural
areas different challenges that
may be faced in urban areas mr
chair representative mister
chair and representative of
paton I think this will be
standard training for across the
board I think you will look to
the new mexico association of
school boards to really kind of
honion and and talk about
different issues in in smaller
communities which they already
do and I again I think this
gives everybody a platform
of knowledge and from there
they'll know where they need
more help in that I think
they'll turn to the new mexican
schoolboard association for
that.
Thank you mr chair
representative
for about covered thank you
mister chair and thank you
representative I am looking at
the new material on page
fourteen which is the
webcasting and archiving
I was reading through more of
the detail and it suddenly
occurred to me
to ask the question mister chair
how will executive sessions be
handled in terms of
um webcasting I know they're not
going to be wet cast because
that's against the principle of
executive search however will
the proceedings that occur
in executive session b archived
recorded in our country
you know I can't miss your chair
and represent it ever a robot
cover yet I
am I think that most executive
sessions go in and that's a
personnel matter and I don't
imagine that they would be
archive because you know you
would
it defeats the purpose of an
executive session so I imagine I
can't speak for a bit alternate
that over to john
mrperiod chair representative
courier this this bill doesn't
affect any of the standard
practices of your school boards
it only requires that those
public
sections of other meeting be
webcast it wouldn't affect any
of the other practices
thank you mister charles and
thank you
representative as a
parliamentarian I was hoping not
that it would be maintaining the
integrity of what an executive
session
is all about and the hope is
always mister chair and
representative that even the
members of the school board
understand the nature of
executive sessions on assuming
that the training will also talk
about what the roles in
responsibilities are
as it affects every part of
governments.
And then finally mister chair
and and representative I just
wanted to mention that
on the and the point of
compliance and what happens if
there's non compliance I just
like to remind everybody that
that's why we have elections
transparency and accountability
or key factors and whether you
we elect or reelect
our school board or any any
elected position so that is
always the.
The recourse voters it's in the
hands of the voters and that's
what makes our democracy in
electoral process so great that
the voters have a voice
throughout that process so
mister chairman representative
thank you very much.
Three thank you I don't have
anybody else in my list but I
didn't want to commend you off
in the work of your
representative in our earlier
team
you know for a couple years
we've had some contentious bills
centered around school boards
and all that but bringing it
through the interim process in
being able to really talk with
all of the stakeholders involved
i'm get everybody on on similar
footing as far as the
legislation I think is is
something that's important in a
bill that we heard.
Broadbased agreement on in and
seemingly from the committee as
well so thank you offer your
hard work in the interim on
working on this piece of
legislation but with that
members motion
mister
we have to do pass motion on
sentiment one thank you seven as
mended I thought represent
madrid first so i'll credit him
with it but I appreciate it
members management secretary
call the role please on the new
passmention.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Great by road of twelve two zero
you have a due past you
representative thank you members
alright so that concludes their
