also the sponsor of three forty
four Center couples has us that
Bill B. rolled over until he
asks for it to be reviewed the
also on our Friday agenda we've
got a number of straight
appropriation bills I've checked
with the minority
leader with us were a ranking
member and so those procreation
bills we're going to do kind of
as a block on almost like a five
minute time limit on each one to
four short presentation and then
investors objection move those
on probably with no racks on the
finance committee.
The people that are looking
forward into some of those other
bills as they come on Friday.
Please.
and also when remember people
today was going to be the.
The
I was elected junior college New
Mexico community community
college but again because of
whether that is just going to be
kind of an announcement on the
floor instead of normally we
introduce all of them here in
education but weather's kinda
get in the way of a whole bunch
of things right now so.
It with the Representative
Thomson affirmative consent
policy in schools thank you Mr
chairman members good morning so
this bill has been around for
awhile and I'd like to call it
only yes means yes so in terms
of sexual activity being drunk
isn't it yes being asleep is a
yes not saying no isn't it yes
there must be an affirmative
consent for any type of sexual
activity that can be revoked at
any time and the reason we're
doing this bill is to teach are
you that there are rules around
this doing doing working on this
bill many forty and fifty year
old people came and said I wish
I would have known about this
when I was younger things and I
once I had a young man a thirty
something man in my office and I
was talking to him about this
bill and he said when we were in
high school the guys all talked
about how to get the girl drugs
so we could get sex and we want
to get away from that kind of
thinking so what this does first
off there's no criminal
penalties there's no punishment
it's about education it
unanimously passed this
committee the last time we were
here and the only change from
the former bill is that we
dropped a task force for post
secondary education and it's it
applies to all schools that
receive state dollars and then
that there's a post secondary
piece and with that I think I
will turn it over to my experts
hi good morning Mister chair and
committee my name's just Clark
as the director prevention for
the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs I
support prevention educators
across New Mexico who provide
life changing affirmative
consent education to young
people I spent ten years myself
teaching affirmative can consent
education to students across New
Mexico and the number one
comment I got from teachers who
were present during our sessions
with that they wish they would
have had this education when
they were growing up that it
would have saved them years of
can.
Yushin and sometimes
extraordinary pain HB forty
three will help us ensure that
ten years from now students
today students will have to say
the same.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name's
Alexandria Taylor and executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs I'll be very brief I'm
shaken by the events that came
out of the Mexico statements
basketball team this past
weekend this bill is meant to
address exactly that to prevent
that from happening and to
create trauma informed responses
should it happen on college
campuses as well as teach our
younger kids are younger youth
in high school or in eighth
grade that only yes means yes it
must be affirmative consent my
second point is that we have
many many groups and individuals
including young people this
movie this bill has been led by
the young people they have asked
us to make this the standard
that be taught in their schools
to keep them safe we have asked
them not to make public comment
this morning to keep it brief in
this committee but I just want
the committee to know that there
are many organizations many
individuals including young
students themselves or in
support of this bill thank you.
Yes Representative no Mr chair.
Thank you with that will go out
to the audience and and take for
five people who would like to
comment.
The body like this.
Mr chairman in order to save the
committee time we process our
team to not comment okay thirty
one in opposition that would
like to comment.
Anyone not part of that team
that would like to comment.
Okay.
They had to scare you that much
joy I told ya don't have come
off comments.
to questions from the committee.
Sir Kernan.
Thank you very much I'm looking
up on page eleven of the bill of
to to statutes that are
referenced well I guess I
understand harassment stalking
at I guess my question is the
definition of
Sexual abuse sexual activity
because at somewhere in the
coming what would.
Check out for that let's go.
I was gonna I'm covered for Mr
chair so okay yes good cheer for
Committee then all right I look
at she's gone so just it just
kind of explain to me the
definition what what would be
the definition under will you
please well I'm just trying to
figure out.
Consent to what we're talking
about sexual activity correct
and you have to say yes means
yes no means no but to what
we're we're in the bill does it
kind of draw the line of what
you have to say yes to Mr
chairman centered low miss
Taylor Mr Clarke answer that
question.
Mr chair Senator sexual activity
is the range of behaviors that
are included are can be
considered sexual activity
requiring consent and so it can
be we teach anything from
touching kissing sexual contact
but it encompasses a range of
behaviors.
I think Mister chairman Senator
that's that's kind of what I
think needs to be clarified
because when you're talking to
young people and you're trying
to tell them you have to get
consent you really need to be.
Very clear about what is
considered behavior that you
have to consent to so when you
say touching does that mean
holding someone's hand does that
mean
putting their arms around
someone mean what what except
we're where's the line here on
this Mr chair and senator.
The programs that are already
teaching affirmative consent
across the state which we have
many.
Our teaching exactly that
they're laying out what requires
consent and in many ways that
conversation a scaffold ID based
on the age so some programs and
that is not addressed in this
bill but some programs are
teaching consent for elementary
students and in that case it's
you ask your friend if you want
to have when it comes to this
bill it is in middle schools are
eighth grade in high school it
is anything from kissing someone
that you should ask someone
before you kiss them up through
any other sexual activities so
touching anything else and in in
title nine we already have
sexual activity defined in title
nine and this doesn't replace
that session so Mister chair and
you have I mean I don't know
what that is so you can find
that
to me before this goes to the
floor because you know I need to
understand that would clear the
other thing that concerns me is
The fact that that when you have
two people that are exchanging
because this it can go both ways
maybe I'm I would suggest that
that young men and boys in
middle school and high school
often times so that the victim
rather than the female and maybe
I'm wrong on that that that's
what I certainly I've heard and
I don't mean to disparage any of
my colleagues but but I do think
that's a problem too and it goes
both ways I'm assuming with this
bill correct yeah Mr chair
Senator this is not a gender
dealt with about about about all
people being safe okay and and
so the programs that are
currently Mr chair being.
taught will the will the PED or
the higher it Department
prescribes the programs that
each school will need to use our
will that be left up to the
school boards to the local
districts to make that decision
on what they can use to
accomplish what's in this bill.
