next
We welcome you all here today to
see you, see what goes on in
here all day long.
A
And students, do you know how
old you have to be to run for
the House of Representatives.
21 years old.
So for some of that might be in
3 years.
Do we have any?
Um, we have another group over
And where geographically is
that?
Thank you. And um um Madam
Chair, just to let you know,
you're not just a member, you
guys do awesome things.
Uh, in, in you're right. So just
because you don't hold an office
or leadership, you were doing
amazing things, so you're not
just a member.
Um, we have one more person to
introduce himself. He didn't
Oh, you know me from when you
were very young.
I sure was, thank you.
Great.
Go coyotes.
OK, with that, we'll come to
our third and final bill for the
day, and if anybody has to move
on from this room, um, we
appreciate your presence here,
but we also understand you have
other places to go. This is
House Bill 193.
Uh, it's to study the public
education system and
representatives, uh, please
start when you're ready.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so for the returning
champions, this is a very
familiar bill for those of you
that are new, um, it's new, but
this is a bill that is to allow
the legislative education Study
Committee to study um not only
K-12, um, but the early
childhood, early childhood as
well as higher education
currently, the legislative
education Study Committee is
statutorily limited to K-12 and
the colleges of education in
high.
Um,
in higher education, um, I feel
this is something vitally
important for us to be able to
study in the
In her arm, I hear the
secretaries of each of the
departments talk about cradle to
career, which is awesome. We
would like to be able to join
and partner with them in that
sort of study so that we can
better.
And, um, early childhood, it's
impacts on the K-12 system and
then it's impact on higher
education as well, um, certainly
we mean that.
to be cooperative as I feel
through the legislative
education Study Committee we
have been and certainly our
staff, um,
There has been great partners
with the public education
department um and we would like
to extend that to higher
education department as well as
um
Early childhood and higher
education departments and so I
have Representative Baca here,
but with that, Madam Chair,
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um.
Mister Chairman, I, I just agree
that as we um.
As we're looking at this, I
think this also gives us the
opportunity with our staff to uh
outline our interim work.
plan as far as to make sure that
we do have the continuation and
collaboration at the different
levels, um, so I do, I do
appreciate.
and German did a good job of um.
com m un ic ating the need for
this.
Thank you. And with that, we'll
go to public comment. Is there
anybody online who opposes.
House Bill 193.
Is there anybody in the room who
opposes House Bill 193. no
opposition will go to support.
Is there anybody online who
supports, who wants to.
Speak in support of House Bill
193.
See nobody online. Is there
anybody in the room who would
like to speak in support of
House Bill 193.
OK.
Uh, we'll start on this side,
the gentleman.
Mr. Paul in the back.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, um as the sponsor
mentioned. These are
inextricably linked, um, if you
play a role in any part of that
system, you know that, um, and
so we support this bill and it's
long overdue. The thing I wanted
to mention was, I think in the
past there have been some
notable uh opposition that
didn't make this happen. Um, the
LESC is both about investigation
as well as lifting up successes,
and I think ECCD and higher ed
could benefit from both of
those.
Thank you.
Uh, next, Mister Dirt.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, John Diarch with
AFT New Mexico, uh, aside from
the bill we just heard, this
might be one of the more
important bills you consider
during this legislative session.
We were here 2 years ago in
support and 2 years before that
and unfortunately, we all know
this bill has been vetoed twice
by this administration. It's so
critical, the work and
education, especially in public
education is intersectional from
early ed K12 to higher ed, and
as we push more into studying
higher ed and how these
systems work together with one
another, you all need the
authority and the ability to
work in the interim on some of
these issues, uh, that impact
the members we work with as a
labor union, but also the
members in your community and
those institutions. So we urge
you to support this bill once
again this year. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else in the
audience want to speak in
support of House Bill 193.
I've seen no more public comment
we'll turn to our members.
Representative uh Mit Moya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
thank you gentlemen, um, I, I, I
really um think that this is
important and hopefully it goes
all the way and gets signed this
year, um, mostly because as we
in um in.
Session in in education
committee will see a lot of the
bills that come through that
have to do with all of these,
but we don't have the ability in
interim to be able to study them
and mull them over and chew them
and do all these other stuff
that we do, uh, because we can't
study those issues, and I know
that this body here likes to uh
pass on bills that that have
been vetted.
Um, and not, uh, and, and not
something on the fly. So, so I
think it is, it is definitely
important to give us that
ability, not that I want to give
LESC more work, but uh
Um, but, uh, but it's, but it's
something that we could have um.
Um, thoroughly vetted, um.
Bills that come through for all
of the areas, not just K-12, so
I think it's really important.
Uh, Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um.
And uh
Gerd Omero, thank you so much
and uh Representative Baca,
thank you so much for
Creating this bill, um, I always
wondered why it was that we
aren't, um,
Incorporating the um higher ed
and early childhood and with the
study, um, committee, um, I have
to say that when the Latino
education task force was raiding
the Martinez lawsuit.
We studied the Constitution very
carefully.
And we looked at Article 12 and
Article 12 encompasses all of
education.
Education at early childhood
ages, all the way through
college and um post college, um,
anything education is in Article
12, and so I wondered, um, why.
Why we don't include.
Higher read in um.
In the work of the LESC, um, the
only reason that the Martinez
lawsuit is K through 12 is
because there are 3 departments
and there were 2 at the time.
Related to education when the
PED and one higher ed, um, but
in the Constitution they're all.
They're all together in Article
12, so I'm wondering.
Um, what might be the problem?
Why is it not?
Why, why is it not, um, been
approved, I wonder.
Madam Charon and representative,
I'm not sure about the history
as to its exclusion directly. I
know that from some of the
opposition that we have had, um,
Including the vetoes it's been,
um, stated that it's the, the
oversight would be
duplicative, um.
because legislative finance
committee does oversee higher
education and early childhood,
but as we saw last week from our
presentation our aims and LESC
along with LFC or
are not always united.
Oh, look at that. It seems, that
seems to be about, that seems to
be about.
Well, this, this one might be.
Me.
Oh
He went out for a moment, um.
Are, aren't always the same and
in fact can be quite different.
So, um, that's where I see our
role as being um it can be
complementary, we can help the
system as a whole, um, if we're
allowed to study and it should
be within our purview, I think
part of this is is the
strangeness in us as a
legislative branch having to ask
the executive branch, um, if we
can have oversight into that
branch, um, it's something for
me that's very frustrating,
which we could do.
Unilaterally, but you know, we
all got to work together and so
it's a give and take.
Any further questions from the
members. Hey, see no further
questions, I will.
Um, Madam Chair, I move a due
pass for House Bill in 193.
OK, we have a motion from
Representative Mitterbaugh.
Moya
And a second from Representative
Cole.
Is there any objection to
passing hospital 193.
Seeing no objection, uh.
Representatives you have a bill.
asked
Right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Just want to point
outent Baca has been up here all
day. So he truly is the MVP for
today.
I, I was gonna say that he's an
all-star, but he's the MVP for
today. No offensive linemen
today.
the
Thank you everybody for being
here. I do believe the house,
uh, is on the floor at 10:30.
To
