economy that we believe we
already have. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, and uh and
commissioner, I'm Steven
Carrillo. I'm from Public
Education Commission
representing District 10, which
is pretty much, uh, I call it
the Great North, um, all the way
to the Colorado border standing
in support of the bill, local
control, autonomy for these
schools, districts know what's
best for their kids and for
their populations, and I think
it's almost arrogant, I would
say, for people to tell them
otherwise. So absolutely support
this.
Great. Thank you, folks on my
right hand side that wish to
speak in support, please.
you up, you'll have up to 2
minutes. Lily May morning. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman Lily May
Ortiz representing the New
Mexico School Board Association,
and one of the most important
components of a successful
public education system is local
control and flexibility and
decision making. The New Mexico
School Board Association, it
maintains this as one of its
greatest priorities, local
control. We ask for it and we
support bills that goes to the
legislature that support local
control, and we put local
control for all the reasons that
Mr.
sounds mentioned, uh, we support
this legislation, we thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward,
and we're, we ask you to as
well.
Sponsor it, send it through and
approve it and uh keep that
local control in the districts
where it belongs. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name's Colton Grau. I'm a 4th
generation cattle rancher from
Grady, New Mexico.
I've been on the Grady school
board since 2016, and I'm
currently serving as the board
president.
The Grady school district is on
a 4-day schedule.
And we consistently perform in
the top percentages of the
state.
Across elementary, middle
school, and high school.
Our district report card for the
2023, 2024.
School years showed that Grady
At a 98% attendance rate.
This was one of the highest
rates across all districts in
the state of New Mexico.
And this is largely due.
To the flexibility that a
four-day school schedule
provides rural schools such as
Grady.
I fully support local control
and House Bill 65.
Our objective on the school
board is to provide an
environment where our children
can thrive academically.
As well as physically.
Emotionally and socially.
This means
That we should know their
circumstances and that of their
families.
We do as a board, and I do
personally as a father of two
elementary age children.
Respectfully, agency officials
in Santa Fe don't.
Nor can they be expected to.
They need to understand that New
Mexico's school districts cannot
function effectively with the
one size fits all approach.
That's why it is important to us
at the local level to have the
authority to make decisions on
instructional days.
Please give us that authority to
help our children thrive. I urge
you.
To approve House Bill 65. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Please, sir, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Mr. Chairman and fellow
committee members.
Thank you very much for hearing
that, and we would like to speak
in support of this bill and we
appreciate um.
The
Rural New Mexico.
Is a different beast than
whenever you get politan areas.
And whenever you're trying to
force.
Very, very rural New Mexico and
to go on 5 days a week, the
cost, if have you talked with
anybody from say Animus area.
There's kids that ride a bus
for.
An hour and a half just to get
to the school.
Not including the trip home.
And that their budgets are built
around the schedule that they've
been using in the past, so.
We would urge you to support
this, uh, in favor for all of
the small rural communities
throughout the state that gives
them the ability Thank you.
Right, they don't have anybody
Online.
for those opposed to house Bill
65, please indicate by raising
your hand on the zoom, if you
wish to speak.
Folks in the room, is there
anybody in opposition that would
speak against House bills.
Right?
Seeing none, we will come to
committees to represent Buck.
I think he was determined and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, when we talk
about, um,
Legislative intent.
It was always the intent of the
legislature for local control to
make decisions based upon their
communities.
Uh, that was the message that
was sent in the 23.
Uh, legislative session when we
looked at House Bill 130.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
representatives as we know.
When we talk about small
districts and we talk about not
only the time.
That there may be spent on a
bus, but also that many of our
young people are involved in
industry. They're working on the
ranches, they're working on the,
the farms, and they are actually
preparing and helping.
Not just with their own um.
Experiences or internships but
are also working for the future
of New Mexico.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, as I say,
I
I support this bill, and I thank
you for bringing it forward.
For for us and to really kind of
codify into law that school
districts have
That ability to make these
decisions.
Communities
Do what's best for their kids.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative.
To share. Yeah, I.
I fully support this bill. We
know that one size doesn't fit
all.
Uh, here in the state and uh we
need to make.
That our community.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for bringing this. I
think, um.
This is is definitely having
this in statute is, is much
needed because um
Not only uh uh
uh uh transportation and and
schedule, but there's a lot of
teachers that that that these
rural areas have a hard time
staffing.
And, uh, and I, and I know that
many of them, uh, the teachers
don't live there, so they, they
come and then they go back home
for the weekend and, and so if,
if a lot of these schools are
forced to go to a 5 day.
Our teacher crisis is going to
be multiplied.
So, and, and that's the thing is
that um firm believer, uh, it is
about quality instruction, not
the quantity of infrastruction.
Um, you can do subpar
instruction.
You can double it and you're
still not gonna get.
What you need. Now, if you have
quality instruction, then that's
what we need to focus on is what
we're doing in there and it does
it and adding more days is not
gonna make uh make this thing
better. So this is, this is
perfect.
Um, we have the hours and um and
and it gets to fit every single
community, so thank you.
Chatfield.
I share a lot of time we've been
fighting for this for a long
time. Thank goodness.
Those real like he did.
Uh, some of our top performing
schools or 4 day a week schools.
I think more of a bad thing's
not gonna help us any. I think
it's quality.
Instruction is what making the
appreciate the time, I support
this bill.
A stroke.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative and Mr. Browns.
I just want to ask some
clarification questions.
The legislature codified in law
that we have 1140 hours.
It went to court.
The judge ruled in our favor,
but there's still a chance that
or it is going to be.
Challenged
What I can't quite understand is
why is this being challenged
and, and does this bill give
local authority to the school
boards and once that does then.
It's, it's this bill's codified
in law, Mr. Chair. Chairman
Representative Vincent, um.
This
Potifies in my opinion, what the
court ruled.
Once you codify the statute,
it's one of the district court
level.
There, there are pellet
opportunities for the state of
New Mexico.
So there's an emergency clause
in this.
We'd like to see this codified
into law, so there's no question
that anybody
will operate anything other than
what you've already said in law.
Which was our argument 1140.
Nothing else.
But that was challenged and so
this would cease that challenge.
How to find the law and uh
eliminate all question we would
hope this would remove.
Concerns at local districts at
4040 districts and not all
districts that are 5 day meet
180 day requirement by also say.
Because there's flexibility,
that's the intent of putting
this in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that answer.
What I want people to understand
about this particular bill, and
I appreciate you bringing it
forward. I like the local, the
local decision makers. I don't
know a lot of people that don't
want locals to have their own
autonomy,
but we, I don't know how many
bills I've heard about
apprentice apprenticeships.
CTEs and in my rural districts,
those kids on Fridays when they
don't go to school and they're
in the agricultural side,
they're getting apprenticeships,
they're learning how to be
cowboys. They're learning how to
be welders and, and plumbers. So
not only do you get uh.
You get to codify this in law,
you're actually running with
this bill, you're running an
apprenticeship program and you
run a CTE program. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to ask the
representative. It's a 4 day
school.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Vice Chair
Garrett.
The first district was the
Cimarron School.
And with that, um, Madam Chair,
I graduated. I, I went to school
my whole life in a 4 day school
district, uh, which was in the
big town of Dadd, New Mexico.
And the coyo to go coyotes and
uh and then I graduated from
high school from Comaro, New
Mexico, which is a 4 day school
week. All of my 4 children have
graduated from Magdalena Ghost
ears, uh, from a 4 day school
week and uh and they're well
rounded, well versed, uh, good
people. And ultimately, um, Mr.
Chairman and Madam
Representative, this is really
about local control.
Uh, that we, um, uh, I was, uh,
Surprised that uh the PED
secretary at the time, Romero.
Uh, came and rode the school
bus. I invited the governor and
I invited the PET secretary. Uh,
he did, and, and I was very
proud and he had several staff
members with him and they rode
the bus for an hour and a half.
Dodging elk, we dodged elk,
deer, and antelope. We changed
buses in the middle of it.
To a cold bus from a warm bus,
and, um, and, and then he got to
see the real problem of why we
have a 4 day school week. And so
ultimately,
I just want, um, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Representatives, and chair
and committee.
Not all schools are created
equal. Yeah, I wish they were,
they're not.
And so we really need to be able
to, to do what's best in our
districts and we'll have the
local members of that district
making those decisions.
Mr turn representative and.
And thank you for
Showing us what it's like, I
will say I'm, it's great to see
the cattle grower people here.
And I will say though, there
are.
Kids that ride buses for an hour
and a half internally on APS.
So just so you know, there are
urban areas.
I don't have anybody else on my
list. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
move a do pass.
Wow.
I didn't even recognize your
ranking member VACA.
But
I'll accept that motion. I heard
Representative Cole.
I'll give her a second on it,
she was the loudest he squeaky
wheel gets to Grease, um, but I
will say, um, before we go to a
vote on it is thank you for
bringing this forward. I mean,
obviously, um,
Vice chair and I had sponsored
House Bill 130, which had so
much support, centered around
exactly this issue because when
we went through an LESC to study
it through the interim prior to
bringing the bill.
That was the most salient point
that folks brought from around
the state to us um was just this
very issue, so, um.
I appreciate you bringing it
forward, but um we do have a due
pass motion. So Madam Secretary,
if you call the roll, please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
represent Torres Valesque. Yes.
Representative Vincent. Yes.
Garrett
Yes. Yes.
You have a unanimous due pass on
House bills.
my first commit my first time in
front of education, that that's
the way to go. Appreciate it.
Welcome.
Can't always guarantee it, but
certainly with House Bill 65. We
appreciate it.
Right.
Please, Madam Vice Chair,
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, this is House Bill 67,
reasonable assurance for adjunct
instructors, and I will say this
is another bill that passed the
House in 2023, and we're
bringing it back hoping that the
time again.
Uh, so House Bill 67.
Uh, seeks to men the state
statute to allow access of
unemployed benefits for adjunct
instructors in New Mexico.
Higher education,
uh, institutions, it better
defines the concept of
reasonable assurance, which is
the determining factor for
unemployment coverage, and I
will add that um.
In the national ranking of
public flagship institutions
across the country, the
University of New Mexico ranks
12th for its high number of uh
faculty, 52%, the majority of
their mission.
So the bill.
Um, as workforce solutions said,
it removes the less
well-defined.
Um, factors of the statute and
replaces them with definite
criteria that can be used by an
administration to determine
reasonable.
Uh, assurance, and this
legislation is consistent with
the federal requirements that
benefits.
So, uh, the 5.
Things that are added is the 5
part ela Chapaz to determine
reasonable assurance for
re-employment.
that the one the education
institution has made a written.
Oral
Or implied offer of employment
for the following academic the
offer of employment was made by
an individual with actual
authority.
To make an offer.
The offered employment is
substantially the same position
or higher position.
than the previous employment.
The consideration for the
offered employment is at least
90% of what the claimant earned
in the then or current academic
year.
And they offer of employment is
not contingent on factors such
as course programming.
Uh, and other things, and with
that, I wanna introduce my
expert witness, uh, he's
attorney asked him to add a few
points.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Steven Curtis. Um, I have a
slight cough. I was COVID
negative, but I thought I'd be.
Uh, extra careful.
Um, I am a labor attorney in
Albuquerque, New Mexico,
occasional adjunct professor of
law, um, this bill is important
to see what it does and what it
does not do. Um, so unemployment
benefits are one of those weird
Federal state kind of uh
partnership type situations,
Federal law since the 1970s
required the states to begin
offering unemployment benefits
on equal terms to higher
education, public employees.
Um, however, recognize certain
exceptions. So for example, a
professor has generally a summer
break, um, they didn't, they
allow the states to deny
unemployment benefits for that
summer break.
For contingent faculty, it
becomes a problem for, or if
that's gonna be so current
federal law requires that it be
offered.
Unless the contingent fact
that's not changing environment.
What is changing is
How we determine it goes from a
multi-factor test, if you see on
page 6 at the bottom, you see
what's crossed out, right? So
consideration of all relevant
factors, including the
historical pattern of
re-employment in such capacity a
reasonable anticipation that
such employment will be
available in a reasonable notice
or understanding.
That
I can tell you as a lawyer
whenever I see multi-factor
tests, I groan inwardly. You and
I can agree on all of the facts.
But I may weigh one factor more
than you weigh it and will even
on the same fact. What this does
is have a essentially a
checklist.
This checklist, you have to meet
all 5 requirements. It allows
the applicant. It allows the
employer, and more importantly,
it allows the Department of
Workforce Solutions employee who
has to make this determination a
much, much simpler path to
making it.
So I think it's a very
relatively minor bill in the
grand scheme of things and that
it's not changing the standard,
um, it's just making it easier
to apply. Thank you with that
stand for, Mr. Chair. All right.
Thank you all so much. So we
will go to our audience if you
are in, I'll start off with
opposition this time. So folks
on Zoom, if you're opposed to
House Bill 67, if you would
indicate by raising your hand.
folks in the audience, if you're
opposed to House Bill 67, wish
to speak?
Please raise your hand.
right? So we'll go to sport.
Folks on Zoom.
If you wish to speak in support
of House Bill 67, please
indicate by raising your hand.
books in the audience, if you
wish to speak in support of
House Bill 67, you wouldn't line
up behind our presenters,
please. You'll have up to 2
minutes.
Good morning again, Chairman and
members of the committee, John
Archer with the AFT New Mexico,
we were on the journey with this
bill in 2023 and time did run
out in the Senate side. What's
so great about this bill as
section we find as the testimony
has suggested more and more
reliance on um contingent
faculty and what we would call
adjunct faculty, and they're,
um, employment is, is tenuous at
times. Um, it's, it's difficult.
They don't have the consistent
schedule that we think of, of
higher ed professors being
tenured and just being there
for.
decades and decades at a time,
it's not. And so we really like
this bill because it does
streamline the process and it
makes it understandable for
workforce solutions for the
institution and for the employee
about that criteria of why I
went to the federal definition,
it removes that ambiguity from
our state would urge your
support again in 2020.
Great.
Thank you. Please, sir, you'll
have up to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lachutes
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. Uh, we too have been
in strong support of this
measure, uh, higher ed folks,
uh, through the years that this
is uh been trying to pass, um,
we view this really as a measure
of fairness. We represent, you
know, over 40,000 workers, but
in a lot of ways we kind of view
ourselves as, as representative
of all workers, and, you know,
we're, what we're talking about
is fairness of people who
Uh, pay into a system of
unemployment and have been
denied those benefits because of
uh because of situations that
are outside of their control.
And, uh, like a lot of bills
that we talk about in this
roundhouse, this is not a bill
that is being brought up to
punish someone unnecessarily or
to uh just uh just bring up for
no good reason. There are plenty
of instances in which people are
being denied unemployment, who
should be having it, and
That is why this measure has
been brought up by the sponsor.
We thank you very much for doing
that, and I urge your support.
Great.
Thank you. Anybody wish to speak
in support anybody else. All
right, see. We come to
committee, committee, question.
For anyone, I'll entertain
pass motion by Representative
Vlada, taken by Representative
Mino Almoya. I'm assuming that
means that everybody's in favor.
Any objection to the DuPass
motion, see none.
That was simple. All right. You
have a do pass 67. Thank you.
Hm
All right, so
position a little bit.
Madam Vice Chair, just whenever
you're ready.
Again.
Um, Mr. Chairman and, and
members, um, I'm here to
introduce House Bill 365 public
education commission staff. My
expert witnesses are Matt Paul,
who is the public charter
schools of New Mexico executive
director and Rebecca Burt who
share and district.
Um,
the pub first the public
education ers who are elected by
voters in our state, they serve
4-year terms, and they represent
the geographic districts across.
New Mexico, they meet monthly,
uh they meet monthly.
And their main purpose is to
authorize and overseas state
chartered.
Uh, charter schools. There are
now 60 of those and about 43 are
authorized, so.
That's their job.
And this bill is very simple. It
detaches the public education
administratively attached and
staffed by the public education
department. So and so they would
have their own staff, their own
director, and people now working
in the public, uh, the.
Charter division of the PED with
C.
Um
It would require PC to continue
to cooperate with PE and it
would replace in our laws the
references to the PED's public
charter division with the
And there's already 2% that
comes off the top of the SCG
formula as oppose to pay for
administering and that money
would pay for this office, and
with that, I, I would. Thank you
and I first want to say.
Seeing this bill is common sense
and and helping support us. Um,
good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Becca Burt. I am, uh,
like she said, District 4, which
encompassed Dacia area, um, I
have been on the commission for
4 years now and was elected to
the chair, uh, this year.
We have seen over the course of
time that the commission was set
up by the legislature to be an
independent authorizer. We have
seen that that is very helpful
in doing the business of
supporting charter schools and
including their oversight and
accountability. We have right
now 5 Democrats, 5 Republicans
on the commission, you would
never know by our votes, who's
who. We do not vote by party
line. It's just not something
that really impacts our work at
the schools,
Um, with, with schools in our
state. So we feel like that
independent elected body is
actually a really great
opportunity for schools to
receive the support and
accountability they need.
The administrative attachment
has hindered our progress in
supporting schools through many
different ways. And so we have
seen over the course of time
that while maybe good intention
to have us have that
administrative attachment. It
really is coming at the
detriment of our schools and our
work. So, um, we are asking for
your support in creating a truly
independent authorizer in our
state, um, and that would allow
us then to have staff that
doesn't have multiple priorities
being pulled in kind of several
different directions.
We oftentimes when we talk about
it internally, we often try to
relate it to imagine if LESC had
a director appointed by the
governor and then staffed by an
agency. It'd be very difficult
for the legislature to do their
work as they would like to, just
having those competing
interests, so we do see it as
just common sense legislation,
we, we do feel like there is a
funding stream already
available, so we're not asking
for any kind of reallocation of
funding, and we do encourage uh
it to be seen as just common
sense kind of clean up language
in order to really create that
autonomous in independent
authorizer that the legislature
intended.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'll just give you
one example of how, uh, how, how
this hinders I'm here today
because I spent one fateful year
as the charter school's
director, uh, the division at
the public education department.
And at that point in time, our
staff was doing site visits. We
were writing the reports as
staff would do for um the public
education commission, um, the
department I was working for and
my to be the only thing that
you're authorizer paid attention
to when they
made decisions on a school. So
when schools were being
reauthorized or renewed for a
new five-year contract. We just
took the accountability data and
said if you're low on that list,
we recommend you get shut down
if you're high on.
The PEC wanted to have
additional factors in that. So
as a school, I'm getting a
letter saying staff recommends
that we shut you down, where the
commission had no intention of
such, um, because they knew that
the schools had different
indicators, one example of that
would be um with a dropout
re-engagement high school who,
who has never really done well,
but provides exceptional uh
exceptional and needed value for
that community. And so that's
one example of how when the
division
is staffed by a department with
different values, how it can
create more burden, uh,
miscommunication on what the
intention of the folks with the
actual votes are. And so this is
not uh this this has nothing to
do with the skills and capacity
of the staff. It's really about
the potential for misalignment
of the charter sector. Um, two
other things I just note.
Locally authorized charter
schools. This one,
as nothing changes for you
there. Um, and then secondly,
Um
Actually, I just had one point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Thank you all so
much. So we will go to our folks
on Zoom, if you wish to speak in
support of House Bill 365, would
you indicate by raising your
hands on Zoom with that populate
folks in the audience if you
wish to speak in support of
House Bill 365, if you'd line up
behind our presenters, please.
You'll have up to 2 minutes.
As Chairman members of the
community, good morning again.
Stan rounds with the
superintendents and the
coalition of Educational
leaders, and we stand in support
of this bill.
Uh, I want to put it in context
to a bigger policy issue that
we're also bringing forward to
you, and that is in regards to
having a board of education for
all of education in New Mexico.
This is an important.
Message to all of us that this
is a carve out of the business
of the public education
commission.
They should be duly staffed.
They should be autonomous in
their tasks.
And Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we strongly support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you're welcome. You have
up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee and the
head administrator at Turquoise
Trail Charter School, and I
increase efficiency and
accountability, um, for our
schools and for our charter
leaders. Thank you.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes.
Hi, good morning. My name is
Rachel Sewards. I'm the founder
and executive director of Salari
Collegiate Charter School, and I
am in strong support of HB 365.
1st and foremost, um, over the
last 6 years that we've been
authorized as a charter school.
We've had really strong
professional and demanding
relationships between ourselves
and the publication commission.
And this is something that we as
a school want to see continue to
grow. Our work as educators is
relational, and our work with
our authorizers should also be
relational and the commission
has done a really great job with
making schools feel number one
supported, but also demand
hacks.
Um, in addition, this is an
alignment with charter school
autonomy. We are supposed to be
independently authorized and
managed and have public
education department.
Um, in addition, I believe that
we will have higher levels of
accountability as charter
schools if we do continue to be
authorized, um, right now we
presently have the demands of
the PEC as well as that of the
charter school division to care
about.
Um, they work in our contracts
that we've created at each 5
years.
And I believe the demand will be
higher overall because of that.
In addition, that would reduce
the administrative burden for
schools because we won't be
beholden to both the
requirements of the CSD and that
of the education.
Um, and that's. Great. Thank
you.
Welcome. Good morning, Mr. Chair
and committee. Thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak. I'm Steven Carrillo. I'm
the secretary of the Public
Education Commission
representing District 10, which
is the northern part of the
state in support of this bill. I
think it's a great idea. You've
heard the words accountability,
a number of different times, and
that's what they're removing a
layer of bureaucracy, if you
will. One of the things that
we're able to do of a school.
And when the school either comes
to us or we see that there are
areas where there's challenges,
we can respond.
immediately, and we do with the
supports they need and so I
don't want anything to stand in
the way of that. I'm not really
sure if Mr. Paul was going to
say the second thing. It's
budget neutral right now, all of
the money that we're funded with
comes from the SCG and from the
schools, so that no one's here
asking for more money. We're
asking for the opportunity to
increase efficiency and
accountability, accountability
and to kind of follow through on
with the legislature's intent
was, and that was to create very
intentionally a separate
authorizer.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Hm
Thank you, welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Patty Gibson, uh, publication
commission District 7, which is
Donana County.
So the PEC fulfills its role in
the state as an independent
chartering authority, which is
national best practices. We are,
however, the only chartering
authority in the country that
does not have the capacity to
hire its own staff.
We are one of only 3 chartering
authorities in the country that
is administratively tied to an
agency, and two of those
entities are currently seeking a
detachment.
The PEC has created a very
robust system of accountability
and support.
But that can only be carried out
fairly and equitably when we can
hire our own staff.
And have staff not in conflict,
potentially with
An agency.
Our mission and our vision needs
to be able to be carried out in
a
Consistent
An appropriate manner.
The Charter 2%.
Should never be viewed.
has a loss of money if we become
an independent entity.
Of uh from PED it should not be
considered a loss of money by
PED. This is once again ECG
money. This is money that it
belongs to the schools, and it's
intent is to support the
chartering authority.
And it is often unfortunate that
the delay for supports from the
PEC.
We encounter barriers with the
use of the 2%.
And by creating an independent
Commission
Those supports would be able to
be administered.
quicker. Thank you very much.
And
Thank you.
Welcome, you have up to 2
minutes.
Good Morning, Chair. Honorable
Representatives. My name is
Doctor Robert Hunter.
I'm the director of the Middle
College High School that's on
the Unha Gallup campus. It's New
Mexico's oldest early college
high school, where the students
graduate degree alongside a high
school diploma.
And further we serve
predominantly Native American
students.
Um, I'm here today
Um
First of all, on the individual
that emailed you all the report,
efficiency report from 2017, if
you received that.
And um
You know, at present, when you
look at the
ch ar ter school division,
there's a structural problem
that exists.
And I think that housing it
within the PED has resulted in
its functioning as an additional
layer of duplicative
bureaucracy.
In which a tasks charter schools
in providing data that they've
already provided to the PEDs
various other bureaus.
Um, and I think this is
particularly onerous for charter
schools and smaller rural
districts.
Simply because we don't really
have the human capital.
That you would see in a larger
district, it's adequately
staffed, you know, with a large,
um, group of uh.
You know, people in their
central offices.
Um, there are a few places I
know of where.
After the end of the day,
completing all of the required
reporting and so forth.
You know
The superintendents aren't the
ones that are out there
shoveling the sidewalks and
salting, you know, after the
snowfall or fixing the toilets
when they break down. Uh,
there's a lot.
Of stuff involved in um running
an effective school.
And I think that um what this
bill seeks to do is to
streamline.
The structure of inefficiency.
And it brings the charter school
division to where it belongs,
you know, under the public
education commission.
And if you look specifically at
section 3, Article A.
It addresses this by identifying
those data sharing agreements
that are designed to mitigate
those redundancies.
That the uh current structure
only promotes. So I think the
streamlining provisions of this
bill.
Really could go a long way.
um, consolidating administrative
burden.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, sir. I appreciate
your time.
All right, welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes. Hello, my name is
Stuart Ingham. I'm the District
6 commissioner on that um I have
been relatively remarkable
adventure for me. It is an
incredibly high functioning.
government do want to say we
have
Um, initiated a performance
framework to evaluate our
schools, that is sort of
opportunities for schools to
prove how they are immunities.
And so I just want to Thank you.
All right, so we'll go to our
folks on Zoom.
Mm
John
Good morning, John. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome. Hello,
good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
John Bennett. I'm the executive
director at Cottonwood Classical
Preparatory School in
Albuquerque, and I want to stand
in support of this bill and echo
my colleagues who spoke to you
about relationships with the
public education commission
being very positive and
dedicated people, and also the
inefficiency that comes with
working with the public
education department sort of on
the tangents. There's a lot of
triangulation.
And waste the time and
inefficiency, so I hope to get
your support on this common
sense legislation. Thank you.
OK
Thank you.
We'll go to Brandy. Good
morning, Brandy. You have up to
2 minutes. Welcome.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
this morning. My name is Brandy
Burnett and I am a charter
school teacher as well as a
Teach Plus New Mexico fellow
this year.
Um, I'm here today to support HB
365. Um, the reason that I
became a teacher was because I
wanted to make a difference in
my community. And the reason
that I work in a free public
charter school is because their
mission-driven spaces that exist
to fill gaps in a community that
deserves choice of how and where
their children are educated, um,
this separation is just common
sense in order to live up to
those ideals of mission-driven
institutions, and I hope that
everyone will agree.
Alright, thank you so much.
Right, so we'll go to opposition
folks on Zoom, if there's
anybody opposed to House Bill
365, please indicate by raising
your hand.
Populate folks in the room. Is
there anybody opposed to House
Bill 365.
Right. So if you would line up
behind our presenters, please,
you'll have up to 2 minutes.
Thank you. Good morning, Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, I
am Amanda Debell, the deputy
secretary for teaching, learning
and Innovation at the Public
Education department.
this bill intends to do is
separate the charter school
division from the PED and we
have a few concerns with that.
One, the public education
department exists to serve all
public schools in our state.
Which includes charter schools.
Moving the charter schools
division under the direct
supervision of the PEC would
embolden the PEC to work in
isolation from the PED which
creates further division for
schools.
To, moving the charter school
division under the direct
supervision of PEC would also
put our district authorized
charters, schools at a
disadvantage because they would
no longer receive the great
support from the division.
Next, all schools will always be
administratively attached to the
PED for functions such as
accountability, finance, and
following state statute. While
we agree that the current
structure may create challenges,
it is always our intention to
work productively with the PEC.
Uh, to support the needs of all
schools, including charter
schools. At this time, we stand
in opposition to the bill, and
it is as it is currently
written, but we are open to
conversation around how to amend
the bill in order to best
support charter schools as well
as the PE.
I wish to speak in opposition?
Right?
Nobody else, we'll come back to
committee represent Baker.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um, Representative
for bringing this forward.
I was actually shocked when I
learned.
That the piece he could not hire
its own staff.
that right there. It's when we
It really drew my attention,
kind of watching the spill, um.
So, Mr. Chairman, um,
Briefly, if you guys can just
tell me about the 2%.
That is, you know, as far as the
responsibility to charter
schools, I would appreciate it.
Thank you.
OK.
For
Uh, Mr. um, the 2% withholding
is provided for in statute for
charter, um, those include an
annual site visit, um,
monitoring of charter school
performance, as well as some of
the other oversights that are
that are um taken care of by by
people from an authorizer and so
those can vary depending on an
issue and that 2% is there for
those oversight and support
activities and uh uh Chair Bert
can articulate a little now.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. Um, so I wanna
give you a little bit more
background about myself just
because I actually think I have
a little bit, well, actually
not, I'm not so unique anymore,
but I think I was one of the
first former PED employees. So I
actually used to work on PED and
the executive leadership before
I became a commissioner in 2020,
and now we have actually since
then 2 more former PED charter
school division staff, um,
actually charter school division
directors that are now part of
the PEC as well. So
Actually a very melded um
commission at this point. I can
tell you from my perspective on
the commission and the level of
clarity or transparency we have
in the 2% today is actually more
than the commission has ever had
in its history. Um,
Starting in 2020, we initiated
really good discussions with the
PED just to see how much the 2%
was, where it was being spent,
who it was being spent on, there
was never any clarity before
that time as to the exact dollar
amount of it or how exactly the
PED was spending it. I can tell
you from my own knowledge and
expertise. When I was hired into
the PED in 2017. I was not hired
as a charter school staff in any
way, shape or form, but I
hired under the Charter 2%
money.
And so the PED has used Charter
2% money to hire staff outside
of the charter school division
for for decades, for a long
time. They, it's been used
outside of the charter school
division. Now coming into the
PEC there has been more
transparency on exactly how much
the money is, where it's going.
There is an MOU right now in
which the PEC did concede to up
to right now, a 30%
administrative fee that goes
straight to the PED in order to
support our charter school.
in our division and in our
commission. So for example, in
FY 23 are the total 2% budget
was about $4.3 million. The PEC
and charter school division
spent about 2.1 million of it.
The other half was spent by the
PED on various initiatives and
staff.
FY 24, the 2% money was 5.2
million, and the charter school
division and PEC spent about 2.6
million of it. So once again,
just about 1% of the 2% was
actually going to PEC CSD and
charter school initiatives. This
year, we have about $5.7 million
projected, um, for the charter
2% and once again, our, our um
budget has stayed flat at 2.6
million, that would go to the
PEC CSD, the
rest is being utilized by the
PED, um, mostly on staffing, but
we also know because of some
increased transparency in recent
years. It's also going to
programmatic pieces in the PED
like in FY 24, about $400,000 of
it was used to pay for the dash
software for the entire state,
not just charter schools. So
this money is being spent
outside of just charter schools.
We do have more increased
transparency on it, but the
amount of money that's actually
being used to spend.
On the PEC and charter schools
division is about half of what
is being taken by the uh by the
department.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that lengthy, um,
but informative explanation.ies
representative.
Um, my, my last question, Mr.
Chairman.
And uh representative.
As I support a separate uh PEC.
But, uh, Mr. Chairman, I also
became aware of a very obscure
thing in statute where the PEC.
As some connection with the
school board where, where a
school board removal or
suspension of a board.
One before the PEC. Do we know,
Mr. Chairman, if that statute
still exists, or do we have any
kind of
Attempt to take it so that it
truly is, it's separate.
Entity and working only with
charter schools?
Mr.
I believe it's thank you Mr.
Chairman Representative, great
question. There's actually
several items in addition to
that, that is still in the in
the charter schools Act and in
the creation of the commission,
um, we would be open to right
sizing, you know, uh, making
those technical changes that are
actually supporting the work
that's happening, um, there's
several items, but that is one
item that is still in there at
this time. There's also some
attachment to um CTE work.
There's also, um, a 5-year
strategic plan, um, there's a
couple
Elements in the statute that
created the PEC that haven't
really followed what the
practice of it being the state
charter authorizer as the
primary focus has really been
what the work has been.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank
you. So I mean, that's, that's
what I'm saying about if we're,
if we're going to make sure that
we are truly focusing on this
commission is doing the job that
they are sent uh sent for and
elected to do.
Then we shouldn't have crossover
into the school board
association if there were some
kind of action or anything else
or so.
Uh, along with this, I also
recommend that we separate that
out there that way we have, you
know, clear lines and we don't
have any kind of confusion.
Or crossing of agencies and or
entities for the school board
association, so.
Um, those are my questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It was about Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative and all.
I am
Have several questions where to
begin.
So, um,
I understand. I'm gonna go to
page 4.
Section
Uh, 3.
All of the
Section, Mr. Chair, that is
underlined.
Beginning with um A.
And then numbers 12, and 3 are
all the new additions, correct?
So
Thank you um. So,
In looking at that and then
going up above to the other
underlined.
Lines 8 through 14.
Well, I'm sorry, particularly uh
lines 10 through 14 brings a
little bit of concern to me. I
agree.
Um, Mr. Chair, as many of you
know, my husband is a former PEC
commissioner and we've had a lot
we had.
A lot of experience about the
need for staffing, so the need
for staffing is indeed um
something that that is really
important, dedicated staffing
and a dedicated office.
What concerns me.
Is that the PEC is an elected
body, public education
commission is elected body.
As an elected body.
As as we.
We are tuned in more directly.
With the constituencies, Mister
Chair, that we represent.
Consequently, language like is.
A referenced in line 10.
That the commission and office,
and this is where I need the
clarity.
It says the commission and
office and then it continues.
Oh, we'll monitor state
chartered schools for compliance
with the public school code.
So my question is how
Involved
Will the office be in the
monitoring when it is the charge
of the commission itself.
To do
The monitoring, accountability,
transparency, and responding to
the needs of the constituencies.
So,
If you could kind of weigh in
on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Caballero.
Um, that's actually an
incredible question, and it
actually really gets to the
heart of where the disconnect
can come from. The commission.
Authorizes all the work of the,
the department of the division
of the staff. So staff really
should be taking all the
direction from the commission
and executing on whatever
policy, whatever requirements
that the PEC sets, and that's
how the monitoring should be
moving forward. They should be
going as representatives of the
PEC under the direction of PEC
votes of PEC guidance, that's
how it should be, um, and that's
actually where.
Right now that system is still
present. Right now, the PEC does
guide the charter school
division staff. And that's where
sometimes the disconnect happens
is the PEC will make a vote,
will make a policy, we'll make a
requirement, and then oftentimes
the charter school director or
charter school staff will have a
different or competing or.
variants of that initiative from
the PED and from the secretary.
So they often do get combined
with
two different directions coming
at them, priorities of the PEC
which are already happening, but
then they also get directed by
the secretary on a similar
initiative, but maybe in a
little bit different way. So
this would remove that dueling
um.
Uh, instructions that they're
receiving. So they would just be
under the instruction of PEC
alone, moving forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chan. Thank you
for that response, so.
Going to line 12.
The, they will also be making
periodic reports to the
commission on the activities of
the office.
And perform other duties as
required by the commission. My
again, uh, Mister Chair.
I just want to make sure.
That
The commission doesn't
inadvertently through whatever
having a staff because when you
have a staff.
Um
As many of us are experiencing
now we have a staff, uh, they,
they do incredible things uh
things that we as elected unpaid
are unable to do on our own, so.
The only cautionary note would
be that when this is set up
that.
It doesn't
Deter from the role and
responsibilities of the
commission, and the commission
needs to make sure, Mr. Chair,
that that's incredibly clear in
the um job descriptions as they
work through offices which are
going, no, it's in here.
So my second, um.
Concerned. Now this is a
concern, and that is that.
When we remove the oversight.
Responsibilities, Mister Chair.
From PED.
In my view, this is incredibly
important because PED is
charged.
With um.
Ensuring part of their charges
ensuring inclusion and equity in
all that we do.
And includes the work of the
commission more more importantly
in my view.
Because
Um, Mr. Chair.
charter schools, ideologically
and philosophically.
Should not be in my view
replacing.
Public schools.
That's just in a a foundational
um.
Element
of
The public and what we do.
In order to ensure
That
The commission
Doesn't go into a direction,
Mister Chair.
That would endanger that
relationship that we have as a
legislature.
Constitutionally to public
education.
In my view, there needs to be a
certain degree of oversight
responsibility.
Because the public education
department is our
Um, public.
Oversight
So
I don't see anything in here
except for number 5 on page 5.
Number 3, which it says it makes
recommendations to the
department and then B remains in
place.
Which gives me some assurance,
Mister Charett says the
commission shall continue to
work with the department to
develop the five-year strategic
plan and so on.
So
Somewhere in here, I would
suggest.
Um, I know you're moving forward
out of.
If we move this out of the
committee.
Somewhere
I think we need to include.
A statement or a section.
Or or within that section, um.
Include if you agree, obviously
you're the the sponsors of this
legislation.
Um
The oversight, maintaining the
oversight role of the PED.
And um
clarifying that relationship
somewhere down here in that
section, that's where I think it
belongs.
and that gives.
That avoids what I believe any
potential.
Litigation in the future, it
avoids uh any Mr. Chair undo um.
Criticism, I would say, of PEC
and the role, there has to be a
marriage.
Between the two in my view, so
do you think that's something,
Mr. Chair, that
You would be amenable or how we
could work that in.
I like, uh, Mr. Paul.
Uh, Mr. Chair, what you're not
seeing in this bill.
is hundreds of pages of crossing
out charter schools in the
public school code. So that
still stands that the public
education department will be
overseeing charter schools for
all the things that it oversees
uh traditional public schools
for, um, this would be a much
longer bill and have a much
broader intention, if that were
true. And so what you'll see is
the same oversight from PED for
charter schools, it's always
been extra for the authorizer
authorizer's involvement. And
when you see
In the bill here, um, that it
mentions uh holding schools
accountable to the public school
code.
The vision here and the way this
works elsewhere is not that they
will be overseeing every bit of
the public school code, but it
allows them to hold a charter
school accountable should PED
see a problem, or should there
be a complaint to OCR with the
US Department of Education that
that uh needs remedy, that would
then be brought to the
commission so they can hold the
school accountable individually
in addition to what might happen
from from either department that
I just mentioned.
Mr. Chan of Paul, where would
that be in this bill?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Royval Caballero. Again, it's,
it's not in the bill because
we're not changing all the
oversight that the PED conducts
on on charter schools presently,
including school budget priority
schools, bureau, any one of
those if it touches public
schools, it touches charter
schools because we're public.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Paul
representative it's in the.
Remains in the code, so to
speak, um.
I I still.
I still worry about um.
The equity and that and the
reason, another reason why I
bring it up is because I know
there are a lot of um
community-based.
Approaches.
To
Our charter schools, our local
state charter schools.
That go oftentimes.
Misunderstood.
Because of debased and coming
from the community. So
culturally and linguistically.
Centered
They, they are.
And in some ways,
Misunderstood because they are
culturally and linguistically
centered.
And so
Somehow, somewhere I'd like.
That oversight to remain.
And um and I appreciate the
chair mentioning of the
commission, mentioning the
partisan.
The 5 and 5. I appreciate you
mentioning that.
Because it is representative of
the state.
However, not all.
Of our
Foundational belief systems
align.
Along the lines of
Equity and based schools and
what they're charged with. So I,
for the record, say that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you calling.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, as mentioned by us, and
rounds earlier, you know, I've
been a very big.
Of state school
And um
I've been advocating that for
years.
And earlier we had a, a bill
that um kept PEC intact, but we
got pushback.
From PEC, um, so.
For me, I mean, I'm hoping that
when we're starting to see some
of these changes, so we can
start making.
Uh, an overall change within the
state within.
So
Other questions, members
represent Doris Velasquez.
Mister chair, um, members of the
committee.
And sponsors, um.
I want to say that um.
I've, I've been really grateful
to some charter schools that
have worked with.
Some teachers that are amazing
teachers.
That not, have not been in the
end a good fit.
Or your typical and
Um
And yet I still have some
questions and I have some
concerns.
Um
Should we approve this bill.
Um, there's a lot in here that
I still have questions about.
Many of the questions I have are
in line with.
Representative Royal Caballero's
questions.
Um
But as I was as I was thinking
about your request, it, it is
logical.
You lead staff.
In order to do the things that
you're doing with charter
schools because they are
exploding, they're everywhere
and they're in much greater
numbers than they were 5 years
ago, 10 years ago, certainly 15
years ago.
Um, certainly since the time
that this commission changed to
um to be addressing the needs of
charter schools.
Um
And so, so it hit me as y'all
were talking that.
Um, I've always known the
commissioners were elected, and
I totally understood that, and I
totally understood how that
replaced the state ward.
Of education, um, and I, and I.
Worked in the PED, I understand
the ways that people are hired.
I was an exempt appointed by the
governor, and there are a lot of
positions in the PED that are
like that and and others that
are staff.
And um,
So I guess what I'm getting to
is we've got not only two
systems going, but two very
organically different systems
going.
One
Elected like school boards.
One appointed or hired.
By the current governor that
will change when the governors
changed.
And um,
So many issues that come up just
with that alone.
Um, that I don't see explained
in the bill.
Um
I
I think it's really important to
meet people's needs when they're
meeting the needs of our kids in
education.
Um
And, and, and having also been
involved with the Martinez.
versus Board of Education
lawsuit.
I, I would like to see some
specifics on in the bill.
On how this would affect kids
with disabilities.
The kids with disabilities that
you serve, how this would affect
English.
Learners that you serve.
Um
And I'm not sure where it might
fit.
But I have some concerns about
that. I have some questions and
this is a great idea. I'm
wondering if we need more time
to think it through.
Um
I
Don't know where the money would
come from for your staff, but we
haven't decided yet.
Help the public education
department.
is going to look.
Next year or the year after.
And um.
I'm wondering, I, I, I'm.
I'm sorry that we're in this
position at this moment in time.
Um
But I'm wondering if there are
other ways to provide the
funding for staff that you would
need so that we could still be
in alignment with the state
constitution.
And in alignment with
Um
The needs, I'd like to
start with the response. I want
to remind everybody.
Uh, you know, we will say
charter schools and school.
They're all accountable the
statutes that apply to all of
our schools and so whether it's
uh what we're doing all the laws
that we're working on and
appropriations like decks, all
these things apply to every
single school charter schools
are every single school. They're
public schools, they abide by
all those laws, so I personally
wouldn't add all that stuff
because they're already single.
Secondly, would be funding this.
It's not a new income stream.
We're not looking for more money
saying that the charter school,
uh, commission should be able to
handle to hire their own staff.
So I don't wanna just. So to me,
this bill isn't like some
radical thing, it's more of a.
Putting the staff where they'll
be most effective.
So, Mr. Chair, does this change
the accountability because I.
I had the similar question, the
wording on page 4, section 3A2.
Talks about cooperating with the
department.
And I, I
I would like maybe to see
something a little more con.
That
Spells out
The um layers of account I will
say the.
The accountability model, the
vistas, that the state does will
continue forward.
Forever. This doesn't affect the
accountability of PED for every
single school in the state. They
will always have that. That will
always be followed. In addition,
schools that are authorized
under the PEC have additional
accountability that they have,
and I would actually.
Argue our performance framework
as being the ultimate equity
measure for our state in our
schools. We don't just hold
students accountable to our our
schools accountable to students'
performing just on the state
assessment. We're now provi
we're getting additional data
from our schools that many
school districts aren't even
looking at school by school. So
we look at additional internal
data from schools, we look at
equity data, so we're actually
in our.
new performance framework, we
actually look at student groups
and the achievement gaps between
student groups for every single
school under our, um, portfolio.
So we are really trying to, in
addition to the PED
accountability, our schools
receive an incredibly high
rigorous additional
accountability in their
academics, in their
organizational, and in their
financials. And that's all on
top of what we will continue to
collaborate with all of the
reports that
PED provides for schools. We use
those in our accountability
model as well. We will continue
doing that any report that the
school that the office of
special ed provides, we will
take into account and be able to
hold our schools accountable for
those, and that's in it, so all
of this is in addition to what
the PED is doing for every
school. Um, Mr. Chair, I think
that would be wonderful news,
um.
However, I'm still concerned
about the language.
Um, I don't know how.
We have so many charter schools
and each has their own process
of selecting their own students
for the school.
And I don't know how kids with
disabilities would be affected.
I don't know how. Um.
I, I just want to make sure that
I totally understand what I'm
voting on.
And I apologize that I had not
studied it more carefully and
and represented Garre especially
apologize to you for not having
come to you with questions that
I didn't notice.
Until now
Until we were actually
discussing this.
Um
But I, I do still have a
question.
Thank you, Representola.
Thank you, Mr. Sher, I guess I
have one of the questions is
following up, uh, what, uh,
Torres Velazquez was asking.
I just wanna make sure that I
understand this correctly. If
there is a conflict on a on a
decision from peace.
would, would make that decision.
It is a conflict and, and, and
they come to a different uh
agreement or
Who will make the ultimate
decision?
So I can tell you it, it depends
on what you're looking at. Uh,
there is, and you can actually
see in the bill that the there
is a system in which the PED
secretary is often used as an
appeal authority to the PEC
decisions. So that is still
protected in this. So the PEC
does have an additional layer of
accountability for a lot of the
more high stakes, uh, choices
that are being made across the
PEC charter schools have the
ability to appeal to the
secretary. That is preserved in,
in the um.
I think Mr. Chair
Representative, I'll remind you.
So there's some stuff that it's
not unique.
Mr. Chair, that, that clarifies
a lot. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Chef.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, you know, I like the fact
that the PEC is an elected
board.
And I want to say that
If PED withholds 2%.
They need to give 2%.
I, I, why am I not surprised
that they're withhold 2% and
give 1%.
That, that is, that's not OK.
Uh, since
I took office, we've increased
the education budget 60%.
We have went from
Almost last
Alas
Somebody
has oversight there.
We need to talk about.
Uh
I
Certainly support
Bring PEC up to do their job.
And I support
Uh, returning to an elected
state school board, which we
tried to do last year.
But uh he didn't ever get her
chair.
Thank you.
All right, I don't have anybody
else on my list.
What's the will of the
committee?
Mr. Turner Representative Lara,
right, so you have a pass. I'm
gonna give that to represent
Vincent because he's thinking he
was trying to weigh in, unless I
was wrong, representative.
OK, here's the 2nd. All right,
Madam Secretary, if you call a
roll on a do pass motion for his
bill 36.
Representative Baca.
Representative Chatfield, yes.
Representative Gonzalez.
Representative Guola, yes.
Represented Lata.
Yes.
Representative Mirabel Moya.
Yes.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Yes, and Mr. Chair, I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Cullen, yes.
Representative Torres Valesques.
I am so torn.
I just yes or no.
Representative Vincent.
Yes.
Represented
Madame Vice Chair Garrett.
Yes
Representative Romano of Romero,
sorry, you go to the first.
Uh
Loses
Yes.
Represent Romero. Yes.
All right, so before we call the
vote, Represent el Caballero to
explain your book.
Thank you, Mister Chair, and
it's important to move this
forward from the stand of what I
said earlier about, I understand
the need for
administration and for staffing.
However, I have grave concerns
about the accountability and
oversight, um, sections not
being clarified to the extent to
which. Great. Thank you. You
have a unanimous due pass on
House Bill 365. Thank you,
folks.
All right, so we will see you
all on Wednesday. A note to
members, please make sure you're
keeping track of the schedule,
because we're going to be
changing it a little bit more
than we have, obviously within
the 24 hours, um, but excuse me,
excuse me. Excuse me, ma'am,
we're still conducting business.
Everybody, if you would, please.
I'm making some announcements
for committee.
All right, so
As I was mentioning, we're going
to be changing the agendas a
little bit more often, probably
having more items because we're
getting to that point in the
session where we get bills
through or not. Um, so please
keep on the agenda and if you
have questions, comments,
concerns, please bring them, but
with that, we'll see you all on
Wednesday.
