Hearing health field three.
Amendment for discussion all
right so we have a motion to
discuss the amendment house bill
three eighty one second by
Representative Garrett
discussion on the amendment
folks support well if you would
thank representative there and
thank you committee okay I've
got this of.
I you all heard the bill and we
discussed it thoroughly on
Monday and we determined that we
didn't need the appropriation so
on page one line fourteen it
a striking appropriation and
insert in lieu thereof
appropriations.
Number two on page three between
nine to twenty two and twenty
three insert the following new
section section for
appropriation one million
dollars is appropriated from the
public education reform Fund to
the Public Education Department
for expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty four to support
educators.
With teaching English to
speakers of other languages any
unexpended or unencumbered
balance remaining at the end of
the fiscal year twenty twenty
four shall revert to the public
education reform Fund Mr chair
that those were the only changes
all right thank you so much
discussion members on the
amendment.
I move we adopt the amendment to
house bill three eighty one.
So we have a motion to adopt the
amendment second by
Representative Ezzell.
No discussion any opposition to
adopting the amendment see none
you have an amended bill
discussion on the bill itself.
All right seeing none.
Representative Lara.
One is amended thank you all
right so you have to pass a
motion on house bill three
eighty one as amended I heard to
all give that one to
representative will call on this
one I'll get you next time
Representative anymore where all
right is there any opposition to
the test motion.
Seeing none do pass on house
bill three eighty one as amended
thank you ladies and gentlemen
of the jury.
Thank you Representative all
right so
I will say that house bill four
eighty one which is our third
item will be rolled to Wednesday
So we'll hear that on Wednesday
not today
And then we have hospital for
eleven server then Pettigrew.
You Mr chair and members of the
committee or we have no
amendments on this bill so I can
take it to pass right now we can
get out of your.
No we'll have some discussion
first representative Cadena by
you don't have amendments
because we didn't get any and
you would have broken are for
twenty four hour rule.
We take action on the bill so
when you're ready representative
please thank you so much for
this morning and thank you for
finding time in the in a way to
get this in here very busy
Committee
Mr chair members of the
committee to my left is period
Valdez the executive director of
the PS four and to his left
those protons are the board
chair and
find a engineer with the Salazar
Miller associates.
Mr chair and members the.
The changes that the you see
inside this bill are pretty
straightforward and all of these
changes Mr chair and committee
are changes that were
recommended by the Legislative
since the review committee which
house bill two oh nine did pass
House Appropriations last night
with the sensor addition that
you see in the very tail end of
this.
So with that the they're
expedited comedy pass within
this bill reduces the
administrative burden and also
increases the
Governorship Fund redefines a
few things.
Section one inside the
definitions are just modernizes
and cleans up a bunch of the
language and we can answer
specifics on any of those.
In the the following sections
sections two and seven deal
specifically with the intern and
with the surveyor it internship
from the engineer and surveyor
certifications both of those
changes are pretty much the same
specific to the discipline and
it deals with three and eight
deal with a professional
engineer and surveyor changes
again those changes are
consistent with the nature
within both sections specific to
the discipline four nine for the
same thing application and
examination fees
one of the interesting things in
section four nine that you'll
note is both in both sections
the term moral turpitude which
is been a term is been being
pulled from from
Most of our statutes over the
last several years has been
pulled and replaced with maybe
that may impede the ability of
the applicant to perform
professionally as determined by
the board of rules.
So we address that issue the
that we see in statutes section
five and ten deal with the
licensure renewal fees once
again specific to the discipline
six eleven the exemptions.
Section twelve is the sense that
rural in sections thirteen
fourteen deal with.
Wording changes from scholarship
to university support and
increases the the board's
ability to.
Put funding out from a hundred
thousand dollar love real level
to two hundred fifty and all
that comes from the fund balance
that exists.
And with that Mr Mr chair and
committee I turn it over to my
experts that whatever they would
like to have and then we would
stand for questions are a
welcome gentleman briefly
please.
More and thank you Mr chair
members of the committee for
lotus to speak this morning
regarding these changes we've
tried to again try to bring up
our practice act with the these
changes and also to meet some of
the nationally
standards national standards
that are out there as far as the
definitions go and we've tried
to again.
Assisting those who are here in
the state of New Mexico and try
to bring up the numbers of
survey our licenses by adding
the expedited process which is
a mere to the engineering expert
our process so we've tried to
we're we're looking at two in
that for the surveying
profession and again to keep it
brief
And in the engineering
scholarship to aid those
universities or institutions
which may need assistance
purchasing equipment for service
programs or
Looking into expanding their
programs into serving so we're
trying to do that sure Mr
commander as an.
Please share.
Members the committee very
briefly again
thanks for your time this
morning as I mentioned of the
scholarship the expansion of the
scholarship and providing
equipment was something we were
approached by from the
university's we didn't feel in
our AG Representative didn't
feel that we could if utilize
the existing language to fill
that so we try to make that
change
one of the other notable changes
in their I I think it is that we
had a request from people who
are going through school now the
existing language did not give
experience credit while also in
was achieving an advanced degree
and that's fairly common
language across the US that it's
that way but we were approach
saying that that was really
viewed as being somewhat
antiquated that a lot of people
now are going to is going to
work full time after bachelor's
degree and continuing doing
remote education for masters or
other advanced degrees so the
language is proposed will give
simultaneous credit for that so
that was thousand dollars meant
when other minor add that I
would say that might be of
interest to the Education
Committee not a change here for
the change at the board made and
policy last year is that recent
graduates for New Mexico
universities those graduated
within the last five years and
our New Mexico residents we
waive all registration fees for
those individuals so it's a way
to try and encourage the
investment made through the New
Mexico schools to stay here and
return to the state.
Representative thank you.
Mr chair and committee I believe
you all have one of these as
well kind of gives the
highlights of of everything we
just try to go over and eight
minutes all right thank you
great thank you so much for the
presentation all right so we
will go to our audience if you
are in support of house bill
four eleven online please
indicate by raising your hand.
Those the in our audience
support for house bill for a
lead in okay we'll start in
front Sir please you have up to
two minutes welcome morning Mr
chairman members thank you for
the opportunity my name is
Michael and I'm executive
director The New Mexico mining
association our our some of our
engineers and that and a few
issues with some of the material
contacted the sponsor and
respectful manner responded to
the concerns they had indecently
mediated the concerns of a hat
and we stand and support thank
right thank you for please Sir
give up two minutes welcome
morning Mr chair members of the
committee claim that the with
Mexico State University we can
stand in support of this bill
and thank and Representative
Pettigrew and chair small for
bringing this forward our
students very much benefit from
the scholarship or tuition fund
as I think they're describing it
in the bill and also the
additional options to fund
equipment which is very
important to our university and
also New Mexico tech University
of New Mexico I believe our
beneficiaries so we just the
usual also support thank you
right thank you anybody else in
our audience and support.
All right do we have opposition
either online or in our audience
to house bill four eleven.
All right not seeing any welcome
to committee representative
please.
Just a simple Mr Chairman just a
simple clarification experience
credit simply means experience
not academic.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative get.
Well Mister chair I have some
questions.
Right now I just have one
question I've always wanted to
ask Mr chair the professional
engineer the PED because I
always see it and in the D. O.
T. what how do you become a
professional engineer what do
you what yes education and is
this and every category of
engineering that that
designation exists so madam
chair arm Mr chair and and vice
chair I'm gonna give you my
experience and then I would ask
my experts talk about what it
takes to get it done now.
So as as I graduated I graduated
with a four year degree from and
a bit twelve school which is a
American board of ed of
engineering.
And so they set a baseline for.
What a school.
Can how they teach them what
they teach across the the U. S.
and once you become that a bit
accredited school school you can
during school you can take an
eight hour exam for your
certification as an engineering
intern.
In the state of New Mexico at
the time that that I ticket I
had to wait.
Four years before I could take
my P..
And so I had it for years of
experience in as my dad very
which is a professional engineer
professional surveyor was very
clear it's four years of
education it's four years of
knowledge on the job training
not one here four times.
And he was very clear about that
you need to do expand what you
were doing you needed to be able
show continual growth and what
your to and then you have to
take a an eight hour exam in
some states like in California
where I actually ended up taking
my exam I had to take another
eight hour exam that dealt with
Construction earthmoving and
calculation from that side and
then also a seismic exam.
With that and so after that then
I was able to get it these rules
have changed just a little bit
so I'd like for for Perier Carl
to talk about why this is
important and what this does to
help us because the rules to
change that.
Thank you.
Mr madam chair members the
committee to be licensed in
engineering you do need the a
caller said education and now we
allow to take the exam with two
years of experience but then
they still have to wait an
additional two years to get the
total for years to be licensed
and the differences well is that
the exams are now offered by
computer based testing and are
offered year round so any any
student can register when they
feel that they're prepared and
take it at any time.
There's also
the only difference between
engineering
disciplines is the structural
structural discipline because
it's been more vigorous dealing
with bridges buildings that one
is a sixteen hour exam that's
again those are national exams
to not set by us but their
national exams at individual
have to take sure.
Thank you very much for
explaining that thank you that's
my only question thank you
Representative Ezzell please Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative rate through the
freesheet you bring in this bill
because it does spell out and
helps these people that are
going on to get their
engineering and surveying the
license can you tell me the
steps that let's say somebody in
state engineers office right now
has to go through to be able to
fulfill that particular role
make your expert witnesses can
help.
Mr chair vice chair
Representative though I am gonna
ask period and New Orleans for
the okay.
To.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell members committee for
someone to be in the state
engineers office and.
The need to be if they're gonna
be holding the title of state
engineer the need to be licensed
within the state of New Mexico
as a professional engineer and
they do have to go through these
qualifications in order to be
able to hold that license Mr
Chairman representative and
expert witnesses I appreciate
that because it is a very
rigorous Judy at.
It's very many rigorous steps to
get to that point and they do
have to have follow the
qualifications that are set
forth and I think that's very
important for all members of
this committee to now as far as
your survey adolescents go I
know that they do whatever comes
to the land surveys how
important that is in case
somebody is by and tract of land
or a creature of land to make
sure that those are in place so
I think what your bill does
Representative it makes it for.
More economically feasible for
these people to be able to take
those exams to get to the state
that they need to be so thank
you very much for bringing this
bill I appreciate that's all Mr
chairman right thank you
Representative have anybody else
but I did have one question.
From page twenty seven we're.
Looking at the university
support
Forgive me if you had mentioned
this but it's also including
a quick minute in related
materials can to talk about what
some of the equipment and
related materials might be for
this program please Mr chair and
and members of the committee I'm
gonna I'm gonna give one thought
on this and I'll turn it over
the amendment.
In the engineering from the the.
We have an and southeast New
Mexico.
We use drones to accomplish a
lot of our serving right.
The drone may cost me eight to
ten thousand dollars the camera.
On the other hand is worth the
five to six times that amount
and so when we look at things
from our college standpoint
making sure that our students
have the have the tools that
they need to be able walk and
industry is very important and
that's one of the reasons why in
my opinion the two hundred fifty
is probably a little bit on the
light side with that I'm gonna
ask for expert witnesses say
answers well please Mr chair
going directly to a
Representative Pettigrew just
mentioned last year we did have
a request for support and
specifically it was a drone from
one of the universities
fortunately the education they
get cost breaks on equipment so
it's not as much as if you're
buying it on the market but
there are all sorts of
techniques mobile light or in
this case was one of the things
they want to put on this
particular unit as well they
were developing a replacement
curriculum actually for a a
program they could no longer
maintained at that particular
university
so as far as equipment goes a
drone is a good example
certainly not a soul simple I'm
sure you can all imagine various
pieces of equipment the other
materials that would go along
with that using again the drone
as simple there is a high degree
of processing that goes along
with the data on this other
software there are manuals or
other things that go with it so
beyond the physical equipment
that would be what's referred
to.
Right now thank you all for that
answer
And so currently how do.
The colleges and universities
pay for such equipment.
Thank you for the question chair
and
Mr.
Funds to your question currently
the university's use their
funding or they request funding
through the legislature to
purchase those equipment.
They know that they have.
A plan for that equipment.
In the.
The north can be about a year
requesting that funding that's
how they go about it currently
is through throughout funding
either using what funds they
have available to them right now
for the request a special
appropriation through the
legislature and Mr Chairman more
quickly
two things one is I know with
respect to Mexico tech which is
the one that had put in this
request they've relied heavily
on industry to provide funding
the mining association being one
of those and certainly the
mining communities has given
heavily attack but I will say
last night we had the
opportunity to give a
presentation to students there
on licensure and ethics and I
asked the professor that brought
for the motion and it was on
funded so he still doesn't have
that program going so I guess
the answer the questions not
well just to you know how they
can obtain those that funding
otherwise.
On being asked to related
questions.
I made thank you are you also
able to use capital outlay for
any of this equipments.
Just from the legislature I
would seeing no reason Mr chair
Committee why we couldn't do
that
Do you have a different answer.
Mr chair I am uncertain of the
answer so getting an indication
from behind you for Mr Abbey
that yes that may be.
Used by the university requested
in the because what I'm seeing
here is we're looking at you
know another field like we do in
education of you know the
changing use of technology
technologies involving making
life easier and more difficult
in some ways because we have to
keep up with the financing of
that technology the use of it
and the students that we're
working with that they have the
knowledge of how to utilize
those tools before going out
into the professional realm so.
Appreciate your all the answers
to those questions I don't have
anybody else on the list I did
have a tabling motion for
present Baca.
That's a different okay.
The Mr Mr chairman I move a do
pass.
So we have a due pass motion by
Representative Baca all right
that it has much more
Representative Baca a second by
Representative me to a more apt
any opposition to the do passed
motion making an assumption.
Okay you have a pass on house
bill four eleven thank you
general the chairman and that I
think you committee and thanks
for the fund.
All right so house memorial
fifty one represented a.
You're up.
We'll give you a moment to
transition.
Yeah.
Senators.
Senator all right.
Fifty one yes thank you Mr chair
this this is a House memorial to
really study what are
educational for me looks like I
I mean with all these different
changes I really don't know how
it's gonna format and I think we
need to study it and I hello and
I just put it in so that we do
this during the interim so that
we can really see how these
things we put in the at risk we
put in this week and I would
actually like a formula that
people could actually read I
mean I I don't know how many of
you there tried to read this
formula it is impossible to
sorted out I mean it would be I
mean I just think everybody
ought to be able to read a
formula it doesn't seem like too
much of an S. that's why I'm
putting this memorial for and I
stand for questions Mr chair all
right so we will go to the
audience those in support of
house memorial fifty one.
On line is there support for
house memorial fifty with.
All right.
Any opposition to house memorial
fifty one either online in the
room.
All right not seeing any
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative it up for
bringing this bill I'm one of
the sponsors as well.
And.
Being involved in public
education for the many years
that I've been involved this
particular formula has been seen
as the holy grail.
Of funding for public education
in the state of New Mexico and
it's been federated and
reiterated many times so that
even though
we initially started off with
With
A simple formula they have been
so many deviations I think from
that formula that it's created
A road map for disaster in my
opinion in the way we fund
public education I still like
the premise but I think we need
to figure out a way that makes
it easier for educators
educational and administrative
there's and folks were.
Focusing in on funding public
education.
And this is my political
statement we've always under
funded it even though people say
we have a lot of money it's
still underfunded because
there's there are so many great
needs I think this study
simply a study seven to formula
which is simply trying to ensure
that there's a way we can
navigate through all the.
Once is in the in the bill to I
mean in this in the formula so
that we can get our act together
to like that thank you Mr chair
I would Representative box.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this forward I do
think that we need to study this
and and really take a look at
how the money is Mr chairman
there's also bill bill one that
ninety nine is coming out there
that actually is addressing a
portion of the funding formula
which is the at risk the fine
arts in also a principal
responsibility administrative
responsibility so I do think
that what we want to ensure that
the monies that we appropriate
for getting to the intended
places as far as getting the
students as far as there's of
need as far as whatever they may
be both at risk in other types
of students so I want to make
sure that any funding former
that we do it affects all
students okay not not just those
that have certain but certain
targeted so I support this I
think that we need to take a
look a good time in during the
inter Mr chairman I think it's a
good that we can have
presentations from both school
district's communities to see
how the money's in the dollars
are affecting kids in that
classroom.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
respond to leave you know
senator getting imminent did
this this funding formula when
he was Attorney General for the
state I it's it's I mean we kind
of laughed about it laugh and
issue because he said we have
the best equalization formula in
the country the problem is we
equalised at the level of
poverty
and there is a lot of truth to
that
so I just I just want to say
it's it's it really is time to
do the last time a study was
done was two thousand nine it's
two thousand twenty three a lot
of changes as happened has have
happened in the state and I and
also within our school
district's education is change I
think it's time we really look
at this and and maybe at New
Mexico in depth in the interim
that's that's the purpose of
this legislation thank you.
You Representative Garrett thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative I to signed on
and I'd forgotten until last
night
but I think something that's
really vital that we discussed
last night at appropriations
dinner is it can't be done in
silos that point requesting the
L. E. S. C. in collaboration
with LFC finance and
administration I think that that
is vital that we don't have a
hearing here hearing here a
hearing there but that either
collaborative dates I just think
that we have to ensure that
happens and since the memorial
we have to ensure that it does
happen so thank you for spear
heading this and thank you for
ensuring that all the people are
involved a that's my only
comment great thank you
Representative go to a.
Thank you Mr chair and that's
pretty much following that
that's actually my question and
with this question I want to
show up have a chill hello new I
am on this according the
breakfast right now with the
with the government opened me up
and I and she actually say that
memorials have not something
that she favor a lot and follow
up a lot so I'm wondering this
is really crucial and important
the four when it was created
when I was born.
So why am more Eleanora veal to
make sure that happens.
No memorial house memorial only
has to go through the house I
don't have to go to the Senate
we can do it in the house it'll
happen we have the LFC and
director here she helped me
draft legislation so if you can
get the job done faster I say
get the job done faster.
That's why I did it okay.
Hopefully this legislative work
on this because that's where we
had this morning thank you thank
you thank you Mr chair here
Representative middle million.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I I'm gonna more
of Representative Garrett's
comments I love the fact that
all all the players are are
going to be involved in this
because having things done
individually there's that lack
of communication and it's like
when when everybody's at the
tables and and focused on the
same thing it's it's excellent I
really like because I even just
this year the amount of changes
that are going to happen to this
formula and and since it's been
since two thousand nine
you know it's definitely time
and as a new person that is
looked at the formula when we
had our our new member
orientation and they showed it
to us and it was Greek.
I'm like what what what how do
you do this a simpler of
something that you know lay
people can actually understand
would be wonderful so I I like
this idea.
I'm just economic when director
wonderment respond to the.
Please director on Mr Chairman
representative me demo Moya
okay according to engine omics
laboratory which is for the
premiere
lab at Georgetown University
that really focuses on education
funding the best indicator of a
strong funding formula for
public schools is that people
particularly lay people can
understand it who so it's a very
important piece in terms of
really a functional funding
formula.
Thank you for saying that and
Mister chair I I I think that is
that's absolutely true because
then when you have that better
transparency to the public they
better understand what you're
doing and that you what you're
and what we're doing here is
actually for them and they can
see it and understand it instead
of saying oh yeah I have no idea
what you're doing you know but
I'm I'm just it's hard for
people to trust because they've
been burned in the past so if
they can understand it it's it's
much better.
Thank you thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair thank you all
for doing this I unfortunately
I'm not I'm not sure when it
when you said the first for
every year of funding formula
came forth but I was not of
boarding after the second
iteration but I promise you.
That was I worked long and hard
with the former Representative
Jimmy hall to get the small
rural schools considered in in
the current formula but
immediately again not work
because small rule is so
subjective in the are in need to
our opinions and we have
recently added the word remote
in the in that matters so when
you consider the formula
realize that the wording also
matters you know numbers matter
wording matters and and the I
assume that you're talking about
the SCG but but I can tell you
there was once an unfortunate
group of staff they were
assigned the
job of helping me to learn what
the SB nine pro for formula was
that they still probably talk
about it today with.
In the end I did kind of
understand that but all those
formulas are important to our
schools are very important so if
you look at the SCG I would
encourage you to look at those
other formulas along with them
and be very cognisant of the
wording because of the wording
absolutely applies the numbers
and it it makes a lot of
different thank you Mr chair.
Thank you any other questions I
have I would just like to say
would go through the chair
though we excuse me Mr chair Mr
chair I would like to add that
A former PED and director Kurt
Steinhaus to his doctor degree
on that educational formula with
recommendations we have a world
of talent in the state that can
really look at this and I think
make it simpler and
understandable to the lay person
I really think that's really
important so I appreciate all of
you hearing this and thank you.
Right any further discussion.
A couple comments so I look
perhaps.
Okay
So I appreciate you bringing
this forward and obviously we
had a short discussion when you
asked me to sign on to it and I
think it's something that's
super important I mean we talked
before committee about the last
time that the SCG was study was
right around the last economic
crisis in two thousand eight
which may not have been
incorporated since then we
continued to talk about how we
have not even return to the same
levels of funding in our
education system since two
thousand eight
and then in the meantime we've
added everything out what's
index this and this and this
factor and all those are present
in being looked at
And one of the other things
we've done in the past few years
is also stop taking credit for
impacted
and I think looking at the
impacts of that because part of
the discussion was that we're
gonna have to back fill up to
sixty million dollars or so from
state money if we were not going
to be taking credit for impacted
and I think that also needs to
be a part of what the discussion
is what's happening with the
impact aid dollars as far as
helping our tribal students as
well as with C. impact to
our school finances by having to
back fill on that amount of
money I will say I appreciate
you know the focus on making it
clear and and and easier to
understand but like with
anything I mean it's going to be
complex and it's gonna be a very
complex part process and I think
the fact that it may have to be
explained and walk through with
people should also not be
necessarily a bad thing because
I think we're talking about
clean up
but it's a messy subject on
because we do have to factor in
for the needs of eighty nine
school districts and how can we
do that in some cases it may be
a little bit more complicated so
I think that's something to to
not be afraid of but to welcome
that we can articulate it and
explain it and that it is
explainable and most importantly
is that it is.
Sarah toward all of our students
in the state I think is is is
really a key feature of of what
we're trying to get at because I
think since the
the causation guarantee.
Happened here it's been a model
for a lot of other states seen
distributing
Money to our students into our
districts in a way that that is
a lot more equitable than it is
in some other states so
those are my comments with that.
All entertain a motion if there
is one Madam we'll go ahead.
I move
of the Basel because then what
if you want all right so we have
a due pass motion on house
memorial fifty one second
Representative Trujillo.
Any opposition to the do pass
motion thing thank you
Representative thank you house
memorial fifty one to pass our.
Cool so we're waiting on Senator
pope.
Appropriate balance resented
pope he's in Senate education
needs to vote on a bill
hopefully will happen very very
soon close in those.
Important place.
We will hold in place for five
minutes and see where he's at.
Thank you Mr chair economic.
Yes Representative lane please
so we don't need tomorrow I
assume that's correct that there
is that a fair assumption
Representative lane is that a
request no I.
About to for the rest of the
committee
the reason why I asked Mr chairs
because tomorrow is Bridget
Khan's birthday next.
Of our analysts for Ellie is
sick so otherwise we could sing
Happy Birthday to her tomorrow
but we don't have committees
maybe Representative carefully
this and Happy Birthday.
A request for Representative
Garrett.
Okay.
Okay have you heard.
Thank you.
Happy Birthday to me as hello
this is yes an offline okay.
Thank you for all the work you
do for us thank you.
All right so we do have some
students I believe in the back
is that true.
All right we if you would stand
up introduce yourselves tell us
where you're from.
Hello my name is.
at ten million a community
college and I live in trouble
all right welcome.
Hi this is the ability of the I
was in shock from New Mexico to
the cost of this early college
high school and I'm so glad to
be here and we can hear
everything.
Welcome you.
Hello I'm not available and I
also will and then at the New
Mexico and I am attending New
Mexico State University welcome.
All right you have your Sanchez
as well thank you and even
though it was just me F. with
center and we're M. based also
in Montana county in New Mexico
welcome.
All right any of the others see
a couple that have.
Introduce yourself welcome.
Good morning tell us I'm also
good lesson new food etcetera
welcome.
As a worker also good lesson if
it's under with the community
education program and and the
great welcome to health
education.
All right.
So.
Well hang around will stand in
recess Senator pope somebody to
present Senate bill one twenty.
The.
On.
So this is.
The use of.
The service.
There's a.
Most
of all.
Yes.
Since.
Fifty.
Yes.
And.
Reserve.
But.
This is.
Nice to.
I.
I.
Just.
Yes.
No.
Additional.
Education.
Anyway.
The New Mexico.
House.
is.
Actually.
