Representative more about.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam vice chair here
and Mr chairman.
Right so we do have a quorum all
right hi everybody hope you had
a good weekend.
So.
House Bill three seventy one
which is first on our agenda
that's going to be rolled into
at the request of the Sanchez so
we're going to start off with
house bill four oh three is our
vice chair Mister chair please
when you're ready thank you Mr
chair I'm ready this does have
amendment do you want me to talk
about the bill first when we get
the amendment passed out you'll
talk about the bill and then we
can move the amendment for
discussion.
Okay and I do have the expert
witness should I need him for
technical question he is online
Winston Berkman dream he's the
policy council and deputy
director for advocacy at the
student borrower protection
center
so house bill four oh three is
the public service loan
forgiveness multiplier.
In a bipartisan act the public
service loan forgiveness act was
passed in two thousand seven
however add joint faculty and
contingent faculty been denied
access to it due to the
technicality and how the full
time teaching status is
calculated so this bill fixes
that by allowing at joint
faculty to add up many
adjectives to teach at different
like they me teach it two or
three institutions so they can
add it up are there full time
that full time aspect of their
service because they are done by
our early they don't get the
full time status they deserve so
this allows
if they're working thirty hours
per week for eight months they
use the multiplier and then they
can qualify for this federal
forgiveness on this is not state
money this is the federal act
but the full time status is
determined by the institution so
this allows them to get credit
for the hours they spend out of
the classroom doing their
preparation doing their required
hours meeting their students and
it does everybody have the.
Committee amendment okay the
amendment can I have a motion to
discuss the amendment please.
The amendment.
For.
Posted for discussion for those
thank you have a second.
K. R. second by Representative
Madrid all right so we're on the
amendment okay the end mint
strikes the word public for
example if you're an ad showing
at the university of the
southwest and Hobbs that's a
nonprofit institution and
according to the public loan
forgiveness act you qualify for
this so we had to take out the
word public so that it aligns
with the actual definitions in
of the public service loan
forgiveness act and then it just
changes one day as a result of
that.
Discussion on the amendment.
There's no need to have a motion
to adopt the amendment.
We should talk about all right
second second by Representative
Trujillo is there any objection
to the adoption of the minutes
seeing none do have an amended
bill all right and thank you Mr
chair stand for questions.
Thank you vice chair so we will
go to our audience online those
on my right hand side if you
wish to speak in support of
house bill four oh three please
indicate by raising your hand.
Right hand side folks nobody
nobody online of.
Christine good morning you have
up to two minutes welcome.
Hi thank you I'm on a full time
professor at the university of
New Mexico.
And I will benefit from the
public service loan forgiveness
in June of this year when after
working ten years at the
university of New Mexico as you
all know
rate that the the bottom of the
pay scale in terms of peer
institutions.
And in June of this year I will
be forgiven eighty six thousand
dollars due to my service to my
students of the institution that
might adjunct colleagues who
work full time.
across institutions have the
same expertise I do put in even
more work are to fulfill the
needs of their students they
should have access to this
program as well
I I really encourage New Mexico
institutions to observe adjuncts
and their full time status thank
you.
Thank you.
All right anybody in my left
hand side as we speak and
support right so certain front
Sir please up to two minutes
Garcia with the United academics
and I don't know what that
device to come see us lose the
Portland I have a substantial
student loans I'm on the also
the the forgiveness program the
U. S. government thanks to the
current administration of their
efforts unfortunately that means
we struck down to the Supreme
Court this is why I think this
is extremely important and I
think the legislators and the
staff for being in this like the
small and supported and to
arrange it so that.
Those of us who are adjuncts to
provide a lot of hours teaching
Mexico I think you're seeing the
Mexico.
Can get loan forgiveness thank
you thank you others so we're
speaking support please Sir you
have up to two minutes Ernesto
long the president United
academics at the university of
New Mexico and we represent add
jobs in Albuquerque Gallup
Valencia tiles and Los Alamos
and I stand today in support of
house bill four three thank
thank you others please Sir you
have a two minutes thank you Mr
chairman John George with anti
New Mexico and I think this bill
is really well times is
something that many other states
have already started the process
I or have enacted it has New
Mexico kind of unpacks the over
reliance in our higher education
institutions I jumped in and of
non tenure track faculty this
will go a long way to
acknowledge that it's not just
the time spent in the classroom
but your advising grating you're
assisting students all outside
of those twelve classroom times
this is something that the
federal government has given
states latitude to do and we
think that New Mexico should
take them up on that offer and
help out R. I. judges struck
thank thank thank you.
All right not seeing any more
support is our opposition to
house bill four oh three either
in the room or online please
indicate there is in your hand.
All right welcome to committee
Representative Ezzell.
Mr Chairman there's just a
little problem with the news
that the.
On the amendment under number
nine is is paycheck lied to and
after the first occurrence of of
insert the provisions of and if
you turn the men met over.
It has the key and so one of
those needs to be restricted.
Mr chair that of course it's on
line in excuse me.
It needs to be changed of.
Mr chair and Representative line
ten eleven twelve it's
distracting language the
effective date of the provisions
of state would now my bed Mr
chair.
But you cut it will Mr chair
because we didn't catch it the
first time.
Thanks for bringing attention to
it.
That it Representative up okay
any other session Representative
Lara.
Right so we have a due pass on
house bill four three as amended
second by Representative
Trujillo.
Is there any opposition to the
do pass if I may be so bold.
Okay you have to pass house bill
four three is amended thank you
Mr chair thank you they're all
right.
Representative Trujillo going to
House Bill for seventeen.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I thank you House
Bill for seventeen it's related
to higher education is providing
a minimum concept compensation
for full time path of faculty at
public post secondary.
Institutions and we're making
appropriation to my right is Dr
and this still don't go with my
expert witness and he is has a
statement that he'd like to
present please morning good
morning chairman Romero
committee members my name is or
not so long ago
professor at the university in
New Mexico School of Law.
In the president of United
academics of the university in
New Mexico.
I'd like to begin by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the
committee for voting unanimously
nine zero to establish minimum
salaries for licensed teachers
in pre K. through twelve last
year.
In for voting unanimously this
session to support the
establishment of a minimum
salary for educational
assistance in our public
schools.
H. B. four one seven seeks to
establish a minimum salary for
faculty at New Mexico's public
colleges and universities
comparable to the minimum salary
set for licensed teachers in pre
K. through twelfth.
HB four one seven proposes a
minimum full time salary of
fifty two thousand for faculty
working on a standard might nine
month contract twenty six
thousand for faculty working
under single semester
appointments in seventy eight
thousand for faculty working
extended three term in twelve
month contracts.
The minimum salary for part time
adjunct faculty shall be
determined by multiplying the
faculty members appointment
percentage by the establish
minimums.
The bill includes an
appropriation of thirty million
dollars.
It's an estimated cost based on
faculty salary data provided by
twenty three of twenty nine New
Mexico colleges and
universities.
Four of ten you can get.
the bill includes an
appropriation yes the HSD
The exploitation of advances not
just New Mexican problem it's a
national problem and by enacting
H. B. four one seven New Mexico
could lead the nation in
defining what a living wage
should be for public educators
working at post secondary
Institutions H. B. four one
seven will help over three
hundred full time faculty and
over three thousand action
faculty across New Mexico
universities and colleges yet
the likely cost of paying a
living wage to these dedicated
public health college educators
is nominal given the current
budgetary surplus New Mexico
so for these reasons I encourage
you to pass HB four one seven
I'm also authorized to report
that I spoke with marks of Asia
executive director New Mexico
council of university presidents
and that they have and that they
also support H. before one seven
Mr chair we stand for questions
all right thank you so much so
we'll go to the audience those
in opposition to house bill four
seventeen online please indicate
by raising your hand those in
opposition.
In this opposition in the room.
Okay those in support of house
bill four seventeen please
indicate by raising your hand if
you're in the room I saw Maria
incitement secretary please have
up to two minutes welcome.
Senator Rodriguez and I am
cabinet secretaries in Mexico
higher education department I
think that it's important I feel
for seventeen across the United
States have some faculty members
provide forty percent of
instruction on average and
higher education institutions
especially community colleges
specially community colleges
here in the state of New Mexico
how do you for the work to help
all those who are supporting
involved part of talks forward
and this is definitely a
starting we hope that we can
support therefore we will work
in the inner with our partners
at the union and other
supporters to really discuss
this issue so continues to be
top of mind for all of us thank
you Representative appeal for
bringing this bill forward and
thank you for supporting faculty
staff at all levels that are
here and institutions thank
thank you anybody else on the
right hand side wish to speak in
support.
Right will go to my left
incentives which speaking
support right now for sure if
you good morning you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Morning Mr chair representative
my name is order to with the
lecture in biology and you all
the tricky Representative you a
U. N. M. R. faculty you and I'd
like to express my heartfelt
appreciation for the support of
our sponsors Representative
Trujillo Representative Rubio
yes Representative grow up and
Representative Chavez and I'd
like to thank you Mr chair
providing time for this today.
I agree with everything that's
been said so far in support of
this bill and I'd like to share
statement that was sent to me
from a colleague from the human
elements was a temporary part
time faculty member from UNM
scallop campus juvenile can be
here today confined to some of
he is featured also in my hand
out that you were given he's.
Right here.
This is this is from juveniles
works.
Like many of my colleagues I
dedicated over a decade of my
professional life to teaching
for you and without significant
pay raises for opportunities for
advancement.
It's demoralizing disappointing
and eventually leads to
disillusionment these are the
three days that no one wants for
a career I want to speak for the
scores of motivated educators
who fill the gaps with pride we
love our students and we teach
like any full time lecturer we
simply want respect in the form
of compensation and advancement
in my opinion it's borderline
discrimination because we are
not allowed to teach more than
nine credit hours which
conveniently keeps us below the
rate limit for budget and keeps
our income consistently low I
personally been informed by the
New Mexico retirement board at
the university use the five
twenty our rural one reporting
my retirement credits which
means that I lost five years of
credit towards my retirement the
university has since rescinded
this by twenty rural but I still
lost those five years I just
wanted to say that we.
We have those two minutes thank
you so much for opportunity.
Thank you yes thank you others
in support please UPSR will jump
to the front.
You give two minutes welcome.
Good morning chair and the
members of the committee.
I'm up my name is Michael
securing the associate chair of
Chicana Chicano studies at a
associate professor of American
citizenship because that is at
UNM it is a first class
institution one of the places
places we fall down as a as an
institution of the state is in
pain R. faculty
our faculty are not paid nearly
as much is our peer institutions
and many of our federal
department faculty are the sole
support of their families and
the work full time.
They're not PED and that is
commensurate with their
credentials and the about the
work of this causes us
difficulty in retaining
experienced faculty it's
first instructors and
It harms for students that we
lose that faculty so we'll pay
our our faculty the university
and the students I thank you for
supporting this bill thank right
thank you others in support of
my left please Sir welcome back
here Representative Timmons.
Thank you chairman rebuttal of
the committee which is about C.
N..
The Mexico them I want to thank
Representative feeling
Representative Roybal Caballero.
As well as others for their
service as well as supporting in
percent this legislation.
I would like you to think about
this from the way the patches
are treated the way that
employees of Walmart or in the
sense that we don't work enough
hours to get health benefits or
other benefits with our I've
been doing this for a number of
years seven at U. N. M. S. two
thousand two is present as well
as teaching jobs outside the
system thousand twelve so you
need to use a New Mexico's
invested a lot of money in the
in the thousands maybe forty
thousand dollars to master's and
a PhD not gladly loving the
teacher got a discussed.
So there's this discussion of
range right well the most
important ways to keep people in
New Mexico and the way I study
that that is a senior policy
analyst and forcing Policy also
Legislative Education Committee
nine percent some of you in
terms of research and
presentations I've done about
the education in New Mexico
Mexico is becoming a leader in
terms of a variety of areas of
language culturally relevant
education if you want this to
continue you'll find a living
wage to act back to the as well
as anybody to teach in the state
of New Mexico as you have for
native American language
educators thank you for your
time thank you for your service.
Thank you others a militancy
please family of up to two
minutes welcome morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee with Holland president
of AFT New Mexico I stand in
strong support of this bill on
behalf of the members of
antisemitic off college campuses
of higher education institutions
in New Mexico this morning we
have seven hundred seventy five
signatures on a petition up no
more advocacy in support of this
issue I think her actions have
been overlooked for decades and
it's long past time to create a
case after the both recognizes
the importance of their also
pays in the comparison there K.
all calling us for the past one
of our institutions and our
colleges and universities work
because they deal please support
this legislation as it is
necessary and necessary for
staff to recruiting retaining
respecting these important
educators thank you thank you
anybody else in my left hand
side.
All right we'll go online if
you're online English speaking
support please indicate there is
in your hand please.
Primary of up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the of the committee my name is
merry par Sanchez I'm the
president of the national
education association in New
Mexico also representing
postsecondary staff across the
state we stand in support of the
house bill four seventeen
anymore postsecondary
compensation for many of the
reasons that we support our us.
Minimums for K. twelve
compensation and that is to
attract and retain the high
highest quality of educator and
to prevent educator turnover
which has a is a high cost to
the state of New Mexico much
better spend of money to invest
in these educators with the
minimum compensation so with
that I would also like to thank
the sponsors and hope you will
support this important
legislation thank thank you all
right Laura.
Morning Leri of two minutes
welcome.
I thank you thank you Mr chair
and representative my name is
Laura Halford I am a member of
you a you and I'm and I am also
an associate professor in the
college of education I teach in
a teacher education educational
leadership and policy department
and I strongly support this bill
one of the things that we've
started to see in teacher
education classes at the
university of New Mexico is that
difficulty in attracting local.
At Johns because of the
discrepancy between the pay
minimums for K. twelve educators
and then the lack of payment
amounts for faculty at the
university level and so we're
having trouble getting some
add jobs to be able to work in
our department and
Representative the
the knowledge that comes from
the classroom because they make
more money staying in the
classroom that coming and
helping us that are to do
teacher preparation so I think
this is overdue and it is an
important piece of legislation
for New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Joshua good morning
Josh we of up to two minutes
welcome.
Hi good morning everyone thank
you for having me my name is
Josh Reddick mentorship Beckett
I'm a new level Mexicano PhD
candidate in American studies
they taught as a TA at UNM for
four years I'm currently a
fellow at the center for
southwest research and part time
faculty at UNM and I strongly
support eight House Bill for
seventy as an educator who just
work two jobs just to pay for
tuition research and every day
cost of living I can speak how
insecure employment affects
overall student education when
an educator has to worry about
paying rent there less effective
at lesson planning for their
classes and this overall harm to
students when it comes to higher
education job in security does
not make obtaining a degree in
higher ed scene where for many
native New Mexicans like myself
we are less likely to seek an
advanced degree and and many
native Mexicans are less likely
to are more likely to leave the
state a love for better paying
job I have much more to say on
this issue however I know time
is tight so thank you for your
time I hope you consider passing
additional thank you right thank
you.
Hi Christine you're back welcome
back of up to two minutes.
Thank you so much good morning
everyone again my name is
Kristen elder I am associate
professor of English at UNM I am
the secretary for usual way UNM
and I am the president elect for
the faculty Senate at the
university of New Mexico first I
wanted to express my
gratefulness for
your all support of the minimum
salary provided to K. through
twelve educators and educational
assistance based on this
president's I'd support HB for
seventeen and what and hope that
you will pass this bill as well
I want to raise everyone's
attention to.
The full time job that my
colleague at San Juan college in
Farmington and are now
advertising after losing one of
their colleagues to
a faculty member leaving she is
now going to work at K. through
twelve schools because she can
earn a living wage.
Rather than higher education and
K. through twelve education in
the state of New Mexico
competing with each other.
Or faculty and teachers I hope
that we can.
Keep our teaching experts in the
state of New Mexico so that we
don't have to choose from.
A decreasing number of educators
in the state because they can
only they have to go elsewhere
in order to afford a living so
please support this bill so all
educators in New Mexico can.
Four to live feed their families
thank you.
All right thank all right.
Anna good morning you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Anna
rose I am the union
representatives for that
graduate assistants teaching
assistants and research
assistants at UNM and NMSU
twenty five hundred graduate
workers statewide our members I
would not be at directly
included in this bill however we
are here today to speak and full
support of the passage of house
bill four seventeen and I've
seen firsthand how the hollowing
out of faculty positions due to
the inability to inability to
retain faculty members it's a
huge Bridget burden on graduate
assistants we have some graduate
assistants down at NMSC teaching
on the graduate level because so
there are so few faculty in
their department I'm who are in
a continuing continuing to be
there continuing to teach at and
just an advisor Byrd and at.
Will.
Is a real trickle down effect
when faculty is so we want to
support our our action to
colleagues and support our full
time faculty colleagues who may
not be point making a living
wage yet and I encourage you to
ask for an additional.
Thank you all right
Paula morning quality of up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you so much chair the
sponsors of this bill and Mr
chair for hearing us today I am
whole accordance Wallin I am the
unit to vice president of U. a
U. N. M..
I Representative the Johns in
our faculty you and I bring to
say the hopes of all of those
people that you will hear our
words and just understand I know
that many of you do I've spoken
to many of you about the plight
of the object the permanently
temporary at UNM and I just
thank you for your consideration
of this bill as someone who's
been an employee at UNM since
two thousand eight R.
permanently temporary employee
who has hi the crushing
conversation after crushing
conversation over Hey over
permanent employment over the
opportunity for advancement
which is just never happened.
You can't understand what this
bill would mean and so I think
you to all of you legislators
for your consideration today
thank you for.
Thank you.
All right.
cement the.
If they have up to two minutes.
Hi everyone thank you my name
Samantha Committee I am a
graduate assistant at the
university of New Mexico what
this bill would not direct the
benefit need as an individual I
know what it's like to be
underpaid for the important work
of educating undergraduates at
the university are adjuncts
teach about seventy percent of
the classes along with graduate
assistants tenure faculty only
teach around twenty percent at
our universities in the state we
rely heavily on non tenure track
folks like our at jokes and they
are extremely important to the
education of our community
and so I would like to put my
support for this bill as
everyone deserves to have
A that can help them with in the
state thank you.
Thank you.
All right we'll come to the
committee Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair my neighbor now serve
on two committees together she
knows what my favorite question
is
looking here on this all the.
Our new it's so there's a thirty
million dollars
the cost to the general fund so
is that in house bill two Mr
chair and the members of the
committee may I do for to
secretary.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you
Representative currently as far
as house bill two on the house
side is concerned it is not
however there are negotiations
on the Senate side happening for
house bill two and I know one of
the points of conversation is
this very bill and that
appropriation.
Thank you Mr chair that's of.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr Zuckerberg any
microphone I've got three here
and I grab.
The latter joy Representative
Garrett to grab the
Representative amenable Moyle
okay.
Thank you ma'am
Mr chairman committee I have a
couple questions currently
You're talking about a minimum
of twenty six thousand per
semester basically what with
that teaching load look like
this course the the the number
of hours or number of classes
that are being taught because in
my.
Opinion Mr chairman and and
Representative there's a
difference between one section
in three sections so Mr Chairman
representative can you answer
that please committee for to my
expert witness.
Mr chair sorry.
The chairman Romero and
Representative Baca the
that the question is about what
constitutes full time at the
server Mr Chairman it actually
because what the worst as
reading this right here and
that's why needed explanation I
see twenty six thousand per
semester and my question Mr
chairman and and
Representative is.
What does that include how many
classes that include what is
that teaching okay sure
The mid Mr chair there there is
some variety across the New
Mexico colleges and universities
the standard range
for a full time a semester of
teaching would be between twelve
and fifteen credit hours or four
to five courses per semester.
So Mr chairman and
Representative and I I apologize
your your name is yes No longer.
Of last name is longer longer
all right I I don't thank you
The question that I have in the
I do believe earlier testimony I
heard that they're not allowed
to teach more than nine hours
because many of our professors
do not have benefits of can you
clarify that for me Mr chairman
and representative and Mr
longer.
That that they're we've heard
anecdotally that that is the
case that many
part time adjuncts are limited
in the number of hours that they
can work but
You know in at the university
New Mexico there are part time
adjunct to do in fact teach full
time.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Representative Mr
longer.
Are currently in this is a this
is maybe a question for the
secretary what percentage of
funds that are given to our
public institutions goal towards
salaries now.
Mr chairman my name is Terry
Rommel and the academic finance
director at the higher education
department and I do not have
that data for you right now but
I will be happy to pull for you
get to this morning thank you Mr
the reason I ask working in K.
twelve like I do eighty five to
ninety five percent of all
budget all monies are tied to
some salaries and so my question
Mr chairman why us that is by
increasing the cost of the
sellers of the employees if it's
already a high percentage were
in fact is that extra money
coming is it going to come in
terms of tuition or other types
of fees because Mr chairman and
Representative
You know as we said and I have
voted and I have supported the
lottery and I have supported the
opportunity.
But that's that comes at a great
price tag if by making these
minimums in this range here Mr
chairman that the amount of
money that we're going out to
use the phone that.
Could be extraordinary and so
Mister chairman I want to bring
that up
Also Mr chairman and represented
Mr longer you're doing this bill
does it only affect public
schools
Higher rates in here in New
Mexico.
Or what about if I'm a faculty
teaching for some other
university online university.
Mr chair and the.
Of Representative Baca the
language in this bill includes
only the state universities not
private entities.
In my last question is just Mr
chairman and Representative Mr
long ago currently like for
adjunct professors okay I am I'm
I'm currently at the K. twelve
of employee.
I have been the past been asked
to teach classes for grad
programs but the salary that I
was offered was about thirty
five hundred dollars for a one
section so Mr Chairman and and
represented Mr longer.
What about me what about the
person that may be employed in a
public school this bill within
state if they teach one.
Last a joint for any of our
public education they were
setting that anymore for them or
how does that work you funding
you know risk of my own time
working that I teach one class
I'm also going to get the twenty
six thousand.
No you would get there's a
formula in the bill that would
pay you at the rate of the
proposed minimum so if you were.
If you were
if you received an appointment
to teach a single three three
credit class or a point two five
FTE let's say for a semester you
would receive point two five
times the twenty six K. anymore
that's the rate that you would
receive.
Thank you so much for.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you Mr long
that
I worked at tells UNM and
northern for not long but about
five years and I really did see
this problem with that and
faculty I mean it was some of
our brightest best faculty
members because they were
younger and frankly more excited
about the job and I'll just be
honest and I to thought it was.
Really unfair and and I I I want
to say this is just not a
problem in New Mexico how many
states pay their at Jen actually
full time or have within its do
know that answer.
Mr chair and representative that
I'm sorry what is the do you
know how many states Mr chair
and expert pay their action
that'll do a full time salary
with benefits you know if that
happens anyway.
It is.
Yeah I mean that the the the pay
the meeting paying the full time
comparable to to what to what a
tenure track faculty might make.
Or at a lesser level I I would
assume it would be a tenured it
would be the same as a tenured
faculty member but how maybe you
know how many states pay their
adjunct faculty a full time
salary with benefits I if we
could keep the conversation
going through the chair of Mr
yeah Mr chair representative and
I I do not know the answer to
that question Mr chair though
the statistics from the national
A. F. T. have shown that there
are a variety of different
wages.
Of four different universities
throughout the country.
So it's not a it's not one clear
of salary Mr chair and
representative thank you and I I
do understand that I was I was
just curious if that if this
were what's a growing movement
or not I I hope it would be and
I and I and I'm supporting this
because I I really think
that how what is the percentage
of that jet faculty Mr chair and
representative that are now
working in New Mexico higher
educational institutions Mr Mr
chair and and Representative
based on the the reporting that
each New Mexico college and
university you're required to do
to the federal government we've
determined that on average a
majority of faculty at New
Mexico colleges and universities
are are at John.
Mr chair majority so over fifty
percent yes ma'am Mr Chairman
representative that is correct
over fifty percent and Mr
Chairman representative I guess
you know.
I worry that if you know they
could all leave and get much
higher salaries at K. twelve now
you know with the a PH year
masters I'm pretty sure Mr chair
and representative that qualify
for salary of seventy thousand
so I think we are in grave
danger of losing our university
faculty is adjunct faculty if we
don't really step up to the
plate like we did with teachers
you know to give them a salary
increase and we did with
educational assistance out
I think I think this is long
overdue thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative for about
coming up.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Mr leader for
being here today and
You know I I plan on record over
and over again about how
important it is.
For us to consider
across the board living wages
period we should be talking
about living wages across the
board but I think that in.
Having been an adjunct on having
been a graduate teaching
assistant hopefully I can
continue.
In those two capacities I have
seen first hand the exploitation
of our adjunct faculty the
exploitation of our graduate
teaching assistants and I say
exploitation Mr chair because.
In answer to your question
representative of well over
fifty percent of
we're hiring well teach.
Those that are teaching our
adjunct and for me to have set
up a structure and it's a
historical negligence on the
part of the university so if
it's going to take money to make
up and compensate for this
historical negligence then
that's what the university has
to step up and do and we as well
as the state Mr chair and and
representatives and panel of
because.
We've basically been using.
The positions.
To get away with not having to
pay what you would anyone that's
on a tenure track and that's
unconscionable for me I've seen
the rising housing costs and its
been brought up over and over
again
rising cost across the board Mr
chair and
There's just no way without a
with living wage that an adjunct
faculty at any level was a part
time to full time whatever
Locher taking.
At the current compensation and
that the current lack of
benefits that can they you know
we we I say we can't live on and
continue to.
To live under the circumstances
and it's very difficult to talk
about it because
it's embarrassing I've said over
and over again Mr chair and
representative that it's
embarrassing to me that we would
have allowed.
this to have proceeded in the
manner that it has and then
place the burden.
Mr chair also on the students
because it's unfair to place the
burden on the students with
higher tuitions you're correct
and so it we cannot continue on
this path and I know that we
have that here and hopefully the
support of higher ed of our
governor and all of that
recognised Mr chair how
valuable.
The
engine faculty are graduate
teaching assistants are they
actually are the backbone of the
faculty they're the ones that
are carrying the majority load
and so Mr chairman and
Representative I didn't have any
particular question because
Representative about the kind of
raised
Some of the questions that I was
anticipating but I do want
everyone to understand based on
my first hand experience based
on the testimony how important
it is to support this piece of
legislation and I wholeheartedly
do so thank you Mr chair
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative will you you yes
I will Mr chairman of sorry I'm
back on the floor.
You're right here you have I'm
trying to speed this thing up
we've got less than twelve days
left you know yeah no worries
I'm I'm there and did you say
your experts name is Dr longer.
Okay thank you for being here
today.
My questions are about the
funding for this he said that
it's over on the Senate side and
they're asking for thirty
million dollars from the general
fund.
Yes Mr Chairman yes ma'am.
I'm seeing.
It in the F. I. R. Mr chair is
is that this funding is
recurring.
Mr chair yes ma'am.
Is that going to be missed
sustainable Mr chair
representative Mr chairman and
and Representative I serve on
house appropriations and finance
and we're always of discussing
whether are requests for funding
can be sustainable I believe
that this cannot move forward
without making it sustainable
has to be recurring cost
because of.
This is an appropriation that is
just like funding K. twelve and.
Yet you have to you have to
ensure that the money is there
to provide for those employees
that are providing the the
education for those kids.
Mr Chairman representative that
brings to mind question I have
for you that whenever talking
about can we.
Sustained this the spending
spree that we're on right now
and Mr chairman I guess I need
an explanation from
Representative Trujillo why we
do have all the money that we do
have right now Mr chairman and
Representative is
Representative Ezzell so that
gas money that's coming from
your area and I truly and.
I'm I'm.
Being rhetorical simply because
you're being rhetorical the
issue though is if we do not.
Support this.
We're gonna lose our our hired
faculty we have to this is not
of part time these are not part
time institutions they actually
exist right now on the donated
time by the faculty that are in
there what we have to do is what
we've done it took many many
years to provide funding for K.
twelve it took many many years
to provide funding for early
education and these folks are
like ghosts in our institutions
you know you're getting your
education but we never really
acknowledge their existence the
reality is that they also have
to feed their families and we
have to make it sustainable it's
it's not if if we make it
sustainable it's we have to make
it sustainable.
Mr Chairman representative it
comes from oil and gas and
agriculture.
Oil and gas is number one
agriculturists number two as far
as funding for state budgets and
I don't know the the reason
we're able to fund education the
way we are is due to oil and gas
people need to realize that even
if you're working on your
computer.
Well I guess if you put make up
on its due to oil and gas if you
ride your bicycle to work.
So I I mean the list goes on and
on and on and I I just get
really really tired Mr chairman
and representative whenever I
hear about some special interest
groups we need to do away with
the whole mess.
They don't understand the impact
this has on our overall well
being throughout the United
States.
And especially since we are
right number two in the nation
for oil and gas production oil
production excuse me I need to
correct that it's of production.
We have seen what it's done in
the past I don't know if you
were here whenever we saw.
Our budget so it would here at
yeah stand what was at a hundred
and five dollars a barrel and
the bottom fell out of the oil
market and what happened then we
had to get back in ways that we
didn't even know were possible
to get back but we had to so as
far as being sustainable as far
as our funding for everything
goes not just education not.
Three PED not through higher it
through everything that we have
funded this year over spending
we're acting like gluttons here
we want more money we want more
money will when is it going to
end why are we saving some of
this money that we can use later
on to maybe fund projects like
this.
And to me we have.
The jobs that the oil and gas
industry creates is unbelievable
and.
What they do for local
communities is unbelievable at
what they do for our education
system in our local levels is
unbelievable so as far
sustaining I don't know if
that's going to be possible Mr
chairman because we are spending
it faster than we are saving it.
And it's not gonna last forever
folks.
Simple as that so whenever that
industry is gone guess what's
going to happen good culture
we've already seen what the
price of diesel fuel is right
now but the cost of a new
tractor is you could build a
brand new school for what farm
machinery cost right now.
So Mister chairman I guess where
I'm going with this.
It's coming from the general
fund again so how are we going
to continue to do that is it
going to be through higher taxes
I certainly hope not because our
families throughout the state
especially in our rural areas
can't afford that Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative I do
want to talk about compression.
And madam Mr Chairman
representative you if you could
address that issue I would
appreciate it very much because
this doesn't address compress Mr
chairman and Representative
result would you like to talk
about compression.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
perhaps just a little
I mean compression is existing
problem a real problem in higher
it right now and I guess our our
position is is that the the
problems of compression should
not prevent
the
The.
The payment of a living wage to
a to a public educators and
higher at I I will I will say
one thing that that minimizes
the the sort of exacerbation of
the existing problem of
compression
by this bill and and and that is
that this bill does not propose
paying a minimum wage to all
that junk said it proposes
paying adjunct faculty at the
rate of the minimum wage and for
example at the university of New
Mexico the average appointment.
Is a point three three
appointments okay per semester
instead if if they if if you
would if you were to work a
point three three appointment
across an academic year that's
that only comes to seventeen
thousand six hundred dollars
you know that's that is not
going to generate compression
problems with full time faculty
at at many institutions.
Mr chairman and representative
and Dr Longo I can see where it
with the and lots of
institutions because well it's
gonna damage morale of the
employees that are already there
that have worked there the
longest it's going to lead to
more turnover in my opinion and
it also states that in the F. I.
R. so therefore I do have a
problem with that.
Mr Chairman representative what
about any
In the those faculty positions
that have you representation can
you talk to me about that Mr
chair and representative result
yes they do and that is why the
members of those unions are here
with me today to try to
generate the support that's
necessary to increase that will
those wages the the issue Mr
chairman and Representative the
cell is that.
We're talking about about a
variety of things but without.
Education and without higher
education we can find
alternatives to oil and gas to
support and sustain the economy
of the state of New Mexico so I
think it's.
You can do one thing without the
other and I believe that at this
point in time.
The the fact that we could lose
those of.
Intellectuals in higher ed
because they'd rather work in K.
twelve because they get paid
more it's a huge loss for our
community so I believe that
those folks that you're talking
about the I think you refer to
the more you're a special
interests they're actually
advocating for their own wages
and and the wages of others that
are not part of the of the you
so that's why I'm here
supporting them.
Mr Chairman representative I
think you've got some of those
attitudes mixed up because what
I'm talking about as far as oil
and gas industry goes or special
interest groups that want to do
away with that particular sector
of business and our state okay
renewables is not going to pay
for it.
But the oil and gas pays.
Renewable small pay in a year's
time put the oil and gas.
People produce one hour and I
can substantiate that I do have
all the features that by this so
folks you need to pay attention
who's paying your wages okay.
Mr Chairman representative and
one of the analysis that I have
read and I've read all of them
of.
One of them states that there
the fiscal implications there
would be
Ring appropriation would be in
excess of self seven million
dollars do you agree with that
Mr chairman Mr chair men and
Representative Ezzell I'm not
I I read the FIR and understand
that but I'm not
an accountant or is someone who
deals with those numbers so I'm
assuming that that's the case Mr
chairman this seven million
dollars will affect just one
university in this New Mexico
State University so I do have
concerns about that
Mr chairman I'd like I said
earlier
Even though that some of the
faculty positions to have of
union representation.
And this is going to be
reoccurring money because I
don't see it any other way for
do it one year you kind of cut
back for the next year so yes it
is going to be recurring and
therefore I do have great
concerns about this there's not
a doubt in my mind that we
everybody wants to be paid that
minimum wage and I'm not
discounting that I'm just not if
we can.
Keep this up from here on out I
really can't.
Where we where overspent our
budget.
Mr chairman that's all thank you
very much thank you
Representative there.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward
Are there any minimum salaries
for currently in place for
contract full time or part time
the contracted employees.
You were I'm not.
Mr chair and and vice chair.
the whether or not there there
it established a minimum slide
through the collective
bargaining process for example
or well Mr chair and and
Representative it defines full
time and part time faculty and
sets minimum salaries for full
time in fact.
Full time faculty as follows so
I'm wondering is there any
anymore for a full time or part
time.
faculty member now not us at Jex
is there any in the state Mr
chairman and and.
Representative of vice chair
Garrett it's my understanding
and I can all I can do for here
but I've never heard of the
minimums existing at this point
in time in any of the
universities.
What.
Chairman of that is shared here
those salaries are set by the
governing board at each
institution.
So Mr chair and representative
and and possibly Dr Rummel is
there any do we have any listing
of what they are crossed New
Mexico.
As set by the a governing
boards.
Mr chair madam vice chair
million not have activities
every year when they go through
their budget negotiations every
okay the higher ed institutions.
Thank you because because Mr
chair representative how was it
determined that it would be
twenty six fifty two and seventy
eight.
What how is that determined.
Ms Mr chair and representative
it was also based on the
conversations by the members of
those governing boards in each
institution they we created that
base and then hopefully they
were working up.
Okay because because Mr.
Chair representative I totally
agree that we want living wages.
But
I'm also concerned about
compaction because.
University faculty are hired on
so many different variables
and then how does this affect
that so I'm just concerned about
that I've applied to be an add
jobs well no I applied for a
full time job at CNN and it was
thirty five thousand plus
benefits
which according to this would be
now fifty two thousand so I'm
just concerned about the
unintended consequences as we go
through it and my final question
is did we study did L. eight
LESC or L. E. S. C. look at this
at all over the interim Mr chair
representative Mr chair and
Representative no we didn't okay
thank you think question and and
just on the point is that L. E.
S. C. is not allowed to study
higher education to this point
however we have the bill that's
going through this because once
their pay with everybody in this
committee in order to do that so
we can get a head on these
issues issues in the interim
but with that.
One attend a motion
Representative okay I move it to
pass on house bill four one
seven or eight so we have a due
pass motion to a second.
Our second by Representative
will vote on madam secretary
called role on a do pass motion
please.
Representative Baca.
No I'd like to explain with over
Representative Chatfield no I
like to explain of a
Representative Ezzell.
Representative girl yes
Representative over yes.
Representative Lara.
No.
Representative Madrid the.
Representative nearby Maya no.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Trujillo yes.
But investor yes I'd like to
expand my vote Mr Chairman yes.
Hi all right so we have a hi
this is in committee
Representative Baca to explain
his vote thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative trio
you know that I support public
education my my question really
is about what the cost is going
to be of the actual to the
universities is long because for
those students who are not
receiving assistance through the
option or lottery the universe
is gonna have to make up these
costs somewhere and that may be
passed along to our student
also Mr Chairman
as far as with the through the
the interim process I I do think
that now hopefully with the
legislation that we can look at
this I'm all for having people
earn a living wage and so that
is without question people
they're providing a great
service.
I don't like with this kind of
legislation kind of takes out
the collective bargaining and
the local control the
universities to set those
dollars based upon their
community both of the.
Also the cost of credit are
because it varies instance
states from the most expensive
U. verse in New Mexico to some
of the other errors so it's for
that reason that I think that
this is a good idea I think it
just needs more study thank you
Mr chairman Representative
capital to explain about thank
you Mr along the same time
for it is as soon as this is
over we got twelve days till
it's over shortly thereafter LFC
will begin to me and we go
through the whole process of
understanding where the money
should come from how we can how
we can come up with it year
after year or if we can or we
cannot what how much money is
appropriate hello to all the
questions that we have in this
committee we dedicate that much
time to to trying to understand
all that and make preparation to
be able to pay enough money so
that people do have a a living
wage not I support the people
making good money not only by
the to make media money I like
people make good money but I
like it to go through the
process and and you know if you
just come to this committee and
there's been no preparation
before will then it makes it
harder to understand how we're
going to become an unfunded
mandate if it passes here and
they don't put money in it in
the Senate passed an unfunded
mandate thank you Mr chair right
thank you I think that was it so
the bill stays in our committee
all right thank you
Representative thank you very
much understands are working on
Senate bill three ninety seven
of the state here if you're
gonna present with Senator
Rodriguez will go to our last
item because I'm gonna be
putting on three oh seven for
Senator Stewart.
So I'm gonna hang around.
I was going.
Contact it okay.
Senator.
All right Senate bill three
ninety seven.
Lee is briefing production is on
the grill when you're ready
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I will be fast and
just fortunate and I can't
I can't not mention how
fortunate I am to have
Representative Trujillo with me
parting on this important bill
and I have staff in the
department of health here I
won't even mention titles or
anything because of the time but
I can tell you this bill is
merely to codify Schoolbased
health centers which are so
vital to our schools and our
kids in New Mexico we're
codifying them into statute it
doesn't change anything of what
we do today but we need to put
in statute so that they can be
legitimized and not at the whim
of some political organization
or changes they could be
flattened out and into
obliterated from schools so we
want to make sure that that's
all we're doing Mr chairman Mr
chair again this was another
health and Human Services
endorse Committee a
recommendation that was
discussed thoroughly in the
summer.
Great.
Right.
So with that we'll go to our
audience if you're online in
support of Senate bill three
ninety seven please indicate by
raising your hand please.
Those in our room on my right
hand side those in support of
house bill or Senate bill three
ninety seven can you please
indicate there is there are we
have a lot of COVID your
allotted up to two minutes but
if you could briefers better.
As always so we'll start off on
the right hand side business
park Surrey of up to and talking
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of the.
Mexico school board association
our association strongly
supports to expand school based
health centers across the state
we do this with the
understanding that the centers
will be created at the local
level is that a mandatory and
that the services to be provided
a retirement at the local level
as well so again thank you for
bringing this up forward in
response to send a strong
support also Mr Stan rounds
before he left in the committee
asked me to voice their support
from under the same conditions
as well thank you.
Thank you others on my right
hand side that we speak in
support.
Give up two minutes good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Laura like
Kellogg I am the current acting
director for New Mexico Medicaid
and I am here to stand in
support of this bill we do
believe that by advancing
additional options for students
in their schools and rural
communities that we will
contribute to the improved
health of all New Mexicans thank
you very much thank you others
Americans I please but to make
sure.
Speaking on behalf of Planned
Parenthood of.
Within support to this bill does
help.
Join the nation's
thank you anybody else on the
right hand side of my left hand
side doesn't support right
please Sir give up to two
minutes for thank you Mr chair
members committees weeks
registered lobbyists for the
hospital association we stand
strong support of this
legislation is based health
centers are critical to
delivering services and getting
access to services for kids in
need it does have a cascading
impact that is beneficial and
families in need so we stand
strong support it's a great idea
thank you to the Sanchez thank
you for thank thank you others
on my left hand side please many
of up to two minutes.
Educators in New Mexico and vice
president Cheney in New Mexico
and we stand strong support of
the school and school based
health centers promote health
and like with.
I health services to students
who were with us and receive
help otherwise increased
attendance at school.
For our students.
Really hard for anyone to focus
on learning when you're not
mentally and mentally.
Healthy and strong support.
Thank you anybody else militants
right so go to those online.
That's a good morning of a two
minutes.
That's the we can't hear you.
At the.
All right we'll see if we can
come back to you.
If you good morning W. of up to
two minutes welcome.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
deficient with New Mexico voices
for children speaking in support
of this bill Schoolbased health
centers are critical to
increasing child access to
health care and to improve
health outcomes in the state the
effects of school based health
centers also extend beyond
health outcomes because when
children have access to physical
and mental health care school
see reductions in absenteeism
and dropout rates may see
increased graduation rates and
higher GPAs for these reasons we
strongly urge you to support
Senate bill three ninety seven
thank you for your time thank
you.
Robert good morning of about two
minutes.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee are
Robert David director Robert F.
Kennedy charter school.
Our school and families have
benefited from the school based
health center on our campus for
the past seventeen years and now
I'm proud of our services to
other charter schools and
several traditional public
schools we've seen dramatic
reduction in teen pregnancy
sexually transmitted disease as
well as providing critical
behavior health for harm
reduction related to substance
abuse I certainly do not want to
see these overrated and stand
strong support of Senate bill
three line seven and thank you
senator and representative for
their sponsorship thank you
thank you.
Any M. I. N. M. M. to.
Good morning give a two minute
warning that good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Gabrielle Dietrich
and I am the executive director
of nami New Mexico I am I am a
committee in strong support of
this bill we believe that giving
children access to behavioral
health care services at their
school hopes to get back to the
business of learning thank you
so much.
Thank you.
Judy.
you also Santa Fe I would be
speaking in opposition are you
asking for opposition comments
now I know it's support.
All right Mary good morning
merry of up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee merry par Sanchez
president of the national
education association in New
Mexico as of lifelong educator
who conducted home visits in K.
twelve education
of not having
access to health care is listed
as a major reason why it is miss
of school and student attendance
is a serious issue in New Mexico
schoolbased health centers would
greatly help keep kids and
schools for everything from your
right two of the flu so
strong support of Senate bill
three ninety seven school based
health centers I hope you will
support I think the Sanchez for
free thank you.
Thank you right Melissa good
morning you have two minutes
walk.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and a
member of the legal team for the
Yazzie plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit Senator
strongly supports this bill and
thank sponsors for introducing
this important piece of
legislation school based clinics
improve the health of children
by providing an easy and
efficient way for families to
access health care and for
students in the for student
groups addressed in the lawsuit
Representative faced the TPS
inequities access to health
services is fundamental for
their academic success and
quality of life codified the
requirements of school based
health centers is an important
step in ensuring that critical
services sustained and expanded
to our most vulnerable students
we are still committee to pass
Senate bill three ninety seven
thank you thank you Loretta good
morning of up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this to the committee
and I wholeheartedly endorse
this legislation my name is
Loretta Trujillo and I'm
speaking on behalf transform
education New Mexico and for
many of the reasons stated I
just have to say that these
school based mental health
centers are essential to
supporting our teachers in this
current climate where students
are struggling in so many ways
in their mental health needs so
that's one other reason I wanted
to add thank you.
Thank you.
All right we'll go to opposition
if you're online and wish to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill three ninety seven please
and.
Our anybody in the room in
opposition to Senate bill three
ninety seven.
All right we'll go to online I
okay please you have up to two
minutes Sir well as it is always
the emails I will email.
But just the fact that Planned
Parenthood is for this bill is
why I'm against.
Okay that's a great thank you
Sir.
All right.
We'll go online Jodie give up to
two minutes welcome Jodi.
Here are Jody Hendrickson I am
the executive director with New
Mexico Family action is that and
we oppose this bill because we
believe that the bill provides
no clear path accountability or
requirement for school based
health clinics to properly
verify and miners eligibility to
consent nor does it provide the
requirements for parental
notification according to New
Mexico statutes twenty four dash
seven eight dash six point two
and unanticipated minor is only
eligible to give consent for
medically necessary healthcare
yes that unanticipated minor is
living apart from the minors
parents or legal guardian for
the minor is a parent of a child
also that term medically
necessary health care and it's
definition brings up questions
as to whether or not all of the
services provided at a school
based health clinic are actually
meeting the definition of
medically necessary health care
thus bringing the minor's
consent into question so because
there's no accountability
there's no a parent parental
notification requirements
there's no system to ensure the
proper requirements of the
miners eligibility to consent
are Matt then we request and
urge you to oppose the bill
because parents need to be
involved the miners eligibility
to consent must be verified and
the services that are offered in
the school based health clinics
must be medically necessary
according to that statutes we
urge you to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Alisa good morning let's see it
up two minutes.
This is a Lisa Martino the.
Okay Lisa Martinez with New
Mexico Alliance for life Mr
chairman members the committee I
think the concern for at SB
three ninety seven echoes the
theme this legislature that
political and government
interests are seeking to
circumvent parental rights that
they know what is best for
children better than the parents
and we can all agree that
children deserve access to the
highest quality health care
however seventy percent of
school based clinics are
offering a host of explicit
sexual activity related services
without parental consent this is
a concern when they're offering
entry during contraceptives
Corman containing vaginal ring
cervical cap for contraceptive
use spermicide all agents plan
B. and more that's from the
NMDOH website I ended back last
year the New Mexico department
of health claim that a reduction
in unintended pregnancies in
school based health clinic users
by forty percent how did they
achieve that we also know that
Senator Rodriguez last week
claim that on the Senate floor
the school based clinics are not
able to refer for abortions but
in fact I am first personally
receive nearly a half dozen
reports from schools across the
state that are indeed different
for abortions in Albuquerque
from Gallup high school Las
Vegas school Silver City and
Sapporo I've also received
reports of school personnel are
transporting teens in rural
communities to abortion centers
and if Senator Rodriguez claims
that it would be what I think
the federal law for these
clinics to do so I challenge her
to join me in submitting a
complaint to the Attorney
General if indeed school clinic
employees are violating federal
law by referring for questions
again if this is a concern that
I she believes to be true I
would gladly work with her to
make sure there is
accountability that we were
Stewart parental rights and that
we up truly protect children
from predators and from other
interests seeking to circumvent
parental rights in the Tory and
for that reason I sentences.
Right at the buzzer thank you
Judy good morning.
Two minutes welcome.
More from Ross on from Santa Fe
I think that this bill needs to
be looked in the context of HB
seven given the language of HB
seven vine with this bill it
seems obvious that there would
be no legal way to prevent these
clinics from also doing
abortions or gender surgery
planned parenthood is already
doing sex said in the number of
schools it's not a stretch to
think that Planned Parenthood
might be in the school.
Also also the end of the last
three percent none of these
services require parental
consent.
or any informed consent or any
parent transparency.
Hello please don't fund these
clinics unless it's just for the
purposes that were stated for
the existing health services for
money on education raise the
standing of the state on
education I will give you a
cautionary tale since I moved
here four years ago from
California.
I want you to take a look at
what happened Oregon on County
receiving and businesses
collapse in the state of Oregon
was California Caden
incrementally adopting the laws
of California please do not make
the same mistake for New Mexico
please keep our family and
Catholic Care thank you.
Thank you Angie good morning of
about two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr Chairman name is
Angie Smith I'm from for
talisman Mexico and I stand in
strong opposition against SP
three ninety seven I remember
when this bill came up last year
and it got my attention because
when I looked at the services
from these school based health
clinics I was astonished and
shocked at all of the things
that were offered under
reproductive health when I went
back when I saw that this was
coming back this year I went to
try to find evidence of the
still going on and surprisingly
I couldn't find any of that
listed anywhere which I thought
was quite shocking and
surprising.
I know a lot of people who
believe that these are good and
if all we're doing is we're
taking care of kids running
noses in your ear infections I'm
all for these but when we start
getting into this area this is
somewhere where parents must and
need be involved if we are
concerned about parents that
would have wrong reactions are
judicial bypasses that are set
in motion for things like this
there is a way to do that but I
have more of a personal story of
a young lady that caught her
parents are going to be so angry
at her firm stated she made and
she found out her parents were
not nearly as angry or just
curious she thought they were
going to be let's not get in the
way of parents that are doing a
great job because we're scared
of the few that may react wrong
we can put things in place to
protect those situations but
let's not drive a wedge between
the parents that are doing a
wonderful job everything good
sound solid citizens we cannot
afford to do that especially in
New Mexico please vote no until
we get this straightened out and
done much better thank you.
Thank you.
All right so will come to
committee Representative me to
level out please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and senator and
of experts here I have a couple
of questions of many of the
people in opposition have a have
asked about this so I want to
know where does parental
notification or consent lie and
all of this.
You're going to take that thank
you for that question Mr
chairman thank you might have
Kristin answer that.
Thank you.
Morning
you Mr chairman then to say
state your name and the year
title for the record my name is
Kristin arrested attended
collaborations manager for the
school based health center
program.
Department of him my name is
Kristen arrests which better.
I'm the clinical operations
manager for the school based
health center program with the
New Mexico department of health
in regard and Mr chair members
of the committee thank you for
the question Representative my
****
Schoolbased health centers are
operated by medical
organizations probably the same
medical organizations where we
all get our health care FQHCs
hospital systems our community
medical clinics and so in regard
to consents school based health
centers follow all of the exact
consent laws and requirements of
every other medical clinic in
the state so at the beginning of
the school year consensus go out
to families in registration
packets we all fill out
registration packets for our
kids that's for the consent
forms go and are signed if a
student who does not have
consent on file in the school
based health center comes into
the clinic they are
the they are the parents are
called families are called to
request consent for the student
to be seen and then a paper form
or in electronic form for
consent is sent home for
subsequent visits but consent is
is re received four visits at
school based health centers.
I'm thank you Mr chair so and
and experts and Representative
so you're telling me that
they're in no way shape or form
is anything going on for any
minors without the parental
consent parents consent.
Mr chair members of the
committee Schoolbased health
centers fall follow all consent
laws for the state that are
applicable for any medical
service just like any other
medical clinic so that is that
is what we do.
Okay the Mr chair and so that
means that so since you follow
the same thing is all of them
anyone over fourteen can choose
for themselves without parental
notification.
Mr chair members of the
committee that is correct.
Of course for for certain
services let me clarify for
certain services so behavioral
health reproductive health those
are the two things that fall
under
under minor consent laws even a
sixteen or seventeen year old
coming in with a sore throat or
sprained ankle would have to
have just a standard consent.
Yes Representative Mr chair and
representative more out my name
is orient lamb I am the policy
director for the department of
health and I just want to be
really clear about the bill
itself as well so the bill the
taxed of this bill what we're
trying to do is codify school
based health centers and what we
put a lot of effort and
intention into with that
knowledge gene the diversity
among all of our communities the
different cultures the different
values and what we wanted to
make sure was a pivotal piece of
this was that first of all it's
a local it's local school in
their school boards choice
whether or not they even want
one of these so number one this
is not mandatory number two the
services are optional okay so
there is a list of services that
you can choose among and you
know we're going to distribute
grant funding according to what
that local school is interested
in providing some schools don't
have certain providers and
they're and they're on their
communities so they might not
want those services some might
have other interests in terms of
what kinds of services they want
their children to have access in
terms of the minor consent
issues that you're talking about
right now so I want to make sure
that we understand that this is
a very malleable model and it's
really within the the control of
the local at school to determine
without medical provider what
they want to provide at that
school.
Mr chair I'm in the
Representative and and experts
I'm glad that you brought that
up because that was part in what
is it page three and a half
where it says the department
which later on we find out the
department means the department
of health shall adopt promulgate
rules regulations of offer
operate over for regulation
operation and oversight of the
school by cell health centers so
that doesn't tell me that the
school has a choice that says
the department of health has a
choice of operations.
Mr Mr chairman came we had short
short brief clarification please
thank Mr chair and
representative lance thank you
so what this is saying is that
the department has the power to
adopt rules okay and the first
rulemaking that were interested
in going into is merely to set
off the grant funds so that we
can distribute according to what
the schools decide to provide at
their campus so that it that is
all this is saying it is not
saying that schools have to have
school based health centers that
they have to find a certain set
of services we just need to be
able to establish the central
does that answer the question it
does the Mr chair it does answer
the question but if it's not in
here that means this it kind of
gives you the department of
health which personally I'm
sorry I don't trust.
as far as a parent and a parent
of a teenager so
but the but this doesn't say
that within the rules of and and
agreements of what the the what
you decide with the schools this
just says that you guys the
department of health has
that they they shall adopt
regulation operations and
oversight.
Mr chair representative more
that I'm I'm I'm not really
clear what the concern is in
particular I I think that I
guess I'm not sure what your
question is well my question is
Mr Mr chair is this does not
state that the school has the
choice this says.
The department helped us
Mr chair representative went out
there other areas within this
this bill where you do see
the school that is going to be
making decisions and cut you
know in cooperation with these
medical centers in trying to
find it actually does anyone
know exactly where that is.
To date school based health
centers to work in cooperation
with schools and school
districts and be operated by
licensed health care providers
including hospitals FQHCs the
department's public health
nurses and other qualified
health care providers so the
emphasis there is on the school
based health center working in
cooperation with the schools in
the school districts I just want
to be clear here what the
department of health's role is
and school based health centers
I don't know if that's totally
clear in the statute so we've
been doing this for twenty five
years it's a well established
national model all we do from
the department of health
perspective is provide a model
in provide supplementary funding
we are not involved in the
actual relationship between the
medical provider which is the
school based health center and
the school that's not really our
area we're a little bit adjacent
to that so I just wanted to be
clear about it.
thank you Mr chair and and
Experts in I page this to me do
yes it says that that's going to
be the schools working in
concert with the department of
health to decide if they're
having one and then it goes on
listing in E. but the center
shall not may.
Shall provide services through
licensed providers with all of
these things here so no where
does it say that the school has
a choice of what we're doing is
this is shell shell is not an
option shell is.
Yes Sir Mr chair and
representative Maria what we're
talking about here is that
Schoolbased health centers need
to provide those services
through licensed providers and
then there's the comma so that's
the and the emphasis they cannot
be on licensed providers when
we're looking at this list of
types of services you're going
to see a very critical were
heard which is or so on number
six crisis intervention
semicolon four it doesn't say
and because there's an order
there any of those services not
all of them are required.
But all the ones before it are
now at all of them are all of
them or all of them are optional
Mr chair representative more aft
they're all optional and that is
just statutory construction and.
I'm I'm sure about that so the
or just pretty critical there
all right thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Thank you others.
The wishes questions.
Representative.
Thank you very much and in the
line of questioning which.
I too have a problem with all
the shelves that are in here.
And I.
Page two but I'm looking at the.
Senate Bill or the one that came
comes from the house side Mr
chairman and representatives of.
let's see here the first one is
the starting on the first page.
Line nineteen department shall
okay I get that that's funding
and technical assistance.
School based on line twenty two
this wholesaler shall be
regulated by the department.
Line twenty five school based
health center shall be
established okay I get to.
On page two of the bill.
this is it shall work in
cooperation with schools and
school districts to be operated
by the license health care but
it.
It doesn't say anything else
about trying to set up rules and
guidelines all this is that you
all are going to the school
based health centers are going
to do Mr chairman Representative
Representative in senators work
with the schools and school
districts to be operated by
licensed health care providers
including hospitals federally
qualified health centers the
department's public health
nurses and other qualified
health care providers it doesn't
say setting up the rules or
anything else I have a problem
there.
Mr chairman if you go on over to
page three of the bill under
line for as if the department
shall adopt and promulgate rules
for the regulation operation and
oversight of school based health
health centers receiving funding
from the department.
So now we're in there does it
say that the department of
health is going to be working
with those local communities so
Mister chairman of you take out
local control like it really and
I'm not going to use the word I
did that the night on the house
floor but it makes me very upset
okay.
In the end.
Whenever we are.
One of the analysis here and I
probably can't find it now
because of market.
All over these things here.
Mr Chairman I'm still got the
floor still got the floor.
I guess one of the questions I
do have about this
School based health clinics the
ruler is just looking for a look
at one of these papers for they
were located in once again our
rural areas are very well
represented but that doesn't
surprise me the least Mr
Chairman.
I hate whenever we are talking
about.
This is the facts.
Regarding Senate bill three
ninety seven.
Whenever talking about the
school based health clinics.
In fifteen percent of the care
is for reproductive health care.
STI's contraception and prenatal
care.
Wait just a minute where is the
parents involvement in that and
if we are there is no there's no
way for you all to check going
to the school based health
clinics the student that is
seventeen comes in is is I'm
eighteen years old how is that
going to be verified Mr chairman
I don't feel that it is Mr
chairman.
If parents are notified with
anything that goes on in their
their child's life with the
government saying Hey we can
take care of this problem for
you come on in there's a
problem.
We are.
Hello I'm looking for.
The marking of.
Good some of the significant
issues and this is the.
Public Health Division miss lamb
at the believe that you would
want to make this assessment
might this analysis.
And the.
You're talking about adverse
childhood experiences.
Well if it if a child if in an
immense plated child is going
through something like this and
it could.
You're right it could develop
into more dramatic.
Eight vents for this person.
If the.
Those those experiences the
state here.
Would include increased risk for
mental illness mental health
issues substance abuse suicide
violence risky sexual behavior
years and lines up lower self
the same.
Do you think that these
facilities these school based
health clinics.
Are the ones that can actually
treat that young person.
Better than maybe state as
psychologist psychiatrist so the
I have concerns about this Mr
chairman
Whenever the local.
Areas do not have any input into
things like this there is a
problem if we are promoting it's
come on over here at school
based health clinic and we can
get you fixed up on birth
control rings or whatever the
case may be I can help you with.
Sibly gets in the.
An abortion we can be quiet
about this we don't need to let
you folks I because you've
already said that you're
eighteen years old with no
verification Mr chairman that's
all I have thank you very much.
The Senator thank you Mr
Chairman representative them is
they'll for your comments in I
may if I may be elaborating here
a little bit and hopefully
shedding some light on some of
the concerns that you have the
bill does in fact say that the
department shall adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations
so it is in there which is
common and also another point
that I thought you maybe maybe
you need some clarification on
the very important to me also is
the local control this bill is
about local control it actually
perpetuates encourages continues
local control the districts
themselves apply for this the
department of health does not
require it they do not force
that they do not encourage
anything they merrily are there
to accept applications from your
districts the school districts
here eighty nine school
districts in New Mexico and the
any one of those districts can
apply and keep that local
control they are also able to
determine.
Which providers they're going to
have for example it is no
different than having a an FQHC
a federally qualified health
care facility if that's what
they choose to have their and
and to enter a contract with it
with that provider they can have
a any other Health Care facility
there even could be some
Presbyterian healthcare facility
whoever they choose and I'm
saying this only to a to a
somehow impress upon you how
much local control we believe in
we shouldn't tell the districts
what and what not to do who and
and what facilities they should
contract with this is this bill
is merely putting in statute
what are ready is there in the
local control is big in the
whole scenario it does not
provide for port to change
anything at anything expand
anything it's not about adding
abortion or about anything else
the it is the fact that the
federal law precludes abortion
by a school based health center
it also precludes a school based
health center from referring a
yeah part a child up for for an
abortion in so if there's any
other changes that need to be
done to the current law it is
not in this bill because we're
doing nothing else than
codifying into statute and
legitimizing these school based
health centers to ensure that
these children our children can
continue to have access to their
health care in the schools
that's why Mr Chairman
Representative Ezzell that's why
we require that the school based
health centers be within the
proximity of accessibility for a
student to be able to have them
in the schoolbased health in the
schools with where their school
based health centers can be
closely situated so that they
don't have to go look around for
health.
If they fall.
If there's an injury they have a
sore throat whatever it may be
that it's readily accessible for
them and that's really the
intent of this and that is what
is currently in place thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative get.
Mr chairman I moved to pass.
We have further discussion
representative will call.
I just have a question I
remember my screen and we have a
school based wholesaler
it was a great experience I
usually the Mr chair
representative have sorry
I'm usually a delay Maestas to
leave for the next to go out to
the most frequently and all
those things.
But when we have a we was from
you an incoming to the school
and some years they were like
able to towards the end when
state it and they were years of
we have to see them because of
the funding I'm assuming but
that was the best resources for
my students as a title one
school either parties were
working two or three jobs so
they didn't have a pet that that
the case of a they have the
resources we always talk about
participants have EDD and I just
have to take ownership just a
privilege to and some of our
kids don't have the privilege
because part is working like a
medication on many other
resources in the commission and
everything and having this was
receiving the information one to
one
they will either help them there
or given the information you can
go here I remember two cases one
kid who was referred to our
health mental health hospital
because he was at risk to take
in to hurry himself they told
them where to go all of the
other kids are members these
kids came in with them let's get
a bicycle over the budget
because if you have a screen in
the window or are they have a
condition I remember thinking
thank god that you people is
here today this kid went to
school they have any and
anything else to do so my
question is will these make a
more available for the schools
exciting the program was it was
not a constant thing going here
we have to look at the times
that week or they're just we
have to see them so will this
make it more.
Accessible to.
Mr chairman and representative
thank you for your comments and
and let me just say that this
would make it more available
because it is actually more
security to ensure that the
school based health centers are
giving the credibility that they
deserve what can happen is in
this political world that we
have if they're not in statute
they merely exist on the line
item somewhere as a program or
something when we look at it
from a financial perspective and
they can be obliterated any time
by the mere fact that they would
be in statute codified in
statute gives that certainty
that more may be able to start
applying for more to health care
for these children there
seventeen schools right now that
are being planned to be
hopefully can be opened up and
and provide more services so
Mister chairman yes there would
be.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair on make this
pretty quick I'm just curious so
schools now can under this law
they can apply for for becoming
a health care center right Mr
Chairman representative that yes
they can that's how they exist
okay because Sam Mister chair I
noticed that whatever had no no
health care center at least on
this map so I know that that
would probably be needed down
there is that correct Mr
chairman and and Representative
and this goes back to the local
control it is up to the school
district to apply and decide
whether they want the school
based health center not there
are some districts Tero and
others that may decide and there
are several there seventy nine
school seventy nine schools
based health school based health
centers in New Mexico and fifty
four of those are through the
department of health others just
do it on their own and so that's
why it may show that they either
that or they just decide they
don't have they don't want to so
that's a local control I'm
talking about it's up to each
district and and Mr chair the
issue is.
You know teaching for me for
example we could all get used to
tell the parents during parent
night you can your kid can only
be sick on Mondays Wednesdays
and Fridays because a school
nurses and here on Tuesdays and
Thursdays you all know when
you're in the classroom if you
don't have access to health care
you know you have a kid.
We are running around with their
to think about and there's
nothing you can do is a school
nurse isn't there so the issue
is providing medically
supportive services for kids K.
to twelfth.
I thank you Mr chairman I ask
you know Espanola has had this
for a long time.
Twenty five years I'm sure and I
was there the night at the
school board when they voted on
this and I want to tell you.
Everybody in town was at that
school board meeting but it was
a matter of local control and
people were very concerned and
wanted it to be done right and I
think it has since been
successful and I'll admit that
thank you Mr.
Thank you so we have to pass a
motion by Representative Garrett
second by Representative Roybal
Caballero and secretary called
role to to pass it.
Senator Baca so Representative
Chatfield nope Representative
Ezzell the.
Representative girl state
representative for yes
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Senate Madrid yes Representative
Mirabella no.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Senator you yes but investor yes
Mr Chairman yes in the past all
right you have to do pass much
members of the committee.
Hey we're moving to our last
bill of the day.
Is.
Senate bill three oh seven as
amended.
Licensed teacher prep of
portability and chairman Romero
will be introducing it on behalf
of a Senate pro tem Stewart.
All right thank you madam chair
and hello Committee from the
opposite side
this is Senate bill three oh
seven so there are a couple
changes that are being made to
the teacher preparation
affordability scholarship
one is that it's to include
teachers who are pursuing their
graduate degree
as far as education or a field
that's related to the area that
they're teaching in so as we all
know that's been having a
master's degree as a requirement
for moving to level three so
that's been a barrier for some
educators so this is to allow
them to do as much and then the
other part is removing the
requirement for those students
to be a role that least half
time on because graduate school
and those of you that have been
in graduate school understand
how labor intensive it could be
we're trying through house bill
one thirty I'll put in a plug
for learning time bills on make
way for professional work right
by having having the work of
graduate school on top of
teaching is incredibly difficult
so to allow the students taking
less than half the time to be
able to to qualify for the
affordability scholarship and I
have secretary Rodriguez as my
expert on this madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee you know the
representative did hit on many
of my points but I want to say
that the higher education
department did work diligently
with the public education
department and the teacher
workforce task force this year
to identify solutions to grow
the teacher workforce and
support licensed teachers who
are ready veterans and working
in the classroom traditionally
right now the teacher
preparation affordability
scholarship favors new teachers
or those with alternative
licenses this will allow those
students who are right or those
teachers that have a license to
go back to the classroom you go
from level two to level three
which is a requirement right so
anyway that's all the state and
we're open to questions I yield
back to you madam chair the
manager okay I will go online if
you're in support of a Senate
bill three oh seven can you
raise your hand if you're
online.
Okay there's nobody online who
wishes to speak in the room of
the side if you're in favor of
it can you raise your hand okay
Mr bush.
Thank you madam chair with the
money to the question staff
members New Mexico we thank the
sponsors bring this important
legislation forward and for the
good work of the higher
education department this is
definitely a big deal for you
and M. and our.
Soon to be or continuing
instructors
through their professional
development career so thank you
very much thank you anybody else
on the right side.
Mr jurists.
madam chair members of the
committee to understand to New
Mexico is the program that we've
been able to partner in the
Publicis ation of this program
to our members in the members we
serve and this development if
this body advances four would be
a positive reinforcement for
those educators are in that
preacher system the one to reach
a higher level of licensure and
so we would definitely urge a
yes vote on three of seven thank
you thank you and back row.
State ma'am and members of the
committee CCI used with any New
Mexico on behalf of our members
we stand in support of SB three
oh seven and we think this is a
premium for that this important
piece of legislation this is
solid bill and the impetus to
behind it is to retain and
improve the quality of our
teachers when we invest in our
teachers we invest in our state.
It's a win win situation for
all.
This legislation will remove
requirement barriers that keep
many teachers from pursuing a
graduate degree.
And removing barriers is a
practical definition of
achieving equity for.
For these rates for these
reasons than those mentioned by
others we asked for a vote in
favor thank you very much.
Thank you
we'll go now to committee.
Of Representative Baca.
Thank you madam chairman or vice
chairman and the chairman
programs for my questions are
really kind of simple
So Mr madam chair Mr Chairman
would this be as far as two
people that pursuant
endorsements of no other areas
okay so I currently have a
teaching license I I may have a
masters would I be able to get
endorsement if I want to teach.
Another sapi or something else
madam chair and Mr chairman.
Madam vice chair Representative
Baca seems like Dr Rommel
was indicating yes Mr madam
chair Representative Baca they
would be able to pursue our.
Adam vice chairman Mr chairman.
Is there an approval process as
to what would be a appropriate
okay let's say you madam chair
and Mr chairman does this have
to be in an educational field
less I want to also become an
accountant or I want to become a
of something outside of what I
speech language pathologist in
my opinion.
Can it is part of that but what
if it was a degree outside the
normal scope of K. twelve
education Mr.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question it was
actually concern of the Senate
so we actually change language
in the bill it has to be in
education or a related field to
their specially specialty
meaning somebody can't go to law
school and then quit and become
an attorney they have to stay in
the system somehow thank you
madam chair that's actually been
up to my second question or
action with third maybe I'm
losing county with their very
short so please understand so
with this madam chair Mr
Chairman and secretary.
Some of taking advantages
deserve amount of time that they
would be required to teach
anywhere in New Mexico and I'm
not talking within the district
as I understand about this but a
teaching within any public
school in New Mexico.
Mr or madam chair
Representative in trying to
understand the question so give
us is madam chair madam
secretary sorry then.
Chair but it's certainly a years
auto just managers kind of
So madam vice chair and
secretary if I am currently
teaching at my school I take
advantage of this program.
Do I in my required to you know
like for my district it is
required that you maybe you were
work in for two more years
within the district after we pay
for this my question is is there
some kind of protection saying
Hey if a teacher takes advantage
of this is another degree that
they work somewhere in the New
Mexico public school system.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that clarification this
is not a loan for service
scholarship it is simply just up
here traditional scholarship
however many of the teachers
that we'll be taking advantage
of it our teachers who already
invested and veteran teachers we
suspect that the at least half
five years under their belt to
fifteen years
that's where we're going with
this.
Thank you my last question so
the the the high the the hello
this is the teacher preparation
affordability act of madam chair
Mister chairman and secretary as
far as funny as we already have
the current we have the
opportunity cautious we have the
lottery scholarship as is
currently named where with this
the monies from this come from
madam chair and Mr Chairman
Madam chair representative there
is funding in the bill a house
bill two for five million
dollars this scholarship would
be applied first that's how the
opportunity scholarship
functions of your receiving
opportunity we applaud state
funding first however if you're
receiving the lottery
scholarship lottery scholarship
is applied first other financial
aid is applied second towards
fees and the cost of attendance
thank you madam chair of no more
questions.
I see no more questions madam
chair.
Okay well there's there's a
motion to pass from represented
Trujillo a second from
Representative data is there any
opposition.
There's no opposition so Mr
chair you have a due process
thank you madam chair thank you
committee Mr chair.
And I do believe before we
adjourn we have students to be
introduced if of the sponsors
and the students could stand up.
And then introduce a group and
then each of you introduce
yourself.
Bill.
They do it just a chair.
Morning.
I'm Isabelle St Onge and the
school director of Vista Grande
High School we're.
We're very excited to be here
thank you we're here at the
invitation of Representative
Herrera.
Good morning my name
come from okay so we can give
and I live in Tel special and
our students Mr brown school and
you can see that we are sharing
our culture with thank you very
much.
Good morning everybody my name
is Haley control and active
participants of global and I am
vice president student council
at least around the school.
Good morning I'm Joe Lewis and
the school president and future
agents.
And all my name is just been
down on sophomore representative
at the GHS high school.
Hello my name is Acker amero and
actively participate for the
council of and I'm junior
representative for the city
council.
A structure on their own and in
the treasure of the State
Council Vacasa the THX hi.
I mean Kelly Romero and the
representative of Medicaid and
from time.
Thank you so much for being here
and I we always I always let's
give a round of applause.
And I always free money our
student visitors that at the age
of twenty one you are qualified
to run for the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico and if you need more
time twenty five is the age for
the state Senate and as your
many are already involved in
student government today student
government tomorrow state
government the next date our
national government so thanks
for being here today yeah.
Thank you so much and madam
chair I'd like to welcome the
students in state my office is
right next door so I want you to
come right around to the office
in a minute with that we will
adjourn for the day until next
Wednesday thank you everybody.
