From Deming I represent house
district thirty two which is
Luna had outgoing part of grant
counties this is my first term
second year on education and I'm
learning a lot so thank you for
having me.
Right thank you for joining us
Representative Figueroa a good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair my name is
Natalie Figueroa I'm the
representative in house district
thirty which is the north these
types of Albuquerque and this is
my second term the house
education very happy to be here
this morning.
All right.
Representative Lane good
morning.
Good morning Mr thank you
Rhinelander representative house
district three which is the
eastern portion of San Juan
County implements dollars about
six one bill and that this is my
second tour of duty within my
first term here on house and
looking for to working on water
really probably some of the
biggest and most important
issues that our state services
so thank you.
All right Representative Roybal
Caballero good morning.
Yes good morning appreciably
balcony at all I represent house
district thirteen which is the
far southwest quadrant
Albuquerque and to be quite
honest I don't remember what.
Nearer term at this juncture but
I'm happy to be here with all my
colleagues and also good morning
to those of the public that are
are watching us today and to all
the members of the committee
thank you.
All right was there
Representative doubt good
morning.
Representative everybody down.
Thank you thank you.
I have grant Hidalgo in Sierra
County and I really enjoyed
serving on the Education
Committee I do think we have
some wonderful opportunities
this year to grow and retain
qualified staff for student
outcomes.
Great thank you I think being in
the committee member might
present some challenges as we're
getting that feedback from from
when you're speaking and it's
over that the microphone
Representative Baca good morning
welcome.
Mr chair I am happy to be here I
am Representative Bryan Baca
Representative district eight
which is in let's see counting
so glad to be here thank you.
Welcome aboard we're happy to
have you.
Representative Chatfield good
morning it's good to see you.
Representative will need to in
meeting.
There you can hear me now.
Good morning everybody Jack
Chatfield Representative
district sixty seven which is
the northeastern corner of New
Mexico this is my second term
third year on Education
Committee glad to be here this
morning.
It's good to see Representative
Chatfield Representative
Trujillo good morning yes good
morning everyone state
representative Christine
Trujillo house district twenty
five right in the center of
Albuquerque it's good to be
here.
Excellent Representative Lara.
Good morning.
Senator there is.
You'll need to in mute Sir.
My apologies I'm still I'm still
continue to have issues this
morning.
Good morning everyone my name is
right on top Representative
house district thirty four in
southern Dona Ana County and
it's great to be back.
Right Representative Madrid good
morning.
Good morning everybody we would
need to Representative district
fifty three hi this is now my
fourth year and in Jordan the
the ground that we have with and
look forward to the progress of
the future thank you.
Excellent and our vice chair
representative Garrett good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman I'm joy
Garrett I represent the
northwest corner of Bernalillo
county in Albuquerque.
The national line immense
Senator my district I retired
from teaching a year ago I'm and
I am just delighted to serve
with all these reps from around
the state and to accomplish
great things this session thank
you.
Right good to see all of you
again in our grid view I'm
Representative on the rest
Romero
House district ten which is the
far south valley and Bernalillo
county and parts of southeast
Albuquerque
you know I always brag to
everybody that I go speak to
about our committee in
particular because I think all
of you bring such a wealth of
knowledge we have
former school board members
Obviously current
representatives current and
former educators people that
bring great financial
understanding in the way the
budget works to our committee
and I think we have a great
depth of knowledge as a team
here and I'm happy and very
proud to continue the work that
we set out
in twenty twenty one.
So we have as you all can see on
the grid view others settle on
be joining us that are very much
a part of our team so all let
them introduce ourselves so I'll
start off with our
Committee analyst so I see Mary
Lee one medic if you would
quickly introduce yourself very
good morning good morning
committee my name is merry
Wommack I am the committee
analyst educator and technical
consultant from Albuquerque it's
my fourth year serving the
committee and I'm in the
building if you need anything in
person thank you.
All right and Rachel good
morning welcome back.
Good morning chairman and
committee members my name is
Rachel step the second this is
my third year serving on the
committee so just reach out if
you need anything.
All right and then we have our
Canadian assistance so we'll
start off with their newest
member Molly if you could
introduce yourself to us points.
Yes.
Around doing a few things but
I'm still here thanks to all of
you.
All right well well.
Thank you for that Molly and.
Welcome back everyone I'm in
that and this is my tenth year
with health education I actually
have fifteen years with the
house of representatives are and
I'm glad to be back with
education I enjoy it and I'm
here to help you with whatever
you need so welcome to our new
members and Representative is
having some troubles to log in
so we're gonna help with that.
Yeah so this possible.
Thank.
Excellent thank you for the
heads up all right so that is
our committee staff so please
like they mentioned reach out to
them if you have any issues need
anything worked up things like
that but then we'll also be
joined by our legislative
education study committee staff
so our interim deputy director
Joey Simon good morning Jerry.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Joseph Simon on a will be either
here or at Senate and during
every committee so able to
answer your questions on on
different topics and on the
quarry to a productive session.
All right welcome back showing
and then we have our interim
director
Dr Hawker good morning.
Good morning good morning
members.
Hawker acting director of the
legislative education study
committee and as yeah we
indicated either see or I will
be with you every Monday
Wednesday and Friday and other
times it committee last.
I would like to point out in the
attendees today.
Of the L. E. S. C. Ameris.
And you may see their names you
may be interacting with them
during the session we have
doctor Joseph Garcia.
Emily hot State yes it halfway.
Allies of William's Holly Duffy.
Daniel.
And if you have anything that
you need from us please reach
out we're here for you.
Great thank you so much and
welcome aboard this will be the
primary eighteen that we see on
the grid view
Representative Dow I did get
your text message I do not see.
Representative Baca there is a
house number three oh nine but I
think that's the committee room.
Home but I do not see his name.
Thank you Mr chairman will
trying okay the worst.
All women as soon as he comes up
and if not just give me a heads
up but I appreciate it.
All right
So welcome back to the house
education
A few things that I did want to
go over just as a reminder so
Rachel who had just introduced
herself I'm supposed sick had
sent out an email I think when
state
Rachel that kind of outlines
some of the process and also has
the contact list from last year
that should have been updated so
if you all would between now and
our next meeting please double
check that make sure that make
sure to make sure that your
email and your phone number are
still correct there my apologies
everybody should be getting that
an update on our before the
meeting with the meeting went in
it in order to do it but the
other thing is the the fail safe
option as well is that if you
just joined the attendees at
eight o'clock I've been pulling
members into the panelists less
just please make sure your name
is pretty clear you can raise
your hand even once you get in
there and I can pull you and so
that's kind of a fail safe if
you don't have the link I'm
doing the tax staff while I run
committee so I can pull people
back and forth that's not a
problem okay
So all of the bills should be
on.
Your share file so that's where
staff will always drop the bills
amendments
and different things into your
share file so please check those
and that's another reason why
your email address is going to
be so important so those of you
that do have it correct know
that you're getting updates when
things are dropped into the
various files in order for us to
be able to kind of keep track of
what's going on with those bills
okay so please double check make
sure we have your correct email
address on both of those sheets
okay
Because we see an indication on
once we do that once we move
forward then it'll be your
responsibility to make sure that
all that stuff is not working
but of course if you have issues
please let me know as well we've
been trying to sort all this
stuff out to make sure
everybody's on equal footing as
we get into the business that we
need to be dealing with some
because I know each of you
stress the importance of the
work that we're doing and we'll
be doing in this committee do
you all have any questions on
that so far.
Okay
So as far as committee we do
have generally the twenty four
hour rule on amendments and of
course that's in place
to make sure that our analysts
have.
On both sides proper analysis
and have time in order to deal
with the changing of a bill to
give us a better heads up and of
course we know that not all
amendments are necessarily
substantive there could be where
changes that are necessary that
are entirely
Difficult to decipher what the
meaning is and generally as
we've done I leave that up to
the committee to think okay we
got a handle on it this isn't
terribly bill changing on
whether or not to move forward
on but in this committee I would
like to stick to the twenty four
hours and all all kind to do
that about and with the twenty
four hours but a day in advance
so that everybody can get a
heads up with enough time for
the analyst to to do the work
that they do for us so we have
questions sometimes well it was
dropped off at nine or ten we
can talk about that stuff
generally that's enough time for
analyst but we can talk about it
so since our.
Representative Baca has has
joined us
that's certainly one thing to to
certainly look out for in in
committee
Any questions about that I
should mention
I have been looking last year to
our ranking member which was
Representative Baldonado for any
sort of changes are to cross
reference things
or any issues to make sure that
things are going.
Evenly well on both sides so now
that has gone to Representative
Dow so Representative Dow will
be in contact my point of
contact for any of those
decisions and kind of talking
through
legislation or the sorts of
amendments
Before moving forward okay so
she would be the point of
contact should be the new
ranking member in our community
on the Republican side.
Questions about that so far.
Comments concerns.
All right so.
We'll try to get the agenda is
printed as soon as possible for
the week.
Making sure that everybody gets
ample time to get their
amendments and a look everything
over certainly our staff at L.
E. S. C. our committee staff and
then the respective analyst for
either side in order to do that
step
But as far as the committee room
of course even though we're
still online I'm a stickler for
the rules and for decorum within
the committee room so please
always go through the chair when
you all do have questions on
whenever they do pop up please
use the raise your hand feature
like I'm doing now in order to
get on the list I'm still making
physical less as you all know
returning champions may remember
so when you raise your hand I
will put your name on the list
for that bill and then I will
lower your hands just so
migrated here stays uniform and
everybody's in the same places I
see you so if your hand goes
down please don't fret I
probably have you on the list if
for some reason it may have gone
down for another reason
Just please let me know give me
a reminder just be like Hey
Mister chairman I have the I
have a question okay well but
generally that spin the custom
that's been the practice.
We'll get a hang of it I do see
we got Representative and read
out there Representative good
morning can you please quickly
introduce yourself.
You'll need to on mute yourself.
All Representative we can't hear
you being worked out.
Can you hear me we can find out
I'm I'm so sorry everybody my
internet is down this morning
there and you're fixing and I'm
representatives I represent
going against district regions
after most of the area right
with the task Santa Fe could be
with everybody I think.
All right.
I never happened are.
All right good morning I'm glad
you could join us
So that's how committee will
work this year are there any
comments or questions so far.
We should be alright.
Okay.
Finally this year and for this
thirty day session most of the
bills that were here are going
to be tried to
Package the medically so the
bills that we here will be the
ideal will be to package them as
teams certainly today's this
teacher retention and
recruitment that'll be a large
team of a lot of the bills that
we're hearing and will feature
this legislative session okay
Also the.
And this is more toward our
attendees we have about fifty
nine which is awesome I'm glad
you all could join us many of
you I notice are returning at
ten the champions that's great
when you do come into the
committee I'll be prompting
everybody so if you would like
to speak for or against a bill
will do it in order of those
that are in favor and those that
are in opposition or vice versa
whichever kind of rolls off my
tongue first but please those of
you in the attendees list wait
until I give the directive
because I will mix it up and
keep everybody waiting on the
weather we're going for or
against a bill
but once I do say that if you
all would use the raise your
hand feature if you would like
to speak to committee so
everybody will get two minutes
no more than two minutes in
order to give us your testimony.
And please do not be redundant
in that testimony of somebody
already said something that that
has been mentioned you could
acknowledge them and say I agree
with in this case Representative
Sweetser
and and did what she said and
then if you have additional
comments that's fine but we
would like to keep Committee
moving as well as well as
allowing the audience to give
their input and their feedback
into the legislation so two
minutes no more but as I always
say
Is that
Brevity is the soul of wit
so I'm partial to to shorter
statements that are short
condensed and well argument to
well argued are my favorite
song.
Well this put that out there.
Four eight.
Other comments questions or
concerns.
Or I think we're all familiar
with this we got into we're good
we're ready to dive in.
All right without further do we
have house bill thirteen teacher
residencies changes so we have
Representative Garrett here I
saw Representative Sarinana in
the audience Representative if
you could raise your hand for me
please.
Okay.
Thank and I know you have a
couple of experts.
All right so Dr Byrne Steen and
and Mr Senator is that right.
That's correct Mr chairman.
All right so give it a second.
Just promoted both of them.
Right.
So house bill's third team and
so representative Sarinana
whenever you're ready please
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee it's good to be
back I am representative Debbie
sari ana and I'm here along with
my co sponsors Representative
Garrett and Representative lane
to present house bill thirteen
the teacher residencies bill
amended
my expert witnesses like Mr
chairman severed doctor Ellen
Burstyn from ATF and Mr Johnson
at the director Policy at PED.
Mr chairman this bill has been a
collaborative effort with PED
the unions and our universities
and I want to start with a quote
from secretary Steinhaus and one
of the meetings he said we have
over a thousand classrooms
without a teacher that's not
just a problem it is a crisis
and that is why this bill is so
important we are at crisis
level.
Mr Chairman the current teacher
residency legislation is
specifically focused on
alternative licensure and for
the new people the the resident
in an alternative licensure the
rest it must hold a bachelor's
degree be a professional from
outside the field of education
and have a strong content
knowledge or record of
achievement and they cannot hold
a level one two or three eight
teaching license and we've had
great results with through UNM
and CNM and and miss you.
So the changes are the this
program in this bill the program
expands the teacher residency
program to those students and
their senior or final year of
the department approved teacher
preparation program this I've
been for the resident has gone
through twenty thousand no less
than thirty five thousand and
that's really in hopes that the
resident doesn't have to take on
a second job as they go through
the program.
The level two or level three
teacher will continue with the
two thousand dollar stipend per
year the principal is two
thousand dollars type and also
in the coordinator at our
universities and colleges they
were received no less than fifty
thousand per year and they have
a huge job if we get a hundred
new residents at their
university or college they are
in charge of really making sure
everything runs smoothly and
they're well communicated in
this and everyone is successful
in the program.
And Mr chairman as far as the
program the resident is embedded
in one classroom with a level
two or three tier for an entire
year.
So that they can see and will
experience how to plan and
manage a classroom with hands on
experience
and the biggest thing is they're
gonna see how students progress
not only academically but
socially and emotionally
throughout the year.
Mr chairman I do have amendments
to one that now or or later or
but we want to do.
Thank you I'm do you have
amendments are and an amendment
or amendments and amendments
sorry.
Okay I'm.
Let's take up the amendment
second have a motion to move the
amendment for discussion.
So move Mr chair.
All right all this.
Okay.
No worries so we have a motion
to discuss the amendment could
you talk us through the
amendment or at two oh two
number and then what the
amendment.
The to to number is two two two
one two one point one.
And what does on page one line
eighteen after secretary we
insert in partnership with the
department approved teacher
preparation program.
On page five.
By nineteen before teacher gonna
insert undergraduate this came
from NMSU really making it clear
making outlook little clear.
I by nineteen after the
semicolon and insert or.
In on page five line twenty
three gonna strike or in insert
and.
And again this is just to clear
clarify the bill
so it everyone who who commented
on the bill
the last comment was this party
to be a little clearer.
Representative can you tell us
what the change from and from or
does.
In the bill sure please the last
one.
We get several.
Okay so.
And so they have to be so
there's this program to three
parts in the first year but
department approved teacher
preparation program that's
eight or B. an alternative
licensure like we have now and
they cannot hold a level one two
or three teacher license so the
item is they cannot do this so
it's this for this but they
cannot have a well the teacher
licensure.
Great thank you so.
Well we're going to questions
about the amendment.
Some members with questions
about the amendment.
No questions about the image.
The motion on the Representative
Garrett please wait please
choose you raise your hand
feature.
Thank you Mr chairman I move
that we adopt the amendment.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa typical.
Second okay great Representative
question.
All right.
So we have multiple seconds on
that is there any opposition to
the adoption of the amendment.
All right then you have an
amended bill.
All right did you have any more
presentation there would your.
Like to defer to my co sponsors
for additional comments and then
to the expert witnesses for
short.
Representative dear.
Thank you Mr chairman I just I
just want to add something that
the LFC analysis stated on page
share successful teacher
residency program designed the
teacher residency programs are
teacher preparation programs
that bridge in class course work
with meaningful supervised on
the job training and applied
learning in the classroom so I
was a graduate of the teacher
residency program we would study
for example classroom behavior
in you would read about it you
will hear about it but the
difference is when I went in the
classroom and struggled with the
second grader who was extremely
recalcitrant my mentor teacher
could separate joy don't raise
your voice lower your voice
those are the kind of things
that you don't get just reading
or hearing you get it in that
classroom situation where an
expert teacher is actually
guiding you it's it's an
apprenticeship so I just want to
add how powerful this model is
and how signet be can't the
expansion of the program is in
truly preparing New Mexico
individuals to be effective
teachers thank you that's all I
wanted to add.
Some and then experts would like
to go first.
Representative lane is also a.
Because Spencer Representative
Lane.
Thank you Mr chair
I echo the comments of the the
co sponsors I think given the
amount of teacher shortages we
have I think it that's this
point it's all hands on deck in
terms of trying to brainstorm
what are some possible solutions
to are in only recruit teachers
but but retain them in the
classroom and I think this
uniquely has the ability to
accomplish both of those because
in terms of recruitment now
right now we're saying you have
a you know close to a livable
wage for that you're that you're
doing you know this this teacher
residency program and then the
read the repayment portion I
think is important because now
we're we're pairing them up with
sort of this this mentor ship
component as well and so I think
both of those are really
important for us bill to get our
hands around this problem for
and so that's why I support this
bill thank you Mr.
All right I think we can now go
to experts so Dr Byrne seen it
see here I need to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Ellen
burns Steen on the president of
the Albuquerque teachers
federation the goal of house
bill thirteen is in a relatively
short amount of time building
number of well prepared and
diverse teachers in the
profession across the state who
will stay in our state in twenty
seventeen and see just the
national conference of state
legislatures called out the idea
that no other countries have
this idea of alternative routes
into teaching that don't
require a lot of support time in
preparation they called out the
need for our nation to invest in
a residency style teacher
preparation program where ask
the Sanchez said teacher
candidates work alongside
accomplish teachers for a full
year with a gradual release of
responsibility making sure that
are beginning teachers have more
skills in all areas in
particular as Representative
Garrett pointed out classroom
management the research on
residencies recommends that you
start with some kind of a
competitive grant opportunity
which we did with house bill
ninety two and twenty twenty
from that we're able to see what
works and we've seen in our
state that some of the residency
programs that have the seed
money through the requests have
really followed national
research in fact one of them the
Albuquerque teacher residency
program is about to get an award
from the teacher Association and
teacher at educators the model
that is recommended in the
research is you have.
Strong partnerships with
universities you have diverse
candidates you up full year
where asset course work and
practice are intertwined the
research on the impact of
residency model such as the ones
we have started in our state is
on average.
Are more diverse.
They're more likely to stay and
teaching they serve high needs
districts and are typically more
effective than other beginning
teachers.
Thank you very much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Right in the Mr send I'm before
you find committee Mr etcetera
thank you for reminding me that
the public education department
there will be somebody on the
street center one of the
deputies always in the audience
should we have questions for
them as well we can bring them
into the meeting to kind of
clarify from the administrative
point issues about bills so with
that Mr Senator said my
apologies welcome.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee I don't
want to I want to repeat what
everybody else is that other
than the executive is very
supportive of rate of teacher
residencies we think it's a an
important step to making sure
that all our teacher candidates
are extremely well prepared to
be since the day one ready one
eight after having a full year
of high quality.
Mentorship and apprenticeship in
in a residency program
this bill also aligns very
closely with the executive
recommendation for resident
teacher residencies funding and
so that it would allow us to
expand that funding to
undergraduates again as
Representative Sarinana
mentioned currently the bill
extends only to alternative
licensed teachers or that the
statute does so this would allow
us to extend opportunity to
undergrads and I think it's
really important so thank you.
All right Representative further
comments.
I think we're ready Mr chairman.
All right before we come to
committee members will go to the
attendees list.
So those of those in the
audience that are in support of
house bill thirteen please
indicate by raising your hand.
Give me a moment.
All right so.
As I have mentioned those of you
in the audience you will have up
to two minutes but no more
please do not be repetitive but
once I calling you you'll have
two minutes all right so we'll
start off with for some analyst
is quite.
Good morning thank you two
minutes walk.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Chloe and Abbie I'm the director
of state government relations
with New Mexico State
University.
And I would like to begin by
thanking the sponsor a
Representative Sarinana and also
Johnson of from PED we work very
closely with them to work in a
couple of amendments really just
to enhance the recruitment angle
of this because obviously that's
at the core of this we want to
attract more prepared teachers
and and we're facing a shortage
at the moment so with the
amendments.
We believe that we have a better
shot at getting more students
into this track and so for that
we thank the sponsors we're
really supportive of this bill
and I would also like to
compliment Representative down
on that beautiful master she's
wearing thank you all.
Thank you Clayton alright so
we'll go to stand good morning
stand here folks two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman Stan
rounds I'm representing the New
Mexico coalition of education
leaders New Mexico school
superintendents association we
strongly support this bill did
you know that today there are
over nine hundred classrooms in
New Mexico there on covered.
This is one of the ways we are
going to be able to deal with
that long term continue to in
fact on the need any given day
there between nine hundred
fifteen hundred on cover
classrooms this is a step in the
right direction something we'll
build our capacity the will
build of qualified capable
excellent teachers in New Mexico
that we believe we can retain
and so for all those reasons
chairman we strongly support
this bill.
Great thank you stand all right.
Allen.
Earning Allen you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
Alan matter the president the
golden apple foundation for
excellence in teaching we
strongly support house bill
thirteen for teaching is a
profession on which all other
professions are built.
His doctor burns Steen said this
bill is important to preparing
hiring and retaining teachers
for the state of New Mexico and
the stipends may bring even more
people into their supporting
roles for pre service teachers
since teaching is both an art
and a science we know how
important high quality mentoring
is to the retention of teachers
and this bill supports that
mentoring and or recognizes that
day and the school leaders who
create the conditions for
success are recognized for this
impact on providing the right
conditions you stipends for
student teachers demonstrate the
investment The New Mexico is
willing to make to ensure that
students have high quality and
well prepared teachers thank you
for the opportunity.
Thank you.
All right so a list Sir.
Good morning let's say about two
minutes what.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa Dion attorney with the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty and a member of the
legal team for the Yazzie thing
to just make us rich he has
lawsuit yep he stands in full
support of this bill for the
many reasons given here today I
and I will be labor the point
about the critical role that
teachers play and giving our our
kids a cost usually sufficient
education or doctor shortages
that the professionals currently
he's seen I'll just add that you
know programs like teacher
residencies are known to be an
effective way to develop the
well prepared our teacher
candidates reflect the diversity
of our students and are
typically more effective
educators as has been said so we
see this program is a critical
one that has long required an
investment like that of house
bill thirteen we stand in full
support of it thank you.
Great thank you.
Right so move to heather good
morning heather you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you all for being here
Albuquerque public schools this
is heather Bassett sorry.
We've been here we support
possible thirteen week and the
sponsors for continuing to
refine legislation and finding
solutions for that crisis and
our future educator pipeline if
yes please that supporting
students us in their final year
of education is a is a great
idea and allows them to truly
experience in transition in your
career that will create create
educators that'll stay in the
profession and we are also
seeing an increase this year and
the number of jobs at schools
covered by substitutes that do
not have full time teachers so
we think the crisis is is really
important to address now thank
you.
Thank you.
Will move to Willie Mae.
Good morning we may welcome you
have a to the.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
the light may or tease I am the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico School board association
which is formally known as the
acronym and MSBA and then must
be a maintains a membership of
eighty nine school districts
throughout the state of New
Mexico and we stand four hundred
fifty strong was school board
member voices Mr chairman the
NMAA BA at the January Ellie S.
C. needy expresses support for
the expansion of the rate
teacher residency programs for
the support of this bill along
with educational partners which
you've heard from this morning
already we stand in strong
support of this bill which
expands existing teacher
residency program and we hope
this will work towards reducing
and hopefully eliminating the
current shortfall of teachers
that has already proven to do so
and we believe it will continue
to do that of we I believe we
can all agree it's critical that
we need to find this additional
funding to recruit more
candidates and need our students
and district needs we
wholeheartedly support this bill
and we think the Sanchez Mr
chairman and we just favorable
consideration of the committee
thank you for your
consideration.
Right thank you.
All right Sherri.
Morning sherry you have a.
Yes good morning Mister chair
and members of the committee my
name is Dr Sheri Williams
retired associate professor from
the university New Mexico I'm
very familiar with the
Tremendous impact of a residency
style internship certainly
continuous improvement of
education in New Mexico will
depend on well prepared teachers
who are ready to address the
deficiencies identified in the.
Martinez Yazzie reading this
assessment really to help meet
the needs of students families
and the communities in which
students live and thrive
that definitely ask the support
of the committee to move this
forward.
Right thank you doctor.
Meredith.
Good morning welcome.
Two minute warning chairman
members of the committee on
there and I'm thinking or
to organizations and then also
from my.
I.
Our with our American
number women are non marker
American board.
How to care for the league of
women voters of New Mexico and
I'm thinking our goal person who
started up to help her of life
your program alright Sir.
What you as well and I I will
and our we go
from many many different
character well as data records
program we're going to help not
only to improve.
Quality of.
Every girl but all who are the
current or and I don't want to
work with other people of
credit.
Really important bill I want to
thank.
On your progress four and I
appreciate for members.
Of fabulous and I only work
thank.
One of those people are across
the state everyone
required all court and not a
competitive program works
my concern is you know on a
recommendation card program
so I think that we are not
seeing and our core funding
Okay
great thank you madam.
All right so that's all we have.
In support so we'll move to
opposition those in opposition
to house bill thirteen.
All right we don't have anybody
in opposition awesome I have a
couple
Members on the list from
committee so Representative Dow.
Get you on the list
Representative Baca.
Mr Chairman is my turn.
It is Representative Dow please
go ahead thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to the to the
sponsors of the bill this is
great and it's much needed I
just have some where
clarifications on implementation
and just some questions about
language in the bill
Mr Chairman on page three line
sixteen well I guess fifteen and
sixteen it scribes a full
academic year of guided
apprenticeship in the classroom
could you provide me with the
definition of guided
apprenticeship.
Mr Chairman sure Representative
Dow so it's it's like a drive in
the in the resident it's a
teacher it's a it's a level two
or level three teacher these
experienced teachers that will
be working with the resident
they were working be working and
hand in hand as co teachers
that the best part of this is
especially with classroom
management when the the
residents starched having
trouble that she can always call
on or he can always call on that
expertise to help our guide him
through the whole experience of
managing a classroom.
Does that answer your question.
You Mr chairman thank you
Representative I'm just
wondering apprenticeship is a
particular term that's tied to
any particular program or
something that it is it just it
is a digit directly use word
because I don't see it defined
here.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I I don't know
can I defer to Mr Senator honest
with.
Sure Mr chair if that's okay.
Mr chair representative doubt so
I think in in this particular
case I know you're talking about
is specifically when we talk
about CTE and trades
apprenticeship has a very
specific meaning in this case I
think it's it's used in a more
generic sense where the teacher
is essentially serving as an
apprentice that classroom
teacher learning on the job but
it doesn't that doesn't have a
specific definition in this
particular case thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representatives I I'm I'm
wondering if the Sanchez would
be okay with making a definition
because I you know sometimes I'm
learning I support a bill I put
an application you know we
support the bill and then when
it's put into application it
actually creates roadblocks
we're trying to remove barriers
and so I just I I think it would
be safe to put in a definition
and it Mr Chairman
representative.
What there's also language that
says department approved and it.
A department approved process
are there programs that exist
that aren't department approved.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative but this one
every college or university
could have a different program a
little different than there's
not one standard program so that
the whatever put the program
they go it has to be approved by
PED four can be initiated so I'm
not sure if that answers your
question or not thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative I'm just trying
to find out if there are
existing types of programs that
aren't department approved like
why is this language necessary
are there programs out there
that aren't department approved
and what are day.
Mr chairman I'll defer to Mr
semacam.
Mr chair representative data
this is sort of.
Standard language that goes with
educator preparation programs so
you're right of the the programs
that exist as far as I know
there are no better department
of that are not department
approved but it's it's just sort
of standard language that we
include to ensure that folks who
receive the funding.
Two for the larger education
educator preparation programs as
a whole that we oversee those
programs so it's you're right
there's probably something well
I shouldn't say I don't know
what's out there that's not
department approved but this
just signifies that those who
receive the funding would be
department approved that we
review what they do is along
with the overall educator
preparation programs thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative and thank you
John for that I'm is there an
approval process that's defined
currently.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll defer
to the policy director Mr center
which so Mister chair
representative now I just want
to clarify your question I could
are you referring specifically
to residency programs are you
are you referring to educator
preparation programs.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr Santa I am just trying to
make sure maybe I have a little
bit of PTSD from last year
session when so many bills
required at certain
apprenticeship program certain
percentage of roof work that was
going to be done on school
school facilities things that we
wanted as legislators to get
dollars quickly to districts
that actually end up putting up
barriers because there were
stipulations are certain types
of language that actually made
it harder to engage your
required additional process and
I'm where there's not a
definition I'm seeking
clarification.
Sure thank you Mr chair
representative thank you for the
clarification I appreciate that
so if you'll remember when this
when residencies were first
implemented we receive funding
and I want to say it was in
twenty nineteen or twenty twenty
minutes forget the here and
there was no bill we we the the
the PED got residency funding
and I think what what the body
recognized was that it that it
needed a some more guidelines
more sort of guard rails if you
will for how residency should be
run to align with professional
best practices when the original
version of this statute was
passed it it pretty clearly
aligned what up what an approved
program should look like and our
our current implementation of
residencies.
Strictly aligns with the
statutory requirements there's
as far as I can say there's not
anything above and beyond what's
already outlined in this bill
that we would require
institutions to to implement the
department approved so we would
we would we would follow the
language in the statute.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
on page four on line twenty one
and it talks about her here that
fifty thousand dollars per year
for teacher residency program
coordinators for each department
approved New Mexico teacher
residency program is that one
for school district are the
residency programs approved by
school district by region how
many program coordinators could
there be.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative the coordinator
would be at the university or
the college.
Thank.
I'm sorry more questions
chairman sorry on page five
online six
and it says support it talks
about after the presidency is
completed support for teacher
residents for no less than one
year following the residents
completion of the program.
Does this not already existed
the district level are you
looking for additional supports.
Mr Chairman representative this
is already in the bill from that
already in the bill so this is
just additional support this
these residents are going to be
supported by the school by the
teachers by the district they
are going to be well supported
and successful in in this
process thank you thank you Mr
chair I'm finished.
Great thank you Representative
Baca please.
Morning thank you Mr chair good
morning community committee
members and community members.
I am in support of this bill
I'd like a we're getting a
little bit of feedback from your
headphones.
The yes thank you are you is it
better now Mr chairman this it
is often please right well thank
you I I I totally support this
bill I do know as in my current
role as deputy superintendent
and also in my role as the New
Mexico school personnel
association president work with
all eighty nine member districts
I understand the shortages that.
The teachers have across the
state the US state and also the
child's it does for both the
school sites and most
importantly the students we do
want to make sure that we have
quality teachers in every
classroom I do a also I do
totally support the idea about
this type and because we do not
want to have
As far as financial hardship by
doing their student teaching but
Mr chair and committee members I
do have some questions that I I
don't know if it's addressed
anywhere else so if you would
please allow me one of the one
of my questions I have regarding
this is about with the stipend
is it with the stipend would
they be paying into your B. and
with that count towards one year
of their a thirty year now a
retirement.
The dress anymore sorry Mr
Chairman
thank you Mr chairman and thank
Representative I would like to
differs to the specifics to Mr
Sanneh
since from PED.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair representative Baca nice
to meet you
So as though the way that
residencies currently work is
this the students are
Still still part of their
program and so they're not and
and I can I'll defer to talent
because I know she's much more
familiar with the residents in
Albuquerque but I think our
intention here is that they
would still be students not
employees of the school district
and so the statement is just
that it's a stipend not a salary
and so they would not be paying
to to E. R. B. because they're
still officially students.
Thank you Sir Mr chair of the
other question I do have is also
and I I think you may have
answered about your previous
because budget and I do know
that you know like as far as
health care benefits for
otherwise I know as a challenge
being a you know twenty nine
years ago when I was a brand new
teacher we we had all these
things and and budget or
something that also so because
are not an employee with that
also mean that they're not
eligible to receive benefits
health care other of.
While they're in their teacher
residency programs.
Mr Chairman thanks for the
question we discussed this in in
some of our meeting so I'm gonna
defer this to either at I'm
doctrines dean or Mr center.
What we have to go first
Representative for us Mr chair
representative Baca
Yeah we we did talk about it is
an interesting question
especially for folks who might
consider more nontraditional
students who are in a working
adults and and it is an issue.
Specifically in regard to the
expansion to undergraduates we
know that that not all but but
some of our institutions are
here to offer insurance benefits
the university often students
are are still part of their
their parents insurance plan and
so
Obviously that that's going to
depend on on individual students
but the bill itself does not
address any sort of again
retirement or insurance
benefits.
Thank you Mr Senate Mr chair
well.
I I understand this and and this
is what I'm trying to advocate
for for families as well as
we're talking about families or
talk about access to health
care.
For a nontraditional person a
person that is a second career
of a person to be coming from
something else the ability to
access health benefits could be
a limiting factor so I I would I
would strongly say that you know
as far as with the bill that
these types of things we need to
realize because it's not
everybody's I can tell you that
many years ago we were really
able to fill our positions with
you know the.
College students or graduates
but the nontraditional about
fifteen to twenty Patrick
percent if not more of all
classroom teachers are now
nontraditional second for folks
in the fact is that health care
benefits I would not you know I
want to see that included so
that these couples can have
access to health care and all
these other types of benefits
thank you Mr chair Mr chairman
Dr Berns dean speak on that.
Okay please okay thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
representative Baca I agree with
you that it would be an enhanced
It would help attract second
group people like you every time
I go to new teacher orientation
I don't see traditional students
as the major IC second and third
career students and the reason
that this piece of legislation
increases the stipends for rate
residencies from twenty thousand
to thirty five thousand dollars
a year is just so we can better
attract
second and third career people
so that they can actually see
themselves while they're going
back to school I think it's
difficult because
somebody who is going through
the residency program is not
fully employed yes and does not
have a teacher licensed yes and
as somebody who has supervised
student teachers most of them do
well and they graduate and in
this bill we're asking for an
exchange of service so that they
do employees and the rate of an
employee is to have those
benefits and that retirement
system but they're not employees
yet so I can see as we evolve
our teacher residencies we might
continue to look at ways to
support our residents to be our
teachers but at this point
They're not employed and I think
that's a roadblocks what you're
talking.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Dr thank you
doctor person but again we also
have other programs for we are
encouraging other stuff whether
be teachers assistance whether
because from the systems to also
become certified teacher so
again I am a hundred percent in
support of this bill I'm just
trying to advocate for those
nontraditional folks those
nontraditional teachers out
there that they could access if
they choose and again if they
choose health care otherwise and
also with the R. B. requirement
thousand having range from
twenty five to thirty years if
that would be some time for that
but I I do appreciate it I do I
do thank you Mr chair for
allowing me to bring up my
points.
Representative Garrett did you
have something that.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
and thank you Representative
Baca for being at that point I
think we realize that there's no
program that is going to
perfectly align with every
single.
Date so well I think the
insurance which is something we
have to work on but it's just
impossible to attract everybody
with one program and that's why
we need multiple pathways to
teacher licensure ship just
wanted to throw that in thank
you Mr chairman.
Right thank you Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative then experts and
everyone online I am supportive
of this legislation but I'd like
to also bring up and
You know support the the
statements made by
Representative Bryan Baca.
To a large extent
I'm actually living through our
experiences and that graduate
workers education systems are
having right now at the
university in that they are not
being paid adequately and then
they are expected to carry heavy
loads but yet they're teaching
assistants in the classrooms and
carrying out the duties of an
instructor or faculty member and
so there's a reason why it's
important to explore ways in
which we can value their
presence in addition to the
payment in addition to the
statement and so I would
encourage our Mr chair everyone
involved in this to put on our
creative innovative habits and
look at ways in which we could
further on enhance.
The packages we offer for this
with this that supplement ways
in which we can make that happen
because it is.
Important not just to have a
salary Mr chair but it's also
very important especially those
with families to know that they
have our health care.
and that there is a pathway to
making contributions to their on
to retirement although I know
that one is more directly
related to employment I wouldn't
necessarily promote that at this
point but I do think that Mr
chair it's important that added
benefits such as health care
that's incredibly important
that's probably the highest on
the recommendation that
everybody work on our because it
is of primary importance on next
to a salary so that's all I
would encourage everyone at the
table with this bill and
everyone involved in this
process Mr Sanneh
to look at and misprints time
bring Stan and others please
look at ways in which we could
add that supplement or.
Create.
Levels are set some some way in
which we could look at health
care.
As a benefit thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
All right so you don't have
anybody else on my list I'm I
did have a couple a couple of
questions
How much how much is the minimum
that that those in the residency
program would be making.
Mr Chairman thirty five
thousand.
And could you remind us
representative of how much a
level one teacher currently
makes.
Mr chairman I might have to
defer to doctor rinsing madam
chair.
Currently Mr chairman members of
the committee currently forty
one thousand dollars a year.
So we have
Am I going to residency program
continuing their course work and
working with
The veteran teacher in the
classroom making eighty eighty a
comparable wage at this point to
to the person that they're
working for its part my mask
seems about correct is that
right Representative.
Pretty quickly Mr pretty close
Mr chairman.
Thank you for that and then the
statements that are included for
teachers are their their minimum
requirements on who that
educator that that mentor could
be.
They have to be a level two or
level Mr Chairman they have to
be level two or level three
teacher and their stipend is no
less than two thousand dollars.
Great thank you for that says
Representative R. I. drive and
seem to have something to add to
that I say.
Thank you Mr chair on that point
one of the things that it's very
important to do as these
programs are created as a
partnership between the district
and the university is to define
how they choose those co
teachers that work with the
residents because it's it's
really important that the co
teacher not only be a level two
or level three but be an
excellent role model and and and
we have the support and and
learn themselves how to actually
teach other teachers to teach so
that it's not just somebody
serving like an assistant in
your classroom but somebody
who's truly learning all the
skills it takes to manage a
classroom and teach well.
Thank you thank you so much for
that
I mean I would I will say as
well that I have a little bit of
the hesitancy as was suggested
before perhaps adding any sort
of prescriptive guidelines in a
residency program and what that
may constitute
because
what we hear from school
districts all the time is is
give us we way we have different
ways of operating in this case
working with colleges and
universities in their program so
I would have some hesitancy
looking into the future to be so
prescriptive as adding a section
that without one exactly what a
residency program
entails.
But I think as we roll this
statewide and be more inclusive
of those that are in residency
programs this is certainly
making it a lot more attract
attractive and and plausible for
During those that wish to go
into education and providing
them
a salary in order for them to to
complete all the work that they
they need to be doing and
getting them
Paired to manage our classrooms
and to juggle grade books in
attendance and everybody us
thirty five questions in less
than thirty seconds at once I
think this is a this is a great
pass forward and and obviously
something that you know we've
talked about in the interim will
continue to talk about and
follow up as as suits residency
programs continue to grow and
grow and that's what's awesome
about our interim and the
legislative education study
processes is continuing to
follow through on such programs
but I think we're we're off to a
great start here Representative
Trujillo.
Mr Chairman I'm I was just
hoping to moles this piece of
legislation out of committee so
that we can move forward so if
you would make the motion I move
that we support this piece of
legislation endorsed this piece
of legislation.
Mr chair.
To pass on house bill thirteen
as amended.
Senator ko with that motion a
second by Representative
Sweetser believe that so I heard
well I'm madam secretary if you
call the roll we'll do it that
way so everybody gets their
voice heard okay.
Representative Baca.
yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
gal.
Yes.
Your.
Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa should
be on in a minute.
Representative Herrerra yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Thank you welcome bye it'll yes.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Representative.
You.
Yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative vice chair Garant
yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Chairman.
Yes.
Two zero.
All right by a vote of twelve to
zero you have a do pass on house
bill thirteen as amended thank
you all thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee.
Thanks.
So everybody will move to our
second agenda items so that is
house bill fifty nine school
group insurance card
contributions Representative
Lara who do I need to promote or
demote from the attendees list.
Mr chair we need to are promote
Mister Patrick Santa.
All right you should be making
its way in.
Anyone else.
I don't know Sir all right so if
you read Representative Lara Mr
Santa has fifty nine thank you
Mr chair house bill fifty nine a
the goal household fifty nine is
to
Allow.
Employees school teachers school
employees teachers custodians US
secretary of social assistance
to benefit from the increases
that we're providing in in pay
of this bill the goal of this
bill is to have or raising for
contribution to eighty percent
employee contribution for their
health insurance to twenty
percent.
We believe this will allow
people to
Bring more money home bring home
more money in their paychecks
because as we know when the pay
increase is going to affect so
do the increases in health
insurance and many and many many
employees find themselves in the
situation where they're bringing
home less pay because the
insurance
Goes up and and they find
themselves without less
less money your dad or or just
seem to so in essence we are
many people talk about race.
So what this bill was trying to
do in one way also is to bring
two carry school district
employees and state employees as
far as a contributions concern
I know out with this this bill
doesn't complete include offer
but schools use up but the
school says are separate
insurance our program going but
the benefit of this.
One of the benefits of this bill
as well Mr chair is that I
believe that will it that'll
also help with recruitment and
retention of new teachers and
current teachers as well current
employees you know this this is
something that that people
really don't think about it look
at you know we see the the rate
level and while you know will be
fifty six thousand dollars a
year but a good portion of the
percentage of that is going to
want to health insurance
especially to the family plan
and especially you do the they
choose to use a high option.
So this is something that's
right that's very important
house bill fifty nine.
Give us or at least looks are
the opportunity for.
Maybe more people to have better
health insurance have better pay
and help having better budget
and we believe with this bill
this this is one of the bill
second really help
bring more people into the
classroom more employees into
possible employees it's the into
the school districts because you
have a good benefit package and
so that's something you don't
think about when you when when
you're looking for work you just
see once again I'm repeating
myself but when you just see the
the pay and while I'm gonna be
making this money but you don't
think about how much to get
together check and so this bill
is going to allow.
People to really look at that
and say Hey this is going to be
worth it for me I can afford
this I I can really consider
going somewhere or being us only
and that's just a general
statement Mr chair there's need
more details into this but I I
will give it up to you well the
committee process to to answer
those questions but for now Mr
chair would like to defer to you
Michael Sanchez that they would
like to say anything about I
need for doula.
All right so I think one of
those would be me but I think
you covered it well
Representative but I appreciate
it thank you.
Funds for.
Mr Mr Sunderland do you like to
make opening remarks.
No opening remarks at this time
Mr chairman Romero.
Great thank you so much I think
we have that conversation a bit
earlier about compensation
packages and I think certainly
that's one thing one way we can
try to attract people into
public service and serving the
public that's traditionally kind
of been the leader we've had and
the public is is offering a
retirement in offering insurance
packages
you know you're not gonna get
rich in public service but
you're gonna be taking care of
all after the fact in your
family as well so I support this
Representative Madrid is
cosponsored you wish to say a
word.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I just
want to say this is getting
those back to a loan deal with
in the state and and and cross
country which is hopefully what
we're seeking to do to get long
term Germany with people being
you know able to do this as
being a person of the plus part
feel that this is something
that's really essential in that
area as well because a lot of
need for.
You are As EA's throughout the
state to get support so I think
it's a great level in field and
I appreciate the Representative
Lara doing this and bringing it
to us thank you.
All right so you all stand for
questions Representative letter.
Mr chair we know several
questions also.
So we'll go to the attendees
list those in support of house
bill fifty nine please indicate
by raising your hand.
For the moment.
All right so each of you will
have up to two minutes so I'm
going order which I see you all
stand.
Morning Stan welcome back.
Thank you Mr chairman stand
rounds for the superintendents
association of the coalition
educationally there's Mr
chairman I think you'll
appreciate this house around for
the first go around for public
school insurance and the
stratification that is in
statute hasn't changed since we
rode at almost forty years ago
now and that's the issue really
addressing.
We at the original time slot
that lower paid employees should
have a higher benefit and higher
paid employees should have lower
budget this changes that matrix
slightly but isn't a laudable
way of going I do not Mr
chairman as we do support yes
then and perhaps only Mr Simon
away and at some point I believe
as we read the L. E. S. C.
a valuation of this short or
bill analysis that I think they
should or might be about a
million dollar gap between
likely cost an actual
appropriation that be the only
past that we would make into
this just be for the work right
sized we fully cover the cost of
the employer so that we can move
this benefit for final comment
Mr chairman we do believe this
bid good recruitment tool and
again today's notions are about
how do we recruit to get all of
our positions filled like we
need to thank you Mr.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to any a
and M..
Good morning you have up to two
minutes talking.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
see on is and a New Mexico
government relations director
and I apologize for the name
the you know in recent years
wage increases for educators
from the state have barely kept
up with the cost of living
increases with the cost of
rising health insurance premiums
and including prescription drug
and health service costs have
have resulted in educators
paying more out of pocket for
the same level of care.
You want to point out that the
LFC is August hearing brief you
did.
The
great job of pointing out the
disparity the stark disparity
between what public educators
rate and government employees
pay for the premium insurance
public school educators pay up
to three times.
In premium costs compared I'm
talking about public school
educators covered under New
Mexico at the three times
improvement costs compared to
government employees and twice
as much as educators in a peak
in APS.
Let me give you a simple maybe
you can making forty one
thousand dollars a year covered
under MCP pays ten thousand five
hundred and seventy one dollars
for insurance.
That to the company.
Who pays for that very similar
it's the same type of insurance
seven thousand four hundred
eighty four dollars L. as
compared to the eight piece APS
teacher.
He pays where she pays only six
thousand five hundred and twenty
eight dollars I stark disparity.
Not only that but the current
Sierra statute which each B. R.
H. B. fifty nine would change
produces a cliff of fact so as
the lowest rate school employees
move up and eight.
They actually face higher
insurance premium cost.
And for some unfortunately in
unintended it produces thank you
Steve that was two minutes thank
you.
So we'll go to John.
Good morning John you have a two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's John urchin with American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we do want to stand in
support of this legislation to
sponsors and co sponsors are
laid out all of the points we
wanted to mention so we will not
repeat that in the state for one
we often hear from our members
and educators in rural school
districts that access and
affordability of health care is
a primary concern and we feel
that house bill fifty nine would
go a long way to keeping our
educators and our more rural
serving school districts and
that's a big win in our mind we
we want to keep that balance of
educators in our rural districts
so that they're not
disproportionately impacted by
issues of access to health care
and we don't want to
unintentionally because of
migration of educators to more
urban centers in search of that
health care coverage and
affordability so we stand strong
support and urge members of the
committee to vote yes thank you.
All right thank you.
All right so go to heather
welcome back either.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and we are neutral on
this legislation even though we
stand and support on behalf of
educators in our state on if
house bill fifty nine were to
apply to this fifteen thousand
employees of the yes we would
support it as it exceeds our
current employer contribution
rates for most employees as it
stands to keep APS current rates
to not impact employees
paychecks in APS for FY twenty
three we need about eight point
five million in benefits to low
through the SCG which is the
normal mechanism for the
distribution of funds for school
district budget thank you.
Thank you.
All right so go to Willie Mae.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee milling
more T. E.'s provided by zoom
The New Mexico scored
Association and we want to thank
you for so Mister chairman for
grouping the legislation and the
and subject matter really brings
a lot of definition and and
makes it simpler in terms of
talking about the issues of.
Your attention is one of the top
races school board association
and we support this legislative
action since it incentivizes
school personnel to remain in
our schools which is more more
needed each day as we move
forward we specifically support
legislation that partners with
schools to cover costs to
provide equitable health care
for our school personnel clearly
and importantly the requiring
employers to cover a larger
share health insurance costs
that this bill that will help
increase the take home pay for
school district employees and we
agree with the superintendents
previous comments the
superintendents association that
there's a gap between the cost
of the appropriation and we ask
this committee Mr chairman
And as the bill makes its way
forward to address that gap so
that on school districts have
the funding to cover the cost is
be required by this that we
think the sponsor Bruce Sanchez
for bring this forward and we
ask you to favourably consider
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you.
Learning to me of up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you Jim I just post cruise
public schools.
NBA New Mexico Los crucis so I
just want to say it really does
help keep especially a teacher
like myself who's been with the
there's with the state for
twenty five years.
R. it it helps us with our
families I mean I'm gonna be
forty eight twenty five years.
I really can't work for years
but insurance is what I need.
And that's what my family needs
think that the insurance has
been doing for us lately is.
Without it with it being right
now the sixty forty are we get
less to call every time we get a
raise insurance goes up.
It really just heard.
Eight years ago I was making a
little bit more than I am today
and that's with my years of
experience with everything I've
done by master's degrees all the
places I've been all the
experiences I've had at I thank
you less.
So I mean this would really help
teachers out especially with
retention.
Thank you.
Right thank you for joining us.
All right so we'll go to the
opposition west.
Is there anybody opposed to
house bill fifty nine.
Preposition.
All right so we'll come to
committee for some A. list
Representative lane please.
Thank you Mr chair I have just a
technical question I I I like
the bill but I would ask
question on page three of the
bill line eight.
This has the appropriation going
directly to PED and my my
question is should this instead
be targeted into the SCG.
Mr chair representative in the
eight it's targeted it The
appropriation would be for the
PED so they can included into
the SCG and the passage in
schools are.
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr Jana.
I don't know I just wonder if
the if the language if we
pointed directly into the SCG
just make sure that that's
exactly what happens the funds
as opposed to going to PED first
and then open up to get some of
the SCG that's that's my only
comment thank you.
Thank you Representative going
on Representative Garrett
please.
Thank you Mr chairman my
question was related to
Representative lanes the first
states that PED suggests that
the legislator may want to amend
the appropriation to be made to
the SCG so to ensure that its
recurring that it's
automatically done so that's
just an extension of
Representative lanes a question
thank you.
Excellent thank you
Representative Representative
Baca please.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
one question again I definitely
sure the settlement that
Representative Madrid in some of
my other colleagues that are
public school employees have
expressed I do understand and
know that we
We do pay higher as we're
talking about for for folks that
are contributing to NMPSIA we do
pay a higher percentage my
question with this is.
Really about the reoccurring
this is this a one time
opportunity or is it going to be
recurring because I think one of
the the unintended challenges
may be as a for one year we may
see this higher percentage of
the the very next year you could
actually kind of
kind of snowball and they'll
they will revert back to the
other one so I just need
clarification on that play a
point Mr chair if this is a
recurring of event or is it a
one time or for one year.
Thank you for that represented
Mr chair so the the our intent
for this is I would love it to
be recurring but this is the.
The the funding that we're
asking for in this bill is is to
reflect on the eight on the
increase that's coming up.
So what we what I would like to
see Mr chair representative is a
long term solution to this and
and and not just a not just a
patchwork of things here and
there so I I I would say that
this is something that is just a
reaction or a
We're a week to to
Mitigate the increase that's
coming up that we're that that's
coming up this business use for
your fancy person Mr chair
representative.
Thank you Mr chair of thank you
Mister Lara.
Again and I said before I I
support this but I do think that
the unintended is up for an
employee coming in there we have
this one one time opportunity to
receive this higher percentage
rate by the the school district
within the very next year the we
may have even greater deficit
and so of that's just the one
point I want to bring up as far
as what happens on here too when
actually the percentage goes
down school districts across
state pay different levels of.
Some something different levels
based upon the level of a salary
so the higher you go up there
the the greater percentage that
falls on the employee as opposed
to the districts so I just want
to make a point because I do I
do foresee the possibility of
some folks come back they're
saying well I receive more money
this year.
But how come now a year later we
see a a sharp decrease.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
loss.
Great thank you and and
Representative Baca and and like
to point you to page two line
twelve as well within of the
language rates within available
revenues so the way I'm reading
that it's that when the revenue
is available Representative that
this eighty twenty split would
be funded under this legislation
in my reading that right.
Yes Mr chair that's correct
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you all right
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
my I have one question similarly
to the question and
Representative back and he and I
need to be on the same page
today
that was one of my concerns and
thank you Mr chair for
clarifying however I think that
on the question might be.
Still on my mind how or if the
Maybe not the legislation that
how we can encourage your how do
we institutionalize that because
I think that.
we need not only respond to a
crisis which I think the
representative for doing that
but I also think that we need to
look at it as an opportunity to
a line on a permanent basis and
make sure that contributions and
pay scales are all aligned in
the manner in which we retain a
living wage.
and at the same time we retain
the highest level of benefits
so.
I'm not quite sure if
if the department would be
looking at
Overseeing this process because
it does do a disservice.
to a large extent if we don't
use this as an opportunity to
create the necessary structural
changes so that we don't have to
be responding
during our ads and those are.
Different circumstances
in our economy and I don't know
if Mr Santa can answer whether
this would be something that
would be up that are together
with the association of.
Of
Well everybody involved actually
all of that Mr chair all of the
entities involved how do we how
do we ensure this how do we
secure that.
If you if you if right the so
I'm trying to clarify so
Representative I don't know if
you had a response or I can look
for Mr send are the PED
representative from the
attendees less if you would
raise your hand thank find.
you're here missed Senator all
right please.
So Mr chair representative
coming in
A little bit of clarification on
your question is is this a about
the department
Sir further investigating this
issue and and trying to come up
with a long term solution.
That's correct to maintain the
the alignment so that employees
don't find themselves in the
position of because they have to
pay higher insurance costs and
they don't have in their wages
have less of a value due to
inflation or any other
situations so we want to have
the maintain a living wage but
also be able to continue to
you know retain their the
pandemic health insurance are
their insurance benefits sure.
So Mister chair representative
of Colorado are that's that's
extremely important and I and I
think we really appreciate that
the intent of the bill to make
sure especially.
That that all that all employees
that their insurance premiums do
not did not
Make up a huge a significant
amount of of their pay I think
one way to do that and if I
could put in a shameless plug
here is is the overall salary
increases right and so the
executive does recommend and it
is recommending anymore
increases for for for teachers
but also across the board
percentage increases for all
school employees and I and I do
think there is a there is a.
It's it's not
Insignificant but there is some
misunderstanding about when you
get a seven percent pay raise
which is with the but the
executive is recommending and
your insurance premiums go up
for instance six percent or
seven percent those are not
equal right we're talking about
percentages of very different
numbers and so seven percent pay
raise is a percentage of your
salary where is that seven
percent six or seven percent
increased your premium is a
percentage of your premium right
and so is often a narrative out
there that you know if I get a
seven percent period but my
insurance premiums go up seven
percent well that wipes out my
rates that's that's not
technically true but generally
speaking I do think we we agree
that we want to do something to
make sure that all of our
employees all school personnel
are make a living wage one and
two that they that their
insurance premiums do not
constitute a such a significant
portion of their of their
salaries just to be
just to make them want to do
something else.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Senator that's exactly my
point is that we need to make
sure that that.
Somehow structured or are
working to the mindset and
approach as we take on in this
in this arena my second question
Mr chair yes and I'm not quite
sure should know this but if
higher education consider part
of this group
insurance.
Discussion.
Mr chair representative you
know.
Mr chair representative
come here and it to the to my
knowledge no it's just only be
public school employees.
So all right thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative so they're not
included in this particular
legislation but in that group
insurance
the the whole collective group
insurance is higher education.
Part of that group insurance.
Mr chair and representative I'm
not familiar with the in the
medical insurance the higher
education folks use I don't know
if they are on another part of
means you're not but that the
If you it Mr chairman it's okay
maybe we can refer to our to my
experts Mr secretary maybe he
has something.
It.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee we do have some
higher ed institutions in names
yes so this would affect those
higher at the most of the higher
it institutions are already
contributing at least eighty
percent or higher than the
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr some of on thank you
Representative I it was that was
a point where you're asking
where we will thank you I
appreciate it that's all.
Thank you Representative and
just to know Representative I
did lower your hand because once
I add you to my list I lower
people's hands so my grid stays
the same.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
And I fully support this bill I
mean insurance is
It's really detrimental I'm I'm
just curious what the highest
level of.
earnings are for it to qualify
for Medicaid because I think a
lot of our lower paid employees
with family members would
probably be eligible for
Medicaid and I just I mean I
know when I was running my
business a secretary with six
people in her family decided not
to pay your health insurance
premium because you know she got
Medicaid which basically in
rural New Mexico is the same
medical services to get just as
much coverage on Medicaid issue
gives private insurance and it
was just beneficial for her not
to pay that that.
Louis contribution and go on
Medicaid does anybody know what
is the I guess what's the
highest level of salary and I
know this depends
Members in your family but does
anybody know that on this
Medicine.
On this meeting.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair I defer to Mister some of
all would you know Sir.
Mr chair representative Lara I
do not know what the minimum is
but I do know that over the
years and trying to find the
number here we have lost quite a
few members.
We've lost actually since the
inception of Medicaid in twenty
thirteen we've had about five
thousand four hundred and ninety
nine members that have been
eligible to receive.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
sent about I I assume that
that's probably why those
numbers are going down because
Medicaid eligibility is going
up.
And I I I know what we're trying
to do here trying to get this
you know if we can get it in
this year great but really what
we're trying to do is get that
annual that annual bill LFC to
include this
This formula eighty twenty and
we need to work toward that so
we can do it share right are are
really setting the stage really
for future years when this
becomes part of the annual
budget for this state thank you
thank you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you thank you for that
representative I really
appreciate that you bring up
that point because at one point
during our discussions are
brought up the Walmart example
in how they you know they pay
you keep people out at thirty
hours a lesson and instead of
offering insurers say they drive
off on to the on to the system
and in this way
I want to compare this is is not
the same thing but if we don't
include or we don't work towards
including this in the SCG or
allocating funding for many of
these people who'd who are using
or were using Medicaid are still
benefiting from state budget so
we're still we're still paying
for is just coming from a
different part of money so I I I
would rather you bundle this and
make this as an incentive for
for employees and for and for
teachers to to to stay in the
classroom as opposed to dumping
them off on to the Medicaid
system thank you Mr chair.
Thank you others on the list.
Just to get on the list
so I did have a question and if
I may Mister Simon
So there was the suggestion that
certainly the intent is for the
public education department to
send the money into the SCG
For distribution as intended to
tell
of what consequences adding the
state equalization guarantee
into the language of the bill.
Mr chairman as as drafted on.
Not sure
the current language in section
two of the bill allows PED to
distribute those funds through
the state equalization guarantee
I would say the primary reason
for that is.
The language has to distribute
to school districts charter
schools and participating
entities in the Public School
insurance authority that's not
synonymous with the state
equalization guarantee so
participating entities would
include things like like higher
education institutions some
other institutions so I don't
believe as drafted at least it
does not clearly to me.
Allow PED to distribute these
funds through the SCG.
The other the other consequence
of that of that would be because
twenty five percent essentially
of the SCG dollars goes to
Albuquerque public schools the
essentially the appropriation
bill would be diluted
so are using data from that Mr
Santa as provided it appears the
cost to school districts and a
higher education institutions
would be about fifty three point
three million if we were to
assume Albuquerque public
schools on top of that we get up
to about sixty four million
dollars needed to get Nipsey
covered entities essentially the
forty nine point nine million
that they would required to
cover the cost of the bill.
thank I believe that answers
your question Mr chairman I'm
I'm not if you had a on another
specific question I.
Not sure.
Yeah no no that was perfectly
clear I would say I was just
I'm
going over my head if if such a
specification is necessary but
it seems like the bill as
intended would do what the
sponsors hoping it what do you.
If you want if yes go for so I'm
as is it would be current
practice with the appropriation
committee any appropriation in
the bill would be would likely
be stripped from the bill anyway
so the exact language of the
appropriation here is is is
maybe not likely to be enacted
it so I would I would just note
that if you know the intent of
the sponsor is to get the get
the dollar in the in the SCG
you know when this gets to the
appropriation committee you know
that that sort of intent could
be you know made clear and so
that the exact language of the
of the appropriation section in
this bill is maybe not as
important.
you were heading into my next
line of questioning but but
certainly went above and beyond
that so I appreciate that Joey
other questions comments
concerns.
Not all entertain a motion.
Mr chair I would be passed.
Two passed motion on house bill
fifty nine a second by
Representative Trujillo
madam secretary called the roll
on a do passed motion please.
Representative Baca yes.
You yes.
Representative Dow.
Your.
You are muted.
Representative Dow.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Read.
Representative Bourbon Coverdale
yes.
There.
Yes.
Jim Trujillo yes.
Sure Garant yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
All right I voted thirteen to
zero you have a do pass on house
bill fifty nine thank thank you
Representative your.
All right seems like we're in
harmony this morning so we'll
move on to house bill seventy
three Representative care at.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
please move my expert witness
stand rounds the executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of educational leaders
to join me all right Mister
Anthony would in the attendees
said would you raise your hand.
All right.
Gone away.
Thank you set the top now yes
the top now he's bouncing up and
down on my list.
It's almost like going.
Fishing online point in the
side.
All right so we have.
Stand with us good morning.
Whenever you're ready
Representative jump around thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill seventy
three amends the language of the
educational retirement act so
that a new category return to
work for retirees is at it.
Currently if you want to return
to work as a full time employee
you have to set out for one full
year this addition permits you
to a reinsurer the educational
workforce after ninety days
however there is a trade offs
you can only return for thirty
six months of consecutive or non
consecutive work whereas if you
set out a full year you can
return indefinitely and and many
do.
I'm so this address is part of
the emergency we're currently
facing and staffing at every
level of our educational
workforce I'm.
But it again it stopped
limitation.
I'm I do want to state that I
have an amendment
to this bill.
All right so once you give your
overall remarks as to the bill
then we can locate amendment for
discussion unless you really
need to for discussion.
Okay I'm well it addresses the
emergency so that someone can
return after ninety days it
doesn't sunset like some of the
other clauses because there is
an ongoing evidence low well we
have an emergency now six years
ago we had too many educational
employees so it it doesn't
sunset thank you.
I you can only work for those
thirty six months if you take
advantage of the ninety dates.
Mr rounds you want to add
anything and then I do think I
need to present the amendment
because it addresses something
that was left out.
Yeah yes mistranslated your
opening remarks is the bill as
it is and then we can start the
amendment for discussion.
You Mr chairman and Madam co
chair thank you for I think a
good overview this is a this is
a fix for our problem getting
immediate reaction to comment in
are understaffed when we talked
about
there are B. as I said earlier
between nine hundred and fifteen
hundred open classrooms
every day this year this is a
way of generating those staff
who might be on the eclipse of
retirement to encourage when we
come back to work for limited
service up to thirty six months
is all however Mr chairman and I
believe that the amendment is
going to be necessary as in the
drafting there was an
inadvertent.
A lack of inclusion of the
section II in a matter of
support as far as the payment
into the E. R. B. that in fact
this how would protect the long
term you'll be found.
All right so it sounds like
we're moving into amendment
territory may have a motion on
the amendment.
Mr chair I move the amendment
for discussion I thank you and
all right thank you
Representative Sweetser
Representative Figueroa I'm and
so just to reiterate the two oh
two number is point two two zero
seven six point two is that
correct Representative yes that
is correct and it is in your
share file.
Excellent all right so armor and
we're a discussion of the
amendment so could you just
reiterate again Representative
be fair and what the amendment
is seeking to correct.
Yes so on page two one twenty
you're striking or F. and your
inserting in lieu of F. or hi
what happened is a returning
employ in every situation but
especially in this ninety day
situation must pay and to the E.
R. B. and their employment
situation was also eight so that
was in a permanently left out.
So in that case if you see the
older analyses bill say that
this takes a hit to the E. R. of
the fund but this makes it clear
that it doesn't cause returning
employee after ninety days does
have to pay
and they don't get to add any
additional years to their
service just as other returning
employees to.
I stand for questions awesome so
discussion solely on the
amendment folks.
So only on the amendment.
I have been a motion on the
amendment if there is a
discussion.
I move that we adopt the
amendment Mr chair.
Thank you all right so we have a
second by Representative
internet internet on that is
there any opposition to the
adoption of the amendment.
C. line I will have my pen.
You have been amended bill thank
you further introductory
remarks.
I have none of Mr chairman of
restaurants do you have any
further remarks.
That will be a family maybe
there is.
limited risk if you will into
the future for the first retiree
system and that was important
for us for tax for balancing in
this bill the need for immediacy
of availability of staff for
those who can be in joined.
I and then we also are
protecting the fund to sure they
have a non refundable
contribution from both the
employer and employee as you do
in the other matters that are
within the current statute sure
we have we have an answering
questions that you may have as
the the Sanchez who spent.
Thank you.
Right Representative you stand
for questions.
Yes I stand for questions madam
Mr Chairman all right thank you
so we'll go to the attendees
side those in opposition will do
opposition this time those in
opposition to house bill seventy
three hi Council yes Mr chairman
we also have somebody live in
the committee room would like to
speak as well.
Okay we'll get to them do we
know if they're in opposition
are in support I do not.
Okay my.
Or help support I'm looking at
awesome well there on my screen
so those in support if you would
indicate by raising your hand.
All right so we'll go to the
person in the committee room
first so welcome if you state
your name and who you may
Representative if you represent
an organization and you'll have
up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr Chairman
representative I am doctor
Kimberly money now the
superintendents local school
district and the president and
the superintendents association
I'm here to at.
The support of this bill in on
the basis of the crisis that
we're experiencing education and
school districts the
superintendents are
experiencing.
We have twelve hundred openings
in our state agencies in our
state and we probably have
increased that with mid year
retirement.
And this will be one of the
phases that will address the
needs and the school districts
that come across this for many
of us.
So we definitely support the
return to work bill house bill
seventy three and the amended
bill.
Thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to the
attendees list so we'll go to
Sean.
Good morning Sean you of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee I'm
doctor Chantelle I'm president
of eastern New Mexico university
here in Roswell and I wanted to
speak on this bill on behalf of
higher education.
And on our campus we have about
two hundred full time employees
in twenty twenty one this last
year we had thirty positions
that were vacant for more than
three months and so when we
think about that quarter of the
year when people were not able
to fill jobs in Roswell there's
help wanted signs everywhere in
Travis county it's a similar
situation so I would encourage
support of this bill and I
appreciate your consideration
thank you Sir right thank you.
All right so we'll go to lily
may.
Morning Willie Mae welcome back.
Morning Mr chairman thank you
really more teas provided lies
on for the next school school
board association and Mr
chairman members of the
committee because of the crisis
of our empty classrooms of the
teacher shortage we need to find
mechanisms that will bring
teachers back into the classroom
return to work is an issue that
the school board association is
consistently reported supporter
over the years.
Is it allows retired school
personnel to return to work and
educate our students we support
this action we asked the
committee to favorably
considerate and supportive
management as well thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee for you hard work we
appreciate.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to John.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman John durch
with A. F. T. New Mexico we are
also here in support of this
legislation normally this is not
type of legislation that are you
would be in support of however
the sponsors were really careful
in balancing protection of the
fund limited application of this
legislation and as others on
this call both within the
legislature and from the
advocate science that we are in
a full crisis and this will help
go a long way to alleviate some
of those pressures we're seeing
in our schools if you New Mexico
is proud to have all a large
segment of retired educators who
actively want to go back and
serve in schools recognizing the
crisis were and and this bill
would be a gateway for them to
be able to use their expertise
to benefit our local districts
so we urge support of house bill
seventy three thank you right
thank you.
Right so go to heather welcome
back other.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and we support this
legislation and the conversation
to consider how return to work
as part of the immediate work
for solution and the short term
educator pipeline we encourage
the sponsor to also consider and
ending existing law and other
ways such as increasing the
salary threshold above fifty
thousand dollars a year or
creased the one quarter of the
year requirement EPS this fall
semester had substitutes cover
over eight thousand jobs to
teacher vacancy which is normal
to a four year so increasing the
salary level would allow for
this to be for teachers who may
need additional and longer well
we we we down from COVID thank
you.
Right thank you.
So we'll go to doctor burn sting
thank.
Okay about two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee doctor Allen burns
Steen president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
and I would second what Dr
Bassett just said one of the
things retirees that I work with
talk about is an interesting
going back in and serving as a
sub for a long term substitutes
knowing that they don't want to
return full time to work but
they want to help out their
local schools during this time
of shortages so I support the
bill and it's then thank you
very much right thank you.
All right so Meredith.
Morning Meredith give up to two
minutes welcome back.
Good morning R. chairman members
of the committee are the league
of women voters of New Mexico
under your care and American
parking and.
Are your women New Mexico and on
the policy care support L. R.
thank you for bringing report
and our long partner there are
and go live with our for many
many years.
One of our legislation for mac
Act might only heard that we're
only here for.
R. twenty twenty four and I
don't know if possible but
where have any language where
are another amendment that would
allow
what could be an actor for your
American people alright we are
facing a long term care shortage
with retirement and
frankly the lack of interest in
going back and.
What what court highly valued
the fact with our.
But we know that we're not gonna
have a order now twenty twenty
four we're working long term
but and I and you know it would
be wonderful there were some
language in there that are
murder.
active proponent for murder I
don't know possible but thank
you very much the author on for
all the work on the.
Okay great thank you.
All right any and then.
Good morning.
Steve here at good morning your
need may need to on mute.
Yes good morning I'm so.
Mr chair and members of the
committee stage challenges
within the NM government
relations director for the the
reasons already pointed out
which the very clear and the
course of the reasons and the
intent has been very very.
Why we need to pass this bill
New Mexico supports the passage
of this we can we ask
respectfully request that you
also support this bill thank you
all right thank you.
Right.
Okay very good morning you have
up to two minutes welcome good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I carry Robin
brindar here speaking on behalf
of public charter schools of New
Mexico we do support this
legislation we think it's
incredibly important to help us
fulfill some of our teacher
shortages in the short term
while we work on that long term
pipeline that you all had such a
wonderful conversation about
this this morning so we support
bill thank you very much.
Thank you.
So that's it from the list we've
gone through opposition right so
we'll go to committee so first
on my list is Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and I don't
actually have a committee I just
account question rather I just
wanted to comment on is a member
of the committee and on the
Sanchez thoughtfulness to
dealing with both the retirement
aspects and the teacher shortage
aspects I think this bill is a a
really nice answer for that and
I'm like one of the people who
spoke I actually appreciate that
twenty twenty four.
sunset or or ending if you will
because I think we can
reevaluate at that point
hopefully many of the things
that we're putting in place to
help with the teacher pipeline
will have been brought to
fruition by that point and and
we won't have to require as many
return to work teachers as we do
right now so anyway I just
really appreciate how well this
bill is presented thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser Representative Trujillo
please.
I saw her and then she may be in
other committees so we'll move
on see if she comes back
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative I also wanted to
just
Comment on the
provisions that were made in the
amendment as the chair of the
investment pensions and
oversight committee income
committee I really appreciate
the language of non non
refundable contributions and
it's limited application we've
spent as you know Mr chair and
representative a considerable
amount of time over the years
discussing the funds and
the impact that our decisions
maker on the plan and we have on
solvency issues in the long run
to address that we haven't quite
gotten to address in on this
particular fund as well as are
other public kind so I just
wanted to
Commend the the the sponsor Mr
chair as well and all of those
on the team for providing for
this but I think that we will
have to again in in responses to
our crisis situations we need to
be vigilant as we proceed.
In the long term to make sure
that we are cover on and come
back to these issues and make
sure that that we reduce our
state vigilant with
maintain the least amount of
impact on the long run on on
these funds and that's all I
have to think I just want to
make that statement thank you Mr
Chairman representative thank
you.
Right thank you Representative
lane please.
Thank you Mr chair I think it's
apropos that we started this
morning with HB thirteen and her
book and is H. B. seventy three
you know thirteen of course is
the younger younger teachers are
trying to track and we're just
seventy three is is designed to
to fill some of our teachers or
is what the with our our older
more retired teachers and and
the reality is a lot of those
retired teachers and the
teachers are being provided the
mentor ship and other things
they have valuable experience
and and tremendous asset to our
educational community so I I
just to support this bill
hopefully we all the strategies
we're implementing we will be
able to shore up the teacher
shortages and and this isn't a
long term need but I think it's
a good short term strategy to
try to again get our kids with
full time certified teachers and
get away from the long term subs
and all the things that we're
aware of some thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative as much
as I'd like to take credit for
scheduling it that way
we started off with the incoming
teachers and that all we had
current staff and now we have
returning staff perhaps so I was
gonna go back to Representative
Trujillo
okay journalists Representative.
Mr chair can you hear me.
I thank you.
I just want the.
Do pass.
All right so what that is we
still have discussion
Representative out thank you I
have to go into another
committee okay so I'll I'll talk
at that we'll get to it thank
you Representative out please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Garrett for
the bill I'm would you be open
to an emergency clause and like
this is a pretty urgent need
that we have right now and could
we discussed imminent for
emergency clause so we can get
folks in the field right now.
Can I answer that Mr chair.
This how it is applied is to the
teacher so I believe this goes
into effect may eighteenth
passes the floor in the Senate
and the governor signed said and
I'm sure the governor would sign
it so if it goes into effect may
eighteenth that means any
educational employees who
retired already within ninety
days could apply this bill to it
so when we discussed it the need
was felt that we actually did
not need an emergency clause
because the ninety days refers
to the retiree it's not ninety
days after may eighteenth it's
ninety days from the time the
retiree had the retirement date.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Garrett so you're
saying if we put an emergency
clause on this it would entice
anyone to go to a school
district right now I mean our
governor is becoming a
substitute teacher.
That would not help someone feel
slot that's currently filled by
the governor or perhaps by at
the National Guard.
It would would work.
My understanding Mr chairman and
and Representative doubt is that
it would not be necessary
because someone if they're
already retiring and they have
the ninety days they could go
back basically in August or the
latest September.
So Mister chairman chairman of I
could perhaps suggest we might
have Mister Simon talk about Mr
chairman you about the effective
date of the networks to clause
there may be limited.
Limited situations where
individuals have retired then
ninety days upon this would come
into effect the might need that
eclipse question the
representative Garrett's Madam
is the discussion we had
happened but I'll defer Mr are
Mr chairman to your staff and
expertise on.
Dates that this would become
effective.
Joey I'm would you have comment
on that on what the the meaning
of an of an emergency clause
might mean to.
Mr chairman and Representative
Romero
so if this bill were to pass the
governor would have will depend
depending on when it were to
pass but let's assume it passed
near the end of the session of
the session the governor would
have until March ninth to sign
the bill at which point it would
become effective immediately it
had an emergency clause I will
note that under the terms of the
bill and I just need to find
the that Mr B. is required to
develop forms and applications
so you.
Even under this new program I
believe that you're building
would still be required to go
through a process to
Prior to hi being able to hire a
person whether or not they could
go through that process.
In less than ninety days
yes they could perhaps expedite
that process to be a a little
quicker from the time the bill
goes into effect.
To
Until the all of the all of the
process works itself out there
may be with an emergency clause
eight it could be possible that.
Someone returns to work early
could return to work earlier you
know.
Julie as early as let's say
March early March if the
governor resigned the bill by
then depending on how long it
would take your beat up the
update their systems.
Mr chairman.
Nationally in light of the fact
you know we don't know what's
going to happen with your on
screen extend the dates can
extended learning that we can't
think about fall August that we
think about keeping people being
occurring return to the room as
early as you know April and may
it could have a benefit.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative and of
course I defer that to the bill
sponsor
Their bill when it comes with of
course added procedural risks
but.
That is your call
Representative.
So Mr chair I understand that
for an emergency clause you have
to have two thirds of each house
approve it is that correct in my
understanding.
Yes so I I'm Representative Dow
I really appreciate your remarks
what I would like to do rather
than doing it at this time is
before it goes to the next
committee a check and also with
E. R. B. E. R. B. wanted to add
some additional clause that it
wouldn't apply to anyone who
retired before December thirty
first twenty twenty one which we
did not go with.
So I agree with you with the
urgency but rather than doing it
right now I wanted just to a
little bit more diving in with a
Joan Boue and and that Mr rounds
in the E. R. B. and then I can
present that as amendment the
next committee.
I really appreciate that because
I have in my notes are ready to
consider that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you so so one thing I did
mention as I'd like to get clean
bills out of this committee and
not rely on other committees to
to clean up our work and make
sure that we're passing
legislation that could claim
that we'll agree with what are
the what's the extent of the
conversations with the R. B.
about the for twenty twenty one
and what may be the implications
of that and how likely is it to
see that.
Thank you Mr chairman they were
concerned about the solvency of
the fund and that people would
rush to retire in order to take
advantage of this that that was
their concern that people would
suddenly retire right now so
they could come back for three
years that was their concern.
Mr rounds you want to add to
that.
Yes thank you
The co chair of the
I think of the R. B. discussion
is before the change we made
today in the amendment I think
there is a concern about opening
up a large liability to be very
candid the liability is only
thirty six months on for
employees did that they have the
other options that are currently
available which you have the
support and because we added to
the non refundable payment we
believe that it it is a find
amount of risk if there is any
risk at all to the funding and
so we're going to recommend to
the to the sponsor that would
not be for.
All ten of them at the present
that's the course of the
legislature.
Miss Mister chairman Mr rounds
you faded out you're
recommending that we not to the
emergency clause is that my
understanding of what you just
said.
That that would not be for two
the R. B. concern that you had
mentioned because I believe that
was dealt with and see have been
met today to the section are to
the page two inclusive of
section II which significantly
minimizes any risk it's only a
three year period that somebody
would draw from both sources and
will treat all those who are
interested in sort of internal
opening their service they still
have the other provisions I have
had which includes the year lie
out of state I want to go to a
true make long term bubble yup
which is for the fans exposure
tends to bait and so that's
where we're at at this point we
certainly think that exploring
the impact on the political
issues of a an emergency clause
are worthwhile and we certainly
are willing to work Madam spots
with you and others about the
efficacy of that in addition in
our initial view that have.
Some potential related but not.
As You balanced against the
likelihood of getting to serves
on both sides all the way
through as an issue so Mister
chairman we flexibility is
current respect meets the
affects in question restaurant.
Great I'm sorry Representative.
Mr chairman I'd I don't wish to
add an emergency clause.
Great thank you for that and
then I was asking
yes west concerned with the with
the emergency clause letter it
added or or not but more of the
substantive we're gonna really
see up a pretty big change in in
the bill I think is Mr round
said mentioned in is stated in
our house committee analysis as
well but the amendment is to
bring down the cost of being
that it's a three year period I
would also argue that if you
don't allow for that you could
see it it serves as a deterrent
for people wanting to work that
they wouldn't be able to access
the goal for that period of time
so it might be like okay why
would I bother to go on the back
into teaching yes if I'm
potentially going to be doing
without which is what I've heard
from from sept Senator
colleagues of mine and of course
this is anecdotal but that was a
deterrent from them coming back
to work additionally is that
they were going to take a pretty
big hit and being that this is
only for a short period of time
I think it speaks to
Representative Sweetser and some
of the people on the attendees
list about being very very well
thought out be careful in this
process because of course we
have in this case I'm gonna
point out a tri partisan del
which I think is a first in this
committee but I think it's
because it it it really walks
the fine line that we've had
plenty of back and forth yes
return to work.
Public in the public sector now
in our public schools but I I
think it does a very good job of
that so I just want to make sure
in their heads up for committee
is that making sure that we have
good clean bills and don't to
for substantive work that we
should be doing in the Education
Committee to further committees
we want to make sure that we can
stand by the votes we take in
the legislation that we're
looking at and it sounds like we
do so with that are there for
their comments or questions I.
I'm sorry Mr chairman that yes
yes yes your and Mr chairman it
has to do with the January
twenty twenty four dates was
mentioned by several of those
and ask questions around the
committee I just want to clarify
if you look on page one with may
have lines nineteen and twenty.
This is very important says
except as otherwise provided in
subsections be half H. and a
high of this section until
January first twenty twenty four
so January twenty twenty four
used to all other provisions not
these provisions if you look
back on it those provisions if
you go to section hi.
The balance is you don't you no
longer have the twenty twenty
four sunset.
Thank you do have the three year
limitation amounts that fine
balance I want to know to
committee but I don't want
people voting with the
misunderstanding that the twenty
twenty four date if you look at
subsection hi it does not give
any limiting date for this
legislation what the limitation
is is in the term of service
allowed only and so Mister I
just want people as you go to
photos be clear an understanding
of what's there I think that
speaks to several views on that
matter but some agnostic about
it but I just always wanted to
have technical correctness in
your reading and I would turn if
Mr Simon disagrees with me to
his expert opinion but that's
what I'd read as I read this.
Mr chairman of Mr rounds in
committee that that was very
intentional that this provision
does have a sunset clause and I
appreciate the comments of
people in the audience who
wanted that to be amended but I
think yes Representative
Sweetser pointed out I'm we
still can amend that
at the next session.
Mr Chairman ever Representative
Airtel's issued in her oversight
role we're we're shooting at gap
Mr Chairman to try to limit the
exposure allow this to meet the
needs that are continuing to
emanate in public schools allow
local districts and our
employees especially teachers
have the opportunity to to
decide what options would be
used as we as we cover this but
being very internally careful to
be sure we're not putting the
fund balance in the significant
risk.
Right thank you for those
clarifications.
And with that I did have a
motion from Representative
Trujillo.
Lacking a second.
A second I saw Representative
Sweetser I'll give it to her I
saw her two fingers go up.
All right.
So is there any opposition do it
this way is there any opposition
to the passage of house bill
seventy nine as amended.
Seeing none you have a do pass
on house bill seventy nine as
amended thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
All right so I did want to bring
before we adjourn recess until
Wednesday lily may Ortiz she's
going to talk to us about the
New Mexico school board
association and.
There event that they're
inviting us to is they do every
year so and.
Thank you Mr chairman I yes
members of the committee The New
Mexico scored Association
annually four institute in Santa
Fe during the legislative
session that brings to the city
of school board members from
throughout the state
for legislative collaboration
and and conversation and
training and as always we of
would love to have your
attendance as members of the
house Education Committee all
the dates of the conference and
the beginning opening ceremonies
are Friday February the fourth
which would be next week and
we're inviting you all to an
appreciation breakfast because
of the hard work that you do for
us and for the citizens in your
districts Representative this is
from seven to eight AM it's a
pre conference breakfast it is
held at the Eldorado hotel and
you should have received an
email I'm sorry you should
received a memo from Mister Joby
and executive director of the
school board association they
should have this in in writing
and so you can check with their
secretaries if you if you down
this practice will be preceding
the general open session of the
conference after breakfast we
will have a Mike there and if
you would like to speak to the
the board members in attendance
and share some of your feelings
and use we would love to have
that occur so please mark your
calendars Friday February fourth
seventy eight A. M. in pre
conference breakfast at the
Eldorado tell we're inviting
both education committees that
would love to see members of the
house education maybe there
thank you.
Great thank you so just to
clarify I'm sorry that was house
bill
Seventy three as amended thank
you Representative Figueroa
house bill seventy three
Representative court right okay
and is that what you and your
and
what I find Mr chair.
Thank you all I think we were
all understanding of the issue
we're discussing the bill all
right awesome.
So I'm generally for the New
Mexico school board association
breakfasts we tend to start at
eight thirty we'll see how much
business we have to conduct but
I hope to be able to see you all
there thank you lily may.
All right with that we will meet
again on Wednesday so just a
reminder to members please will
make sure that we get a reminder
link sent out to you an hour
before committee this next time
so you all have the link and if
not if something happens you
always have the available
availability to enter the link
on New Mexico and then we just
dot gov attendees and then just
raise your hand I'll pull you in
so long as you're named
appropriately with that
everybody thank you all so much
for the good work we will see
you all on Wednesday have a nice
rest your day.
And Mary are we going to send
them to me right now.
I don't know I was gonna run up
there with you.
Okay.
You're you're Perry Winkle to
color.
And then just you know just ask
them a couple questions like for
example well they stopped that
have based.
We think because I don't know if
this is reported yes also the
zoom is still happening so we're
gonna leave and
I'll go up there and okay okay
thank you.
