Representative Lara.
Representative Lente them.
I'm here.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative or bomb Committee
Anil.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser.
Here Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative director.
Thank you Sir.
Vice chair carrot.
Chairman there.
We do have a quorum all right
good morning everybody I hope
you had an a good nice restful
Sunday
we're back at it so I do not see
Senator hope that's fine
we can move on sorry
Representative Garrett
but why don't we go on I can put
on house bill three thirty one
it's something we've seen before
and then we can take people as
they're coming and hundreds Act
Lucy goosey for this sat.
Toward the end of the session
all right
So give me a second.
Them there ready to the chair.
Yes good morning everybody our
first presentation will be our
chairman Andres Romero
presenting on house bill three
thirty one public peace health
safety and welfare pertaining to
transportation please go ahead
Mr chair.
Right thank you madam chair so
so very briefly this is
something we've seen before if
you remember I presented house
bill one seventy five a few
weeks ago which was the hold
harmless and there were two
parts to it there was a hold
harmless for school districts as
a whole for next year and then
the second part was the
transportation hold harmless for
Transportation funding heading
into this next year so we
understand that they've been
having trouble in are taking
issue with the language in house
bill two in terms of the
transportation budget and so
therefore this is something that
we need to codified for next
year in law
So with that madam chair all I
will stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
secretary can you send Senator
pulp the link again.
Thank you okay we'll start with
our audience attendees if
we'll start with those in favor
of house bill three thirty one
just a reminder that you have
two minutes
So if you would like to speak in
favor please raise your hand
now.
Okay and we will start of with
Mr Stan rounds and you have the
floor thank you madam chairman
good morning members the
committee stand rows for the
school superintendents
association
we stand in full support of this
solution we know it's the intent
of the legislature whole
districts harmless it is one of
our highest priorities as an
organization.
This legislation will in fact
solve the issues at hand and
therefore we asked the committee
voted firm of late for this bill
and let's move along quickly
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is C. R. Bruhn
Jr.
I carry I carry.
Good morning madam chair and
members the committee Kerry
robin for under with the public
charter schools of New Mexico we
also support this legislation
this morning thank you so much.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is
asset heather.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is heather asset and I'm
with Albuquerque public schools
and restraint stand in strong
support at House Bill three
thirty one we think it's that
policy that we need in order to
hold districts harmless for
transportation funding for next
school year and get back to
school thank you.
Thank you.
At our next speaker is lovely
may are keys.
Good morning madam chairman.
You're on mute.
Thank you Mr chair I'm sorry I
thought I had done that earlier.
A good morning I'm willing their
teams that represent the New
Mexico school board association
and madam chair of the school
board association supports
legislation that holds schools
harmless we wholeheartedly
support this piece of
legislation we're concerned
about the reductions property
budgets due to the client to due
to the declining enrollment
during the pandemic and we're
thankful that this who's the
legislature can forward to fix a
transportation issue we asked
the committee to favourably
consider this and pass it on and
you get forward thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Our next do we have any more
people that would like to
Speak today.
Anybody else please raise your
hand if you want to speak in
support of house bill three
thirty one okay I don't see
anybody else is there anybody
who would like to speak in
opposition of house bill three
thirty one.
Raise your hand if you would
like to speak in opposition okay
I see nobody
who wants to speak in opposition
so we'll go to our panelists and
Representative doubt you have
the floor.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman for bringing the
bill and I understand I'm just
trying to understand the the new
language in the statute is only
for COVID because it is
restricted to a time frame it
references twenty twenty two and
twenty nineteen numbers and so
after at when we move forward it
just reverts to the previous
statute language art language
that's already in statute.
madam chair and and
Representative yes that's
correct so it's temporary
because we have a
I should say sketchy information
from the pandemic for last
year's ridership in order to
yeah keep the districts whole in
terms of their transportation
budget to next year.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen and are there some
districts to you know.
Perhaps.
Did not renew their contract
with their private lenders are
were did everyone have fix
transportation costs were what
happens to the costs that were
not used.
I'm madam chair if I could defer
to director gradual on that
question.
Mr chairman and madam chair
representative the costs are
going to depend on how districts
transported students to and from
school so I think the department
has allowed actually districts
to use their funding to support
meals that they were doing so
that doesn't comply with the
statute but I'm guessing it's
going to be an allowable cost by
the department
most transportation programs
have been limited because only a
limited number of students have
been being allowed to go to
school State of elementary
school students and small pods
of
Small pods of special education
students so you guys making
appropriation of around a
hundred and five hundred and ten
million dollars a year for
transportation the dollars that
go on Spence by a district this
year fifty percent will revert
and state charter charter
schools fifty percent will
revert to the state
Emergency transportation funding
fifty percent will be ring team
that by
by the districts for state
charter charters and can only be
used for to and from
transportation in future years.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
our madam chairman Mr chairman
thank you Rachel that I just I.
You know I just want to comment
how kind of going into our own I
think this committee has become
I mean most of the members are
relatively new and it took us
awhile to kind of figure out
what was happening and and I
just want to commend the
chairman for kind of digging in
the house bill two taking a look
at the language for those of you
who haven't done that yet that
language matters and I am glad
that this committee is
introducing bills whether they
are I think recalling
engineering bills now our
emergency bills to address what
we see as missed opportunities
or or things that are important
to districts that maybe wasn't
captured in house bill two and
so I just want to commend the
chairman for his efforts in
coordinating and collaborating
with folks who may not serve on
this committee or understand how
important their decisions are
any what kind of impact that
it's having in our education
higher education systems.
Representative field up
Representative Chatfield your
next thank you madam chair my
question discussed at.
Is there anybody else that has
questions for the chair for the
chairman Romero Casey no further
questions do we have to pass
okay.
Your manager point I think we
need to adopt the committee
substitute.
To to
committee substitute
Representative.
I I misunderstood thank you okay
we need a second is it is a
committee madam chair it is a
committee substitute so the
proper motion would have been a
motion to discuss the committee
substitute and then we can move
a do not pass on house bill
three thirty one but a do pass
on Baba Baba box.
It.
Okay we have a motion to.
not pass.
House bill thirty three thirty
one and to pass the committee
substitute.
I mean Madam madam chair so so
will need in first to discuss
the
Committee substitution in the
beginning and madam chair I move
that substitute for House Bill.
One you for discussion.
Okay.
That.
Okay we have moved and seconded
the discussion
is there anybody section.
I.
Sure and all of who has a
question of.
I have a question is this
Is this of a committee
substitute of three thirty one.
Is that okay New Mexico and.
And Dow is making the committee
substitute to us
discussion I Representative
Baldonado seconded okay and
they're no objections so that
passed and now
we need.
We need the motion.
Madam chair substitute.
Okay it.
Okay and how would second it
affected it.
Okay.
Second not to pass the three
thirty one but to have a due
pass for the committee
substitute for House Bill three
thirty one is there anybody who
objects to this.
I see no objections at chairman
you have a due pass for the
committee substitute for House
Bill three thirty one.
Thank thank you madam I'm so
confused I'm so sorry I'd still
need to know who was the nominee
for the two do not pass but for
you to do a pass it was.
You okay.
And then Representative
Baldonado is all right thank you
madam chair Mr Chairman but
because it's a generic bill
there's not at not to pass.
There's not at.
There's a no do pass
recommendation we're the only
recommendation is to move this
up.
To be a do pass correct.
Okay what I learning moment I
love it thank you
Representative.
Okay but so it's a on the on
that point I mean there was a
house bill three thirty one
which is does have not
necessarily substance to it.
it it does it was still a bill
that was introduced and so since
this is a sob I think that rule
still applies it still would do
not pass but it to pass on the
committee substitute just like
it would be for any other bill
now this is my first time
running engineer.
Mr Chairman but but right
because it's was still sits at
well right he caught substantive
bill but it was still a bill
that was introduced.
So I think that rural parts I
think we're good.
Madam secretary is that all
clarified.
You
are and so I'll turn the chair
back over to chairman Romero for
the next bill.
Right thank you madam chair
So I just do not seeing I.
That will be favored do we have
all those in favor an agreement
that are present.
I think so there is no J. okay
all right thank you.
Okay.
Thank you so I do not see
Senator hope I'm here there are
I just find them nice.
All right thank you very much
all right.
Mr Chairman.
Stapleton place I had technical
problems getting on this morning
connection it kept telling me to
connect wouldn't connect so did
we do anything with HM I all
kind we do no no not yet so
we're gonna do will take Senator
pope and then we can do the
Joint Memorial next okay if in
fact Mr chairman that
And you have a bill in in Senate
at right I have a leadership
meeting at the same time so
let's see.
Okay.
All right senator pope hugely is
Senate bill two seventy two.
You Mr chairman committee
members Senate bill two seventy
two amended as the military
family relief school enrollment
about a hundred eighty five
thousand military children
change schools annually due to a
permanent change of station move
the challenger transferring
records state differences in
education and graduation
requirements also be in Rome
enrollment barriers and sports
electives in extracurricular
activities can be daunting if
your child is on individual
education program you had
another layer of concern.
The department of defense has
been working with the national
center of interstate compacts
established by
Charles based at the national
center for interstate compacts
established by the interstate
compacts education opportunities
for military children in two
thousand eight which covers
common policies for records
transfers enrollment placement
and graduation requirements
these reforms were great.
But we still Lee families to
deal with the issue once they
arrived at a new duty station
they DO DS been working with
states to make the task of
transferring to a new school
easier by giving military
parents a temporary waiver to to
residents requirement this will
enable them to pre enroll their
children in a school district
before they arrive at the PCS
destination this initiative is
called advanced enrollment and
is now policy in nineteen states
and currently being worked in
Vermont and now here in New
Mexico.
So what is the advanced and
Roman initiative the advanced
enrollment let some military
child register in their new
school district at the same time
as the general student
population which is generally at
the end of the previous school
year military children moving to
a participating state will no
longer have to prove physical
residence within the school
district boundaries before the
rules.
Some of the benefits of this
initiative.
Given the opportunity for
students participate in random
lotteries for charter magnet
schools it gives them a chance
to enroll in specialized
academic programs.
Yes me opportunity begin
coordinating the IEP and five oh
one I will for plan requirements
give them the ability to
register for courses and plan
their course of study and
finally gives in the comfort of
knowing which school they will
attend before arriving to the
location.
So how does this process work
first documentation is used
usually military orders of a
pending military location and
then second once they arrive
within the state they'll
actually just show proof of
residency residency in that
school district and we're asking
for them to show that proof
within forty five days.
Now some of our school districts
already
have this initiative especially
those near our military
installations what we want to
make sure that this is down
statewide because we have
members of our National Guard
members of our reserves and even
some of our active duty folks
that are in some remote
locations or maybe a military
recruiter that's in a location
not near military installation.
With that being said Mr chair
committee members are I'm ready
for any public comment or any
questions on this bill thank
you.
Right thank you senator so we'll
go to the attendees list is
there anybody here in support of
Senate bill two seventy two.
Enrollment.
All right good morning Serra you
have up to two minutes welcome.
There we can't hear you.
Can you hear me now we can sorry
about that thank you.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Sarah fitz Gerald I'm senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
chambers in strong support of
this bill and we think Senator
co for bringing it forward I'm
so currently when military
families relocate their children
might end up stuck with whatever
courses are still open and
available that leaves them with
classes that might not suit
their credit needs or their
elected interests or they've Mr
charters lottery and they have
to kind of resigned themselves
to wait list or another option
that is still in rolling this
bill creates a more supportive
and welcoming environment for
military families as they moved
to the area and there's a
committee to approve it to help
boost our children's success
through challenging transition
to the new home thank you great
thank you Sir all right and
there are others in support and
wish to speak the attendees
list.
Is there opposition.
Stan.
What the weight hand stand in
German I'm sorry went off all of
a sudden I developed good
morning Mr chairman members the
committee stand around for the
state superintendents
association we stand strong
support of this bill as a
superintendent serving in to
districts Alamogordo New Los
crucis that heavy ties to our
military we have supported any
flexibility we can as families
PCS from location to location as
Senator pope indicated Mr
chairman this is a critical
nature for those children this
is not inconsistent weather open
enrollment act in New Mexico
public schools and meets the
intent of the two thousand eight
legislation that we brought in
the state of New Mexico so for
those reasons and the reason of
fairness to our children we
strongly support this
legislation.
Right.
Hi there this is a wish to speak
in support.
All right so we're good
opposition their opposition to
Senate bill two seventy two.
All right.
Welcome back to committee
comments questions concerns from
the committee.
I'm a do pass of Senate bill two
seven ages amended all right
thank here Representative
Garrett I'll give that to the
second Representative Baldonado
is that what you're gonna
mention Representative yeah
that's fine okay.
All right.
No comments questions.
Is there opposition to the past
motion.
Okay Representative Lara please.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
god thank you Center for
bringing this bill forward I do
have a a quick question Mr
chairman Senator so last week we
passed a bill of this committee
that would allow
parents that work at charter
schools in boulder children and
charter schools.
And this bill is also allowing
students for military families
to have expedited employment in
a.
In
Charter schools.
So my question is is if this
bill the the bill that we pass
of this committee last week.
How would that bill impact.
The enrollment of these military
students if priority is given to
the employees the children of
the employees of tarsal.
Mr chair representative Lara
So the process of this bill
would once again that military
family got the orders then they
would be able to qualify before
they arrive to to
You know participate in a
lottery for the charter school
so I guess to answer your
question I I guess the only way
where there would be any
conflict or out with with
deal with that prior bill is.
If a parent have their child
getting prior to that charter
school I guess.
I don't know if there would be
less opportunity for military
child but I I don't know any
other way that it would conflict
with what that bill is saying.
Unless unless the military.
Parent was also with a charter
school.
Educator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that that that so
that that helps I just wanted to
to make that clear that that
that the bills that we do have
passed to have a lot of
repercussions and have impacts
on other bills that were moving
to this to this body and so we
have to take a whole a whole
students are whole global
approach when we do these things
thank you for your bill Senator
all I intend to fully supported
thank you Mr chair.
Here Representative
Representative Garrett.
Mr chairman that's what I was
just gonna clarified that
military family have have to go
through the charter of process
and not Senator pope clarified
that thank you.
Great thank you so we did have
that do pass motion by
Representative Garrett the
second by Representative
Baldonado was their opposition
to the do pass.
All right seeing none Senator
you have a do pass on Senate
bill two seventy two as amended
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee I just think this is
one of one of the important
bills taking care of our
military families and our kids
and I and it's real also really
important secondary factor that
the department of defense when
they're deciding military
missions that come out to our
installation they look at how we
treat our family so I appreciate
that this is something that we
need to continue to thank you
thank thank you Representative
Stapleton house joint memorial I
do wish to squeeze that in.
Yes Mr chairman please Mr
chairman and members of the
committee good morning
house joint memorial I studied
the effects of funding formula
changes Mr chairman and members
of the committee house joint
memorial I request the
legislative education study
committee and the legislative
finance committee to create a
joint subcommittee to study the
effects of changes to the state
public school funding formula Mr
chairman and members of the
committee public school finance
experts will be included to
provide assistance the purpose
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of this Joint Memorial
is to examine the changes that
the legislature has made to the
formula and how these changes
affect the public education
system many of you have had a.
A profound impact on the funding
formula and consequently the
program in and delivery of
educational opportunities the
public school funding formula is
complex with multiple factors
wait send in indices the
calculations required to arrive
but the funding a school
district received for the
educational program is the
result of the district program
units multiplied by the annual
St unit value in turn Mr
chairman the effort required to
calculate all of the factors
components of the formular
require extensive documentation
and reporting requirements the
study would examine both the
elements of the funding formula
as well how effective the
formula is as a mechanism to
meet the significant
educational needs but New Mexico
diverse student population Mr
chairman it will provide a
better understanding of changes
to the formula that have
occurred and the changes that
may be needed to the formula to
address the current challenges
New Mexico public education
system is experiencing a Mr
chairman I now stand for
questions.
Great thank you Representative
I'm so we're going to the
attendees list is anybody in
support of house joint memorial
I.
Heather good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome in
morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my
name's heather Bassett and with
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in support of this is a
study and we're ready to assist
if needed thank you.
Right thank you others in
support.
Opposition.
All right so we'll come to
committee.
Questions Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning members.
Representative Stapleton I I
know that you part of the
discussion on house bill that I
recently proposed house bill
eighty four that has to this
committee and had some
substantial work done by L. E.
S. C. staff and and I'm
wondering if perhaps you would
be amenable to expanding some
language in your HA am I to take
into account some of the
discussions that we had in this
committee in regards to the
expansion of.
Of a finances to native American
tribal education departments.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
I don't have a problem with that
I just I'm trying to understand
what those issues fit into the
formula study.
On the list study with the
native American issues is
related to the actual formula
study.
Mr chairman and and
Representative I do believe it
is germane to the subject at
hand the possibility for was
looking at of funding the tribal
education departments and and so
I think it changes the form the
funding formula generally
speaking and so I I would I
would I would think it's
appropriate at this point.
I'm I I'm that the chairman have
your amendment I don't know
that that actually Mr chairman
and and Representative he does
not have the amendment it's just
something that I saw and reading
your your your memorial and so
at it would be a matter of of
adding a sentence two I think
three sections of your of of the
memorial.
If if if I may Mr Chairman
representative we can do it here
or.
So so I I will I will say
Representative went to that I do
see it as outside of the
purposes of the the funding
formula
and so that's something that
would need further discussion
but I really don't see it as
something that's that would be
necessary as part of this study
is it's part of it's outside of
of our funding formula
discussion I mean that's
certainly something that can be
entertained as part of these
discussions perhaps if we're
going to tack on things but I
don't think it's necessarily
pertinent but that's something
we could discuss this this bill
this Joint Memorial goes goes
forward.
Mr chairman and Representative
then perhaps something that you
and I can talk about before then
heads to the floor and and it's
something that perhaps we can
energy at that point in time.
I have no problem with that
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Representative Derrick please.
Thank you Mr chairman I in and
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward in
response to Representative Lente
is question it does say on page
three
lines one through six it says
that the legislative education
study committee and the
legislative finance committee be
requested to study all of the
current issues affecting the
funding formula including
legislation passed by the fifty
fifth legislative session so I
feel like that encompasses
Representative led to this point
so that that's just the
information I wanted to put
forth thank you.
Thank you Representative I'm I
think that's a really good point
I mean I think it'll be
certainly part of this
discussion as we move forward in
the bills that we have had
I mean are Representative
Stapleton I just want to say
because I know you're pressed
for time and need to jump off
here and go to another meeting
but thank you for bringing this
forward I think it's super
important those of you that I
certainly talk to and personally
and and kind of voice in this
committee is the fact that you
know we certainly with the
change in impact aid
we're taking one of the funding
sources away from the SCG and
and putting it to I mean sixty
percent is going to a handful of
school districts and we will be
time the rest of the eighty nine
school districts more closely to
on the fluctuations in our
economy so I think it's it's
about time we look at and we
have to I've been talking about
redefining what equity means
based on our student population
and where we need to go in terms
of our funding formula forward
so we've seen that certainly
representative Lente that has
been active in that discussion
and we've seen a few of his
bills Representative Dow in
looking at well the at risk for
formula but taking all these
factors into account and where
the money is going and how we
can best support our students I
think this is something that is
certainly needed I don't think
it's been done since two
thousand eight two thousand nine
so it's helpful in light of
lawsuits in light of what we're
doing here to try to remedy some
of these issues certainly as it
relates to it to impacted for
military families and our our
our our tribal schools is is
super important thank you for
bringing this forward I'm so
that further questions comments
concerns.
All right.
So.
Mr Chairman.
All right so in the past motion
by Representative Baldonado
thank you.
Thank you bye representative
Lente is there any opposition to
the past motion.
Did you just text me no
Representative Eli.
Okay I was just seeing if you're
paying attention.
All right.
Have a unanimous Asenath thank
you okay house joint memorial I
you have in the past thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
All right so hello transition
here.
We have a weekend off and then I
forget how to do stuff on Senate
bill three forty one.
So we'll bring in senator
Neville.
All right good morning senator
did we need to pull anybody in
to act as an expert for you.
Can you hear me now Mr chairman
we can that I need to pull
anybody in Senator ritual goes
go July I think she's already
somewhere under so yes please
when you're ready thank you this
is a simple bill it basically
changes one line in the current
statute that allows us to.
The subject the community
schools fund to appropriation by
the legislature this is a non
reverting fund as I understand
it it'll be about a ten million
dollars appropriation and then
there's another ten million
dollars or so from I believe
federal other sources federal
money and the it's intended that
these dollars would continue for
two three years and it's so
important the legislature have
control of the appropriation
that's all it does and Rachel
can explain a little bit more
about the community schools and
what they mean to the to the
state and how these dollars
might be used or any other
questions you might have thank
you.
The bridge is available.
right now in house bill two
there's a ten million dollar
transfer from the general fund
in a ten million dollar transfer
fee the public education reform
Fund both of which are
contingent on enactment of this
legislation so as you know
community schools provide a
holistic approach to improving
student academic achievement
they look at both act making non
academic supports for kids.
Last year I believe the
department funded twenty six
community schools currently in
house bill two there's an
appropriation in addition to
that twenty million dollars and
transfers.
Of it two million I think it's
three million dollars
And with the transfer of funds
into the fund the intent is to
scale up
Scale up grants over the next
three years so to have some
funding available over the next
three years to offer PED to
continue to approve requests so
preliminary grants planning
grants or fifty thousand dollar
grants and then those grants
jump up to a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for
implementation requests so
out here is are more expensive
than the front end and the
concern inputting a large dollar
amount in this funds is making
sure you guys as the
appropriating body are managing
how much money from the fund
will be used by the department
every year to manage a
sustainable growth
in community schools at the
department to manage
and and provide oversight to
that Mr Chairman and stand for
questions.
I think that's all we have Mr
chairman if you have any
questions force.
All right thank you Senator
thank you director Deutch also
will go to the attendees list
there anybody in support of
Senate bill three forty one.
So really make good morning
about two minutes.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me I'm happy to.
Right good morning thank you Mr
chairman willing more to use
with the New Mexico school board
association and the school board
association could telling
supports community school
programs in our school districts
we've consistently called for
additional funding for the
community schools program and
recommend the use of the statute
as a guide to implementation the
community schools model is based
on the belief that programs
which successfully Neville both
non academic and academic
schools to improve student
outcomes many of our school
districts have community schools
which partner with their
families and communities to
provide well rounded educational
opportunities and supports for
our students success we
appreciate this legislation and
we asked the committee to move
forward and we think the
committee for allowing the
school boards association to
voice its position thank you.
Right thank you.
Are there others in support that
would be.
All right opposition is their
opposition to Senate bill three
forty one.
What.
Credit disclose those reports.
All right.
Welcome to committee.
Representative yes.
Representative Dow plates and
it's here and.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator for the bill could
you please explain what what
what would the consequences be
Rachel if we do not pass the
bill what will happen.
Ms
river go ahead I'm sorry
Richard.
Senator I was gonna say that
dollars would revert back to to
the general fund and would not
be utilized where we we want to
use them for community schools.
And thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator does this make the
dollars per minute and
reoccurring moving forward.
There is not recurring in this
current appropriation I don't
know what the future plan is for
that Rachel you might want to
chime in on that yeah so so
Mister chairman
Representative it you know how
you guys appropriate funds.
You you would have to
appropriate funds from the
recurring pot of money for the
appropriation to be considered
recurring but keep in mind just
because it appropriation comes
from recurring funding sources
doesn't mean The appropriation
is always going to happen so
appropriations are subject to
your deliberation every year
right now the appropriation
going
into the fund and a judge to the
departments use in house bill
two is coming from the public
education reform Fund which is a
nonrecurring source of money and
then the transfers are also
coming in I believe from non
recurring money ten million
dollars from non recurring
general fund and another ten
million dollars from the public
education reform Fund.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and Rachel and so what
since two thousand nineteen the
first time that we appropriated
funds from state dollars to
community schools.
I believe you're right laws of
twenty nineteen chapter one
ninety eight I believe that's
correct so thank you Mr chairman
and senator so in two years we
are now funding community
schools that twenty million
dollars and so Mr chairman and
senator some of our school
districts have been doing
community schools for five years
what have been their outcomes.
Do we have any measurable
outcomes for most just just this
this funding just to for where
where do you know what ritual
discussed the the uses these are
recurring dollars intended to
last more than one years so just
want to make it clear that
that's not to we're not just
doing one year's worth of
funding so Rachel you can tell
us what we've been doing on
community schools so so Mr
Chairman representative I think
we have to get with PED they're
the ones that are managing the
grant would know what the
outcomes are part of the
challenge you have right now is
it's probably fairly easy to
measure some of those non
academic outcomes things like
how much food is being provided
to family are we connecting
those families mental health
services behavioral health
services medical services
Thanks clothing banks those
types of things but as you know
I think the twenty twenty
legislative session was the
first session you actually
appropriate for the first year
you appropriated money to PED to
provide grants for community
schools and we don't have any us
student achievement outcome data
from twenty twenty or twenty
twenty one.
So we would have short cycle
assessments if PED is collecting
that data but that legislative
staff does not have that because
it's typically not collected at
the state level.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you senator and I am a
huge advocate of the whole child
approach regardless of the grade
level of the student where they
are in kindergarten or whether
they are in twelfth grade I just
simply wanted to have this line
of questioning to point out and
and Rachel I want to thank you
for pointing out how important
it is to be tracking food that
served to families referrals
that are made to community
connections that that improve
and strengthen the family what's
happening outside the school day
and and different examples that
we can go on how how many
children are current on their
immunizations and if they're
eligible for insurance that
they're actually insured and it
could go on and on and I just
want to point out to this
committee that we talk about a
commitment to early childhood
which is where over sixty
percent of abuse and neglect
occurs and yet in two years work
setting twenty million dollars
to community schools without
measureable outcomes because of
the circumstances and yet when
we hear presentations on what
the importance of early
childhood which is the out of
school time version of community
schools be filtering in our
interschool they'd pretty much
discredit those referrals and
discredit the connections that
we're making with families and
focus on pre literacy in pre
math so I I just I just want to
continue to advocate for the
zero to five world and I
appreciate the commitment of the
body of recognizing the risk
factors of our students are in
school systems but as a body
there is over all just a two
million dollar increase to our
ECECD budget and I think there's
a lack of of that investment in
our state but I will be
supporting the bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you further questions.
All right before it
Representative Garrett and so
you know I Mr chairman I was
going to move it to pass.
Okay so in the past motion by
Representative care at
All second but I had
a couple of questions for so
thank you for bringing this
forward senator so Rachel you
had mentioned that the twenty
million had already been
appropriated from.
House Bill to
for the purposes of community
schools right.
Mr chairman not I'm not
appropriated it's transferred
and that's the fundamental
difference in that is you're
moving funds
From where they exist right now
general fund written reserve
supports that public and reform
Fund into the fund the appoint
in the bill is so that all of
those funds are appropriated to
the department and single year
see of a second creation in.
If that I believe totals three
million dollars two or three
million dollars right now.
It will authorize PED to spend
those dollars.
And and thank you thank you for
that clarification director
dental so so
Is this bill going to be
necessary for the money to be.
Directed at community schools
Mr Chairman if you don't enact
this bill based on language that
you guys passed out when you
passed house bill two over to
the Senate that twenty million
dollars in transfers is
contingent on this bill so
contingent on removing the
continuing appropriation
language from the fund and
adding language that makes the
fund subject to legislative
appropriations so if you don't
pass this.
Ten million dollars will stay in
the public and reform Fund in
ten million dollars will state
in the general fund.
And and so Senator was there can
is there contingency language
within House Bill to contingent
on Senate bill three forty one
for this.
It's not specifically I think
contingent on house bill three
our arms are on Senate bill
three forty one but it is
contingent on a bill that makes
the funds subject to legislative
appropriation.
So it's a director Joe was at so
if it's not directly there
wasn't contingency language
contingent on Senate bill three
forty one or Miller that's not
the language was it is it not
withstanding language within.
No you don't need to stand in
language so basically in a in a
transfer you are saying with
that language make the transfer
if this bill is getting past if
the bill doesn't get passed
don't make the transfer so.
Fire not withstanding language I
am looking right now all for
that.
The transfer page it is on page
two ten of the general
appropriation act fund transfers
are contending not actually does
a fund transfers are contingent
on enactment of Senate bill
three forty one or similar
legislation.
I apologize I didn't think it
was subject specifically to the
belt but it is.
That certainly helpful
So we don't have a situation
like that like that
transportation
language it's not withstanding
so awesome.
Thank you director Jo thank you
senator did have a due pass
motion by Representative Garrett
I seconded it is there any
opposition.
All right seeing line you have
to pass on Senate bill three
forty one thank you senator
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee appreciate it.
All right we're in agreeable
group this morning
so that looks like we've
completed our business for today
like I mentioned last time it
didn't happen this time but it
may happen in the next couple
days is that look for time
changes
things like that as we start
kind of winding down the session
as we phase out it's kind of
that the committee for portion
of of are working more into
floor session so we may be
meeting a little bit later since
we're kind of going through our
agenda pretty quickly which I'm
sure won't sadly many body.
But keep a look at listen for
the announcements as they come
through on the floor thank you
all and have a nice rest of your
day we'll see you all on the
floor later on.
