Here.
Representative Vincent.
Representative.
Garret
Vice vice chair Garrett.
Here.
Right.
Do you have a quorum? All right,
thank you. Good morning, folks.
I hope you all are doing well.
So, um,
I'll be presenting House Bill 63
here in a moment. Um, but I just
want to remind folks because it
feels like a minute ago since we
had kind of the first day of
school stuff. So um please be
concise with your questions, um,
as they come up, obviously the
chairs will be making note of
those that wish to speak and
we'll call you in the order that
we see you all, um, and then for
members of our audience, welcome
and thank you for being willing
to participate. Um, you will
have up to 2 minutes.
Um, for public comment, so
please do not be repetitive of
the comments that we've heard um
to voice your support, but we
certainly appreciate you
engaging with us um online and
those of you that are in the
building. So with that, I'm
gonna turn it over to our vice
chair, um, while I make my way
over to present House Bill 63.
All right. Good morning, Madam
Chair, committee members from a
different perspective.
Are we ready, Madam Chair?
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, proceed as soon
as you're ready. Alright. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
members, um, this is House Bill
63, so House Bill 63 is a lot of
what we heard of um over the
past week. This is a two-year
effort um as a result of a house
memorial, I believe sponsored by
um
Um,
Representative, I'm forgetting,
Susan Herrera, um, and our vice
chair a couple of years ago to
convene a task force based on
SEG state equalization
guarantee, um.
Changes. So this is the product
of that work group.
Um
This bill would do essentially a
few things, so, um,
The at risk factor, as we know
it, um.
will be gone and will be
replaced by the
family income index as an
indicator why the family income
index because the family income
index um has been able to get
more accurate representation of
students at their schools that
are living in poverty. So this
will
A better way to direct funding
to the schools, um, that have
the population of students that
the
The at-risk factor and now the
family income index, uh, will be
able to target, um, it will also
increase the
Um
The
Factor from its current.332.40,
so increase the distribution,
um, of the at risk index, what
is known now, um, it would also
tease out the English learners.
in favor of.
stand-alone factor, um, so, um,
again, we could better target
the
our English language learning
population um by having a
standalone factor and again
directing those resources to um
our ELL EL students who are um
Generating them
Um
Also this would
The third thing that it would do
is
Put 6th grade into the secondary
factor, which is something that
the memorial had directly called
out um because at the time, as
you heard from uh.
Daniel last week, it's had been
written when middle school was
primarily 7th and 8th grade and
not 6th grade. So that would be
an inclusion, um, as well as
increasing um the weight of the
secondary factor currently, so
the estimate is 137.5.
dollars in order to do this. Um
132, um, but then there's the $5
million to um offset the changes
that some of the schools may
experience for one year, um.
Due to these changes, um, so
Madam Chair, that's an overview
of what the bill does. Um we do
have an amendment and I do have
um
Director John Senna and policy
analyst Daniel Estupinan with us
as um.
for testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can we
pass out the amendment?
And this was sent to all
committee members, uh, with
24 hours.
If
And there'll be Madam Chair.
Need to be emotion to discuss
the amendment? I
uh, Madam Chair.
And more to discuss.
OK, in a second we have uh% of
Uh, growla moved and
representative Moya Mirabal's
objection to discussing the.
And that is the number is
230136. Mr. Chair, would you
like to discuss the amendment.
Madam Chair, I'll go through the
amendment very quickly. I won't
go through each of the items uh
generally speaking, this is some
technical cleanup that we had to
do after the amendment was, was
already drafted.
The largest portion of it, I
will go over number 3 on page 7,
line 19.
Um, you'll see that there's a
Big chunk of of language that we
wanted to put in there. That's
to make sure that for new
charter schools.
They continued to use the
factors of the district in which
their geographically located
until they are able to generate
3 years' worth of data to
calculate the averages for the
other factors. So all of these
factors that are at risk and
English learner are operating on
a 3-year average.
So that you don't, you don't
have big fluctuations over year
over year.
And so this language is to make
sure.
That in their 1st 3 years of
existence, those new charter
schools continue to use the
factors of the district in which
they're located.
Otherwise, um, most of these are
very small language changes and
technical cleanup.
We just stand for questions.
Thank you. Is there any
discussion on the amendment.
See no discussion, uh, can I
have a motion?
I'm not I'm sure I move a motion
to accept the amendment.
OK
Uh, it's been moved to adopt the
amendment.
2nd manager.
OK, we have a second.
Uh, moved by Representative
Carollo, seconded by
Representative Laura. Are there
any objections? no objections.
Uh
House Bill 63 is now. Thank you,
Madam Chair, we stand for
questions.
OK, we'll start with public
comment.
Um, is there anybody in the room
opposed the house feels.
OK, sir, you have 2 minutes.
Please identify yourself.
Michael Rodriguez, I'm the
executive director for dual
language education of New Mexico
and I stand in favor of HB 63.
Uh, there are several factors.
One of them is the middle school
factor. I was part of the
committee that I worked on that
task force to study it.
6th grade is, it's important for
them to be counted as middle
school. Uh, the other one is
English learners, uh, for many
years we have not found the
right formula to effectively
support our English learners by
having had its own its own
category. I feel that this will
help to ensure that you're being
equitable in how we're serving
them. So you actually stand in
support of the bill.
OK, I like it when, when people
actually are in support, even
though we thought they were
gonna say they weren't.
OK.
Is, is there anybody who is
opposing it.
Uh, online, is there anybody
online who opposes.
Housevi, OK, we have no
opposition online will now go to
support for House Bill 63.
Um, please raise your OK, we
will start in the front row
again, you have.
Too strict minutes max. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
One more thing
Uh, if somebody says exactly
what you were gonna say.
Please don't repeat it for 2
minutes. Thank you, Mr. Rounds.
Thank you, Madam Chair, stand
rounds for the school
superintendents and this morning
I'm also uh bringing the voice
of the New Mexico School Boards
Association since they're unable
to be here this morning.
We stand in support of this
bill. Uh, we were part of the
committee that did it. One of
the things we appreciate in this
bill is that we now are
beginning to delineate where the
real costs and real needs are.
As was already stated, bringing
6th graders into secondary is
what our operating condition is
in most districts. Final point
there is a $5 million saved
harmless in this, we support
that in fact, as this moves
forward, we're likely to ask for
up to 3 years of safe harmless
as you move policy around.
It has impacts on schools. We
know what this chairman's
intentionality is, which is a no
harm intentionality, and that's
why we're likely to push that
forward as we move. Thank you.
Anybody else in row one.
OK, row 2, Mr. Paul.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul with Public
Charter Schools of New Mexico.
We stand in support of HB 63. We
were on the working group as
well and appreciated the
inclusive nature of the uh of of
figuring out what to do on the
at-risk index. In fact, um,
public charter schools of New
Mexico has been advocating for
uh an at-risk index that allows
charter schools to generate
their own for 3 years.
That said, if you go all the way
to the back of your FIR you see
a lot of red for charter
schools. So the policy is right,
allowing us to generate our own
at-risk index is something that
should be done. Um, but there
are a number of schools that are
losers here, um, and so I want
to make a note on those schools
that have been using their uh
district at risk index for many
years. They never asked to just
have their at the district's at
risk index, um, they put those
dollars to good use, there's no
way.
to give SCG back to the PED, um,
and they're not asking us to
oppose this. They're just asking
us to give them more financial
cover as they move forward. So
we support the bill and for
those of you that also sit on
house appropriations, we implore
you to support a 3 year hold
harmless on this. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Garrett.
The Chairman Romero and members
of the committee, Carlos Lucero
at the Public Service Company in
New Mexico.
And HB 6 HB 63 will fund and
allow a school district or
charter school for additional
program units including career
technical education.
And that's where we really see
this as a benefit for the CTE
programs to assist middle and
high school at-risk students.
to reach their full academic
potential and an equitable
manner.
In the last year, PNM has funded
and developed its own CTE
program, P&M Power Pros, to
create a pathway for high school
students to pursue careers in
the electric utility industry.
In December 2024, the 1st 12
students from the 3 New Mexico
high schools successfully
completed the apprenticeship
program and upon the completion
of the program, these students
will receive OSHA 10
certification, and CTACTE course
credits.
This is an example of how these
programs with the proper
funding, training, and
partnerships can work to give
our students options to pursue
rewarding careers. For these
reasons, PNM supports HB 63.
Thank you. Next.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Alvin
Warren with the Lano Foundation,
we strongly support this bill.
We appreciate that this is the
product of 2 years of work,
collaborative work as others
have spoken to it directly
addresses findings from Yasi
Martinez, uh, particularly
around inadequate or
insufficient funding. We really
appreciate the emphasis on the
family income index as a way to
target uh uh lower income
students, um, the EL factor has
long been coming, so we
appreciate that that is included
in here.
And we do a lot of work with um
superintendents with charter
leaders, principals. We know
that there's a need to do to put
additional emphasis on
secondary, um, we're doing so
much in early childhood. So, so
we need middle schools and high
schools to meet those students
and provide them with the full
range of supports for career
technical education,
social-emotional learning, and
other kinds of opportunities
that this bill would make
possible. So we urge to do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Mary Par
Sanchez, and I am the president
of the National Education
Association in New Mexico. We
stand in strong support of the
House Bill 63, and we thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward. Provisions of this bill
would shift the share of SEG
funding from schools with higher
income students to schools with
lower income students from
schools that don't serve 6
through 12th grade students.
to schools that do serve 6
through 12th grade students.
Additionally, by moving the
English learners from one of
three measures of in the at-risk
index to their own program unit.
We believe this will incentivize
the identification and service
to English learners and the LESC
in their report that they gave
to you uh states that for New
Mexico students to be successful
through their middle and high
school years, and
current learning structures and
systems should evolve to reflect
the changing landscape and and
interconnected relationship of
schools with community and
economic development, House Bill
63 would help that in 2024, you
all changed New Mexico's
graduation requirements to
include a graduate profile.
These graduate profiles will
include attributes from
employers, families,
communities.
students themselves, that they
feel are valuable long term,
this may also enable greater
development of systems and
measures to understand statewide
progression towards skills,
characteristics, mindsets and
attributes indicative of genuine
career and civic readiness.
Modern CTE is a critical
evolution in education,
potentially bridging the gap
between classroom learning and
future career success to
prepare.
students for lifelong
achievement. Please support
House Bill 63. Thank you.
Exactly 2 minutes.
See, nobody more people on this
side, let's go to this side.
Please raise your hand.
OK, I think I see one hand, Miss
Holland.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Whitney Holland, president of
AFC New Mexico. For all the
reasons you've already heard
this morning, we support this
bill, and we're honored to be a
part of this work and how
carefully and mindfully it was
crafted. Thank you.
Thank you, and I believe we have
one more speaker in favor.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Machin
speaking on behalf of the League
of Women voters of New Mexico.
And the American Association of
University Women, and we stand
in strong support. We know lots
and lots of work went into this.
I want to thank the sponsors and
the LESC, um, for their work on
this, uh, I would like to echo
especially Alvin Warren's
comments about secondary uh
schools we really need to put
lots more money into career
technical education. I'd love to
see even more than is in this
funding formula.
Right now, but we really
appreciate how much work went
into this and what good it's
gonna do. Thank you.
Thank you so much. We will now
go.
Uh, online, if you are in
support and would like to speak,
please raise your hand.
And we will start with Amy
Taylor, please identify yourself
and then you have.
And Amy can unmute yourself.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. I'll go.
Uh, online
OK.
Mm
It's our first online comments.
Amy, can you start again and
we'll see if we can hear you.
Uh, can you hear me now? Yes.
Hi, I just really wanted to
clarify for all of the people
standing up to say that House
Bill 63 support CTE, um, it does
not explicitly support CTE, um,
there's nothing in that bill
that says that CTE must be
funded or that um dollars are
allocated to CTE. It is only a
suggestion that CTE is supported
with the extra funding, and if
it is only a suggestion, it is
my experience at the local.
School district that CTE teacher
see zero funds. So I really want
that someone that is sponsoring
the bill to correct all the
people that have stood up and
said that this bill explicitly
supports CTE because it does
not.
Thank you very much.
Is there anybody else online
that wants to speak in support
of House Bill 63. See nobody
else who wants to speak.
Uh, we will turn to our members.
Uh, representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair.
Mr
Uh
What do you have to say about
this?
How
How is it, how is it included?
No.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative, um.
Because by increasing that
secondary factor and giving
these schools more money, we're
giving them the flexibility to
use it toward programming that
they see fit, so school
district, the schools um want to
work towards career technical
education programs, they may,
we've heard about attendance
issues, um.
From other school districts,
they may use that funding for
attendance initiatives, they
may.
the funding for all sorts of
different things and we're
giving the flexibility with the
added funding to the school
districts to make those
decisions, um, as was pointed
out last week, there are
different pots of money in our
LESC and LFC proposals towards
specifically career technical
education, so this could be a
supplement for those districts,
um.
But it's not strictly limited to
career technical education in
that sense, but very well could
be.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, second thing,
Since I am not a teacher and
that that is not my profession.
Can you talk to me a little bit
about at risk factor.
And uh
Is that not called out in uh.
And uh Yazi Martinez lawsuit is
definition there and so I'll
talk about the about is that.
In there or is it just uh
byproduct of it are we free to
change it, uh, just curious.
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, you're absolutely
right, the Martinez Yazi, the
court in the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit did.
Refer to
The at risk factor.
Call for the for the state
actually to increase the at risk
factors so that we can increase
the amount of funding that flows
essentially to students who need
it most.
And so over the last few years,
you all have actually increased
that at, at risk factor.
From at one point it was 12.
So essentially about, you know,
an extra 10% of of that um.
Unit value to currently 0.33.
Um
And now this bill would increase
that to 0.40 while also using
the family income index.
has a better mechanism to
identify poverty so that you're
sure that the money that is
generated by the at-risk factor
actually goes to the school
districts and the students that
are generating it.
And
Madam Chair, this bill has a
whole harmless.
Uh, lousiness, so tell me about
that.
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, so the whole harmless
essentially says that if your
district is negatively impacted
by the changes of the bill.
This is very important.
Uh, if for instance, you're at
risk factor decreases and you
generate fewer units as a result
of the passage of this bill,
that there's money set aside to
ensure that you receive at least
the same amount of funding for
next school year.
For that particular component.
Madam Cha next school year or?
Oh
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield currently in the bill
that's a one year old harmless.
So Madam Chair,
I like a lot of good hard works
got into this bill looks like
you have the normal oversight to
That uh goes into our funding
and I'm probably gonna support
the bill. I'm looking here at
224 over here on the side
nation's report card results
released were still dead last
besides a 60%.
Uh, increase in educational
funding since I've been here. It
makes me not in favor of of
funding that has no oversight
like the first girl that we
talked about.
Uh, yesterday.
But those bills like this where
they, it goes through the
process and we're trying to make
things better.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm gonna, I'm
a supporter of that. I'm a
supporter of education. I'm a
supporter.
Of oversight.
And open this where people can
see what's happening.
Thank you, madam chair.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And while everybody was working
on this this summer, I was stuck
in health and human services, so
you're gonna have to bring me up
to speed on some of this, um.
I, I do, Mr. Chair, I understand
the Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
I, I understand the, the premise
of this bill.
But, uh, would you, would you
let me know who the stakeholders
were that helped you put this
together.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
sorry, Representative Vincent, I
don't have the full list in
front of me. We can get that to
you. Um, it was a
Made up of of some of your some
of your members.
Uh, the Secretary of Public
Education Department.
Partners from our labor unions,
our superintendents association
or school boards association.
Uh, representatives from our New
Mexico school business
officials, so the folks who
actually run budgets at the
district level participated in
that process as well.
forgetting that.
Oak charter schools,
representative, obviously, um.
And our our partners at the
finance committee. Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters so whenever you were
going through all this,
everybody was, they felt pretty
good about this bill going
through and how to identify the
at-risk.
Abortion and the metric that was
put in place in order to give
those schools that additional
money.
Is there any way that, that a
school especially rural type
schools could be adversely
affected by this.
Madam chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Vincent, um, you'll see in your
in the LESC analysis.
of this particular bill, and if
you printed it out on an 8.5 by
11, you're gonna have a hard
time seeing it because it's a,
it's a big sheet.
But you'll see that there are
some districts that do um
Essentially
lose a little bit of money based
on the changes.
It's not so much a rural factor.
I don't think as, as much as it
is and maybe this is partly
rural.
Some of the data that we that we
get to calculate the at-risk
index currently?
I, you know, we talked about
mobility a little bit last week,
I think, and that's essentially
students transferring in and out
of schools.
And unfortunately we're, we have
a hard time being able to
validate.
audit that kind of uh data, and
we think that has something to
do with some of the, the
discrepancies in the two
methodologies and the other
piece is title I, which is a
federal indicator that we get
directly from the federal
government.
We have no say or really know
exactly how that, how that title
one number is generated. We do
know it does come from.
some state data
But um
It's hard to say exactly.
Why the difference between the
two, but we are seeing a few
districts. Again, hence the
whole harmless. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. And so I, I
thought I heard you respond to
Representative Chatfield on the
hold harmless so if it did
adversely affect a school, then
they would be still made whole
through the SCG, is that
correct? Madam Chair
Representative Vincent, they
would be made whole for one for
one fiscal year, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the time.
Representative Mal Moya and the
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
thank you gentlemen for um.
For this presentation, I, I got
to, I had the the luxury of I
wasn't stuck in in health, I was
actually here, the
The 2 years, but I have to say,
um.
Um, so, so I've, I've got to
chew on this quite a bit, but um
I wanna ask a quick question. So
when, um, based on uh some of
your other
Um
Findings or or uh or studies
with the with the LESC. When do
we usually see start seeing a
drop of
From K through 12, when do we
see a drop of attendance and
proficiency and where does it
start like?
Going, going south.
Madam Chair and representative
of middle school typically is
what we have seen.
Especially I will say, um, Madam
Chair and representative is um
part of
That carries over into high
school and that was what we were
trying to address last year with
the high school graduation
requirements.
Um, changes and then having this
as a supplement um for the
programs that school districts
are going to be implementing
here this next school year as
well.
And um, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you for that because
that's, I mean, the fact that
we're we're changing this for
for the older grades is huge
because they're the ones where
we start to lose them, and, and,
um, and so like you said before,
um, Madam Chair and, and, um,
and Mr. Chair, the.
The districts have their um
total.
Um
Let's say, uh,
Now I'm losing the word, but
that they have their choice on
what they can use this, this,
this is above the line. This is,
uh, even though certain things
are generated by certain
factors.
Um, they can then use that, they
can then decide they have that
uh uh what's good for
Albuquerque schools, what's good
for Dao schools, all the of what
they get to use this for,
correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
exactly.
Um
I have another quick question,
um, Madam Chair.
We had studied.
The whole SCG during the
interim.
Um, maybe Daniel can kind of,
um, say this, um, why is it
cause and I, and I asked it then
and I know a lot of people may
have not uh really uh may have
not listened to that part, but
um, why are we deciding at this
point not to um.
Change like all of the, the all
of the base units and just
secondary at this point.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I think over the last
2 years, the working group very
much found that there's some
pretty significant and chronic
needs, specifically in grade 6
through 12 that we haven't
invested in comprehensively in
the last.
And, and I just thank you Madam
Chair, I just wanted to kind of
have it out there that they're
there, this has been studied,
this has been really mulled over
and um and the fact that we're
bringing 6th grade up is huge
because that is the majority of
our framework, and they're not
generating the monies for that.
So there's still educating them
the same as the 7th and 8th
grade, but not getting the
funding.
Or as as as the 7th and 8th
graders. So that would be uh it
could be, um, and especially
when that's the age group that
they really need that extra
help. Hopefully it's some
behavior health.
That kind of stuff, but um, but
those, those are the kind of
things that they can do, um, is,
is, uh, is be able to satisfy
the needs of uh the continuing
needs of middle schoolers, um,
so I am definitely in support of
this bill. Thank you,
Madam Char if I could just very
quickly uh represented me, you,
you also bring up another point
because I think you're gonna
hear some concerns.
above increasing funding for
secondary while we see dropping
enrollment, especially in
secondary.
And I would, and I would just
sort of ask you to think about
whether or not that's a chicken
or an egg problem.
And is, are we, should we be
careful about funding in a place
where units are decreasing.
Because they're going to
decrease.
Or units decreasing because
we're not providing the services
that students need. We all know
that freshman classes especially
start very big and they get
smaller as they go and, and some
of that is about just our, our
trends in enrollment and, and
birth rates, of course, but
there are just other.
Questions about whether or not
we're providing the appropriate
services to students at those
grade levels to ensure those
that are in the system do stay
with us.
And that those that aren't in
the system see a high quality
system that they want to be part
of.
Thank you.
Representative of colon and then
Representative Baca.
Thank you, madam.
Um, so when you were talking
about.
The the funds that they could
use for different services and
CTE.
Product
It's no cheese
big part of my heart we're
hoping up Rio Texas next year.
Um
It's extremely expensive
programs. I mean, the cost, I
mean.
And we really want to see it
across.
I'm not just to the larger
districts.
So, um, when you were saying
that you could use that pot of
money to go towards this or some
other.
Now there was, um, you were
talking about another bill in
reference to CTE that's for some
other funds which you.
Expand that, it'll be on top of
this.
Madam Chair Representative
Colin, the chairman, I think was
referring to the larger budget
request, so not a separate bill
necessarily, but the other funds
that are proposed currently for
It's called the NextGen CTE
program that pilot that you've
all been funding for a number of
years now, as well as work-based
learning initiatives and some
high school transformation stuff
through innovation zones. So CTE
is captured in part of that.
OK, because we are definitely.
Um, yeah, we're definitely
behind in this state with career
technical education compared to
the other states across the
nation, and it's, it's taken a
long time to, to be able to get
these funded and get them moving
across the state, so I
definitely need the focus there.
They do see that that can also
help with, you know, our
graduation rates, you know.
She
Lawsuit we're looking at.
Funding for
Um, and Madam Chair, um.
And I'll just say cause Rio
Rancho, um, has always been kind
of on the bottom of the funding
charts whenever we look at uh
the funding formulas both.
And transportation, we've always
struggled with it.
And um, so with these changes, I
know that um we will see.
Uh, some issues and personally I
would like to see a 3 year
harmless well.
One year
Just because we know it takes
time, we start rolling these
out, that we'll start seeing.
Representative Baca.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
I did, uh
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman is
actually most of my questions
are going to be for Daniel, so
I'll be pretty.
Pretty precise and so.
Uh, on page 3,
Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, um, we're talking
about the family income index
rate.
OK.
Um, page 3, section G.
Could you briefly kind of talk
about
It says the family index rate
means a percentage of men.
What levels are used for
extremely low income.
or very low income, do we, are
those of similar rate? Have they
changed to what was calculated
before.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, when you all created a
family income index in 2021, you
are the statute the actual
income thresholds that each of
those categories is defined as
for extremely low income. I
believe it's 0 through 75% of
the federal poverty line.
very low income, it's 76 to 130%
of the federal poverty line.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer. I
guess one of the, you know, when
we, when we set levels uh at a
certain year, 2021, we've had a
lot changing for that, so that's
something we probably need to be
mindful as how we calculate
that. Uh, Madam Chair, my next
is on page 6 and 7.
Actually, it's page.
So this section is under charter
school operating budgets.
This does this also section
apply to public schools.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, this section only dictates
how charter schools generate
funding in the SCG.
Um
Madam Chair and uh Daniel.
The, the question is,
The approval of the entire
budget, and it does say here.
That local school boards have no
veto authority over individual
line items within.
The charter schools proposed
financial budget.
Or any item in the educational
plan.
My question is you this is under
the.
Charter school area.
Is that also practiced within
the regular public school about
do they approve the overall
budget?
Or do they have basically that
individual resources or
individual expenses, they can
veto.
Madam Chair Representative Baca,
I wanna, I wanna say one thing,
try to answer the question, but
I hope that, if not, please
clarify this.
This particular section is
existing language.
It's not, it's not new language
for the bill, and it essentially
says that if you're if you're a
locally chartered charter school
currently.
You have to submit your budget.
2 year chartering, the local
school board.
For approval
And, and then that budget makes
its way to PED for its normal
approval process. This is just
saying that a local school
board.
cannot interfere essentially
with the line items of a locally
chartered charter school.
don't believe there's, there's
similar language that would
Prohibit a school board from
having input on its own.
budget. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, John, for that
clarification.
Um
Madam Chair, page 15.
Line 13
Just one thing that just caught
me, um,
I'm sorry, page 15, line 13.
The the date there, uh, manager
January 31st, 2026. Was, is
there any significance to that
date. I know that we, if this
is passed. It goes into effect
July 1 of 2025.
And it says that PD shall submit
a report.
By that date, and it was just
curious to me is we'll actually
be in session.
For that date. So just, is there
any reason for the
That day
Mr. Chen, Representative Baca,
the bill does go into effect,
uh, this summer, this section of
the actual bill just requires
PED to report to the LEC and LFC
on the need for those actual
harmless distributions for the
next fiscal year.
Yet Madam Chan, I understand
that, but the LES the LESC is
that's an interim.
Right, we'll be, we meet in the
interim, so that would actually,
if they're reporting, we would
actually be in house ed, right?
We would not be in and so it was
just that date again, and I'm
not gonna, I'm not gonna stick
on the dates.
But I'm just saying is that if
it was house education,
I think that would, would, um,
my question.
And then finally, um, Madam
Chair and the
We're talking about the whole
harmless, OK, and we talked
about if there's any impact
regarding the family income
index.
This is also taken account dec
declining membership.
Um, if in fact a district is
seen.
Declining membership, would they
in fact also be held harmless
for one year.
Based upon this legislation.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, the whole harmless takes
effect if a school district or a
charter school sees a decline in
program units and
basic membership for grade 6
through 12 or in those at risk
changes. So if they do have a
decline in membership, they
could possibly be qualified for
whole timeless, but the whole
time is a very intentional and
looking at the decline in
programming for those specific
components of the SCG.
And and thank you Ma. My last
question is just a very simple
question. And we talked about
decreasing membership or
numbers.
My understanding and I, and
maybe I wasn't, was that in the
high schools, we are seeing
increased, was it the middle
school elementary that we're
seeing the decrease in
membership for students. I know
that we've said this.
I'm not quite sure.
You know, cause I know that the
middle school is a priority. I
do appreciate the at risk and
including 6th grade.
But where are we seeing that
that decrease in student
membership. Is it across the
board or is it particularly
uneven in one area.
Madam Chair Representative Baca.
Um
So I think
What you, I think what you're
getting at is it's, it's we're
seeing smaller kindergarten
classes coming in right because
of birth rates obviously we see
sort of this.
Sort of you upside down.
U shape or mountain shape of in
terms of enrollment where you
have smaller enrollment because
you have smaller classes coming
in at kindergarten and bigger
enrollment at 6th 7th grade
because you had this bubble of
students that came in much
earlier and then of course, you
see this natural.
Sort of downslope.
That has less to do with birth
rates and more to do with
deciding that they're not going
to be in school anymore or
parents choosing to move their
kids to other.
Kinds of school, that kind of
thing.
Thank you, man, and I do agree
that middle schools where
everything happened. Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, I support
this bill.
Representative Grola.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and like
all my colleagues here, thank
you for the work in this bill.
I've been lucky to be part of
some of the conversation, so I
appreciate it. I have one
question. Um, and that for the,
uh, I didn't specific item
language English learners or
multilinguish learners were
added.
Um, my understanding is, is, um,
if the student is identified to
the with a test.
It's included in this, so.
How are they founded besides
that?
At risk
Average, how the students who
were uh multilinguage learners
or English learners, uh,
supported in the past.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Gurola, there's federal funding
available.
The school districts for to
support English learners, so
there was that bucket of money
and that remains.
As, as Daniel said, or we
probably we all talked about it
at a point English learners were
one component.
of the at-risk factor, but we're
um
part of that calculation that
included mobility and
economically disadvantaged
students. And so I think
Even though some districts might
have been more savvy about the
formula than others. It's
probably unlikely that they saw
that that.
At inclusion of English learners
in at risk as
an explicit direction to
To use those funds to support
English learners. And so that's
the big change here is by
calling that out districts and
charter schools.
be able to see exactly how much
money those English schools.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
just a follow up, uh, so just to
clarify.
Schools could have students who
were identified as language
learners, English language
learners, and do not provide
services for them.
Through the state
Because they were not funded
through the statement, but I'm
sure
I believe English learners have
federal protections and there
are requirements in the state
also has
Some statutory and regulatory
language about how to serve
English learners, so even though
they may not have identified
specific funding sources
targeted English learners, they
were school districts and
charter schools were still
required.
To provide services to those
students. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair. So basically we
were relying on the federal
funding until now.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Madam
Cha.
Thank you. Uh, would you like to
make any closing remarks, Mr.
Chair.
Sure, I'll just take this
opportunity.
um
in an for running the
2 years' worth of work that's
come to the spill, you, madam
vice chair, for being a part of
it and everybody else that was a
part of all this hard work
because as we heard, these
changes um.
I've been a long time coming, so
we're hopeful that um this will
get the money to the students
who need it and our districts
will do well with it. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
And with that I'm sure I'd
recommend a due pass.
Mediture.
as amended.
As Amanda.
Thank you.
Represented a lot as amended.
It's been uh moved and seconded
to pass House Bill 63 as amended
by Representative Falco seconded
by Representative Carrola. Is
there any objection to passing
Asville 63.
No objections, Mr. Chair, you
have a bill.
All right, Madam Chair.
When you're ready.
Please.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
today I'm presenting House Bill
156 increase educational
salaries. My expert witnesses,
Annie Armitage from.
Uh, the legislative educationudy
Committee.
Um, house Bill 156 would
increase the minimum salaries.
On the three-tier system by
$5000 per tier.
That would bring level one
licenses to 55,000 level 2
licenses to 65,000 and level 3
licenses to 75,000.
And as most of you know, the
school counselor and principal
salaries are tied to teacher
salary minimums, so this bill
would automatically increase the
minimum salaries for such
school.
Uh, personnel.
Um, it would adjust the current
teacher's salary minimums for
inflation this is the original
salaries that were amending or
passed in 2022.
And so inflation accumulated
since they were adjusted at that
time.
A secondary consideration that
those of us in education are
aware of is the rising costs of
insurance.
So it's $5000 can sound like a
lot, but it ends up not being a
lot, actually, frankly.
We know that we need highly
effective teachers when we raise
salaries, we saw a bump in
people choosing to become
teachers, that is tapered off,
uh, and we believe this will
also help.
that to happen.
Uh, research shows that teachers
are the most important
school-related factor
influencing student outcomes
such as academic achievement,
high school graduation, uh
college and career and social
emotional health, frankly. And
so this contributes to all of
that.
Um, and I would like to ask my
expert, would you like to add
any?
And
Chair Representative Carty, like
you said it really well, but I'm
here and ready for questions.
With that, Mr. Chair, we stand
for questions. All right, thank
you all. So we'll go to
opposition first, so those of
you online, if you're opposed to
House Bill 156, if you'd
indicate by raising your hand.
In the room, is there anybody
opposed to House Bill 156.
Any opposition.
Give it a moment.
Not seeing anybody online, not
seeing anybody in the room. So
we'll go over to support. So
those of you in support of House
Bill 156, if you'd indicate on
the Zoom by raising your hand if
you wish to speak.
Please raise your hand on the
zoom if you wish to speak in
support of House Bill 156. And
then on my right hand side those
in support of House Bill 156,
right? So we'll start in reverse
order. So, ma'am, you have up to
2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Mary Par Sanchez, and
I'm the president of the
National Education Association
in New Mexico. We stand in
strong support of this
legislation, and we want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward in the LESC's
executive summary in the report,
the need for New Mexico and the
legislature to stay the course
on funding and programs that
continue to stabilize the
education system during
turbulent times while
also looking for innovative ways
to improve that system is
paramount. New Mexico has 737
education vacancies, which is a
2% decrease, but the highest
areas of need are special ed,
elementary ed, and educational
assistance.
Um, educators from the round
around the state have this to
say in inflation is quickly
outpacing our salaries, and it
is due to get worse. This is in
all consuming job with major
serious responsibilities. A
yearly wage increase that keeps
pace with inflation is very
important to me. Schools need
all the help we can get. And we
should do whatever necessary to
recruit and retain.
laugh
The cost of living in Santa Fe
has increased so much that I
worry about making my rent each
month. I worry that I will no
longer be able to afford to live
in the community that I teach. I
can't afford to be a teacher. I
love my job and the kids, it
just isn't enough to make it.
I've done many jobs. I've never
done so much for so little.
While salaries have increased
significantly in recent years,
insurance costs negate any real
Cola cost of living increase and
a teacher who is not constantly
stressed about their life is
better able to show up for their
students. Please support. Thank
you.
All right. Anybody else in that
back row we speak in support of
House Bill 156, right? We'll
move forward.
looks like a couple of rows.
Sir, please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee met Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico,
the sponsor our previous
speaker, uh, outlined all the
reasons why the policy is a good
one. I know I'm in the wrong
committee to talk about
financial issues, but I'll do it
again. Um, the dollar amount
that we uh distribute for salary
increases is probably the right
one. The funding formula is an
imperfect mechanism to deliver
those dollars to the appropriate
school district.
charter school. And so it's just
a note that we may need
additional funding than what
we're seeing in the budgets,
just to make sure everybody's
made whole to make these uh
salary increases happen. So,
just to, just to comment for you
all to take forward and we are
supportive of the bill. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you in the next row
up, those who wish to be in
sport.
Oh ma'am.
Oh.
All right.
Welcome. You have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Loretta Trujillo, and I'm with
um Transform Education in
Mexico, uh, coalition that
Is fighting for the rights of
the students named in the Yazi
Martinez court ruling. Um, I was
an educator for 20 years here in
the city of Santa Fe, and I just
wholeheartedly want to express
support, um, on behalf of this
increase and thank the sponsor
for bringing this up at a
critical time. And also just
want to remind all of us that
educators are at the heart of
the education system and our
young people have spoken to us
over the last year and a half in
efforts around the state and
they value their educators and
we ask that you value them as
well. Thank you.
Thank you. Please, you have up
to 2 minutes. Stan rounds again
for the superintendents
Association, of Educational
Leaders and Joe Guha again just
reminded me New Mexico school
Boards Association.
We stand in full support of this
bill. It's good legislation it's
going to assist us in both our
recruitment and retention of
teachers and other educational
personnel that are certified.
One of the things is the move
forward that we're gonna talk
about is long term funding.
Right now as we look at House
Bill 2 and what may happen
there. There's will be some
compaction within the teacher's
salary schedules because of how
we're modulating those
increases.
We would urge us over time to
consider.
Our policies to decompact.
Sour schedules as you move
along, but Mister Chairman, this
is the right thing to do.
We fully support it, we urge you
to support it. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Anybody else
in my right hand side?
Right, left hand side, that wish
to speak in support.
Right.
Please, sir, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, John Disch with the
American Federation of Teachers
in New Mexico, with strong
support of House Bill 156, for
obvious reasons and those that
have been stated, and we really
just want to say thank you to um
the members of the interim
committee that worked on all
pieces of salary legislation.
It's this committee in
particular, um, LESC and the
House Education Committee that
is always working to keep our
salaries competitive, both
regionally and nationally, and
whether it's certified or
classified employees in our
school district, so we
appreciate the work and urges
strong support. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Others on my
left hand side that wish to
speak in sport.
right? Not seeing anybody else
that wish to speak in support.
And
so I'll go to online, so
Melissa, good morning, Melissa.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee,
Melissa Candelaria here. I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. We
thank the sponsors for proposing
this important measure, and I
won't believe for the point of
how critical teachers are or
really the urgent shortages that
we have in our public schools,
um, this measure is a good step
in the right direction towards
building a robust teacher
workforce, a wage increases that
address the cost of inflation
will help the state to fill
teacher vacancies.
Especially teachers who are
Native American, bilingual oral
endorsed and those licensed in
special education. We hope that
raising teachers' salaries is
just one aspect of a statewide
teacher workforce plan, a plan
on how to achieve a fully
staffed, effective and diverse
teacher workforce that is
responsive to the needs of the
four student groups at the
center of the Yazie Martinez
case. So for those reasons, Mr.
Chairman, we urge that this
committee vote a do pass. Thank
you so much.
Thank you for joining us.
Right, I don't have anybody else
on the Zoom or in person wishes
to speak in favor. Um so we will
come to committee.
I don't have anybody on the list
either.
Oh, Represent Vincent, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Vice Chair.
So I can get this out of the
way. I'm gonna support your
bill, but I'm gonna ask you some
critical questions.
Has, has the teachers had a
raise in the last 3 years, and
if they have, why do we still
have a shortage of teachers, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Taran and
I'm sorry, I always want to say
Representative Harlan,
Representative Vincent.
Uh, yeah, the
The salaries were adjusted in
2022.
Um, however, they haven't kept
up with inflation.
And there's hard to fill
positions, especially special
education, so we worked in the
last session to do stipends for
that and and would you like?
Sure, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um.
Yes, there have been salary
raises in the past 3 years.
Um
I think a lot of teachers who
speak to would say it's not been
enough to make a difference um
when we look at those costs of
living.
Increase it increases that have
happened in particular over
those last 3 years, um, they're
still not keeping pace with
that. And in the period of time
before that last 3 years, they
really weren't keeping pace with
that, um, and then in addition
to salaries, we know that
salaries are one of the.
Key reasons that teachers do
leave the field, but it's not
the only one, it's a really
complex ecosystem, just like any
job, as you can imagine, you
know, we need to work on
principles, school environment,
preparing our teachers better.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate, I appreciate those
questions. I have lots of
teachers back home and I know
that some of them are probably
listening and we're, we're
cheering them along and I know
it's a tough job and we.
I don't even want to be in the
middle of the pack. I want to be
leading the pack.
I wish we could pay, I wish we
were the number one payers, but
I wish we were number one in
education as well. And if this
is going to hit us in that
direction. And I listened all
during the interim.
in LFC.
I've listened to most of my
colleagues here and we're ready
to win. We're ready to see PED
get a touchdown and um, you
know, have some consistency and
lay out some programs and if
this is, if this is our path to
get to that.
That's what we want to do.
Um
So my other question is,
We are going to fully fund this.
There will be multiple teachers
that will have to get a bump as
they weren't receiving the new
minimum yet.
And have more years. Can you
explain that, Mr. Chair?
Representative, could you say
that one more time? Are you
asking if this is funded
legislation, there's money in
the budget for it, so I want to
make sure that the, the money is
not gonna dry up.
And the second thing is from
what I understand.
Is there's teachers that have,
you know, they've been there
longer.
And they're still not receiving
them.
They're, how do I explain this?
So if they were making 5000 and
the new bump is 5200 bucks. How
do we get them up to that?
That new maximum.
Sure, um, Representative, so
first of all, there is money in
um both the LFC and LASC
proposed um budgets for public
school support funding. So yes,
um, you know, if that's
appropriate, then it would be
funded.
I love the way you follow me
too. I saw you, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent, I think
you might be referring to some
compaction issues where you have
teachers who, excuse me, who
have a lot of experience, um,
especially in level 2, for
instance, you've been in, you've
been a teacher for a long time.
And what happens is when you get
this bump, you'll get a small
bump.
That somebody behind you with a
lot less experience gets the
same bump and now there are
$1000 or $2000 behind you even
though they only have, I mean,
they have maybe 10 years less
experience, right? I think uh to
what uh Stan said earlier,
something that you all want to
consider in the long run is is a
is an intentional pathway
because what we're doing here is
we're raising minimums.
And so that's a recruitment
tool.
That means I know I can come in
and get in er certain levels of
pay.
You have to pair that with
salary increases on a regular
basis. Otherwise what you and
you end up, and you have to do
them both in tandem.
Because what we've done in the
state had to do with the amount
of resources that we had
available.
is that we didn't raise minimums
for a very long time.
And so teachers worked for a
very long time, not making a lot
of money. Some of these salary
schedules.
Literally increased salaries
about $1 or $2 a year.
Cause we've essentially say set
a state salary schedule with our
minimums.
So then when you bump minimums
$10,000 you really do this thing
where the where the folks coming
into the system brand new, get
to that, that level of more
experienced teachers very
quickly.
So as you move forward, as Dan
said, I think it is important
that you pair.
Salary, percentage increases
with regular increases to those
minimums so that you don't end
up closing that gap so fast that
more experienced teachers feel
like they've been penalized.
To that.
Mr. Chair, that's exactly right,
and I just wanna add that what
we see is that uh school
districts who were in charge of
setting salary schedules are
mostly matching those three tier
licenses where we see those
$10,000 salary bumps. What that
means is that after that 3rd.
Here, which you could reach
within.
7 years of teaching in most
districts, there's no real
growth after that, so what
happens for teachers after that
point, there's nothing to stop
schools districts from.
Doing something different, but
they're just instead of there
being like maximums like you
just said, it's just those 3
license minimums. So if we're
looking at compaction, while
there have actually been, um,
you know, each year since we've
last raised the minimums,
overall salary across the board
increases, and when I checked,
they actually kind of account
for inflation if you've been to
that.
Full time, although some years
it's been more than others.
Um
After you reach that 3rd level
of licensure, there are no big
bumps in your pay salary after
that, um, as you can imagine,
you might hope there.
Yes after your 30 years old,
potentially in the profession.
So I think that would be
important for the committee to
look at a long term
sustainability.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters and thank you,
Mr. Ser for uh for taking care
of me. I appreciate you, you
making that question a little
bit, uh.
Where people can understand it,
so.
Are we causing ourselves a
problem with, with these kind of
bumps, or do we need to really
look into it deeper so we can
keep everybody.
I'm not saying that everything's
fair.
You know, type one or tier 1,
tier 2, tier 3, you deserve
that, but
How, how are we keeping a
modest, how are we bringing it
up all at the same time, and I
guess my question is, are we
causing ourselves a problem? Are
we compounding a problem with
what we're doing here.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Charon and Representative
Vincent.
I think what we've identified is
that we need to study the issue.
It's not a problem, but it is
something that we have to take a
deeper dive into over the next
year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because I
do love my custodians at our
school, and I want to make sure
they're on the cutting edge of
pay too, cause I don't know how
we, I don't know how we'd get
along without them, so thank you
Mr. Chair, for the time.
And you represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I'll first start to say I
support this bill, OK, but I do
think there's some questions
that we need to
Look at moving forward.
As we
Quote unquote studied the
effectiveness of this.
I do believe that teacher pay
and the pay of all employees.
Um
Is part of our um solution to
improving schools.
Uh, Madam Chair, or Mr. Chair
and Madam Chair, the, the, I
think that
We have, have we, have we done
any studies because according to
what we have here, we, it was
reported by Secretary Padilla
that we still have.
Around 700 vacancies.
Do we know how teacher
vacancies.
Wood has been the average of
teacher vacancies over the last
several years since this
committee.
And this uh body started to make
an investment into education.
That's probably for Annie.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, I know that when I started
here.
There were about 1400 teacher
vacancies.
So it's about 50% less, that's
not acceptable because we still
have to address this.
But increasing salaries and
other measures have cut into.
Um, the vacancy issue.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. I think the
The other piece that we have to
really take a look at is.
Why are people leaving? because
we have both a recruitment issue
with this is attempting to
address.
But the retention issue.
Why do we have, because
Many of these folks after their
first
couple years or whatever, we
have both.
The new teachers, and then we
have the teachers.
Towards the end of their career
that are
And of exiting. So, um,
Madam, Madam Chair or Mr. Chair
and Madam Chair.
Do we have any, as far as
reasons, have we collected or
gathered any data.
As far as to show why people are
leaving this profession.
Um, now that we've made
considerable investments, I
believe.
And, and, and
I think that it was one of the
largest increases, the teacher
increase the pay increase was
Like 17%. I mean, we've we've
made a huge investment here, so.
Do we have any data to support
or to capture why people are
still leaving?
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
actually is something that PED
as district to report, but when
I've looked at the data, it
appears to be really incomplete,
so to my knowledge.
We don't have kind of a
statewide survey data of that
where you have national research
that would suggest compensation.
Uh, needing additional support
in the classroom, um, whether or
not you have a supportive
administrator, how prepared you
are when you go into the
classroom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
actually you hit a point upon a
point. Leadership matters. The
reason why most people are
leaving, their primary reason
for leaving is not necessarily
salary.
It's actually leadership in the
culture of the school that they
work in.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the, the
question I have is.
The impact, OK, we talked about
compaction of
The teachers and we do see that
we do acknowledge that a, a
level 2 teacher with 9 years or
10 years would be making what a
level 3 teacher with 3 years
that they've gone through the
process.
How does this impact the
administrators, OK?
Is there
I, I do believe and and I'm
looking over looking at Daniel
Sonny, that the
Administrators are calculated
off to level 3.
Is that, am I correct with that,
Annie?
But
So I know that there's
legislation out there, there's
also bills that we're gonna be
addressing.
Because we have teachers'
issues, we also have
administrator vacancies, which
again contribute to many people
leaving, so.
Um
Mr. Chairman, my last question
is really regarding
The counselor, um,
Licenses
And again, I'm in, Mr. Chairman,
this is not a trick question,
OK? I'm not trying to trick you.
I do sometimes try to trick
people, this isn't one of them.
For social workers, it talks
here in very specifically talks
about
Uh, and this is on page 7,
starting with line 14.
It talks about a level 3.
Um
Counseling license.
Are there other licenses? Do, do
counselors start with a level 3
license or do we have a level 1
license level 2.
How do they I see NEA back there
kind of shaking their heads. So
they start with the level 3
license right out of right out
your uh graduation. So, um, Mr.
Chair representative Rebeca,
this is a really interesting
question that I learned the
answer to and uh.
You know, drafting this bill,
and it's, it's sort of
interesting in statute, um.
From any I can correct me if I'm
wrong, but my understanding is
this is the only place that
those writers are um that their
salaries are in statute is this
case of a level 3 counselor
being tied to levels.
However, PED does issue level
12, and 3 school counselor
licenses, however, those are
not.
The other levels are not tied to
um.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Is that Greg, is that true?
Or the licenses where there is a
level 123.
Calcium.
And they're, they're not
Titan statue to the teacher.
Um, again, I think this is a
huge investment. I support this
bill, and I thank you for
bringing this forward, Madam
Chair.
Resume calling.
Um,
I did have a.
I'm definitely bored of this, I
mean, I wish we could pay.
or a teacher.
Definitely
It deserve more um.
Yeah
Sometimes it feels like a
thankless problem.
Um
Um, but, and, and I did
appreciate that question earlier
in reference to
Cause we've had teachers that I
know when these increases come
up and they've been there for
1520 years, so we do need to fix
that here.
There was a question, uh, Mr.
Ja, is in reference to um he
said that we're doing the
special.
A stipends now and again I I um
new on this, so I need to kind
of play catch up. What are we
doing on those?
Sure, Mr. Chair, Representative
Cole, um, um, so last.
session, there is an
appropriation me dollars for um
to be appropriate, we did PED to
implement special education
teacher stipends.
Um
So far and over those period,
there will be an opportunity to
study.
Any other questions from
members?
Right, I'll accept the motion.
Represent
Um sure I moved to a a pass.
Sorry, I get
confused to pass on House Bill
156. Alright. Thank you. We have
a motion for
do pass on House Bill 156, the
seconded by Representative
Chatfield, representing Colin,
did you?
Oh, OK. Uh oh.
Veteran beat you too, yeah.
All right, um, so Madam
Secretary, if you call a role on
a do pass motion for House Bill
156.
Resin Barker
Yes.
Yes
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
If
A Torres
Velasquez.
Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair Garrett.
Yes
Upset chairman. Yes.
Right, so vote of 1120, you have
a due pass on House Bill 156.
Thank you representative.
Right.
So
Have a little less changing up
at the presenter's table.
So
Members, if you're looking in
your binder, especially for new
members, we have House Memorial
2. So you'll see it under the
House Memorial tab toward the
back of your binder.
Right.
House Memorial too.
Madam Vice Chair.
When you're ready, please.
Thank you, and I want to add uh.
Cheromero that when I started
teaching my salary was $29,000.
So
Just had to add that.
OK.
I'm here uh now to present House
Memorial to, which is the
legislative education Study
Committee, artificial
intelligence Workgroup, it
probably should have been data.
Uh, and
As part of that title and it's
co-sponsored by Representative
Baca, my expert witness is Tim
Bade from LESC.
House Memorial to requests that
the ESC convene a working group.
To study and recommend a formal
policy or policies for statewide
education data governance and
policies as they relate to
artificial intelligence because
that's something we have to
include in all the type of data
work.
Data governance is a set of
rules, policies.
Season standards that data
should meet to make sure that
the data is high quality and in
addressing some of these pills
like why do we have a problem
with vacancy, why do we have
these issues? We sometimes found
that our data is lacking.
There's holes in our data, so
the data we're using to reach
policy and legislation isn't
what it should be because data
should be accurate, complete.
Consistent granular and timely.
And so New Mexico education data
does not always meet those
standards.
Data quality issues have
affected the implementation of
programs. They've made it
difficult for the legislature to
understand whether its
investments are working, because
we want to know that when we
invest, you know, $50 million
and something, is it working?
Can we accurately state that.
State agencies are working on
their data systems and making
upgrades. We have iOSa at New
Mexico Tech, which is a leader
in the field.
Um, they received an
appropriation to study state
agency uh data governance last
year and will continue working
on that. This working group
would bring together key
agencies and other education
stakeholders to design policies
to improve data accuracy,
consistency, and accessibility.
Formal data governance policies
might help the rise New Mexico
longitude of.
Longitudinal data system.
Um, overseen by higher
education, ensuring coordination
among agencies and safeguarding
efforts to maintain high quality
education and and what have I
observed in the last several
years, we have a lot of agencies
doing data governance, but it's
in silos instead of integrating
and working together.
Um, how's Memorial to
acknowledges the increasing role
of artificial intelligence and
education and the need for
policies.
that protects sensitive student
data, ensure equitable access
and preserve the meaningful
human interaction in classrooms.
We've heard from tribal and
pueblo communities that they
have desires to use the systems,
but we also need to protect uh
the data sovereignty of our
tribal uh communities.
AI is more sophisticated.
Uh, schools will need to start
considering what types of
information to consider as data
and then how artificial
intelligence should be used to
govern data in schools.
Um, and so I'd like to have
timba dough and he's been
studying this for the last
several years, uh, when you like
to add something at this time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, thank you,
Representative Garrett for that
introduction. I think it was a
very good summary of the
memorial. Um, I'm here to serve,
uh, as a technical witness if
any questions come up. Thank
you.
And with that will stand for
questions, Mister Chair.
Alright, thank you. So we'll go
to our audience before we come
to committee. Is there anybody
online that wishes to speak in
opposition.
To us Memorial to so I'm taking
opposition on Zoom, so if you
would please indicate by raising
your hand.
All right, those in the room, is
their opposition to House
Memorial too.
OK, I think that was an
anticipatory hand on Zoom, so.
On Zoom, is there support for
House Memorial too, please
indicate by raising your hand.
There we go. All right, in the
room on my left hand side is
there support for House Memorial
to inside folks, right?
Right, um, you all can decide in
the front here who wants to go
first, but you'll have 2 minutes
nonetheless. Welcome.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Alexander
Jacobson. I am the founder of an
AI startup in Albuquerque called
Airma.
And I've been working with
future-focused education for the
last year or so to investigate
AI and education in New Mexico.
I speak in support of the bill.
And in particular the artificial
intelligence components of it or
in support of the memorial,
excuse me. I imagine the
question of data and artificial
intelligence might sound
important, but somewhat abstract
at this juncture. I would like
to relate that it's crucial to
deal with these questions right
now for a couple of reasons.
Firstly, data and artificial
intelligence is very different
than what we think of as data
conventionally. We already heard
that when we think of data,
we're thinking of numbers rolls,
etc.
Artificial intelligence deals
with data in the form of
patterns, things like culture,
the way we teach, the way we
talk, etc. etc. And that's
something that we haven't had to
think about before. So
governance is crucial to start,
it's crucial to start applying
governance measures to that type
of data. Secondly, we're already
seeing instances of data being
misused with an artificial
intelligence, um, just last
week, the model De Seek, which
was in the news for crashing
much of the American.
Uh, artificial intelligence
stock sector showed that
entities around the world are
using American data to create
artificial intelligence systems,
and these entities are
generating responses that are
favorable to certain points of
view and bluntly are creating
output that represent the
interests of the People's
Republic of China on a
geopolitical level, making sure
that our data isn't being used
in that sense is proactively.
is critical and in fact, things
even like Facebook are already
using data from things like New
Mexican history and indigenous
history and generating
responses, describing
Our history, our communities in
ways that are not entirely
accurate and that 2 minutes.
Thank you so much.
Please. Welcome.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Lisa Harmon Martinez. I
work at Future Focused
Education, and I work with
Doctor Jacobson to create an AI
tool with New Mexican teachers
and students to support Capstone
and authentic learning in the
community that preserves local
wisdom and data sovereignty, and
we heard directly from teachers
that this is a priority, a need,
and we imagine also as uh Doctor
Jacobs had mentioned that the
ideas of data will evolve over
time and this working group will
help understand how to protect
and preserve New Mexican
language and culture, as we,
these tools evolve over time.
And so as future focused
education, we support this
memorial. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Others on my
left hand side that wish to
speak in support of House
Memorial.
Right, we'll move to my right
hand side. Those who wish to
speak in support House Memorial,
right?
Sir?
Please, you'll have up to 2
minutes. Mr. Chair. I'm Valera
Fermi, I'm the president of
NMSU. I think uh one of our two
things. One, we really are
making this a priority at NMSU
or higher learning commission
accreditation focus is gonna be
on data governance and the other
thing is, as we're really
promoting both an AI institute
and MSU. We want control of the
data. We want to make sure that
the data is actually clean, that
there are these algorithmiciases
that are
are taken into consideration to
avoid that uh there are problems
and 3 that when different bodies
have access to that data. There
are controls on who can actually
imput information in that data,
and that includes AI and machine
learning. So it's really
important that we continue to do
that. Thank you. OK.
Thank you.
Welcome Mr. Chairman Stan rounds
again for the this time for
coalition of educational leaders
and school superintendents
because the school boards
association doesn't have a
position on this, on this item,
Mr. Chairman, we're about a year
late.
We need expediency in this area.
I will tell you as a recovering
superintendent that that one of
the most important long-range
impacts on how we educate.
The data we use and the
integrity of, of our education
lies in this field.
This is a huge impact on our
students and on our system in
New Mexico. We urge you to pass
this along, Mr. Chairman, we'd
love to have an opportunity to
serve on this committee. It's
very important. Thank you.
Thank you. You almost need a
jacket with the people you
represent and then the lights to
indicate which ones are a
support or not. Others on my
right hand side that wish
speaking in sport. Please, you
have up to 2 minutes. Thanks,
Tony. Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul with Public
Charter Schools of New Mexico.
Uh, we support the memorial as
proposed by the representative,
and I'll just focus on the data
governance issue. Um, I think
data in our K-12 sector and
beyond, um, is more of a hurdle
than it is something that's.
ring right now and appropriate
data governance will really
allow us to at the local level
to leverage the data in the way
that will impact students
positively. So we think the
sponsor for the memorial.
Great. Thank you. Others on my
right hand side that wish to be
in sport.
right? Not seeing anybody. We'll
go to our phone.
Person on Zoom.
All right, hope
Ah, good morning. I hope you
have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales and I'm the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico. I work with 900
teachers across our three state
programs. Mr. Chair, we strongly
support this effort. During the
past 7 years in my role, we have
found a variety of data pieces
that are missing from important
systems related to cross
collaboration, meaningful
decision making, and
transparency. As part of our own
research, we have often had to
create IPA requests in order to
have access to data to learn
more about
educational issues and connect
our learning to recommendations.
We would like to request that
the metric for college and
career readiness be part of this
study. Mr. Chair, our
organization and teachers would
also love an opportunity to
participate in this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
